

Regina versus Cheung Matter No Cca 60404/93 [1997] NSWSC 572 (21 November 1997) ` 
Regina versus Ying-Lun Cheung aka Gary Cheung` `CCA 60404/93; SC 70007/91` `21 November 1997` `Handley JA, Smart J, Dunford J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` ` 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence in Criminal Division of Supreme Court (Badgery-Parker J)` `FILE NO/S: CCA 60404 of [1993 SC 70007] of 1991` `DELIVERED: Friday 21 November 1997` ` 
HEARING DATE/S: Thursday 28 November 1996,Tuesday 4 February 1997,Wednesday 5 February 1997` `PARTIES: REGINA versus YING-LUN CHEUNG aka GARY CHEUNG` `JUDGMENT OF: Handley JA, Smart J, Dunford J` `COUNSEL: ` * `Appellant: P Byrne SC/D W Phillips` * `Respondent: J Agius SC/E A Wilkins` `SOLICITORS: ` * `Appellant: Horowitz & Bilinsky` * `Respondent: Commonwealth DPP` `CATCHWORDS:` `CRIMINAL LAW - appeal - whether verdict unsafe or unsatisfactory` `DRUG OFFENCES - knowingly concerned - relevance of failure by law enforcement officer to report information` `EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved` ` 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed` ` 
NO OF PAGES: 32` `REGINA versus YING-LUN CHEUNG aka GARY CHEUNG` `JUDGMENT` ` ` `CRIMINAL LAW - appeal - whether verdict unsafe or unsatisfactory` `DRUG OFFENCES - knowingly concerned - relevance of failure by law enforcement officer to report information` `` ` The appellant was convicted of being knowingly concerned in the importation into Australia of a commercial quantity of heroin. He was sentenced to life imprisonment. At the time of the offence he was a senior inspector in the Hong
Kong Customs Service. The Crown case included evidence from an accomplice implicating the appellant in the importation, and independent evidence including tape recorded telephone calls between the appellant and the accomplice. He appealed against conviction.` `HELD: (1) The accused challenged the directions about the elements of the offence arguing that the jury could have concluded that the mere failure to report what the appellant knew of the importation could establish this offence. The directions made clear that the physical aspect of the offence would be satisfied by a deliberate decision not to report the information if this assisted the importation. The direction that the deliberate failure of the accused to report information in breach of his duty under the Hong Kong
Customs & Excise Service General Order No. 6 could constitute the necessary physical element in the offence was sound. A deliberate omission can constitute the physical element of this offence. Ashbury versus Reid [[1961] WAR ] at 50-1,
R versus Kelly [(1975) 12 SASR 389] at 400, R v Tannous [(1987) 10 NSWLR 303] and R v
Bucket [(1995) 79 A Crim R 302] at applied.` `(2) It was also contended for the appellant that the General Order only created a moral or ethical duty, and that breach of such a duty could not be relevant in establishing criminal liability. No such point had been taken at the trial and under r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) leave to raise this issue was refused. In any event the duty imposed by the General
Order was enforceable by disciplinary action and the Crown only relied on the duty as part of a matrix of fact to establish the appellant's complicity in the importation.` `(3) The evidence from telephone interceptions was in Cantonese. There were several differences between the Crown and defence translations. The trial judge directed the jury that if they were not clear they should adopt the translation most favourable to the accused. The points of divergence did not render the verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.` `(4) The appellant argued that the trial judge's directions on corroboration were incorrect or insufficient. This challenge failed because the directions were correct, there was much evidence to corroborate the accomplice, and the
Crown had an alternative case which was not dependent on the accomplice.` `(5) The Crown argued at trial that the accused lied when he denied meeting with a third party involved in the importation. The third party was not called and the judge gave a Jones versus Dunkel direction but told the jury that in the circumstances they might ignore her non appearance. This direction was sound because the third party could have been called in the defence case.` `(6) The appellant led fresh evidence that witness X, a policeman who had been involved in the investigation, had earlier provided false evidence in another criminal trial, this having been revealed in the Police Royal Commission. X was not a significant witness in the Crown case. The fresh evidence did not establish that the appellant lost the chance of an acquittal, as the evidence of X was procedural in nature and could have been given by other witnesses.` `(7) The verdict was not unsafe and unsatisfactory. The explanations given by the accused for his conduct were inconsistent. The jury could find that they were false.` `ORDER` `Appeal dismissed.` `REGINA versus YING-LUN CHEUNG aka GARY CHEUNG` ` ` `JUDGMENT` `` `THE COURT: In 1993 the appellant stood trial before Badgery-Parker J and a jury on a charge that, between 1 August 1988 and 12 May 1989, he was knowingly concerned in the importation into Australia of a commercial quantity of heroin, contrary to <case> B(1)(d) of the Customs Act. He was convicted after a 2 month trial on 19 May 1993, and sentenced to life imprisonment, subject to a non-parole period of 21 years and 11 months dating from 9
February 1990. At the time of the offence the appellant was a senior inspector in the Hong Kong Customs Service.` ` On 9 May 1989 a ship, "The Nimos", berthed at the Glebe Island Container
Terminal in Sydney. Its cargo included a freezer and water heater within which were concealed 148 blocks of high grade heroin with a gross weight of approximately 50 kgs containing 38 kgs of pure heroin. This had been shipped from Hong Kong to Vanuatu where it was unloaded, packed in the appliances, and despatched to Sydney.` ` The pending arrival of the heroin had been notified to the Australian
Federal Police on 24 April 1989 by Cheung Siu Wah when he arrived that day. He had been involved in the export of the drug from Hong Kong and its transhipment in Vanuatu. He received indemnities from the Directors of Public
Prosecution in Hong Kong and Australia and gave evidence for the Crown at the appellant's trial.` ` The appellant had met Cheung Siu Wah in Hong Kong when arresting him for drug trafficking. He became an informant for the appellant and they became friends. They travelled to China together in 1988 and on their return the appellant, on the Crown case, recruited Cheung Siu Wah for the proposed importation of the heroin from Hong Kong via Vanuatu. The appellant had another informant, Ng Yun Choi (nicknamed Ah Kam), who was also a drug dealer.
On the Crown case the appellant suggested to Cheung Siu Wah that he meet Ah
Kam in connection with this importation.` ` Cheung Siu Wah visited Vanuatu early in 1989 to arrange for the unloading of the heroin and its shipment to Australia. During his second visit, from 26
February to 18 March, he arranged for two persons, including Kwan Yuk Ming (known as Amy), who lived in Vanuatu, to pack the heroin in the freezer and water heater and ship them to Australia. Cheung Siu Wah returned to Hong Kong on 19 March 1989, met the appellant, and told him of the progress of the drug shipment. The appellant asked to meet Amy who had arrived in Hong Kong about the same time and Cheung Siu Wah arranged this for the following evening. In his statement from the dock the appellant denied that this meeting took place.` `The shipment of the heroin to Australia had been delayed, and shortly after March the appellant directed Cheung Siu Wah to return to Vanuatu, and then travel to Sydney to appease the buyers.` ` Cheung Siu Wah co-operated with the Australian Federal Police after 24 April and they were able to record his telephone conversations with others involved in the importation. These included three calls from the appellant which, on the Crown case, contained instructions or directions for completing the importation.` ` The appellant participated in two interviews with the Hong Kong Police and records of those interviews became exhibits. He gave sworn evidence during the extradition proceedings in Hong Kong, and this also became an exhibit, as did his evidence in pre-trial proceedings in Australia in August 1992. He claimed in his unsworn statement that he had not reported the movement of this heroin because he was protecting his informants, Cheung Siu Wah and Ah Kam. He intended to report the matter once the heroin had been delivered and his informants were safe.` ` The appellant appealed against his conviction, relying on 8 grounds. He also relied on fresh evidence to be given by Ah Kam, currently serving a sentence of imprisonment for his role in the same importation, and evidence relating to a police officer, X. X gave evidence at the trial without being cross-examined on credit, but later had admitted to the Royal Commission into the Police
Service that he had given false evidence in another case to secure a conviction.` ` Grounds 3 and 4 raised preliminary issues. Ground 3 alleged that the appellant was denied a fair trial because the venue was in New South Wales, and there were no Chinese speakers on the jury. Ground 4 alleged that there had been a miscarriage of justice by reason of the inability of the appellant to secure the production of evidence from the Police and Customs authorities in Hong Kong.` `The intercepted telephone conversations with Cheung Siu Wah, which were in
Cantonese, were an essential part of the Crown case. The making of the calls was not disputed, nor was the Cantonese text, but there was a dispute about the English translation. A great deal of evidence was given on this topic in both the Crown and defence cases. Although a Sydney jury is not the most suitable tribunal for deciding disputes as to the English meaning of spoken
Cantonese, this cannot be a ground for challenging the conviction. The trial for this offence had to take place in Australia.` `The Judge summed-up on the translation evidence with considerable care. There were very few differences in the translations which were of any significance.
He directed the jury that, given the problems of translating Cantonese into
English, it would be very difficult for them to do anything except adopt the translation which they regarded as most favourable to the accused unless they were completely satisfied that they should reject that version in favour of the version asserted by the Crown. In view of this direction there is no substance in this ground of appeal, and the difficulties with the translation evidence cannot assist in establishing that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.` ` The issue raised by ground 4 was the subject of an application for a stay of proceedings before the trial. This was refused by the trial Judge and an application to this Court for leave to appeal, pursuant to <case> F of the
Criminal Appeal Act, was refused. See R versus Cheung Ying Lun (CCA, 4/12/92, unreported). The written submissions prepared by Mr Byrne SC refer in some detail to the evidence in the possession of the Police and Customs authorities in Hong Kong which the appellant was unable to use in the trial. However there was no evidence on this issue before us and we have no way of knowing whether this material exists, and how important it may be.` `The appellant resisted extradition to Australia, but did not claim that he could not obtain a fair trial, and did not require the production of the evidence in those proceedings. This ground of appeal is without substance and cannot assist the appellant in establishing that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.` ` Ground 1 alleged that the trial Judge erred in his directions on the elements of this offence. If the jury accepted the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah, they would have no difficulty in concluding that the appellant was knowingly concerned in the importation of heroin because it showed that he authorised and directed the importation. The alternative case for the Crown depended on the intercepted telephone conversations and the appellant's breach of duty in failing to report this transaction to his superiors in Hong Kong. The Judge gave the jury extensive directions on this alternative case. ` ` Mr Byrne submitted that the directions on the Crown's alternative case were erroneous because they suggested that a person in authority may be knowingly concerned in a drug importation simply by failing to report his knowledge.` `The Judge reminded the jury that the acts alleged to establish the appellant's knowing concern in the importation fell into three groups. The first two depended on the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah. The third did not. His
Honour directed the jury that the Crown had to prove that the accused was concerned in the importation in the sense that he was an involved participant who acted with knowledge. The offence involved both a physical and a mental element. The physical element required the Crown to prove that the accused did an act or series of acts which tended to advance or assist the importation. He further directed them:` `"... the physical element ... would be established if the Crown proved that the accused did a particular act but it would also be established if the Crown proved that the accused, being under a duty to act in a particular way if certain matters were brought to his attention, took a deliberate decision not to act in that fashion and, thereby, in fact, assisted the importation".` `As to the mental element, the jury were directed that the Crown also had to prove that the accused did the acts, constituting the physical element of the offence, "with the intention, thereby, to advance or assist the importation of heroin into this country". He continued:` `"If you find, as a fact, that the accused deliberately refrained from acting, you will only regard that as knowing concern in the importation if his decision not to act was made with the intention that by so deciding he would advance or assist the importation".` `Mr Byrne submitted that these directions invited the jury to find that the accused was knowingly concerned simply because he knew of the transaction and did nothing. This, it was said, was contrary to R versus Tannous [(1987) 10 NSWLR ]
at 308-9, where Lee J said:` `" ... a mere state of mind ... would not be sufficient to constitute the concern of which the section speaks. The `concern' to which the section speaks is not a concern personal to the appellant in the sense of being in his mind, but it is a concern which can be demonstrated objectively by reference to his association ... with the importation. It must be shown that he is `concerned in' not just `concerned about the importation' ... (A person) would not be guilty of the offence of being knowingly concerned merely from his knowledge of the importation and his state of mind arising therefrom. Before he could be convicted ... he would have to do something to connect himself with or involve himself in the importation".` `We were also referred to R versus Bucket [(1995) 79 A Crim R 302] at , where Hunt CJatCL said:` `"What must be shown is that the ... accused knew of the proposed commission of the offence and that, with that knowledge and by his conduct, he had deliberately become associated with, and thus involved in, the commission of that offence; in other words, the accused must be shown, by his act or omission, to have had something to do with the commission of the offence or to have made a contribution in bringing about its commission ...".` `The Judge directed the jury that a deliberate omission could constitute the physical element of this offence. This has been established for a long time.
See Ashbury versus Reid [[1961] WAR 49] at 50-1, and R versus Kelly [(1975) 12 SASR 389] at 400.
The Judge told the jury they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the acts (or omissions) of the accused in the third group "tended to advance the importation". He continued:` `"Secondly, as to each of the acts in this group, there is an issue - and this is the crucial issue, I suggest: whether the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt that in so acting, the accused had the intention of advancing or assisting the importation".` `He returned to this question in his closing remarks to the jury where he said:` `"In relation to the acts alleged to have been done by the accused from mid-
April onwards, namely his omission to report information received and his making of the telephone calls, the issue is not as to whether the acts were done - there is no doubt about that - if you are satisfied that they were done and that they were acts of such a nature as would tend to advance or assist the importation and you may think there is not a great deal of doubt about that either, then you go to the real issue in relation to those acts, namely, whether, in acting as he did, the accused is proved to have acted with the intention of advancing or assisting the importation or whether, on the other hand, you have a reasonable doubt about that because you regard it as a reasonable possibility that his explanations of his actions are true".` `His Honour did not direct the jury that knowledge alone was sufficient or, for that matter, that knowledge and inactivity were sufficient. The jury were directed that the deliberate failure of the accused to report the information he had, in breach of his duty as an officer in the Hong Kong Customs Service, would be sufficient.` `The point taken by Mr Byrne was not raised at the trial by experienced senior counsel. It is evident from the summing-up, and the absence of any objection or application for re-direction by counsel for the accused, that the only real issue on this part of the case was whether the accused in acting in deliberate breach of his duty had the intention of advancing or assisting the importation. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) applies, and we see no reason why the appellant should be given leave to raise this new point.` `It any event the submission is without substance. In this context nothing turns on the distinction between a deliberate act and a deliberate omission, as an example referred to in argument demonstrates. A Customs officer who knew, or suspected, that an item of baggage contained heroin, but allowed it to enter the country without taking appropriate action, would, in our view, be knowingly concerned in its importation if he had the intention of advancing or assisting the importation. That intention would exist if the officer had agreed for a corrupt reward to allow the baggage through. It may not exist if the officer merely wanted to get off duty early.` `Mr Byrne submitted that the appellant's duty, as a member of the Hong Kong
Customs Service, was not relevant and should not have been left to the jury.
The formal basis of the duty was to be found in paragraph 4 of the Hong Kong
Customs and Excise Service General Order No. 6 of 1985 "Operational Directives for the Handling of Intelligence ..." which provided:` `"4. It is the duty and responsibility of each and every member of the Service to report any information, received directly or indirectly, in connection with any offence under an ordinance listed in the Second Schedule to the Customs &
Excise Service Ordinance. This also applies to intelligence gathered by field officers in connection with their official duties ... Officers who withhold or delay the reporting of any such information will be subject to disciplinary action".` `One officer of the Hong Kong Customs Service was called in the Crown case and three in the defence case. Each said that the accused had a duty to report information about this transaction which, of course, was initiated in Hong
Kong. Mr Byrne submitted that the appellant did not have "a duty in law" and could only be criminally liable for breach of a legal duty, not one that was only moral or ethical. However the duty arose from a lawful instruction binding on members of the Service and enforceable by disciplinary action. In any event the appellant was not and could not be prosecuted for breach of clause 4. The duty and its breach were relied upon as part of a matrix of fact to establish the appellant's complicity in the importation of this heroin. In the same way a deliberate breach of contractual duty by an employee responsible for safeguarding goods against theft could be relevant in establishing that he was implicated in a particular theft. ` `There had been no issue at the trial as to the existence of this duty and the relevance of its breach, and, if it were necessary, we would apply r 4 and refuse leave to raise this issue.` `The Judge left the acts in the third group to the jury on the basis that each could constitute the physical element of the offence. He said:` `"... there are two issues for you to decide. First, as to each of those acts, whether the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt that it was an act which tended to advance the importation ...` `Secondly, as to each of the acts in this group, there is an issue - and this is the crucial issue, I suggest: whether the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt that in so acting, the accused had the intention of advancing or assisting the importation".` `The jury were not directed that they had to be satisfied that all these acts had occurred with the necessary intention in every case, and no such issue was raised by the accused. The suggestion that all the acts had to be established, and with the necessary intention, lacks reality. The physical element in this offence could have been established by the breach of duty alone, or by a single phone call if the jury were satisfied that either tended to advance the importation.` `The next submission under this ground of appeal was that the directions on the relevance of the appellant's stated motive were erroneous. He claimed in his unsworn statement that he delayed reporting his information to protect the lives of his informers. The Judge directed them:` `"... I should remind you that intention is not the same as motive. The intention with which a person acts relates to what it is that he seeks to achieve by his act. The motive with which he acts relates to his reasons, which may be very private and personal, for wishing to achieve that outcome. A person may have some very creditable reason or motive for doing what he does, for seeking to achieve the outcome which his action is intended to produce, but the motive and the intention are different concepts. If a person intentionally does an act which is, to his knowledge, a criminal act, the existence of a creditable motive for so acting is, in law, no answer to a criminal charge in respect of it".` `No objection was taken to this at the trial, but Mr Byrne submitted that the appellant's stated motive was relevant in considering his intention. If the jury accepted that the accused had the motive he claimed, or had a reasonable doubt, they could not find that he had the intention of advancing the importation, even if that was the necessary result.` `In our opinion the Judge was plainly correct in directing the jury that "a creditable motive ... is, in law, no answer to a criminal charge". The jury could not have thought they could find that the accused intended to advance the importation merely because that was "a necessary consequence of his conduct". On the contrary, they were instructed that in order to convict they had to find that the accused had "acted with the intention of advancing or assisting the importation", and they should acquit if they thought that it was "a reasonable possibility that his explanations of his actions are true".` `This objection lacks substance in the light of this and similar passages in the summing-up. The case in any event is within r 4, and we would not grant leave to allow this point to be taken.` `The second ground of appeal is as follows:` `"The case against the appellant was misconceived in that the prosecution contended that it could establish his guilt by relying on the evidence apart from the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah, whereas in the absence of the evidence of that witness there was no case against the appellant".` `Senior counsel for the accused told the jury in his closing address that the case for the Crown depended on the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah, but the Judge directed them otherwise. He said:` `"It is open to you - again whether you do or not is a matter of fact for you, but it is open to you - to conclude that the evidence which has been placed before you independently of Cheung Siu Wah is sufficient to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. If Mr Nicholson's remarks conveyed a different impression, then you must disregard them".` `The appellant's phone calls to Cheung Siu Wah were capable of establishing the physical element of the offence. Each was concerned with the transaction and little else. The jury could find, even on the translation evidence in the case for the accused, that he was well informed about the transaction and was making suggestions and giving instructions. A number of examples included in the written submissions for the Crown amply support this conclusion. Each call was made at a critical time from a public phone in Hong Kong.` `There was also ample evidence, independent of that given by Cheung Siu Wah which, if accepted, established that the accused had the necessary intention.
Such a finding was open on the evidence of the telephone conversations. The jury also had available to them the evidence given by the accused in the extradition proceedings when he said that his purpose in ringing Cheung Siu
Wah was to elicit more information about the importation. The jury were entitled to find that this explanation was inconsistent with the content of the telephone conversations and with his failure to report the matter or mention it when questioned by the Hong Kong Police on 12 May 1989. He said in the extradition proceedings that he did not have sufficient information to report the matter, but this was inconsistent with the knowledge he claimed in his unsworn statement. There was also other evidence which, if accepted, established that the explanations given by the accused for failing to report this transaction were false.` `In our opinion the Judge's directions challenged in this ground of appeal were correct and the ground is not made out.` `Ground 5 was that the directions as to the role of Cheung Siu Wah, who had been granted immunity from prosecution, and the impact of that factor on the jury's assessment of his credibility, were inadequate. ` `The principal witness against the appellant was Cheung Siu Wah. His evidence, if believed, was sufficient to convict the appellant, and it was therefore essential that the jury be given careful directions concerning the need for corroboration, the nature of corroboration and the evidence which was capable of affording corroboration. It was also necessary to explain the significance of the grant of immunity to their evaluation of his evidence: R versus Chai [(1992) NSWLR 153] at 176.` `The Judge said, early in his summing-up, that Cheung Siu Wah was a most important part of the Crown case and the jury's assessment of his credibility was a most important part of their function. Later he dealt with the attacks that had been made on this witness's credibility, and continued: ` `"The tenth matter is the witnesses' specific motivation to gain for himself particular advantages for which he is dependent upon the co-operation, support and influence of the Australian Federal Police. He has applied for a reward and for permanent residency for himself and his family, and for assistance in establishing a new identity in order to conceal his whereabouts from the Triad who might seek revenge on him. The suggestion [is] that his sense of obligation to the Australian Federal Police and his anxiety to achieve those advantages for himself and his family, advantages he is unlikely to get without the help of the Australian Federal Police, provide a strong motivation for him to give false evidence to procure the conviction of the accused. ` `Number eleven, finally, among the matters to which I propose to make express reference, is the fact that he has been granted an immunity from prosecution, both in this country and in Hong Kong".` `He then gave a warning about the evidence of accomplices, to which we shall return when considering ground 6; and pointed out that, although Cheung Siu
Wah had been sentenced and served his sentence in respect of offences against the law of Vanuatu, he had not been dealt with for any offence which he may have committed against the law of Hong Kong or Australia, but had been given an immunity from prosecution. He explained what that meant and continued:` `"There are two aspects of that immunity which I should bring to your attention and which you should carefully consider in your assessment of the evidence of the accomplice. The nature of the immunity was stated at the outset of the evidence. It is an undertaking that any evidence that he may give in the course of these proceedings will not be used against him, neither in Australia nor in Hong Kong. That immunity is conditional upon his giving truthful evidence. If he gives evidence which is untrue he would forfeit his immunity. In one sense that reinforces, you may think, the probability that he will give truthful evidence ...". (emphasis supplied)` `It was submitted that these directions suggested that the immunity was likely to enhance the credibility of his evidence. This submission is based on a selective reading of the summing-up, because his Honour went on to say:` `"... but remember what I said about a witness who has given an account at an early stage, feeling locked into it. You need to consider whether the risk of forfeiting his immunity creates a risk that, the witness having earlier given an account falsely implicating the accused, will now cling to it in order to avoid the risk that, if he departs from it, the prosecuting authority here or in Hong Kong would conclude that he had given false evidence. On the other hand, any person who gives false evidence on oath before a Court is liable for prosecution for perjury and the immunity which has been given does not extend to protect Cheung Siu Wah from a charge of that kind. You need to consider whether, in these circumstances, that enhances the probability that he would stick to the truth".` `In other words, having pointed out that the immunity only applied so long as the witness gave truthful evidence, the Judge pointed out that if he had originally given a false statement implicating the accused, he may have felt locked in to that falsehood and felt a need to continue it. These were countervailing arguments and it was incumbent on the Judge to present both to the jury. This he did and the objection is without substance. No objection was taken at the trial to this direction and r 4 applies. We would not grant leave for this point to be raised on appeal.` `Ground 6 was that the directions on the question of corroboration were inadequate. The Judge gave the usual warning that although the jury could find the accused guilty even if there was no other evidence except that of an accomplice, the experience of the courts over many years has been that the evidence of accomplices can be unreliable, and it is dangerous to convict on such evidence unless it is corroborated. He pointed out that it was only necessary to look for corroboration if, after having scrutinised the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah, they did not entirely reject it, but if they concluded that nothing he said could be relied on then they did not need to consider the question of corroboration. He went on:` `"However, if you do reject his evidence, you will still need to examine all the other evidence on which the Crown relies, not, in that event, because of its possible use as corroboration but because it is said to establish, quite apart from anything said by Cheung Siu Wah, that the accused is guilty of the offence. That is a separate aspect of the case that I will come to later but if Cheung Siu Wah's evidence is evidence that you feel obliged to reject, then corroboration won't save it".` `The Judge then pointed out that the direction was given in every case where the Crown relied on the evidence of accomplices, and it was given because of the accumulated experience of the courts. He referred to reasons why the evidence of an accomplice may be unreliable, and the immunity of Cheung Siu
Wah from prosecution. He told the Jury that despite the warning, it was open to them, having taken it into account, to find the accused guilty even if they concluded that the evidence of the accomplice was uncorroborated. He then explained what amounts to corroboration, identified the four matters capable of constituting corroboration, and examined the relevant evidence in some detail. They were:` `(1) The appellant's failure to report his knowledge to his superiors;` `(2) The three taped telephone calls with Cheung Siu Wah;` `(3) What the Crown contended were lies by the appellant in relation to his meeting with Amy and his explanation before the examining Magistrate in Hong
Kong (Exhibit Z) for his telephone calls to Cheung Siu Wah; and ` `(4) Circumstantial evidence which tended to confirm the evidence of the accomplice.` `At the end of the summing-up senior counsel for the appellant asked the Judge to direct the Jury: "That if they positively disbelieved Cheung Siu Wah, that corroboration would not take it any further". The Judge said he had already told them that, and he declined to give a further direction. ` `It was suggested that this was a reference to p 141 of the summing-up where his Honour said: ` `"Certainly, if you reject Cheung Siu Wah's evidence because you are not satisfied that he is a credible and reliable witness, the circumstantial evidence that is relied upon as corroboration would not save the Crown's case and you would reject the Crown case in so far as it is based on Cheung Siu
Wah, but if, when you consider Cheung Siu Wah's evidence, you would find that you do have some doubts about his veracity or reliability without, however, going so far as to positively reject everything he says, you might find that doubt was resolved by the matter of corroboration which we have been discussing today". ` `Mr Byrne submitted that this passage only referred to the circumstantial body of evidence relied on by the Crown as corroboration and no such direction was given in relation to the other matters relied on as corroboration.` `Once again a passage from the summing-up has been taken out of context. At the foot of the previous page, the Judge had overruled a submission by senior counsel for the appellant to the jury that if they disbelieved Cheung Siu Wah they could not convict the accused, ruling that it was open to them to convict on the alternative Crown case. In the passage referred to, he pointed out that if they rejected the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah, the circumstantial evidence relied on as corroboration would not save the Crown case in so far as it was based on the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah. The other matters relied on as corroboration were not relevant in this context.` `In any event, the assessment of Cheung Siu Wah's credibility and the assessment of the corroboration were not separate issues, and one would expect the jury to consider them at the same time.` `It was then submitted that the directions on circumstantial evidence as corroboration referred to a large number of matters which were not in dispute and which could fairly be described as so neutral as to have no value as corroboration. However the strength of circumstantial evidence depends on the combined effect of the relevant evidence.` `Finally, it was submitted that there was a degree of circular reasoning in using the appellant's unsworn statement about the meeting with Amy and part of his statement to the examining Magistrate as lies capable of corroborating the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah. The Judge directed the jury that the evidence of
Cheung Siu Wah's wife about the meeting was not corroboration in the technical sense because the meeting did not implicate the appellant in the crime. It was relied on by the Crown to establish that the appellant lied about that meeting, and that lie could corroborate Cheung Siu Wah's evidence. There was accordingly no circularity of reasoning in allowing the lie (if established) to be used as corroboration. The Judge directed the jury to consider whether the evidence of the wife was really independent of that given by her husband about the meeting. He also told them that as her evidence was relied on to establish the lie they had to be satisfied about that evidence beyond reasonable doubt. The directions on corroboration and on the use of the evidence of the wife were more than adequate, and were not open to objection.
This ground of appeal therefore fails.` `Ground 7 was as follows:` `"The directions given by the learned trial judge on the failure of the Crown to call the witness Amy were inadequate in the circumstances of the case".` `On the Crown case Cheung Siu Wah recruited Amy in Vanuatu to assist in the importation of the heroin. She was involved in concealing the heroin in the water heater and freezer from her restaurant in which it was to be shipped to
Australia. She travelled to Australia during the course of the importation.` `Amy became relevant because the Crown asserted that the accused lied in his unsworn statement when he denied meeting her in a Hong Kong restaurant on 20
March 1989. Amy arrived in Sydney on 11 May 1989, and was again in Sydney during the trial. She was then interviewed by the police but did not wish to give evidence, and was allowed to leave.` `The Crown Prosecutor informed the Judge, in the absence of the jury, that Amy would not be called in the Crown case or made available to the defence for cross-examination. In justification of this decision, he "tendered" MFIs 11, , and 13 being a record by Detective Woods of his interview with Amy on 12
April 1993, her statement of the same day, and the summary of a conversation she had with senior counsel for the accused about the same time. This was apparently sent to the prosecutor with a request that she be called by the
Crown. The Judge was invited to read this material.` `On the Crown case, Amy was an accomplice who had been knowingly concerned in the importation of the heroin into this country. She made it clear during her interview with Detective Woods, and in her statement, that she did not wish to give evidence and would not assist the Crown. She had not been indemnified in
Australia, Hong Kong or Vanuatu, and it was clear that she would not incriminate herself. In the light of her conversation with defence counsel, she might even give what, on the Crown case, was false evidence. She had been available to the defence and could have been called in the defence case.` `In the course of his summing-up, the Judge commented on Amy's absence from the witness box and gave the jury a standard Jones versus Dunkel direction. He said that they should not draw an inference against the Crown "unless it appears to you that there is no reasonable explanation of the fact that she has not been called". He explained that on the Crown case Amy, as an active participant, was liable to prosecution on the same charge as the accused. He told them that the Crown could have subpoenaed her and prevented her from leaving the country, but if she had been called as a witness, she would have been entitled to claim privilege against self-incrimination and refuse to answer questions.
He reminded them of evidence given by a police officer that she had not wished to co-operate with the Crown or give evidence. He continued:` `"If it appears to you, in these circumstances, that it is reasonable that the
Crown should not have called her, it would not be proper for you to draw any inference adverse to the Crown case from the fact that she had not been called. If you are not satisfied that there was good reason for the Crown not to have called her, then you may draw an inference that her evidence would not have assisted the Crown ...".` `In conclusion he said:` `"All in all, I would suggest you might properly conclude that the best approach to the fact that Amy has not been called to give evidence is simply to ignore it and to treat her non-appearance as a matter which is entirely neutral and one that does not assist either party in any way".` `These were faultless directions and if anything favourable to the appellant because Amy had been made available to his counsel and could have been called in the defence case. This ground of appeal has not been established.` `Ground 8 related to the proposed fresh evidence. The accused called Ng Yun
Choi (Ah Kam) to give evidence in the appeal but he invoked his privilege against self-incrimination, and the Court then explored the complexities of s of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). This process had been underway for some time, with only formal evidence having been adduced from this witness, when the attempt to lead evidence from this witness was abandoned and he was returned to Berrima Gaol.` `The application to adduce further evidence in relation to witness X was pursued and the relevant evidence from the Royal Commission was received. This established that, prior to this trial, X had fabricated evidence in another case to secure the conviction of a man he believed to be innocent. This evidence would have had a devastating effect on the credit of X in the eyes of the jury. He had been involved, as a police sergeant, in the initial investigations after Cheung Siu Wah had voluntarily reported to the Federal
Police on his arrival in Sydney on 24 April 1989. However Superintendent
Foster had been in charge of those investigations and other police had also been involved.` `As Mr Agius SC demonstrated, the evidence of X related to the police investigations and the gathering of evidence and was adjectival in nature. X did not interview the appellant or arrest him. The evidence which supported the conviction was direct evidence of his complicity given by Cheung Siu Wah and the transcripts of the telephone conversations. X was not an essential witness. The Crown could have called Superintendent Foster to give the same evidence and in all probability would have done so if it had been aware of the information revealed by the Royal Commission. In any event there is no reason to think that the evidence given by X played any part in the conviction of the appellant.` `Mr Byrne submitted that the information derived from the Royal Commission would have enabled counsel for the accused to cross-examine X to suggest impropriety in the police investigation and the gathering of evidence. He referred to a number of aspects of the police investigation, which in his submission were unsatisfactory, and could have been followed up in this way.` `These included the fact that although Cheung Siu Wah was extensively interviewed, no statement was taken from him while he was in Sydney between 24
April and 13 May 1989. He then returned to Vanuatu where Federal Police did conduct a tape recorded interview but the tapes were later lost in Hong Kong.
Although the evidence of Cheung Siu Wah implicated Amy, she was never charged and was twice allowed to leave the country. It was suggested that her immunity may have been the result of misconduct by X. If this possibility had been followed up, other misconduct by X may have been revealed in relation to the evidence given by Cheung Siu Wah, which might have affected the latter's credit. Mr Byrne relied on the fact that Cheung Siu Wah did not implicate either the appellant or Amy during his interviews in Sydney in April and May
He first did so in a recorded interview in Vanuatu conducted by
Superintendent Foster.` `Mr Agius demonstrated that these matters were known to the defence and were before the jury. Cheung Siu Wah and X were cross-examined about the fact that no statement had been taken from the former while in Australia. However there were debriefing notes which were made available to the defence and used in cross-examination. The jury were also aware that Cheung Siu Wah had not implicated the appellant, Amy, or Charlie (Lo Ling, another Chinese resident in Vanuatu), until interviewed in Vanuatu. X did not go to Vanuatu and was not involved in the police investigations in that country.` `There was nothing to suggest that X made the decision in May 1989 that Cheung
Siu Wah should not be arrested but allowed to return to Vanuatu. Such a decision would have been made by Superintendent Foster, or someone even higher in the Service.` `There was no evidence that X had a role in any decision to allow Amy to return to Vanuatu, or in any neglect which allowed that to happen. He was cross-examined about these matters before the jury, but denied any involvement in what had occurred. There is also no reason to think that a successful attack on the credit of X in cross-examination would have led to the discovery of any additional information about Amy which would have assisted the defence case. Counsel for the accused had spoken to Amy while she was in Sydney.` `There was an agreement between counsel at the trial that X could be "a representative witness of the police involvement" (transcript 5/2/97, pp -2). If the fresh evidence had become available before the trial, the Crown could have called Superintendent Foster instead. This could also have been done even if the fresh evidence became available during the trial in time to be used in the cross-examination of X. The Crown's ability to call
Superintendent Foster to give the same evidence as X would have isolated and neutralised any successful attack on X's credit. In our judgment, the absence of evidence of X's misconduct did not deprive the appellant of the chance of an acquittal. The application for a new trial based on this evidence therefore fails.` `The final ground of appeal is that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.
In the light of our conclusions, it is clear that the trial was conducted in accordance with law and without irregularity. The Crown case against the appellant was based in part on the evidence of the indemnified accomplice,
Cheung Siu Wah. However that evidence was corroborated, and the jury were able to assess his credibility in the light of extensive cross-examination, and the available corroboration. The Crown case included other evidence, independent of that given by Cheung Siu Wah, on which the jury could also convict. It was open to the jury to find that the deliberate decision of the accused not to report his knowledge to the Hong Kong Police strongly supported the Crown case.` `The appellant gave two explanations for his failure to report his knowledge.
The first given to the Hong Kong Police was that he did not have sufficient information. The second, in his unsworn statement, was that he wished to protect the lives of his informants. The explanations were inconsistent and each destructive of the other. Each was inherently incredible, but the giving of the second demonstrated the implausibility of the first, and no reason appears for the appellant's failure to mention the second explanation during his interviews by the Hong Kong Police except that it had not yet occurred to him. The Crown were also able to rely upon these matters as lies evidencing consciousness of guilt. There was ample evidence including that given by the interpreter, Mr Chan, in the defence case that the appellant gave advice and instructions to Cheung Siu Wah during his telephone calls. Mr Chan conceded in cross-examination, contrary to his evidence-in-chief, that the appellant's statement during the last conversation "give 35 persons to him/her first" could have been an instruction. It was also open to the jury to find on the basis of the telephone conversations that the explanations given by the appellant for his failure to report his information were false.` `This was a strong Crown case and in our judgment the jury were entitled to find beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty as charged. His previous good character and his senior position in the Hong Kong Customs
Service were important matters for the consideration of the jury, but in themselves they do not establish that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.` `This ground of appeal also fails and accordingly the appeal should be dismissed.` * * * 
