

Charbel Saade versus Bill Vergados and Anor [1996] NSWSC 488 (15 October 1996) 
CHARBEL SAADE versus BILL VERGADOS & ANOR /94; 5332/93 
Tuesday 15 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Handley JA, Santow AJA, Simos AJA 
CATCHWORDS: REAL PROPERTY - LEASE - ELECTION - UNEQUIVOCAL CONDUCT.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
The appellants were the former tenants of premises that were destroyed by fire. The respondent owners submitted plans to the Council for development consent for reconstruction of the building. Consent was granted subject to the carrying out of additional work. The lease provided that where the premises were destroyed by fire the lessor could terminate the lease, or rebuild and continue the lease. The respondents terminated the lease as compliance with the Council's conditions would involve extra expense that would need to be passed on in the rent. At trial the appellants argued that the application for development consent was conduct under the relevant clause in the lease, and evidenced as unequivocal election to continue the lease. The Judge found that there had been no such election. On appeal: 
HELD, dismissing the appeal: (1) There had been no conduct that constituted an unequivocal election to continue the lease: Sargent versus ASL Developments Ltd <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 634] followed.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an appeal by a former tenant of premises at Warilla from a decision of Cohen J who held that the lease had been validly terminated.

The appellant became tenant of the property by assignment from the contractual tenant in June 1991. On 3 December 1992 the premises were destroyed by fire.
Following the fire the landlords caused fresh building plans to be prepared providing for the reconstruction of the building that had been destroyed.
These were submitted to the Shellharbour Council at some stage in December .

At about the same time a representative of the landlords had a conversation with the tenant who was asked to obtain a quote for the rebuilding of the premises from the builder who had earlier carried out alteration work for the tenant. The builder's quote is in writing and was provided to the landlords in late December or January 1993.

In January the landlords wrote to their insurer, Sun Alliance, and foreshadowed the possibility that the Council might require additional work to be carried out as part of the reconstruction of the property as a condition of any building consent acknowledging that they would not be covered by any insurance settlement for such extra work.

On 2 March the Council granted development consent subject to conditions which required the carrying out of additional work. A meeting was then held at the appellant's home which was attended by one of the landlords and his parents at which there was a discussion about the effect of the Council's requirements.

The lease contained a provision in cl 3(c) dealing with the effect of destruction of the premises by fire. This provided: "3(c) If the whole or any part of the demised premises shall be destroyed or damaged by fire ... so as to render the demised premises during the term substantially unfit for the use and occupation of the lessee or so as to deprive the lessee of substantial use of the same then: this lease may be terminated without compensation by either the Lessor or the Lessee by notice in writing to the other PROVIDED ALWAYS that in the latter case the Lessor shall have failed to rebuild or reinstate the demised premises within a reasonable time after notice in writing from the Lessee; any such termination as aforesaid shall be without prejudice to the rights of either party in respect of any antecedent breach matter or thing; nothing herein contained or implied (whether by reason of the nature and extent of the Lessor's insurance of the demised premises or otherwise) shall be deemed to impose any obligation upon the Lessor to rebuild or reinstate or make fit for occupation the demised premises".

It had been accepted by both parties after the fire that cl 3(c) applied and the landlords acknowledged that the tenant's obligation to pay rent had abated pending possible reconstruction of the property.

There was a dispute at the trial as to what occurred at the meeting early in
March but the Judge found that the landlords' version was substantially correct. His Honour said that bearing in mind the impression that had been made upon him by the witnesses and bearing in mind certain external matters which he regarded as throwing light on the probabilities, he preferred the evidence given by the defendants. On these findings Mrs Vergados told the appellant that in view of the Council's "conditions" the old lease was at an end and that there would have to be a new lease at a higher rent if the appellant wished to continue to operate a service station on the property.

The situation which Mrs Vergados conveyed to the appellant was, in her mind, brought about by the increased cost of the reconstruction work which would have to be met by the landlords if they were to take up the development consent.

The appellant's case in this Court was that the trial Judge should have found that the landlords had elected in terms of cl 3(c) to affirm the lease and to rebuild the premises so that the lease was enforceable by the tenant. The trial Judge held that there had been no conduct on the part of the landlords which constituted an unequivocal election to continue the lease. An important element in his Honour's reasoning leading to this conclusion was his findings about the meeting in early March.

According to Mr Moss's submission, the landlords' unequivocal election was evidenced by the preparation of the plans in December 1992 and their lodgement with a development application to the Shellharbour Council later that month.
He also relied upon the request to the appellant to obtain a quote from the builder for rebuilding the premises.

There was no dispute about the relevant legal principles. Mr Moss accepted that these were sufficiently summarised in the judgment of Mason J (as he then was) in Sargent versus ASL Developments Limited <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 634] at 656, where his Honour said: "A person confronted with a choice between the exercise of alternative and inconsistent rights is not bound to elect at once. He may keep the election open, so long as he does not affirm the contract or continuance of the estate and so long as the delay does not cause prejudice to the other side. An election takes place when the conduct of the party is such that it would be justifiable only if an election had been made one way or the other...So, words or conduct which do not constitute the exercise of a right conferred by or under a contract and merely involve a recognition of the contract may not amount to an election to affirm the contract".

The other statement of principle which is relevant is from the judgment of the majority in Immer (No 145) Pty Limited versus Uniting Church in Australia
Property Trust  <case>; [(1993) 182 CLR 26] at 39 where the majority said: "The consequences of election may well be serious for the party electing, in particular election involves the abandoning of a right that is available. A party can only be held to be elected `if he has so communicated his election to the other party in clear and unequivocal terms'".

I have referred to the conduct of the landlords which Mr Moss relied upon as an exercise of rights under the lease in unequivocal terms.

In my judgment the conduct in question was not unequivocal and in any event did not involve the exercise of any right conferred by or under the lease.
Clause 3(c) conferred no right upon the landlords which was exercised by the conduct relied upon by Mr Moss. That conduct was entirely explicable in terms of the landlord's ownership of the freehold. Moreover, in terms of the statement of principle by Mason J, the conduct relied upon was not "justifiable only if an election had been made".

Accordingly the conduct relied upon, although it may be inferred it was communicated, cannot constitute an unequivocal election to maintain the lease on foot. In my opinion, therefore, the first submission on behalf of the appellant fails.

The remaining matter relied upon by Mr Moss involved a challenge to the findings of fact by the trial Judge relating to the events at the meeting in the appellant's home. As his Honour made clear, these findings were based partly on his Honour's view of the credibility and reliability of the witnesses, and partly on what his Honour described as "external matters".

It is clear that these findings are within the principles emphasised in
Devries versus Australian National Railways Commission <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 472.] In order to displace those findings, the appellant must show that they are inconsistent with facts incontrovertibly established or are glaringly improbable. In my judgment the appellant was unable to point to any facts incontrovertibly established which were inconsistent with these findings and nothing brought to the Court's attention established that they were glaringly improbable. In my judgment the findings cannot be disturbed.

In those circumstances the appeal entirely fails and should be dismissed with costs.

SANTOW AJA: I concur.

SIMOS AJA: I agree with Handley JA.

HANDLEY JA: The orders of the Court will be that the appeal is dismissed with costs. * * * 
