

Harrison versus Zurich Australian Insurance Ltd [1996] NSWSC 309 (30 July 1996) 
HARRISON versus ZURICH AUSTRALIAN INSURANCE LIMITED /96 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
CATCHWORDS: Insurance : Fire Policies covering Buildings, Contents and Business 
Interruption 
Primary method of indemnity reinstatement and replacement 
Payments only to be made if reinstatement and replacement carried out with reasonable dispatch and costs "actually incurred" :Secondary method of indemnity payment of value at date of fire 
CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited [[1995] 8 ANZ Ins
Cas 61-232] applied 
Atholone Pty Limited versus General Accident Fire and Life Assurance Corporation & Anor [[1985] 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-648] not followed.

Repudiation of Contract of Insurance: 
The Progressive Mailing House Pty Limited versus Tabali Pty Limited <case>; [(1984-1985) 157 CLR 17];
CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited; Kennedy v
Wueensland Insurance Company <case>; [(1924) 24 SR 542];
Edwards versus Insurance Office of Australia Limited [(1933) 33 SR ]; Broadlands Properties Limited & Broadlands Estates
Limited versus Guardian Assurance Co Limited [1984] 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-552 and
Foran versus Wight <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 385] considered.

General Damages for Breach: 
Interest: Section 57 [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) - "unreasonable" 
Bennett versus Jones [[1977] 2 NSWLR 355] and CIC
Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited considered.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The plaintiff, Mr Sydney Thomas Walter Harrison, for whom Mr P.L.G. Brereton of Counsel appeared, purchased the freehold of the Commercial Hotel at 106
Caswell Street, Peak Hill in about 1979 and, thereafter, he operated the hotel business for a number of years. In about 1985 or 1986 he leased the business to a Mr Kevin Campkin, who, apparently, left after approximately fourteen months. The plaintiff operated the hotel until about December 1989, when he leased the premises to Suzanne Maxine Kenyon for a term of ten years. In about
January 1991 Ms Kenyon defaulted in her lease payments and the plaintiff commenced eviction proceedings against her. He negotiated the re-purchase of the business, including its goodwill, plant and fittings, and entered into an agreement to purchase on 12 March 1991: (Exhibit B). The purchase price was $25,000 and the contract provided that no amount was apportioned for goodwill, the whole being in respect of plant, fittings, chattels and fixtures.

On completion of that purchase in March 1991, the plaintiff appointed Mr Kerry
John Barnett as the hotel's manager and transferred the licence to him. He terminated Mr Barnett's services on 12 July 1991 and commenced negotiations with a Mr Wilkes for the sale of the leasehold of the hotel. These did not proceed because, I infer, on 30 July 1991 the hotel and its contents were substantially destroyed by fire. It was necessary for the plaintiff to engage a contractor to demolish what remained and remove the debris from the site.

Mr Barnett provided a statement to the solicitors for the defendant, (Exhibit ), in which he stated that when he took over the management of the hotel it "was doing virtually no business". No counter meals were available, the bedrooms were not furnished and the furnishing in the bistro area was inappropriate for a restaurant. There was only a small stock of liquor and, at the start of trading he was taking about $600 a week, which "over the following months .. improved to the point when I was taking nearly $2,000 a week".

Mr Barnett said he recorded the takings, save for the weeks commencing 3 and June 1991, and he banked all takings, with the exception of his wages, into the plaintiff's cheque account. The statement also set forth that the plaintiff terminated the employment of Mr Barnett because the plaintiff asserted the hotel business was "going backwards".

The plaintiff entered into a GRE Fire Insurance Policy No 21/216535/1, (Exhibit A), ("the Building Policy"), over the premises for the period from 18
February 1991 to 18 February 1992. By that policy buildings and all structural appurtenances, but excluding property more specifically insured under other contracts, were insured for $1m. The extra cost of re-instatement and costs of removal of debris was stated as being "included" and an amount for accidental damage of $5,000 was also included. This policy was in force at the date of the fire and, in due course, it will be necessary to refer to it in more detail.

The plaintiff also took out a GRE Business Insurance Policy , (Exhibit C), ("the Contents Policy"), the schedule to which is Exhibit 6. That covered a period from 13 May 1991 to 13 May 1992 and provided insurance, inter alia, for machinery, plant and contents in the sum of $400,000, and for business interruption.

Although the policies were issued by GRE Insurance Limited, which initially retained solicitors to act on its behalf, the proceedings are brought against the defendant. No objection has been taken to this and I can only assume that in some way the defendant has assumed liability under them. In the circumstances I do not have to consider that matter further. The liability is that of the defendant for which Mr L. King of Senior Counsel and Mr R.J.H.
Darke of Counsel appeared.

On 24 January 1992 the solicitors for the plaintiff wrote to loss adjusters appointed on behalf of the defendant stating that the plaintiff had been charged with conspiracy to commit arson; that the charge would be "strenuously defended"; that it may take some time for the litigation to be concluded; and:- ".. in the meantime, we would expect that the insurer will put a 'hold' on dealing with the insurance claim. If this is not so, please let us know.
 
On the assumption that it is, however, our client is concerned about his financial position deteriorating because he has no income from the hotel and has mortgage commitments to his bank. Furthermore, he is presently out of work. 
Our client has been approached by interested persons enquiring as to whether he would be interested in selling the land and/or the hotelier's licence. We emphasise that no firm proposals have been put to him at this stage and he is not actively seeking to sell, however, in the event that any such proposals do materialise in the future, we would appreciate if you would advise whether the insurer has any comments to make.
 
Our client is under some pressure from his mortgagee bank and the debt is escalating because our client is not able to make any payments thereon. 
Accordingly, we would appreciate if you would let us have your comments in relation to the above." 
On 26 February 1992 the solicitors then acting for GRE Insurance Limited replied stating:- "As you rightly infer in the third paragraph of your letter our client will not make a decision in relation to your client's claim until such time as the proceedings against him by the Police have been dealt with and the transcript is studied by ourselves.
 
We are also instructed to indicate to you that our client does not wish to make any comment in relation to whatever decision your client makes from a commercial point of view in relation to the hotel." 
There is no evidence to suggest that the plaintiff or his solicitors disputed the stance then taken by the defendant through its solicitors.

The criminal proceedings were heard by Ford DCJ, without a jury, in May 1995 and, at the completion of the prosecution evidence, his Honour acquitted the plaintiff. He delivered his reasons for so doing on 2 June 1995. Although so much was conceded, the reasons were tendered, but not to prove the truth of the facts alleged therein.

On 1 November 1995 the solicitors for the defendant wrote to the solicitors for the plaintiff, (Exhibit K), noting that the criminal proceedings were concluded and confirming that the defendant had considered the evidence "together with other evidence in its possession", and advising:- ".. that our client now formally denies indemnity to Mr Harrison under the Policy".
 
The letter continued:- "The interest to the Westpac Banking Corporation was, at the relevant time, noted on the Policy. Because Westpac is a separate insured, and Westpac's entitlement to claim under the Policy is unrelated to the denial to Mr Harrison, our client will be obliged to meet the extent of Westpac's interest as at the date of alleged loss i.e. as at 31 July 1991.
 
Please note that our client will, after satisfying the extent of Westpac's entitlement, be proceeding to exercise its rights of subrogation under the Policy, in Westpac's name and proposes to commence an action against Mr Harrison for recovery of the Westpac debt." 
The parties, very sensibly, agreed upon the following amounts as figures, Tpp.9 and 10:- 
The amount payable under the building policy upon a reinstatement rebuilding basis - $1m; 
The amount payable under the building policy on a market value basis - $180,000; 
Cost of demolition and removal of debris $19,476, which it was agreed subsequently had been increased, in ways it is unnecessary at present to detail but for which the defendant accepts liability, to $30,612.13 on which interest at the rate of $7.66 per day is running from 17 July 1996; 
Payable to the Parkes Shire Council - $2,115; 
The amount payable under the contents policy on a replacement value - $138,000; and 
The amount payable under the contents policy on a market value - $40,000.
 
The issues propounded require a determination of the correct amounts payable and, in respect of the business interruption claim, the calculation of that amount. The plaintiff has claimed that the defendant repudiated the contract and that he is entitled to damages based on that repudiation. It is accepted by the defendant that if the contract was repudiated, the repudiation was accepted by the plaintiff's Summons filed on 11 January 1996. The plaintiff has also claimed general damages for breach of the insurance contracts.

The Proceedings 
By its Summons, which I note will have been heard to judgment within eight months from the date of filing, the plaintiff raises as the issues likely to arise:-
Whether the measure of indemnity is the value of the subject matter insured at the time of the loss, or the cost of reinstatement.
The cost of reinstatement of the hotel and contents.
The amount of loss suffered by the plaintiff from business interruption.
The amount of the plaintiff's additional loss consequential upon the defendant's failure to grant indemnity within a reasonable time or at all.
Whether the defendant will persist in alleging arson.

In view of the way the issues have developed it is only necessary to refer to certain parts of the Summary of the Plaintiff's Contentions. In paragraph 2 it is pleaded:- "The defendant agreed to indemnify the plaintiff ('the Insurance Agreement') in respect of:- loss, damage or destruction by fire to the Hotel during the period from 18 February 1991 to 18 February 1992, by paying to the plaintiff the cost of rebuilding the Hotel, the cost of removal of debris, demolition and any temporary repairs necessary consequent upon the destruction of the Hotel by fire, and the Extra Cost of Reinstatement necessarily incurred to comply with the requirements of any Act, regulation or by-law, to a limit of $1 million ('the Building Policy'); loss, damage or destruction by fire to the stock-in-trade, machinery, plant, fixtures, fittings, furniture, equipment, general stores and utensils of trade of every description in the Hotel during the period 13 May 1991 to 13 May 1992, by paying to the plaintiff the cost of replacing the Contents by similar property in a condition equal to its condition when new, to a limit of $400,000 ('the Contents Policy'); loss suffered by the plaintiff resulting from interruption of or interference to the Hotel Business consequent upon the loss, damage or destruction of the Hotel or the Contents, during the period 13 May 1991 to 13 May 1992, to a limit of $1 million ('the Business Interruption Policy').
 
Particulars 
The Building Policy is Policy No 21/216535/1.
 
The Contents Policy is Policy No 24/5360070/6.
 
The Business Interruption Policy is Policy No 24/536071/4." 
It is pleaded that by virtue of the policies of insurance the defendant is liable to indemnify the plaintiff and, in paragraph 8, that on 30 July 1991 the plaintiff notified the defendant of a claim and, on 3 September 1991, lodged a claim under the policies. Paragraph 10 alleges:- "The defendant: has failed or refused to the pay the Claim; and has repudiated the Insurance Agreement.
 
Particulars 
Letter from Dunhill Madden Butler to Trisley Kilmurray O'Sullivan dated 26 February 1992 and continuing failure thereafter to admit the claim; 
Letter from Rankin & Nathan to Trisley Kilmurray O'Sullivan dated 1 November 1995 denying indemnity to the plaintiff; 
Continued assertion by the defendant that the Policies do not entitle the plaintiff to recover cost of reinstatement but only value of insured subject matter at date of loss." 
I have referred to each of the letters specified in the particulars.

In paragraph 11 the plaintiff accepts the repudiation alleged in paragraph 10 and, in paragraph 12, asserts that by reason of the failure and/or refusal to indemnify and/or the repudiation alleged he has been precluded from rebuilding the hotel and from resuming the hotel business. Paragraphs 10(a) and 12 thus raise the claim for general damages, and paragraphs 10(b) and 12 the claim for damages flowing from the acceptance of the alleged repudiation.

The defendant filed Points of Defence on 1 March 1996, which were amended on 8
July 1996, in which in paragraph 10 arson was alleged. That allegation was not repeated in the Amended Points of Defence. However it was not suggested that under the policies arson, if proved by the defendant, would not have been a defence. Conditions 7 and 6 of the Building Policy and Contents Policy respectively make clear that it would have been.

In the Amended Points of Defence the defendant admitted that it issued the
Building, Contents and Business Interruption Policies and that the hotel was destroyed by fire on 30 July 1991. The Defence denied the amount of indemnity sought to be recovered, although, as I have indicated, there is now substantial agreement about the figures as such, and admitted there was business interruption, but denied the loss allegedly suffered. It also admitted notification of and the lodging of the claim as pleaded, and that it had failed or refused to pay the claim. It denied it had repudiated the
Insurance Agreement and, in paragraph 13, admitted that the plaintiff had purported to accept the alleged repudiation, but asserted he is not entitled to treat the Insurance Agreement as being at an end. The claim for damages in paragraph 12 is denied.

In paragraphs 15 and 16 it is pleaded:- "15. In further answer to the Plaintiff's Contentions generally, the Defendant says that the Plaintiff is not entitled to be paid the costs of rebuilding the Hotel because: the work of rebuilding has not been commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch or at all (see Special Provision (i) of Extension 11); no sum equal to the costs of reinstatement has been actually incurred (see Special Provision (iv) of Extension 11); the Plaintiff has not elected to seek reinstatement pursuant to Extension 11 rather than the payment of the value of the Hotel at the time of its destruction; and the Defendant has the option of either paying the value of the Hotel at the time of its destruction, or reinstating the Hotel.
 . In further answer to the Plaintiff's Contentions generally, the Defendant says that the Plaintiff is not entitled to be paid the costs for replacing the contents of the Hotel because the work of replacement has not been commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch or at all (see Provision (i) of Reinstatement or Replacement Extension); no sum equal to the cost of replacement has been actually incurred (see Provision (iv) of Reinstatement or Replacement Extension); the Plaintiff has not elected to seek replacement to the Reinstatement or Replacement Extension rather than payment of the value of the contents of the Hotel at the time of their destruction; and the Defendant has the option of either paying the value of the contents of the Hotel at the time of their destruction, or replacing the contents of the Hotel with similar property in a condition equal to its condition when new." 
Although a number of matters have been pleaded, the issues are somewhat narrower. The plaintiff contends that the primary entitlement to indemnity under both policies is on a reinstatement basis and, in essence, the defendant does not dispute this. Rather it says that the right to payment on this basis is subject to these matters. The first is the obligation imposed by Special Provision (i). However, in the end, I did not understand the defendant to assert that there has been, at this time, a breach of that Special Provision. The second is that payment for reinstatement will only be made if the reinstatement costs are "actually incurred", and so much was not in dispute: CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited [[1995] 8 ANZ Ins Cas 61-232.] The third is that if the plaintiff does not undertake reinstatement he is entitled to payment representing the market value of the hotel and contents at the time of the fire. It was not in issue that the plaintiff is entitled to be indemnified for business interruption for twelve months after the fire and for the amounts payable to the contractor and Parkes Shire Council. 
However, the plaintiff made an additional submission, viz that he is entitled to be paid the market value of the hotel and the contents and, in addition, that he is entitled to a declaration that upon reinstatement he should be paid the difference between the market value paid, (to which should be added the costs of removing the debris and payable to Parkes Shire Council), and the total amount of indemnity. The defendant denied there was such a "dual" entitlement.

The plaintiff also claimed that he is entitled to damages for the alleged repudiation of the contracts and to general damages for breach of contract.
The defendant denied any such entitlement.

The first issue, which I shall consider, is the contractual basis on which the plaintiff is entitled to be paid for loss of the hotel and the contents.

The Contractual Bases On Which The Plaintiff Is Entitled To Be Paid 
The Building Policy provides, relevantly for present purposes, that if the insured property is destroyed by fire the defendant:- ".. shall be subject and liable to pay to the Insured the value of the Property at the time of the happening of its destruction ... or at its option reinstate or replace such Property ..." 
The option, to which reference is made, is that of the defendant. It has not exercised it and there is no suggestion it will be. The primary obligation under that part of the policy, therefore, is to pay the value of the hotel at the time of the fire, which is agreed at $180,000. The consequences to the defendant, in the event of its electing to reinstate, are set forth in Condition 8 but, as the defendant has not purported to elect to reinstate, they are not applicable.

The reinstatement or replacement provision in Extension 11 to the Schedule, which I shall now consider, gives a further right and, in my view, the primary right, under the policy to the plaintiff in that:- "... the basis upon which the amount payable under the Policy is to be calculated shall be the cost of reinstatement of the Property destroyed ... at the time of such destruction ..., subject to the following Special Provisions and subject also to the Terms and Conditions of the Policy except insofar as the same may be varied hereby.
 
For the purpose of the insurance under this extension 'reinstatement' shall mean: where property is destroyed, in the case of a building, the rebuilding thereof, ....
 ....
 
Special Provisions 
The work of rebuilding or replacing or repairing or restoring as the case may be (which may be carried out upon another site and in any manner suitable to the requirements of the Insured but subject to the liability of the Company not being thereby increased), must be commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch, failing which the Company shall not be liable to make any payment beyond the amount which would have been payable under this Policy if this extension had not been incorporated therein.
 ...
 
No payment beyond the amount which would have been payable under the Policy if this extension had not been incorporated therein shall be made until a sum equal to the cost of reinstatement shall have been actually incurred.
 ...
 
Where by reason of any of the foregoing Special Provisions no payment is to be made beyond the amount which would have been payable under this Policy if this extension had not been incorporated therein the rights and liabilities of the Company and the Insured in respect of the destruction or damage shall be subject to the Terms and Conditions of the Policy as if this extension had not been incorporated therein." 
The extension gives the plaintiff a right to indemnification based on the cost of reinstatement "actually incurred", which may be defeated if there is non-compliance with Special Provision (i). The defendant does not now deny liability on that basis notwithstanding that it is pleaded in the Amended Points of Defence, and in any event Special Provision (vi) preserves the right to recover $180,000. However, the maximum amount to which the plaintiff is entitled is $1m. He seeks payment of $180,000 and the amounts for removal of debris and payable to the Parkes Shire Council. The plaintiff then seeks a declaration that upon and in the event of his actually incurring the costs of reinstatement the defendant is bound to pay the balance of $1m, after deducting the payments to which I referred in the preceding sentence. 
The Contents Policy provides for cover on the same basis, cover being provided "in accordance with the applicable Basis of Settlement". The "Reinstatement and Replacement" basis states:- "The Company may at its option and in accordance with the Reinstatement and Replacement extension set out herein, reinstate, replace or repair any damaged item." 
Where property, other than a building, is destroyed the reinstatement is by:- "... the replacement thereof, by similar property, in either case in a condition equal to but not better or more extensive than its condition when new." 
Provisions (i) and (iv) are in the same terms as Special Provisions (i) and (iv). It was not suggested in submissions that a different construction applies to the Contents Policy than to the Building Policy. In my opinion indemnity is provided primarily, and thus initially, by the reinstatement provisions. The plaintiff may lose that right to indemnity if he does not proceed with reasonable dispatch but, subject to that and the actual incurring of reinstatement costs, he is entitled to be paid them by the defendant. If the liability has not been actually incurred at this stage the plaintiff is entitled to an appropriate declaration, although it will have to accommodate possible non-compliance with the reasonable dispatch provision. If reinstatement costs are not actually incurred there is no obligation to indemnify on the reinstatement basis. The plaintiff is cast back to recovering on the value bases provided by the policies.

The plaintiff has submitted that he is entitled to indemnity on the two different bases to which I have referred, although he conceded that the maximum amount recoverable is that stated in each policy. If one were to accede to the plaintiff's submission it would mean that there were two concurrent bases of entitlement, rather than the alternatives for which, in my opinion, the policies, on their proper construction, provide.

In his original submissions Mr Brereton put that the cost of rebuilding is the proper measure of indemnity under the building policy which, in my view, is correct provided it is understood in the sense that it is the proper measure so long as it is available to the insured; i.e. so long as the insured proceeds with reasonable dispatch and actually incurs the costs. From that point Mr Brereton submitted that there had been a repudiation of the policy which, for reasons I shall give, I do not accept, and that the damages for repudiation are:- ".. the amount which would have been payable under the policy if it had been honoured, namely $1,000,000." 
Mr Brereton submitted that the defendant could not rely on Special Provision (i), even if there was no repudiation, because "the Defendant by having improperly refused indemnity is not entitled to rely upon that provision having waived its benefit ..". As I have said, the defendant does not presently rely on it and I am not satisfied that there has been a waiver of the provision. Indeed, none was pleaded.

The next submission is that even if the defendant is entitled to rely on
Special Provision (iv):- ".. the Plaintiff is entitled to immediate payment of the sum which would have been payable but for Extension 11 (namely $201,591), and a declaration that the Defendant is liable to indemnify him up to a limit of a further $798,409 in respect of building costs upon those costs being incurred." $201,591 is the sum of $180,000, $19,476, and $2,115. This submission encapsulates the "dual" bases to which I have referred and the same submissions were made in respect of the Contents policy.

Mr King responded, correctly in my view, that the measure of indemnity was either the market value of the hotel and its contents at the time of the fire or the cost of actual reinstatement or replacement. He relied on the words of the policies, which he submitted were consistent with the general principle that a contract of fire insurance is one of indemnity. He submitted that there was no validity in the proposition that the defendant is unable to rely on
Special Provision (iv). I think this is correct.

Essentially the same submissions were made in relation to the Contents Policy, although it was added that the plaintiff's expert did "not deal with the prospect of a country hotelier acquiring second hand contents of a perfectly adequate kind".

In his further written submissions Mr King contended that Extension 11 gave the plaintiff the option of seeking indemnity by way of actual reinstatement; conceded that Special Provision (i) is a condition precedent to the extent that it entitles the defendant to require reasonable dispatch; and relied on
Special Provision (iv) as governing "the time of payment in respect of an established entitlement".

In respect of Special Provision (i) Mr King conceded that the defendant "would not be entitled to rely upon any failure to comply with that provision whilst the defendant was maintaining its stance of not being bound to indemnify.
However, the plaintiff has known with certainty as from 29 March 1996 that he was entitled to indemnity and if the plaintiff wishes to elect to seek indemnity by way of reinstatement he must now act with reasonable dispatch".
As I understand this submission it acknowledges that the defendant is not, at the moment, able to rely on Special Provision (i) and, in my opinion, that must be correct. However, it also seems to me that the time must be fast approaching when, if the plaintiff does not elect to reinstate, the terms of
Special Provision (i) may well apply. I say "may well apply" because other circumstances, which are not before me, may come about and be relevant.

In response Mr Brereton submitted that the plaintiff was not given an option because, subject to the Special Provisions, he has a right to be paid on a reinstatement basis. However, I have no difficulty with the term "option" in the sense that Mr King used it. All the submission was saying was that the plaintiff is not obliged to reinstate and, if he does not, he is indemnified on a different basis. Whether he does reinstate is a matter for him and, to that extent, it is an option.

After dealing with Special Provision (iv), Mr Brereton returned to his submission about the "dual rights", namely market value payment and a declaration of entitlement in the event of reinstatement. For the reasons I have given I reject this submission. Mr Brereton accepted as correct the submission that:- "Special Provision (iv) merely governs the time of payment in respect of the insured's entitlement ... subject to the qualification that it does so in respect of part only and not the whole of that entitlement. That is to say, it governs the time for payment of so much of the amount payable under Extension 11 as exceeds the amount which would have been payable but for Extension 11." 
There seems to me, with respect, to be an inherent contradiction in the submission in that once it is accepted that reinstatement is the primary basis of indemnity, as I think it is, the other method of payment only become applicable if the plaintiff decides not to avail himself of the primary basis.

Repudiation 
I think it is desirable to determine next the question whether the defendant repudiated the contract rather than its liability under the contract. The plaintiff alleges that the repudiation stems from a wrongful refusal to indemnify him. The first particular of repudiation is the letter of 26
February 1992 from the solicitors for the defendant. In my opinion that, either taken alone or in combination with the other two particulars, does not amount to a repudiation or any evidence of a repudiation of the contract. It was a response to the letter from the solicitors for the plaintiff, which expressly acknowledged the assertion in their letter of 24 January 1992 that "dealing with" the claim would be put on a "hold" pending the determination of the charge of arson. The second particular relies upon the letter from the solicitors for the defendant of 1 November 1995. There is undoubtedly a denial of liability under the policy, but that is on the basis, I infer, that there was not an acceptance that the verdict of acquittal disposed of the issue of arson. As I have said, it is not in issue that arson would have provided a defence to the plaintiff's claims. Whilst there is a similarity between the issues raised in the criminal proceedings and the arson defence, there are distinctions. I shall note two. Firstly, the onus of proof on the defendant is somewhat lower than upon the Crown, although I appreciate it is the high onus within the civil onus. Secondly, in a civil case the insurer usually leaves in issue, as was done in the present case, an issue which would require evidence from the plaintiff. It is, generally, damages. Thus the insurer has the opportunity of putting to the plaintiff its case of arson. This is, obviously enough, an important consideration. Therefore, the keeping in issue of liability, on a basis for which the policies expressly provided and which basis would exclude the obligation to indemnify under them if proved, even though it was ultimately not pursued, does not either in itself or in combination with the other particulars amount to a repudiation. This is in the context of there being some reasonable grounds for suspicion, as was the case.

Further, the letter states, in terms, that the contract remained on foot to the extent of the defendant's obligation to pay Westpac Banking Corporation, as a separate insured, and the defendant sought to be subrogated to the rights of Westpac to sue the plaintiff. That could only have been asserted in pursuance of contractual rights and on the basis that the insurance policies remained on foot.

The third particular relies upon the failure to pay on a reinstatement basis and the continued denial of any obligation so to do. However, it acknowledges that the defendant remained ready to pay on another contractual basis, which, in my opinion, is contrary to the evincing of an intention to repudiate the contract. This particular, in my opinion, is both a repetition, in essence, of the first two and an affirmation of one basis for indemnity. It does not amount to a repudiation of the underlying contract, but rather one of the asserted obligations under it.

In The Progressive Mailing House Pty Limited versus Tabali Pty Limited <case>; [(1984-1985) 157 CLR 17]
Mason J said, at p.33:- "What needs to be established in order to constitute a repudiation is that the party evinces an intention no longer to be bound by the contract or that he intends to fulfil the contract only in a manner substantially inconsistent with his obligations and not in any other way: Shevill." 
At p.39 Brennan J commenced to consider repudiation and noted the requirements that a party should renounce liability under the contract or evince an intention no longer to be bound by it, and show an intention to fulfil the contract only in a manner substantially inconsistent with the obligations and not in the way provided for by the contract.

I am not satisfied that any of the conduct of the defendant, upon which reliance is placed, amounted to a repudiation of the contract. The question of repudiation of an insurance contract was considered by the Cole J in CIC
Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited (unreported), and, albeit obiter, by Powell JA on appeal. The Club's premises were severely damaged by arson. Its insurer wrote refusing to pay the claim and purporting to cancel the contract of insurance pursuant to [s.60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s60.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), and alleged fraudulent quantification of loss and the Club's complicity in the arson. Upon that happening the Club's solicitor wrote to the insurer requesting a rateable refund of premiums paid and indicating the Club intended to pursue its claim against the insurer.

At first instance (Cole J - 16 September 1993 - unreported) his Honour said:- "The purported exercise of a contractual power does not normally constitute repudiatory conduct. That is so even if it be found that the factual basis for the purported exercise was not present. The reason why that is so is because the bona fide but wrongful exercise of the power conferred by the contract does not 'evince an intention that the party will not perform the contract according to its terms' (DTR Nominees Pty Limited versus Mona Homes Pty Limited & Anor [(1978) 138 CLR 442] at 397). As Gaudron J said in Braidottie: 'Repudiation is not lightly to be found or inferred'.
 
The conduct of CIC in bona fide but wrongly purporting to cancel the contract pursuant to a power conferred by the contract of insurance which accorded with the provisions of [s.60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s60.html) of the Act affirmed rather than repudiated the contract because it purported to exercise an existing contractual right to negate its obligation of performance of that contract in the future. The intimation of absence of obligation to respond to claims made under the policy prior to its future expiration was not based upon a disregard of future contractual obligations imposed by the contract; rather it was based upon the purported exercise of a power conferred by the contract and the Act to bring to an end the contract and thus any future obligations under it. That not being repudiatory conduct, a request for a return of premium does not constitute acceptance of a repudiation so as to bring to an end the policy of insurance." 
On appeal his Honour's conclusion as to repudiation was not challenged, although it was considered in some detail by Powell JA. 
His Honour quoted the passage to which I have referred and, at p.75,592, said:- "I must say that I have considerable difficulty in accepting Cole J's view that, for the reasons assigned by him in the passage I have just set out, the Appellant's conduct in purporting to cancel the policy could not constitute repudiation." (My emphasis.) 
Powell JA was of the view that the two cases on which Cole J founded did not lead to the conclusion that "a bona fide, but wrongful exercise of a power conferred by a contract can never constitute repudiatory conduct". His Honour then referred to the passages and, as his citations show, much of what was said was obiter dicta on this point, although demanding the greatest respect. He concluded:- "For my own [part I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/index.html#p1) can think of no clearer way for an insurer to demonstrate a refusal to recognise an obligation to pay a claim properly made under a policy of insurance than to reject the claim and purport to cancel the contract of insurance in respect of the unexpired period of the policy." (My emphasis.) 
I think it is clear that Powell JA placed significance on the combination of the declining of liability and the cancellation of the policy in concluding, had it been necessary, that he could not agree with Cole J. In the present case there is no suggestion of any cancellation. The defendant was maintaining, in the ways demonstrated by the particulars, that the policies remained on foot, although not to the extent for which the plaintiff contended.

In order for there to be a repudiation it must be established that the insurer is disputing the existence of any binding contract at all, rather than liability under the contract and on a basis for which the contract provides.
The resistance of a claim and the bases for a claim, in circumstances where there is reliance on non-compliance with policy conditions as a ground for relieving the insurer from liability, is not a denial of the contract, but an affirmation of it. Accordingly, the repudiation, in those circumstances, is of the liability under the contract and not of the contract itself: Kennedy v
Queensland Insurance Co <case>; [(1924) 24 SR 542];
Edwards versus Insurance Office of Australia Limited [(1933) 33 SR ] and Broadlands Properties Limited & Broadlands Estates
Limited versus Guardian Assurance Co Limited [1984] 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-552.

The defendant submitted that even if there was a repudiation the plaintiff's entitlement to damages is restricted to the amount he would have received had the contract been performed: Foran versus Wight <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 385], so that damages equivalent to the amount payable under the policies by way of indemnity would be the appropriate measure. Hence it was submitted that if indemnity under the policy could only be achieved if reinstatement costs were "actually incurred" damages could only be claimed and assessed once that position was achieved. The plaintiff could not simply, as his submission suggested, be paid the full amount of the indemnity by way of damages without undertaking the correlative obligation to reinstate. Further the amount payable would only be to the extent of reinstatement. In my opinion the defendant's submissions are correct.

Asserted Waiver Of Reliance On Special Provision (i) 
Even if there is no repudiation, it is submitted that in so far as there is reliance on Special Provision (i), which requires that rebuilding must be commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch, the defendant, by having improperly refused indemnity, is not entitled to rely on that provision because there has been a waiver of its benefit. This matter was considered by
Foster J in Atholone Pty Limited versus General Accident Fire and Life Assurance
Corporation & Anor [[1985] 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-648.] At pp.78,992-3 his Honour said:- "The plaintiff submits that after 6 June 1983, the first defendant, by a series of uncontested acts, clearly elected to treat the contract of insurance as being on foot; conversely, it clearly indicated an intention not to avoid the contract ab initio on the basis of material non-disclosure as revealed to it in the investigator's report." 
His Honour held that the lengthy period following the arising of the right to avoid was only consistent with an acceptance of the policy's remaining on foot. He considered the proper basis of indemnity; the plaintiff contending that it was on a reinstatement basis, and the insurer that the "Basis of Settlement", which provided for the cost of reinstatement, was not the appropriate measure by dint of the operation of the proviso, which prevented the reinstatement approach and required the indemnity basis. The provisoes were, relevantly, in the terms of Special Provision (i) and that no payments were to be made "until rebuilding or restoration costs have actually been incurred". His Honour concluded:- "I am satisfied that the provisions of para (i) of the proviso do not operate in the circumstances of this case to prevent damages being awarded on a cost of reinstatement basis. The wrongful refusal by the first defendant to accept the plaintiff's claim, which wrongful refusal was a breach of contract, in my view, effectively prevents reliance by 'the insurer' upon this paragraph. The same applies to any reliance that might have otherwise been placed upon para (iii)": (The Payment After the Actual Incurring of Costs).

His Honour does not seem to give a reason for this latter conclusion.

It is sufficient to say that at the moment the defendant is not relying on the operation of Special Provision (i), and that his Honour's view of the counterpart of Special Provision (iv) cannot be accepted in the light of the
Court of Appeal's decision in Bankstown Football Club, which decision Mr
Brereton conceded is binding on me.

The defendant has conceded that it is not entitled to rely on any failure to comply with Special Provision (i), whilst it maintained the stance that it was not obliged to indemnify. However, since 29 March 1996, the obligation to indemnify has been accepted and, so the defendant now submits, the plaintiff must make his election with reasonable dispatch. If he elects to reinstate payment is made as the costs are incurred. There has been no waiver of the defendant's right to rely on Special Provision (iv) because the plaintiff has not evinced any intention to reinstate the premises nor actually incurred any costs so as to give rise to an obligation on the part of the defendant to consider whether payments should be made.

General Damages 
Mr Brereton submitted that the plaintiff was entitled to general damages for breach by the defendant of its obligation to indemnify in a timely fashion, being the additional amount he has to pay to the party which removed the debris and the amount lost from the expiration of the year covered by the
Business Interruption Period, i.e. 31 July 1992 for four years, i.e. to the date of the hearing, at the annual rate calculated as the amount of business interruption loss multiplied by four.

The plaintiff incurred costs of $19,476 in having the debris removed. He was not able, it is conceded, to pay the party, which performed the service, because of the failure by the defendant to indemnify. That party sued the plaintiff and recovered judgment. The amount now payable to that party, which includes the costs of the legal proceedings and interest up to 17 July 1996, is $30,612 on which interest at the rate of $7.66 is running from 18 July
It is not in issue that the defendant must pay this amount. The plaintiff submitted that if the amount over the basic claim of $19,476 is debited against the insured sum of $1m, and there is a shortfall in the event of reinstatement being undertaken, he will be financially disadvantaged. If the balance over $19,476 is characterised as general damages it is additional to the $1m, in which event it is not debited against the insured sum. I consider the proper approach is to treat the difference, together with further interest, as general damages.

A possible answer to this claim is that it was agreed that the claim should be held in abeyance until the criminal charges were disposed of, that no claim was made for the payment of the removal expenses in the meantime, and that the extra costs, except for some interest, were incurred before May 1995. However, perhaps because of the relative smallness of the amount, this was not argued.

It nextly becomes necessary to consider the claim for general damages based on loss of income from the hotel, which is necessarily founded on the assumption that had the defendant accepted liability the hotel would have been reinstated, the business resumed and income equivalent to the loss for business interruption would have been derived. There are a number of difficulties confronting this claim.

Firstly, there is no evidence that the plaintiff would have rebuilt the hotel if the defendant had accepted liability immediately. Although Mr Brereton sought to lead evidence that he would have done so, Mr King objected on the basis that no such evidential case had been made prior to the commencement of the hearing and that he was, accordingly, prejudiced. Mr Brereton did not dispute relevant prejudice arising from the inability to investigate the alleged intention, with all that involved. On this basis I rejected the evidence and, at Tp.9, Mr Brereton said:- "In the light of the claim of prejudice, while I press the statement, I wish to say no (sic) about those paragraphs." 
The word "no" should, I think, read "nothing".

The statement, which Mr Brereton prepared during the hearing, is Exhibit O, and the rejected passages are marked and referred to in the transcript. Mr
Brereton expressly accepted that rather than consent to an adjournment, or have an adjournment granted, to permit the prejudice to be overcome, he wished the case to continue on the basis of the evidence as it stood. In the circumstances there is no evidence that the plaintiff had any intention to rebuild the hotel and, certainly, having regard to the various ways in which he had previously dealt with the business and the negotiations into which he was considering entering at the time of the fire and when the letter of 24
January 1992 was written, no such inference could, in my opinion, be drawn. In any event I would not draw the inference when, in all probability, the plaintiff could have given the evidence if the matter had been attended to before the hearing or if, the matter having been raised only at the hearing, there had been an adjournment to avoid the accepted prejudice.

Secondly, the evidence is that it was accepted by the plaintiff that "dealing with" the claim should be put on "hold" until the criminal proceedings were concluded. This occurred in June 1995. Thereafter the plaintiff indicated no intention to reinstate. Even if he had the hotel would have had to be rebuilt before it became income producing. In my view there could be no claim made for general damages during a period when the plaintiff asserted and accepted that the insurance claim was on "hold" and was not pursuing a claim to recover indemnity. The loss, if there was any, was not in consequence of any breach by the defendant. The plaintiff did not reserve the right, whether such a reservation would have been effective or not, to claim damages.

Thirdly, and this gave rise to part of the prejudice, there was no opportunity to ascertain information to test the plaintiff's intention, if he had had such an intention, nor to see how he had utilised the time available for business matters freed from the responsibility of the hotel. It is known he had ceased the employment of Mr Barnett, but not whether he proposed to replace Mr
Barnett or to run the business again himself or to enter into a lease of the hotel. Suffice it is to say that the business had had a chequered career being run at times by him, at times by a manager employed by him and having been leased by him on one occasion. In the case of management by another and leasing the problems, to which I have referred, had occurred. Further against any loss the plaintiff allegedly suffered there would have to be set off such income as he did or would have earned freed from his obligations to the hotel.

Fourthly, in the letter from his solicitors of 24 January 1992, the plaintiff was said to be considering selling the land and/or the hotelier's licence.
Before any conclusion could be reached as to his intention in relation to the future there would have to be evidence of the way the plaintiff intended to proceed after the fire, which there was not.

Mr Brereton submitted that I should infer that had indemnity been granted the plaintiff would have rebuilt the hotel and continued its business. He pointed to the "massive" difference between market value and the amount payable on reinstatement, and submitted that from this it is clear what the plaintiff would have done. It was submitted that he would have rebuilt and leased the hotel business, thus deriving income, although there is no evidence as to the amount. The onus of proving any general damages was on the plaintiff. It was not until I raised, during the hearing, the absence of any evidence as to the plaintiff's intention, that the document, which became Exhibit O, was prepared by Mr Brereton and shown to Mr King. Mr King objected to certain portions on the grounds and with the results to which I have referred. In the result there is simply no evidence on which I could be satisfied that I should award general damages under this head.

As I have said there were countervailing benefits to the plaintiff, which would, in all probability have had to be taken into account. Further there was the difficulty of his putting "dealing with" the insurance claim on "hold" until the conclusion of the criminal proceedings.

For all these reasons I do not consider the plaintiff has made out his case for general damages in respect of the alleged loss of profits or income from the business.

Business Interruption Claim 
The Business Interruption Policy provides two bases for recovery, viz an "Income Basis" or on a "Conventional Difference Method". In the end the parties seemed content to adopt the latter method, which led to substantially the same result as the former. In his report, Exhibit L, Mr John Stanley
Mahony, who is, by profession, an accountant and has been a consultant to the liquor industry for fifteen years, adopted initially the "Income Basis" to determine the amount of the loss, and examined the Liquor Administration Board
Returns in respect of the periods 1 July 1990 to 24 April 1991 and 25 April to 2 June 1992, although recognising that trading ceased on 30 July 1991.
He had regard to the takings recorded by Mr Barnett and the records of supplies to the hotel, which latter information he found to be of limited value. He interviewed the plaintiff about the trading pattern of the hotel during the period of his ownership and considered the trading and profit and loss statement and the income tax return of Mr Harrison for the financial year ended 30 June 1991.

On the basis of this information and by applying the profit margins, ratios and costs of operation, which he considered to be appropriate to an hotel "of its type and location", Mr Mahony calculated the gross income by using the following figures. He took liquor purchases for the 395 day period of 1 July to 30 July 1991 of $48,175, which he reduced back to a 365 day period, namely $44,516, to which he added ten per cent for cordial purchases, giving a total of $48,968. He estimated the ratio of bar sales and bottle sales at eighty per cent and twenty per cent respectively, and the respective rates of gross profits at sixty eight per cent and thirty five per cent, thus giving an overall gross profit for bar sales of 61.4 per cent and a cost of sales of .6 per cent.

Mr Mahony estimated cigarette sales, accommodation income, food sales and card machine revenue. The first three estimates were not challenged. He extrapolated the figures to $191,340 per annum or $3,680 per week, from which he estimated the net profit of $64,186. He considered all expenses, except for insurance and rates, would be "saved".

Mr Mahony nextly considered the "business trend" and concluded "based on records and information supplied by Mr Barnett and Mr Harrison, that the trade was adversely affected during the period of Mr Barnett's management". He estimated that the amount of "lost" sales was in the order of $30,000 but continued:- "Nevertheless, in the absence of any hard trading records and in all the circumstances we have determined that there should be no adjustment for increased business trend in calculating the claim." 
He calculated the claim by taking the gross profit of $191,340 and deducting costs of sales of $75,134, which gave a net figure of $116,206. He deducted from that saved expenses of $47,870 providing a claim for business interruption loss of $68,336.

In a subsequent report of 15 July 1996 Mr Mahony had regard to other documents and he noted the different estimated figures being his profit figure of $64,186, that of Mr Roberts, an expert hotel valuer, of a net profit of $54,874, and that of Mr Cross, the accountant called on behalf of the defendant, of a loss of $4,609. He considered the difference between his figures and those of Mr Roberts lay in his estimate of $400 per week for card machine revenue and Mr Roberts' estimate of $200 per week in respect of that item. He concluded that applying Mr Roberts' figures and making the necessary adjustments he would reduce his figure to $62,778.

Mr Mahony then considered the Conventional Difference Method adopted by Mr
Cross, which was based on a claim being calculated on that basis and the business not having traded for a full year prior to the damage. Mr Mahony did not accept that the sales figures for March to June 1991 were representative of the full year's figures, and:- "We have preferred to use in the main, the more reliable indicator being the record of liquor purchases for the year as disclosed by the Liquor Returns." 
Mr Mahony also noted that Mr Cross had not applied a rate of gross profit for the sales as required by the Conventional Difference Basis "and does not therefore deduct the purchase cost of stock as a saved expense. We note also that there has been no deduction for the saved expenses for insurance, and rates have been omitted altogether". To accommodate these perceived failings Mr Mahony made what he considered to be proper adjustments and derived a figure on the Conventional Difference Method of $68,336, which would be subject to the same adjustment based on Mr Roberts' evidence of card machine revenue.

Mr Mahony was cross-examined as to the way he arrived at this calculation, and he agreed that he had taken as the source of liquor purchases the Liquor
Administration Board Returns and that to arrive at a gross profit figure he had used industry averages. He said, and I accept his evidence, that these were appropriate averages for an hotel at Peak Hill. He agreed it was possible to isolate from the plaintiff's income tax returns the margins he achieved when he was running the hotel, which show profit margins of about thirty eight per cent, but he said he did not necessarily agree that the plaintiff's figures were the actual results achieved, because the amount of purchases were disproportionate to the return shown. He said he believed that the plaintiff's income tax returns understated the income.

Mr Mahony also agreed that based on the income tax returns during the period the plaintiff was running the hotel it was, at best, a marginal business proposition. He was of the view that the hotel could have jumped from a thirty eight per cent to a sixty per cent figure "quite quickly", and, in re- examination he explained this in a manner I found satisfactory.

Before I consider the evidence of Mr Cross I shall refer to that of Mr
Roberts. As I have said he is a valuer, who specialises in hotel valuations.
He was cross-examined about that. He agreed that he looked at the future maintainable earnings of the hotel in valuing it and capitalised that amount.
He was considering this through the eyes of a prudent market purchaser on the basis of average but prudent management. He concluded that the weekly turnover of the hotel would rise to about $3,483 per week, which is quite close to Mr
Mahony's figure, although he said he could not justify that figure on past performance. Mr Roberts said that it would be difficult to assess the period it would take to achieve the earnings as to which he gave evidence, but that he considered it would be between four and six months.

In my opinion Mr Roberts' evidence was cogent, and although it basically supported Mr Mahony's evidence there was a period of four to six months when
Mr Mahony's figures would not, in my opinion, have been achieved. However during that period the proper inference is that from the earnings at the commencement point the figure would have risen to about the figure referred to by Messrs Mahony and Roberts. In calculating the amount I think that there should be some minor percentage adjustment to allow for the time it would have taken to reach the final figure. I think that only a minor deduction is needed and, in the result, I propose that Mr Mahony's adjusted figure of $62,778, which I propose to round off to $63,000, be reduced by five per cent to $59,850, which I will round off to $60,000, if it is otherwise acceptable.

The witness statement of Mr Cross is Exhibit 2 and, as I have said, he proceeded on the Conventional Difference Method. He calculated a Standard
Turnover of $79,121 and total saved expenses of $56,702. By deducting the latter from the former he produced an amount for the claim of $22,419. I think it is proper to say, without any disrespect to Mr Cross, that his experience in matters relating to the hotel industry is very limited and does not compare with that of Mr Mahony or Mr Roberts. He has never valued an hotel business. I think the general lack of experience was reflected in his answers in cross- examination, which I do not propose to canvass, save to say that I did not find his justification for the figure at which he arrived convincing. The evidence of Mr Mahony was, as I have said, corroborated substantially by that of Mr Roberts, although it requires the minor adjustment to which I have referred. I consider that Mr Roberts' assessment of the card machine revenue is to be preferred.

Mr King submitted that the question involved the proper approach to the period to which consideration could be had. Mr Cross had proceeded on the basis that the business had only been conducted by the plaintiff, through Mr Barnett, for about four months before the loss, and that one therefore has to have regard to the new business provisions of the policy.

The business is defined as meaning and limited to the business:- ".. described in the Schedule carried on by the Insured at or from the Premises stated in the Schedule".

The Conventional Difference Method requires a calculation limited to actual loss of gross profit due to reduction in turnover and increase in cost of workings, and sets out a series of matters to be taken into account. Once the formula has been applied it is necessary for the person making the assessment to carry out adjustments "as may be necessary to provide for the trend of the
Business and for variations in or other circumstances affecting the Business either before or after the Damage or which would have affected the Business had the Damage not occurred, so that the figures thus adjusted shall represent as nearly as may be reasonably practicable the results which but for the
Damage would have been obtained during the relative period after the Damage".

Mr King submitted that as the plaintiff had only carried on the business for four months it should be treated as "New Business", because the Damage occurred "before the completion of the first year's trading of the Business".
In my opinion this is not correct because the Business had been carried on for longer than that.

I agree with Mr Brereton's submission that it was not, in the terms of the policy, a "New Business". Rather there was a change in the way the existing business was conducted. Once that is accepted Mr Cross acknowledged there would be a difference and the evidence has been analysed fully by Mr Brereton in his written submissions. I do not propose to repeat them, save for noting that he submits that on Mr Cross' approach the proper amount payable is $66,492. I have allowed a lower figure essentially because I regard the figures of Mr Roberts and Mr Mahony as more reliable. On that point Mr King submitted that Mr Cross had correctly identified the plaintiff's Business as a "New Business", calculated "Standard Turnover" in accordance with the definition and proceeded on that basis. It seems to me that the essential difference lies in whether it was a "New Business" and that if that is not accepted the basis for Mr Cross' figures is not applicable. However, even if that is not ultimately the correct view I am none-the-less of the opinion that the approach adopted by Mr Mahony which, as I have said, is supported by the way in which Mr Roberts proceeded, gives a far more accurate figure.

Contents 
Although Mr King noted that consideration had not been given to purchasing what he said were appropriate second hand contents, I do not consider the policy required the plaintiff to do that. It provides for replacement in the terms I have quoted and the value, consistently with the policy and if that becomes the appropriate measure of indemnity, is $40,000.

Interest 
Interest is payable in accordance with the provisions of [s.57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s57.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/). Sub- section 2 provides:- "The period in respect of which interest is payable is the period commencing on the day as from which it was unreasonable for the insurer to have withheld payment of the amount and ending on ...".
 
The sub-section provides for the period to end, in effect, on payment. The Court is required to find, in accordance with all the facts of the particular case, the day as from which it became "unreasonable" for payment to be withheld. This, as CIC Limited versus Bankstown Football Club makes clear, requires a finding of fact.

Mr Brereton has submitted that the fact as to when it becomes unreasonable to withhold payment is when "in the normal course of events" the claim would have been paid if liability had not been disputed. In many cases that may be a sufficient statement. But, as I have said, every case will depend on its facts. He has submitted that the time for investigation is the period during which the insurer has a reasonable opportunity to investigate, not the period the police are investigating. Thus, he submitted, the insurer must make up its own mind and not await the investigation of others. I do not consider this is correct in absolute terms. For example an insurer may, in the particular circumstances of a case, be justified in awaiting the giving of evidence at a coronial inquiry or a trial. He referred to the principles stated in Bennett v Jones [(1977) 2 NSWLR 355] setting out the rationale for an award of interest, which, arguably, are based on a somewhat different consideration. Under the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) one must look at unreasonableness. It is not, in my opinion, sufficient to say that the insured has been kept out of his money and the insuirer has had the benefit of it. Something more is required.

Mr Brereton sought to grapple with the problems caused by the letter of 24
January 1992 by stating that it did not acknowledge the reasonableness of the defendant's waiting to see what happened in the criminal proceedings. I do not agree. The letter is quite clear and could lead to no other inference than that the claim should await the outcome of those proceedings. If that were not so one would have expected the plaintiff to have commenced proceedings forthwith. Mr Brereton referred to various authorities giving a longer period to investigate arson claims. But each of these cases must be considered on its own facts. In the present case the outstanding facts are the terms of the letter of 24 January 1992, the acceptance thereof by the solicitors for the defendant without demur and the failure by the plaintiff thereafter to take any civil proceedings until the criminal charges were resolved.

Mr Brereton has submitted that interest should run from 1 October 1991. I disagree. In my opinion the submission of the defendant that interest should run from a reasonable time after the plaintiff's acquittal is correct. The further question arises as to the amount on which interest should run. If the plaintiff elects to proceed on the reinstatement basis no interest is payable on the amount paid by the defendant: CIC Limited versus Bankstown Football Club
It is only if the plaintiff elects to accept value that interest will run on the amount thereof. He has not make that election and until shortly after he does I do not consider that interest on the amount payable to him by way of value will run.

In the present case I do not think it could be realistically suggested that a reasonable time expired before the conclusion of the criminal proceedings and, as I have noted, the plaintiff's solicitors seem to have taken the same view in their letter of 24 January 1992. However, there was a long delay, sadly, before the criminal proceedings were heard. There is no evidence as to why that occurred but it is not suggested that it was in any way the fault of the defendant. One may assume that it was due in part to the heavy case load imposed on the District Court in its Criminal Division. But once the plaintiff was acquitted the defendant was in a position to make up its mind in respect of the matters which did not require a decision by the plaintiff as to the basis on which indemnity would be sought and, in my opinion, it should have done so quickly as it had before it by then as much information as it could expect. There is no explanation as to why it took until November 1995 to decline liability. In all these circumstances I propose to allow one year's interest on the loss caused by business interruption and the amount of $2,115 at the prescribed rate of thirteen per centum per annum. I do not propose that interest on the sum of $30,612.13 should be paid, as that amount includes interest to 17 July 1996, except for the period from 18 July 1996 to judgment at the rate of $7.66 per day.

Conclusions 
The conclusions to which I have come are:- 
The plaintiff is entitled to be indemnified on a reinstatement basis for the building and the contents, subject to his proceeding with reasonable dispatch and I propose to make declarations to that effect.

If the plaintiff does not proceed on that basis he is entitled to be indemnified as follows:- 
Value of the hotel - $ 180,000 
Value of the contents - $ 40,000 $ 220,000 
As the plaintiff has not elected on which basis he wishes to proceed he is not entitled to interest on this amount until he does so elect.

The plaintiff is entitled to payment of the following amounts:- 
Business Interruption - $60,000 on which interest at the rate of thirteen per centum per annum for one year is payable, i.e. $7,800 giving a total of $67,800.

Parkes Shire Council Account - $2,115 on which interest at the rate and for the period set out in (i) is payable, i.e. $275, giving a total of $2,390.

Debris Removal - $19,476.

General Damages in relation to debris removal - $11,136.13.

Interest on the total amount for debris removal being $30,612.13 from 18
July 1996 to the date of judgment at $7.66 per day.

The defendant must pay the plaintiff's costs. Although they are claimed on an indemnity basis no submissions were put in support of that.

Further Submissions 
On Friday, 26 July 1996 I heard further submissions in the course of which Mr
Darke confirmed that the defendant was not asserting, at the present, that the plaintiff had failed to commence and carry out reinstatement and replacement with reasonable dispatch. He submitted, however, that any consideration of that in the future should be viewed as from 29 March 1996, on which date the defendant stated it would not be pursuing the allegation of arson. I think that this is correct.

A second matter raised with counsel was the necessity to accommodate in any declaration the requirement that reinstatement and replacement be carried out with reasonable dispatch. Mr Brereton agreed that the declaration should be qualified accordingly and suggested the wording:- "provided in each case that the work of rebuilding or replacing (which may be carried out upon another site and in any manner suitable to the requirements of the plaintiff) must be commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch following the making of this declaration." 
Mr Darke raised two points in relation to that. Firstly, he sought to have added after the word "plaintiff" the words "but subject to the liability of the defendant not being thereby increased", thereby incorporating certain of the words in Special Provision (i). Mr Brereton objected to this on the basis that there was agreement between the parties that the rebuilding costs were $1m and, therefore, to add the words would be contrary to the agreement. In so submitting he was not suggesting that the plaintiff is entitled, if he reinstates, to an amount in excess of that which is "actually incurred", but he was submitting that the agreement between the parties permits the plaintiff to reinstate, provided the amounts are "actually incurred", to $1m. I think this must be correct and therefore I decline to add those words to which Mr Darke referred.

The words "following the making of this declaration" could lead to the view being taken that I was stating that the time to be taken into account in assessing "reasonable dispatch" would run from the date of this judgment. As I have said I consider that it runs, in all probability, from 29 March 1996, although if it is a matter that has to be determined at some other time it will be necessary to have regard to all the facts and circumstances. However,
I think it undesirable that the declaration should be seen as reflecting a view on my part as to when the time commences to run, and I think the appropriate way to achieve this is by deleting the words "following the making of this declaration".

Mr Brereton also confirmed that although costs on an indemnity basis were sought in the Summons, they are not being pursued.

The parties have also agreed that the present rate of interest specified by the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) is thirteen per centum per annum.

Declarations and Orders 
Declare that upon a proper construction of Insurance Policy No 21/216535/1 ("the Building Policy") and in the events which have happened the defendant is liable to indemnify the plaintiff in respect of the destruction by fire on or about 30 July 1991 of the building situate and known as Commercial Hotel, 106 Caswell Street, Peak Hill in the State of New South Wales, ("the Hotel"), by paying to the plaintiff the costs of rebuilding the Hotel to a limit of $1m but after the deduction of the several sums of $19,476 and $2,115, once the costs of rebuilding the Hotel have actually been incurred and provided that the work of rebuilding (which may be carried out upon another site and in any manner suitable to the requirements of the plaintiff) is commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch.

Order, in the alternative to the declaration in paragraph (1), judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $180,000, together with interest thereon at the rate of thirteen per centum per annum from the date seven (7) days after the plaintiff elects to accept that indemnity to the date of payment of it.

Declare that upon the proper construction of Insurance Policy No /53607/06 ("the Contents Policy") and in the events which have happened, the defendant is liable to indemnify the plaintiff in respect of the destruction by fire on or about 30 July 1991 of the contents of the Hotel, by paying to the plaintiff the costs of replacing the contents by similar property to a limit of $138,000 once the costs of replacing the contents have actually been incurred and provided that the replacing (which may be carried out in any manner suitable to the requirements of the plaintiff) is commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch.

Order, in the alternative to the declaration in paragraph (3), judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $40,000, together with interest at the rate of thirteen per centum per annum from the date seven (7) days after the plaintiff elects to accept that indemnity to the date of payment.

Order judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $2,115 payable to Parkes Shire Council, together with interest thereon at the rate of thirteen per centum per annum for one year, i.e. $275.

Order judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $30,612.13, together with interest at the rate of $7.66 per day from 18 July to 30 July 1996 i.e. $99.58.

Order judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant for the Business
Interruption Loss in the sum of $60,000, together with interest thereon at the rate of thirteen per centum per annum for one year i.e. $7,800.

Order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs.

Order exhibits be returned at the expiration of twenty eight (28) days from to-day's date unless within that time an appeal against this decision has been brought.

Grant liberty to either party to apply on seven days' or such shorter notice as a Judge of the Court may allow in respect of the issue whether reinstatement and/or replacement has been commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch.
 * * * 
