

Regina versus M P Ryan [1998] NSWSC 1022 (4 May 1998) 
REGINA versus Michael Peter RYAN /95 
Tuesday 29 October 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
MAHONEY ACJ, McINERNEY J, BARR J 
CATCHWORDS: Application dismissed; leave to appeal against sentence refused.

Appeal - Court of Criminal Appeal - Leave to appeal against sentence - unrepresented applicant 
Applicant pleaded guilty to seven charges involving break, enter and steal offences - Sentenced to minimum term of nine months with additional term of two years - Unrepresented applicant - Personal circumstances of the applicant - Held: Leave refused; in the circumstances there is no warrant to interfere with the sentence imposed by the trial judge.

ORDER 
Application dismissed.

Leave to appeal against sentence refused.

JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY ACJ: On 18 September 1995 the applicant Mr Michael Peter Ryan was sentenced to imprisonment for four and a half years, his sentence involving a minimum term of three years to date from 5 May 1995 and to expire on 4 May 1998 and an additional term of eighteen months. He seeks leave to appeal to this Court against the severity of the sentence.

The facts have not been significantly in dispute. The judge before whom the applicant came, Blanch CJ of DC, referred to the detail of them in the remarks which he made on sentencing the applicant. His Honour recorded that the applicant had pleaded guilty to four charges of being in premises and breaking out, to one count of break enter and steal, to one count of entering land with intent and to one count of being in possession of house-breaking instruments.
The maximum sentences applicable in respect of the first four offences was fourteen years imprisonment and for the other three: fourteen years, ten years and seven years imprisonment respectively.

The offences extended over a period from about 28 December 1994 until 5 May
They involved, in respect of two of the retail stores in question, property of the value respectively of $91,526.25 and $64,939.25.

The sentencing judge had before him the criminal record of the applicant. His
Honour referred to offences committed in 1988 in Queensland and to a record in this State beginning in 1992. In April 1992 the applicant had been convicted of five accounts of break enter and steal, one of break and enter with intent to steal and two accounts of stealing plus a count of possessing house- breaking implements. He had been sentenced to a minimum term of nine months with an additional term of two years. As his Honour indicated, "it was only nine days after that release that the first of these offences was committed".

The applicant appeared before this Court unrepresented. He had previously forwarded to the Court some written material, and other material, Exhibit "A", was handed to the Court by him during the hearing of the appeal. I have had regard to what has been said in the material which he has prepared. I have referred in particular to the claims made by the applicant as to what was suggested to him after his arrest as to the sentences apt to be imposed upon him. Nothing has been put before the Court in support of those matters and, in the circumstances, I do not accept that the claim, made by him at this stage, warrants interference by the Court with the sentences imposed.

The personal considerations affecting the applicant were referred to in the sentencing remarks of the learned judge. He was born on 15 November 1969. The problems from which, it is claimed, he suffers were detailed by the learned judge and it is not necessary for me to repeat them. The judge concluded that the applicant "does appear to have behaved in a fashion that one might expect from a person who was contrite for committing the offences" and his Honour for this purpose took into account that fact and the time when the pleas of guilty were made.

The applicant has told the Court that he has reformed or intends to reform and that he will not offend again. It is to be hoped that what he says is correct.
However, it is, in the circumstances of this case, the task of this Court to determine whether the sentences imposed upon him were beyond the bounds of a proper sentencing discretion or otherwise such as this Court should interfere.
Having given full consideration to the matters advanced by the applicant, I am satisfied that no error appears in what the judge has done. There is no warrant for interfering with the sentences imposed.

In the circumstances I would refuse the application for leave to appeal. The exhibit tendered by the applicant may be returned to him.
 
McINERNEY J: I agree with the order proposed by Mahoney ACJ, for the reasons he has given.

BARR J: I agree with Mahoney ACJ.
 * * * 
