

Anchorage Marine Underwriting Agency P/L versus Bill Stanley [1996] NSWSC 435 (18 September 1996) 
ANCHORAGE MARINE UNDERWRITING AGENCY PTY LTD versus BILL STANLEY /96; DC 3027/94 
Wednesday 18 September 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
MAHONEY ACJ, CLARKE, BEAZLEY JJA 
CATCHWORDS: INTERPRETATION OF INSTRUMENTS - Insurance contract - Exclusion provision - Express extension of policy schedule to cover water skiing 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: In this matter the plaintiff, Terrence Schafer, brought proceedings in the District Court of New South Wales against the respondent on the appeal and one other in respect of injuries which he suffered on 4 April 1994 when he was involved in, what I would describe generally as, a boating accident.

The circumstances of the accident may be described briefly. The plaintiff was being towed behind a boat which was owned by the respondent on a device which is known as a ski tube or biscuit. This device comprises a rubber inner tube placed in a deflated condition inside a casing of nylon fabric and which is then inflated. The person using the ski tube or biscuit holds onto handles on the tube and is then towed along behind the boat.

The plaintiff was successful in his action against the respondent and the other defendant. The respondent had a policy of insurance with the appellant in respect of his ski boat and brought a third party action against the appellant claiming indemnity under that policy in respect of any damages which he might be ordered to pay to the plaintiff. The appellant denied liability.
However, the trial judge held that the policy covered the incident in question and thus entered judgment in favour of the respondent against the appellant.
The appellant appeals from that determination.

The essence of the appeal was that the insurance policy expressly excluded an activity of the kind in question unless that activity was subject to an endorsement on the policy.

It is necessary to deal briefly with the terms of the policy to understand the issue. In Section 3 of the policy headed "Legal Liability to Third Party", there was provision for the indemnification of the insured in respect of certain activities. However, there was expressly excluded from that section the following: "We shall not be liable for any claims in respect of death or bodily injury to any person or damage to property made against you or any other person indemnified under this section: arising out of waterskiing, aquaplaning or paraflying or any aerial sport or activity involving the towing in the air of any person or object, or any other similar sport or recreational pursuit unless the cover provided by this
Policy is extended by written endorsement and by payment of the required additional sum PROVIDED THAT any such extended cover shall be excluded if there is not on board the Vessel a competent observer in addition to the person driving the Vessel." 
The matter in issue is whether there was the relevant endorsement on the policy. The policy schedule provides the following information. It sets out details of the boat and its registration, its year of manufacture and the like. It then specifies the sums insured and the premium details. Under the "Sums Insured" column, there is reference to third party cover to an amount of $1 million. Under the "Premium Details" it is recorded that that part of the premium applicable to third party is $80.00. The extensions to the policy are then noted. Relevant for present purposes is the following extension to the proforma policy: "Legal liability to third party extensions". There is then inserted opposite that the following: "Waterskiing included".

Counsel for the respondent submitted that the extension endorsed on the policy was in fact an extension to the whole of the exclusion provision covering waterskiing aquaplaning or paraflying et cetera to which I have referred earlier. She submitted that the respondent had paid the additional premium and that a proper construction of the policy was such that it should be accepted that the premium of $80 extended to the complete extension and was not limited to waterskiing only.

The difficulty with this submission is that the specified extension on the policy schedule is confined to waterskiing. Albeit that the space allowed for statements of the extension is limited, there would have been room to have specified more detail if that was intended, even if it said no more than something like - waterskiing, et cetera, included. In the absence of any such indication, I am not satisfied that the Court should go beyond the clear words specified in the policy schedule. In those circumstances I am of the opinion that the only extension of the policy is in relation to waterskiing. Before leaving that point I should note that counsel for the respondent also submitted that it would be ludicrous to think that there would be a separate premium for each additional activity to which the policy might extend and that, rather, it was more likely that there would be one amount only for the total of the premium extension.

That may, or may not, be so. The difficulty which the Court has is that there was no evidence as to whether the premium would be different depending upon whether one or more of the extension activities was included in the cover provided by the policy.

Counsel for the respondent also submitted that the terminology "waterskiing" was sufficiently wide to cover the activity in question here. In her written submissions, she repeated the definitional material referred to by his Honour as to the meaning of "waterskiing" and "aquaplaning". In this regard it is perhaps apt to note that the appellant's case on the hearing was that this activity was aquaplaning and was not waterskiing. That submission was repeated on the appeal and extended slightly so that it was submitted that the activity was "aquaplaning or other similar sport or recreational pursuit".

It is clear from the definitional material to which reference was made that waterskiing is not necessarily confined to skiing by standing on a device or devices which would commonly be recognised as a waterski. Counsel for the respondent pointed out, for example, that there is barefoot waterskiing and that is a well-recognised activity which would fall within the definition.
However, it seems to me that the essential difference between waterskiing and aquaplaning is that in the case of waterskiing the person being towed maintains himself or herself in motion by holding onto, or attaching himself or herself to, a vessel or to a towing apparatus.

The language which I have just used comes directly from the definition of "waterskier" in the Water [Traffic
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/).
However, it seems to me that that is a definition which accords with a common understanding of the term "waterskiing".

In the case here it is the device itself which is attached to the vessel and the person using the device lays on it and holds onto the device itself and not onto any tow rope or to the vessel. I do not consider, therefore, that the activity here was "waterskiing" within the proper meaning of that word.

I should simply note, finally, that, in my opinion, it is clear that the exclusion to the third party liability, to which I have referred, draws a clear distinction between different types of water supporting activities such that, unless the policy has been endorsed so as to note that the policy extends to a particular type of water activity referred to in the exclusion, then that activity is not covered by the policy.

For those reasons I am of the opinion that the appeal should be allowed with costs.

MAHONEY ACJ: I am of the same opinion. In deference to Miss Mundey's submissions I would add this. The exclusion contained in [s 1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s1.html) and [s 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s3.html) of the policy excludes a number of things, including those things which would be caught up by the words "or any other similar sport or recreational pursuit". That exclusion then goes on to add the words: "unless the cover provided by this policy is extended by written endorsement and by payment of the required additional premium".
 
What happened on the river on this day would, I think, on any view, fall within the broad scope of the matters referred to in exclusion 1. Therefore, it was necessary for the respondent here to show that there had been some exclusion of that exclusion - if I may so describe it - by the addition of an endorsement such as Justice Beazley has referred to. The only endorsement added is: "Legal liability to third party extensions: Waterskiing included." 
Notwithstanding what Miss Mundey has said I cannot think that what was being done constitutes waterskiing. However, the submission was that the intention evinced by the addition of "waterskiing included" was not merely to include waterskiing as such but was to negative wholly the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s1.html) in [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s3.html) It is possible that that was what was intended, at least it is arguable, but, although the policy in cl 1 is to be read with the proposal, apparently there was nothing in the proposal which would lead to this conclusion. The proposal was not tendered in evidence and it is necessary, therefore, if the respondent is to succeed on this point, to come to that conclusion merely from the terms of the policy.

The policy is, perhaps, a policy intended to be expressed in the fashionable plain legal English. If it is then the words mean what they say. I cannot read the additions into the words which have been used which Miss Mundey seeks to have. But, however that be, I think the words mean what they say and what here took place was not waterskiing.

If it be that, notwithstanding the verbiage of the policy, it really was the intention of the parties and in particular of the insurer that the words "waterskiing included" should have the operation of excluding the whole of exclusion 1 in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s3.html) then, whatever be the actual terms of the policy, no doubt the insurer will act in accordance with the understanding on which it accepted the additional premium.
But, as far as legal liability under the policy is concerned, in my opinion, the construction of the policy in the present case is that to which Justice
Beazley has referred.

It will be necessary subsequently to consider the form of the order to be made but it is sufficient, at this stage, for me to indicate that I agree with what has been proposed by Justice Beazley.

CLARKE JA: I agree with the reasons of both the judges who have given judgments.

MAHONEY ACJ: Counsel refer to the fact that this was a verdict in judgment given by Judge O'Reilly in favour of the respondent on the third party notice - I am looking at p 212. The order that was to be taken out does not appear in the appeal papers. We are only concerned with that part of the proceedings, namely, the claim by, as it appears to be, only Mr Stanley against the insurer. It should be made clear, I think, that what we are doing is then setting aside the order made by Judge O'Reilly in that respect only and entering a verdict and judgment in favour of the appellant insurance company on the third party notice.

STREET: If your Honours have the amended notice of appeal, your Honours will see, in orders 1-4, they summarise the relief I ask for.

MAHONEY ACJ: Miss Mundey, no order has been made allowing the appellant to rely upon the amended notice of appeal. The matter has proceeded without that order being made, but I think it is clear that what the effect of the upholding of the appeal is in the present case. It is as I have indicated it so all we need is to uphold the appeal against that part of the judgment and orders of his Honour Judge O'Reilly, and enter a verdict in judgment for the company in respect of that issue, and the appeal would have to be upheld with costs.

STREET: I would ask the respondent pay the costs of the Court below.

MAHONEY ACJ: That would be the costs below of that particular part of the proceeding? 
STREET: Yes, it only involved it in issue with the respondent, so it is the appellant's costs of the Court below.

MAHONEY ACJ: There being no suggestion to the contrary - and I am not suggesting that there should be - the orders of the Court will be in accordance with what I have indicated.
 * * * 
