

Theodossiou versus Cui Matter No 1654/93 [1997] NSWSC 603 (3 December 1997) 
Theodossiou versus Cui /93 December 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /93 - THEODOSSIOU V CUI 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff is of Greek descent; the defendant is a Mandarin speaking Chinese. Both are now Australians, ordinarily resident in New South Wales. It is of significance to note that the defendant became an Australian citizen in April 1991. 
The parties met in about December 1987. The plaintiff says that they commenced a de facto relationship in February 1988 which continued until May 1991. The defendant denies this, though she admits that she commenced what she says was "an affair" with the plaintiff in March 1988.

The most significant part of the parties' relationship was that they were both involved in a business selling flowers to restaurant customers. Each of the parties claims that he or she was the principal in the business and that the other was a mere employee. The business involved purchasing flowers in bulk from the markets, individually packaging them and then sending young Chinese women around participating restaurants to sell individual flowers to patrons.

The plaintiff's claim, as it appeared in his statement of claim filed in 1993, was that the court make an order under <case> of the De Facto Relationships Act, adjusting the property interests of the parties so that: (a) 80 Leylands
Parade, Belmore, which property is in the defendant's sole name, be sold and the proceeds be divided 70% to the plaintiff and 30% to the defendant; (b) that the property 117 Campbell Street, Surry Hills, in the defendant's name, be transferred to the plaintiff; (c) that the defendant transfer to the plaintiff the business name "Xia Aussie Rose"; (d) that the defendant pay the plaintiff a sum equivalent to 50% of the nett profits of the business since 14
May 1991; and (e) that the defendant pay the plaintiff various other sums of money.

The hearing commenced before me on Monday 10 February 1997. It proceeded for six days. On the sixth day, I was informed that some audio tapes of conversations had come to light over the preceding weekend, and that both parties required an adjournment so that they could be translated and considered. I also granted leave to amend the statement of claim. On 25
February 1997, in accordance with that leave, the plaintiff amended his statement of claim by alleging that there was a trust under the general law over the properties 80 Leylands Parade, Belmore and 117 Campbell Street, Surry
Hills. I stood the matter over to 29 and 30 April for further hearing.

On 29 April 1997, the hearing proceeded all day, but there were further difficulties and 30 April was vacated and the matter stood over to 4 August.
That was not sufficient to conclude the matter and it finished on the ninth day of hearing on 13 August 1997 and I reserved my decision.

In essence, the defendant's defence is that the business which is conducted under the name Xia Aussie Rose is hers and that the properties referred to in the statement of claim are wholly hers and that there was no trust and there was not a de facto relationship such as would attract the De Facto
Relationships Act. If there was such a relationship, the defendant says that no orders should be made in the plaintiff's favour under <case>. Thus, the parties were at issue on virtually everything.

It seems to me that the matters that need to be decided can conveniently be dealt with under the following headings:-
WAS THERE A DE FACTO RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PARTIES?
IF SO, WHEN DID SUCH RELATIONSHIP COMMENCE AND WHEN DID IT END?
WHAT ASSETS DID THE PLAINTIFF BRING INTO THE RELATIONSHIP?
WHAT ASSETS DID THE DEFENDANT BRING INTO THE RELATIONSHIP?
WHO OWNS THE BUSINESS XIA AUSSIE ROSE?
WHO BENEFICIALLY OWNS 80 LEYLANDS PARADE, BELMORE?
WHO BENEFICIALLY OWNS 117 CAMPBELL STREET, SURRY HILLS?
SHOULD ANY ORDER BE MADE UNDER S 20 OF THE DE FACTO RELATIONSHIPS ACT?
SHOULD ANY ORDER BE MADE UNDER THE GENERAL LAW?
WHAT IS THE RESULT OF THE CASE?
The plaintiff produced 28 witnesses including himself, whose combined evidence, he says, is conclusive that there was a de facto relationship between the parties.

The plaintiff says that he commenced to live with the defendant in a de facto relationship in about February 1988. He says that in May 1988, the defendant said that she wished to return to China for a few weeks to see her parents.
She did so and then telephoned from China to say that she could not get a visa to return to Australia and asked whether the plaintiff would sponsor her return to Australia as his de facto wife. The plaintiff complied with this request, attended at the Department of Immigration, Local Government and
Ethnic Affairs ("DILGEA"), and filled out the necessary forms declaring that the defendant was his de facto wife, and when she returned to Australia on 24
July 1988 he says they resumed cohabitation. The defendant says that cohabitation commenced on that day.

The parties lived at 6A Harnett Avenue, Marrickville, property jointly owned by the plaintiff and his ex-wife, until May/June 1989 when they moved to 51
Benaroon Road, Lakemba. The defendant says that she took a lease of this property in her own name. She says that she lived separately and apart from the plaintiff whilst the plaintiff had an affair with one Yang Li.

In January 1990, 80 Leylands Parade, Belmore was purchased. The cost was $177,000, of which $75,000 was borrowed from the Commonwealth Bank. The plaintiff says that he contributed $71,000 and the defendant $31,000, but of his $71,000, he acknowledges that $36,390 came from the business Xia Aussie
Rose. The defendant says that she paid $110,000 from her own resources.

I should note here, though it is obvious enough, that the totals and sub- totals used in these reasons do not precisely tally due to extra costs for legal fees, stamp duty and the like.

In January 1991, 117 Campbell Street, Surry Hills was purchased. Title was taken in the defendant's name. The plaintiff says that this was funded by $99,500 of his own or borrowed funds, $50,000 from mortgage from his cousin
Nick Petrou, and $25,500 from the profits of Xia Aussie Rose. The defendant says that she paid the whole of the purchase money for the Surry Hills property and that $89,000 of the funds which the plaintiff had overseas represented repayment of a loan which she had earlier made to him and which the plaintiff had instructed the Cyprus Popular Bank Ltd to put in her account at the Commonwealth Bank.

The defendant says that her relationship with the plaintiff ceased in May 1989 and that thereafter he lived with Yang Li until about May 1991, when the plaintiff went to DILGEA and had Yang Li's permission to stay in Australia terminated and began to live in a de facto relationship with Rong Rong Hu. She says, however, that she continued to employ the plaintiff as a driver.
However, in January 1991, the plaintiff "got into a physical incident with a customer" at the Stork Club, 114 King Street, Newtown. She then says she dismissed the plaintiff from her employment in March 1991. She says that during an argument in March 1991, the plaintiff threatened to have her deported. Accordingly, she did not take any proceedings until May 1991 because she obtained Australian citizenship on 17 April 1991 and an Australian passport thereafter in May. She says that when this came through, she had the plaintiff evicted and obtained an apprehended violence order against him.

I will review the evidence of the witnesses shortly. I am of the view that both the plaintiff and the defendant are completely unreliable as witnesses, but if it be the case that one is more unreliable than the other, that one would be the defendant. This makes the documentary evidence more important than otherwise, though where one cannot work out the circumstances in which the document was generated, it suffers the same defect as the oral evidence of the parties.

The plaintiff relied mainly on three pieces of documentary evidence, namely, a large number of photographs which he says showed the parties in a close and affectionate relationship right up to the time when the plaintiff obtained her Australian citizenship in April/May 1991; (b) various taperecordings that he had made of conversations at Belmore; and (c) transcript of evidence which was given to a Local Court magistrate in October 1990.

As to (a), the photographs in the albums PX03 and PX36, are not all dated or related to some specific incident. On many photographs, a camera has impressed a date. In the absence of other material, prima facie this is the date on which the photograph was taken. The photographs are in various categories.
There are some photographs, showing one or other of the parties with flowers, which are equivocal, because they could be portraying either their business enterprise or their personal relationship. There is another category dealing with family groups. Again, these are not of much assistance because often people who are not close to each other smile and are nice to each other so as not to spoil the family occasion. Thirdly, there are photographs of one or other of the parties. As they were sharing the same house, on either view, up until May 1991, these do not assist. The fourth category is photographs of the parties touching each other or otherwise showing togetherness. Although there are many undated photographs, and the plaintiff says that some were taken as late as the Royal Easter Show of 1991, so far as dated photographs are concerned, the last photograph in this category appears to be dated Australia
Day 1990. Accordingly, to my mind the photographs do not of themselves show a two year relationship. However, they do show that the defendant's evidence that from June 1989 the parties were not in a personal relationship is open to some question.

As to (b), although the plaintiff produced the tapes on the sixth day of the hearing, the transcript, PX37, does not assist the plaintiff very much at all.
It is quite clear that the plaintiff was seeking to set the defendant up and to make admissions, but when one looks at Exhibit A, the tape of May 1991, at which were present at least for part of the time, the defendant (called
Catherine on the transcript), the plaintiff (called Peter), Ya Ming Smith (called Ayi) and Lily (Yang Li), the following occurs at page 8: "138 - Catherine: Be careful he got the tape machine.
 - Peter: ... mmm ...
 - Catherine: He is bastard." 
It would thus seem that not only was the plaintiff trying to set the defendant up, but that the defendant knew that what she said was being recorded and was fairly careful about what she said though her emotions sometimes got the better of her! When this happened, she was not careful to moderate her language. The tape starts - "Catherine: Piss off, I like to leave you.
 - Peter: ...
 - Peter: Katerina, I love you ... would you like to marry me please? - Catherine: Piss off, get away from here.
 ...
 - Peter: Katerina, would you like to marry me? - Catherine: Piss off.
 - ... If I take this paper and go to immigration you know what it means to lie, sworn and lie? You lost your passport its true, not good for you.
 - Catherine: Why you don't ring immigration office now ring now.
 - Peter: Because I want to talk to you first.
 - Catherine: (SHOUTING) ring now, piss off, fuck off ring now.
 - Peter: Now? - Catherine: Yes now, ring, if you don't ring you are not a man, you are a poofta, ring now ... malaka (wanker), poofta ...".

The only thing that could be said about this unedifying tape is that the defendant appears to be saying that she is leaving the plaintiff rather than she had left the plaintiff two years ago.

The prosecutor asked the defendant before the Local Court the following questions, having got her name as Xia Cui and her occupation as florist: "Q. I take your mind back to about 11.30 pm on Wednesday night 8 
August this year. Were you driving along with your husband? 
A. Yes ...
 ...

Q. What did you and your husband do then? 
A. So we turn left and parked out car in Anzac Parade. So we cross our road, stop in middle of the road and then we ask the girl are you all right.

Q. When you say we who spoke, you or your husband? 
A. He goes - he went there first. After I - I walked.

Q. Who spoke? Did you both speak or did your husband speak? 
A. My husband he talk first. After I talk.

Q. Can you remember what your husband said? 
A. He asked the girl are you alright love." 
It would seem that the evidence was given in relation to an incident where the plaintiff and the defendant witnessed an accident and their car was later stoned by the defendant before that court.

Allied to the transcript is a statement made to the police by the defendant on February 1991 over the incident at the Stork Club to which I have already referred. She said that at 4 am on 11 February 1991, she was on the footpath outside the Stork Club with her husband. Two men shouted, " `We paid [for] the flowers' ... they hit my husband." Later, on 24 February 1991, she said, "About 1am on Monday the 11th February 1991 I went with my de-facto Panayiotis
Theodossiou to the `Stork' Nightclub in King Street, Newtown. We have a business selling flowers in restaurants and nightclubs." She says that an
Australian man took some flowers from her and she asked for $35 and he said "Can you go away? ... Piss off, get away from here." She then went back to "Where Peter, my de-facto was sitting, and I say something to him." She and the plaintiff then went outside and the two men punched and kicked the plaintiff. She tried to break up the fight and got hit in the cheek.

It is clear that these statements made by the defendant, particularly the statements to the police over the Stork Club incident, are very significant.
The evidence given to the Local Court is to my mind of less significance, because although the defendant was on oath, one can well understand a person not contradicting what might appear to her to be an immaterial detail, led by the prosecutor, that is the suggestion that the plaintiff was "your husband".
I will deal with the defendant's denials in due course.

Turning to the oral evidence, the plaintiff's version, that there was a de facto relationship from 24 July 1988 for at least two years, is supported by a number of witnesses. Looking at these witnesses in order of the affidavits that were read and then those who did not swear affidavits but gave oral evidence, many made passing references to the plaintiff and the defendant being a couple who were invited out together by at least the Greek social circle of the parties. These included Connie Kattirtzis and her husband
George. Indeed, George Kattirtzis said that he saw the plaintiff and the defendant living together both at Marrickville and at Lakemba and 80 Leylands
Parade, Belmore. There was also evidence from a Mr Ange, a bookshop owner, who says that early in the period of 1988-1991 the defendant said to Mr Ange that she was looking forward to marrying the plaintiff. However, in May 1991 when he called on the defendant at the request of the plaintiff to try and mend the split between them, she said, "I do not wish to have anything further to do with Peter he is a donkey and I do not want him any more, I am glad to get rid of the donkey" and she then made an imitation donkey noise. Mr Mavropoulos swore that he frequently saw the plaintiff and the defendant together up until
January 1991 and "Up until that time I saw nothing to make me think that Peter and Catherine were not husband and wife." Mrs Michael said that she visited 80
Leylands Parade, Belmore on two occasions. She said that on one occasion she walked down the hall of 80 Leylands Parade, Belmore and noticed a bedroom with a double bed.

Mr Sparks, a flower grower, says both that the plaintiff has referred to the defendant as "my wife" and the defendant has referred to the plaintiff as "my husband" in the course of the parties' business dealings with him. Mr
Zevlikaris gave similar evidence. Mr Phillipou says that he visited the parties between 1988 and May 1991 and often heard the defendant refer to the plaintiff as "my husband". He said, "I have always been of the belief that
Catherine was Peter's wife and that she worked in the flower business with him." Mr Valensise, a flower grower, also said that the parties told him that they were living together at Marrickville and that he observed their behaviour to be such as he believed that they were husband and wife or in a de facto relationship.

Christine Petrou gave evidence that she had called at 80 Leylands Parade,
Belmore on a few occasions to help the parties prepare flowers for weddings, engagements and funerals. She says the first time she went to the house, the defendant said that the plaintiff was still asleep in bed. Catherine opened the bedroom door and Ms Petrou saw that the plaintiff was asleep in a double bed. She said, "It was obvious to me that someone else slept in the same bed.
I saw Catherine's clothes, shoes, stuffed toys and other things in the room along with Peter's belongings." She says that this visit was in early 1991 and that the defendant said, "I want to marry Peter but Peter is not interested in marrying at present. I am anxious to have a baby because time is running out for me." She says that at lunch time the same day, Ms Petrou repeated the sense of this conversation to the plaintiff and the defendant said, "Peter if you don't marry me there is someone else waiting to marry me." Later the same day the defendant told Ms Petrou that the other gentleman was an Asian who she had known for some time.

By arrangement, most of the witnesses were not cross examined on the basis that no Browne versus Dunn point would be taken from failure to cross examine them. Ms Petrou was, however, cross examined. Her evidence survived cross examination without a problem for her.

I have dealt with the affidavit evidence tendered by the plaintiff as to the de facto relationship. I now pass to the oral evidence. Mr Kolaitis gave evidence that on 29 May 1990, he went to visit his father-in-law in Leichhardt and the plaintiff and the defendant were there. They told Mr Kolaitis that the defendant wanted to stay here permanently. He said he knew the defendant for a year and she was a very nice lady and was very close to the plaintiff. They wrote an application, went around the corner to a Justice of the Peace and signed the form. "The form" was identified by the witness as a document that is currently in the file kept by DILGEA as 90/602045. This is a file on Yang
Li. It shows Yang Li as a person living in a de facto relationship, a business woman from China who is living at 80 Leylands Parade, Belmore. It shows that her de facto husband is the plaintiff. The statement signed by Mr Kolaitis before the Justice of the Peace was that Yang Li and the plaintiff lived as husband and wife and were going to have children. He swore this before a
Justice of the Peace. However, the real importance of the document is that it is alleged that it was the defendant who signed the name "Li Yang" on the form. The form also contains a statement that the witness was alleged to have made before a Mr Monsif, JP, that the plaintiff and Yang Li were living as de factos. Mr Kolaitis conveniently, could not remember very much about this. Mrs
Yvette Clarke, nee Petrou, gave evidence that she wrote out in English a statement for her father to sign. She says that she was a mere amanuensis and her father dictated to her what to write and she scribbled it on a piece of paper and wrote it on the form as a fair copy. She says that the only person that she knew as the wife or de facto wife of the plaintiff was the defendant.
She also says that the defendant was at her father's office at the time when she wrote out the statement.

On the defendant's side, the only evidence on the issue of the relationship was given by the defendant herself. She says that she and the plaintiff found the Lakemba property and made arrangements to lease it together, even though they were no longer in a de facto relationship and she paid the bond money and two weeks rent in advance. It is clear that the defendant entered into another de facto relationship with a man in May 1991, but this is really of little assistance in the present case.

It is abundantly clear that the defendant was, above all things, intent on securing Australian citizenship. On her own case, it was only after this citizenship and her Australian passport were secure that she finally broke with the plaintiff.

The evidence is full of assertions by both sides that both of the parties used threats to inform DILGEA of people remaining in Australia illegally. The plaintiff carried out that threat in respect of Yang Li and it would seem that either the plaintiff or the defendant or both threatened the Chinese girls who were working in the business if they stepped out of line. The scenario is such that it would not be at all unusual for the plaintiff to have reported the defendant to DILGEA if she did not do what she was told.

The evidence of Christine Petrou is that there was one double bed in the house at Leylands Parade and that both the plaintiff's and the defendant's possessions were in the room where that bed was in 1991.

The photographs to which I have referred show that the relationship was existing at least in January 1990 and this in itself throws doubt on the defendant's denial that it ceased in May 1989.

It would seem to me more likely than not on the evidence that the defendant did nothing to rock the boat, so to speak, until she got her Australian citizenship and passport in April/May 1991. This included sleeping in the same bed as the plaintiff, at least if this could not be avoided, and accompanying the plaintiff to functions as if she were continuing in her role as his de facto wife. It may well be that the defendant's allegations that the plaintiff had a sexual relationship with Yang Li were correct until March 1991 when it is clear that the plaintiff and Yang Li severed any relationship that they had and the plaintiff denounced her to DILGEA and it may be that the plaintiff's sexual relationship with Yang Li and later on with Rong Rong Hu meant that retaining her position in the double bed with the plaintiff was not as costly to the defendant as it might have been under other circumstances.

I have turned my mind to the question as to what is the situation in law where there is a "genuine" de facto relationship for say a year, and then a pale continuation of it for two more years, under circumstances where for some collateral purpose one party gives the impression that the relationship is continuing but, in her heart of hearts, no longer regards herself as the de facto wife of the other party.

In the area of de jure marriages, these arrangements are sometimes called "limited purpose marriages"; see for instance the article by Professor John
Wade, "Limited Purpose Marriages" (1982) 45 Mod LR 159.

Section 3(1) of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984, defines "de facto relationship" as meaning "the relationship between de facto partners, being the relationship of living or having lived together as husband and wife on a bona fide domestic basis although not married to each other." People may live together on a bona fide domestic basis even after the initial ardour of their relationship has cooled. It is not enough that one party says in her heart that the relationship is over. I agree with the comment in the CCH
Australian De Facto Relationships Law para 414 on p 1494 that "Some dual test of intention and behaviour will be necessary under the De Facto
Relationships Act in order to prevent secretive mental terminations being used as a fraudulent device upon a naive partner." 
Indeed, it is possible to terminate a relationship without communicating that to the other partner; see eg in the marriage situation Re Tye <case>; [(1976) 1 Fam LR 11],235, but this is an unusual situation and there is a heavy evidentiary onus on a person who alleges such a termination: Re Pavey <case>; [(1976) 1 Fam LR 11],358. An example of this, again in the situation of marriage, is given in Collins v
Collins [(1961) 3 FLR 17.] In that case, the wife had made up her mind to leave the husband when he had a serious accident. She visited him in hospital, did his laundry and gave him some food. However, as he recovered he continued his abuse of her so that, when he was likely to be released from hospital, she left the home. It was held that the separation occurred at the time when she left the home rather than at the time when she made up her mind to do so immediately before the husband's hospitalisation.

The same approach has been taken under the Social Security Act. In Re
Sturges (1983) 5 ALN Note 110, Deputy President Hall said at N153, "De facto relationships, like marriages, no doubt have their ups and downs. Where parties to such a relationship continue to live together after its alleged breakdown, there is perhaps a greater inference than in a marriage that there is a continuing commitment between the parties ... . After all, either party is normally free to walk out of the relationship at any time." 
In the instant case, the preponderance of the evidence leads to the conclusion that the parties still were living together, were sharing a bed, were recognizing each other in the community and being recognized by the community as being a couple and despite any other relationships the parties may have had or their subjective thoughts, the de facto relationship continued until at least the early part of 1991. Accordingly, a two year period of a de facto relationship has been shown by the plaintiff.
It follows from what I have said in 1, that the relationship existed between 24 July 1988 and about April 1991.
At the commencement of the relationship, the plaintiff owned the house at
A Harnett Avenue, Marrickville jointly with his former wife. This house was sold in mid-1989. The other assets of the plaintiff are rather obscure. He appears to have had some money on deposit with the notorious BCCI. Just how much was recoverable is unclear, but at least on the plaintiff's version, about $200,000 flowed through to him in Australia. In addition, he had some investments in England in the form of houses.

The amount of assets which the plaintiff had at the commencement of his relationship are not as important in this case as they might be in others for two reasons. First, the substantial increase in the parties' financial position was a result of the flower selling business that I will be dealing with under heading 5, and secondly, both the parties, to some extent, gained from the relationship financially, though the plaintiff may have lost on the discrete transactions involving the two properties which ended up in the defendant's name and the St George Bank shares which had a similar destination. Accordingly, this case is not really one of finding some global equalising figure to compensate one party or the other under <case>, rather it is to work out the interests in particular pieces of property, including the flower selling business.
The defendant was born in Beijing, China on 25 April 1962. She obtained technical qualifications in China and after working for the Government, transferred to a private corporation in Shenzhen. She came to Australia with about $30,000, $20,000 of which she spent on learning English and retained the balance of $10,000. Apart from this sum, she does not appear to have had any property of her own until she derived money from the flower selling business.
At the end of the relationship, she has two houses and some shares, so that her financial position has increased considerably.
The key property matter in this case is the flower selling business. Both of the parties claim that it is their business.

The background to the flower business needs to be set out. Some of it is non- controversial. The defendant had known Anna Chen when both were students at the Beijing Telecommunications College. Anna Chen had come to Australia about three months before the defendant and they decided to share a flat together.
Anna Chen was working as a waitress at a restaurant at Kings Cross, "Adams
Hut". She was introduced to the plaintiff, who was working at Adams Hut as a waiter, at about Christmas 1987. A close friendship developed between the plaintiff and the defendant in early 1988, though the defendant was also in a platonic relationship with a Mr Wan, with whom she shared a house in early .

The defendant then took a holiday in China, and on her return in July 1988, she obtained employment with a company, "Bow Tie, which conducted a flower marketing business. Bow Tie sold flowers by direct selling in restaurants by young women who all dressed like Little Red Riding Hood. The defendant says she closely observed the way the Bow Tie business operated and in about
October 1988, she says that she commenced the Aussie Rose business. She says that at that stage, the plaintiff was working full time at the Diethnes
Restaurant and she offered to employ him, at the rate of $60 per night cash, to drive the operators from place to place.

The plaintiff says that when he was employed at Diethnes Restaurant, he met some girls selling flowers and spoke to them regularly. He had also been the manager of the Athens Star Restaurant at Crows Nest in 1985 and had similarly seen girls selling flowers. He says that he obtained a job for the defendant with Bow Tie Flowers. The defendant remained for three weeks with that business, when she was dismissed. The defendant was very upset about being dismissed from her job because she had lost face. In order to console her, the plaintiff, who had some experience with buying fruit and vegetables from the
Flemington Markets, had the idea of buying flowers from the market and arranging the roses into single stem roses and roses in cylinders and giving them to the defendant, who walked around various restaurants with a basket selling them to patrons of pubs and restaurants. I will deal with the conflict shortly.

The matter is complicated because the evidence discloses that different ethnic groups of people attach different significance to flowers. This difference, when appreciated by the proprietors of the flower selling business, impinges on the marketing methods.

The evidence was that Australian men are not very keen on flowers and it may be necessary for a flower seller, if her overall sales on a night are poor, to bring down the price of a rose from $12 to $5 in order to sell it to an
Australian. Chinese men are not keen on flowers. Lebanese men find that flowers get in the way of their festivities and so are only interested in arrangements like leis, which can be worn. Greek men, however, are particularly keen on flowers and will give them to wives, girlfriends, singers, or even a wider group of ladies. Indeed, Mrs Michael gave evidence that on one occasion she spoke to the defendant at a function and said, "Do you go to the Chinese functions and sell flowers there?" to which the defendant replied, "No, Peter will not do that, the Chinese people are too stingy for giving flowers. They are not accustomed to the tradition of giving flowers to a singer or their girlfriend and wives, like the Greek people."
Other heavy purchasers of flowers were the Russians.

It also seems necessary in the flower selling business to have some distinctive marketing strategy. The strategy relied on by the proprietors of
Xia Aussie Rose was to have neatly dressed young Chinese girls sell the roses.
This may have had other benefits in that these students might have been prepared to work for less money than other people. The fact that the flower selling girls were Chinese, often Chinese students recently out of China or
Hong Kong who only spoke Mandarin or Cantonese, meant that of necessity, the defendant was the person who had most to do with them. Likewise, because heavy consumers of the product were Greeks and the plaintiff was of Greek descent though born in Britain, it was largely in Greek restaurants and clubs that the flower sellers operated and it was to a great degree the plaintiff's contacts which opened up these sites.

The plaintiff says that when he tried to register the name "Aussie Rose, it was unavailable because someone else had already registered it. He needed a distinctive name and so the name of the defendant was used and the authorities were content to register Xia Aussie Rose as a distinctive name. The plaintiff merely says that it was her first name, Xia, and that she registered it.

Exhibit PX31 is the application form for the business name Xia Aussie Rose to commence on 14 May 1990. The document is signed simply by the defendant and provides that she is to be the proprietor of the business.

Both sides produced a large number of witnesses who, if they were Greek, swore that the plaintiff was the controller of the business, and if they were
Chinese, swore that the defendant was its proprietor. This is quite understandable because the way the business was run, Greek people would have more contact with the plaintiff, and Chinese people more contact with the defendant. In any event, as counsel put, most of the witness' evidence were "one liners" and their material is not likely to affect the result unless their evidence covered some particular area of specific observation.

I said earlier that I did not consider that either of the parties was a reliable witness, but if I had to say that one was slightly more reliable than the other, that person would be the plaintiff. Counsel's address on each side highlighted the problems with credibility and I really do not need to go past the addresses to deal with these problems.

Mr Bell, for the defendant, said that it is to be carefully noted that the plaintiff never properly accounted for the properties which he had in the
United Kingdom, which he said belonged to him. He has never explained the gap between what had gone overseas and what was left in Australia. He didn't put forward his income tax returns and relied on some obscure relationship between himself and a relative in England. As a result, his financial records do not show his position at the commencement of the relationship. At one stage he said there were $40,000 to $50,000 in an envelope. It must have been a big envelope! And the plaintiff does not say where the money went. He is remitting large sums overseas, but yet at one stage, he was receiving some $4,500 from the Department of Social Services whilst he was remitting sums overseas and whilst he said he was running the flower business. Although he said at one stage that his "wife" was in control of the flower business, he is now saying that he was the boss of the business and without him it would have failed.

As to the two properties that are now in the defendant's name, Mr Bell says it is significant that nowhere is it ever alleged that there was any agreement between the parties that the properties would be put into the defendant's name. The plaintiff emerges as an aggressive man who sticks up for his rights and not the sort of person who, in a million years, would put something in a woman's name unless he had to. The real reason why the properties were put in the defendant's name was to defeat creditors. It is to be noted that the plaintiff has shifted ground on this issue. He at times said that he was trusting, a bit soft, totally uncommercial and love-stricken, then at other times he has said that he put the properties in the defendant's name for probate purposes.

The plaintiff admits that he lied to DILGEA and he took the benefit of not answering questions in the Family Court on the ground that they might incriminate him, but he now puts himself forward as a man who is telling the truth to this court. Why should he be believed? Moreover, the plaintiff was involved in the distribution of false identity cards. He does not make a secret of this, but says it was just a joke. The plaintiff's evidence is inconsistent with that of the independent solicitor, Mr Kissane. The plaintiff says that he dealt with Mr Kissane. Mr Kissane says that the defendant was his client, and indeed, the Surry Hills purchase was settled when the plaintiff was actually overseas. The plaintiff's character shines through when he denounced Yang Li to DILGEA and the defendant's assertion that she was constantly in fear that her Australian residency and citizenship would be affected if she crossed the plaintiff is shown to be a true fear. In any event, even if the plaintiff is accepted, his case really is that he can't demonstrate the source of the funds from which the properties were purchased, and merely says that the defendant came to Australia with hardly anything, she now has something; therefore, the plaintiff must have been the source of the moneys that enriched the defendant.

I believe that almost all of the points that are raised by Mr Bell are correct.

On the other hand, Mr McCrudden, for the plaintiff, says that the defendant is completely unreliable. He instances the matter in February 1997 when there is some evidence to suggest that the defendant caused forged terms of settlement of these proceedings to be prepared. The defendant's denial of the de facto relationship was in the face of all the evidence, including the evidence of
Mrs Smith, who was living on the premises, and who saw the plaintiff and defendant emerge from the bedroom. The photographs further show that this could not be so. The defendant changed her evidence as to who paid the rent of the Lakemba property. Indeed, hardly any part of the defendant's evidence was not subject to a complete reversal or a fanciful explanation. She gave evidence to the Local Court and to the police in 1990/91 contradictory to that which she is now giving. She gave inconsistent accounts as to how much money she had when she came to Australia. The income that the defendant declared for taxation would not enable her to make the amounts which she said she obtained from the business and which she invested.

The defendant's story that the plaintiff was working as a driver is ridiculous. She never paid the plaintiff petrol money for the use of his car.
It is just fanciful that he would work six or seven nights a week without remuneration. The defendant has deliberately played down the plaintiff's part in the business by lying.

Mr McCrudden then pointed to 32 distinct inconsistencies in the defendant's evidence which she had tried to explain away under cross examination or blamed her solicitor for not giving a full account in the affidavit or that she merely forgot. Again, I think that almost everything that was said about the defendant was correct.

The court is thus in a position where the main evidence given by the parties on the present issue is unreliable. This does not discharge the court from having to determine the question, but it does so bearing in mind that the onus of proof is on the plaintiff and looking to external documents and other evidence when available.

One starts from the fact that the business name was owned by the defendant in the sense that she was the person in the books of the Australian Securities
Commission who held the registered business name. It was she, and not the plaintiff, who appears to have paid tax on the earnings, though it would seem that she only put in returns in 1994, after these proceedings were commenced.

The business did not keep substantial records. The plaintiff says that all he kept was a little book where he made a pencil note of how much the various flower girls sold. The girls were paid in cash. The profits of the business were banked, but sometimes into the plaintiff's account and sometimes into the defendant's. Perhaps it is more accurate to say that in the business' early period they were banked into the plaintiff's account and later on were banked into the defendant's account (T43). The only likely reasons why this changeover occurred were because the moneys were the moneys of the defendant or because the plaintiff was seeking to hide the fact that the moneys were his. This, to my mind, tends to reinforce the view that if the business belonged to either the plaintiff or the defendant, the defendant has the stronger case. However, the point is not a strong one because it is quite clear from the plaintiff's answers and his declining to answer certain questions about filing tax returns etc, that he thought he had good reason for not giving any details of his financial position and he may well have thought that it was consistent with this policy that the defendant, who was under his control, at least until her permanent status in Australia was assured, held the moneys in her name.

The factor that goes the other way is that prior to May 1991, all the business cards for the business had the plaintiff's name on them rather than the defendant's. Again, this factor is diminished because the cards would have been mainly used in connection with obtaining the permission of restaurateurs to sell flowers in the restaurant, which was the plaintiff's side of the business, rather than organizing the retail sales, which was handled by the defendant.

When one looks at the position globally, however, it is more likely than not that the business was a partnership rather than being solely owned by either the plaintiff or the defendant. One very good reason for saying this is that no wages were paid to either the plaintiff or the defendant. Just as one cannot imagine the plaintiff being at the defendant's beck and call to drive her or the flower girls wherever they wanted to go at night, one cannot imagine that the defendant would work as hard as she did without being paid.
To meet this point the plaintiff put forward some suggestion that the defendant was paid a "commission" of $500 per week. The evidence on this point was sparse and I do not consider that it was established.

It is clear that there was no formal partnership agreement, but that is not the end of the matter.
 "Partnership" is defined by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/s1.html) of the [Partnership Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/) as "the relation which exists between persons carrying on a business in common with a view to profit." [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/s2.html) fleshes out what is covered by partnership, but it is not of value for present purposes. Lindley on Partnership in Chapter 2 sets out a series of definitions of partnership from the leading textbooks (see 13th edition, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1971, pp 14 and following), all of which centre on the contractual association of two or more people for the purpose of carrying on business and sharing the profits.

In the instant case there is no actual agreement as to the proportions in which the profits shall be shared. However, where one gets that situation with every other indicia of partnership, one assumes that the profits are to be split equally. In any event, as Lindley says (see 17th edition, Sweet &
Maxwell, London, 1995) at p 12, the omission of any reference to the splitting of profits in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/s1.html) of the [Partnership
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/) points to the conclusion that it is an incidental rather than an essential matter of the partnership relation.

Accordingly, in my view, the flower business was owned by a partnership of both the plaintiff and the defendant, in which they were entitled to the capital and the profits equally. The partnership business was dissolved in and thereafter the parties went their own separate ways, each taking part of the business. They have developed their respective businesses ever since.
Accordingly, there is no need to appoint a receiver or otherwise deal with the goodwill of the business. The real significance of the proprietorship of the business is in the way in which its profits were utilised in the acquisition of other assets.

Because of these findings there is no entitlement to any order removing the business name Xia Aussie Rose.
The next question is who is the beneficial owner of 80 Leylands Parade,
Belmore? The title is in the name of the defendant.

The property was agreed to be purchased in December 1989 and, as with everything else, both parties give completely opposite evidence as to how it was that the property was purchased and why it was put into the defendant's name. It is common ground that the purchase price was $177,000 and that $75,000 was borrowed by the defendant on first mortgage from the Commonwealth
Bank, which was guaranteed by the plaintiff. Of the balance, the defendant says that she contributed $110,000 from her own resources, the plaintiff says that he contributed $71,000 and the defendant $31,000. The plaintiff says that he was the moving party in the purchase and it was he who retained Mr Kissane, solicitor, to act on the purchase. The defendant and Mr Kissane say that the defendant was the client. I prefer the position that has been supported by the independent solicitor witness, Mr Kissane.

The defendant sets out in detail how she funded the $110,000. She says that she brought to Australia $22,000, including some $12,000 which was repaid to her in Australia. She brought in a further $20,000 from Hong Kong in 1988 and borrowed $30,000 from Bo Wang. The balance ($26,000) was taken from the flower business.

The plaintiff's account of the moneys is far less credible. The plaintiff has not filed income tax returns, he has property interests overseas as well as in
Australia, he had an investment in BCCI, he put money in the defendant's name, he seems to have used at least three names in his banking business, and at one stage even appeared to have two tax file numbers. I really find that it is almost impossible to see corroboration of the plaintiff's version.

Accordingly, I will accept the defendant's version as being more likely than not. However, on this basis it would seem that the plaintiff, if he had half of the business, and was responsible for half the mortgage, then his contribution is $50,000-$55,000 out of a total of $177,000, or about 30%. It would seem to me that, on the whole of the material, it was never intended by the parties that should the relationship split up without attributable blame, there should be a windfall to the defendant because the property was in her name.

There never appears to be any common intention that the parties would own the property as joint tenants or tenants in common, and indeed, the problems that
Mr Theodossiou says he was having with his bank, which was part of the reason for putting the property in the defendant's name, would suggest that even on his evidence this was never intended to be the situation. Accordingly, there would need to be an equitable charge for the contributions made by Mr
Theodossiou towards Belmore. Theoretically that matter will need to be referred to a Master if the parties cannot work out what should be the appropriate amount. However, for reasons stated later, this need not occur. In addition to the contribution, cognizance will also have to be taken of the fact that the plaintiff did expend moneys on the mortgage and on repairs once the parties had split up, which he did on the basis that he had an equitable interest and which expenditure was of incontrovertible benefit to the defendant.
The next matter to consider is the equitable ownership of 117 Campbell
Street, Surry Hills. Contracts were exchanged to purchase this property in
January 1991 and the purchase was completed in March 1991. The purchase price was $175,000. Again, Mr Kissane acted on the purchase. This time, however, Mr
Kissane says that he was in much greater contact with the plaintiff than he was over the Belmore property, though the settlement actually took place when the plaintiff was overseas.

The property is in the defendant's name. The plaintiff says that he brought in $89,000 from overseas, borrowed $10,500 from his brother, borrowed $50,000 from Nick Petrou on mortgage and the balance of $25,500 was made up from the flower business. The defendant says that there was the mortgage from Nick
Petrou of $50,000, $68,000 that she borrowed from friends and $55,000 which were the profits from the business. She points to the fact that in her money market call account with the Commonwealth Bank at Belmore there is a deposit of $100,000 on 13 February 1991 and a further deposit of almost $12,000 on 18
February 1991 and this funded the withdrawal of $109,955.65 on 25 March to pay the amount due on settlement.

However, there is no doubt at all that some moneys were being transferred freely between the plaintiff and the defendant and to and fro from overseas about this time. Furthermore, the loans of cash which the defendant does put down in her final affidavit as moneys of her own or as borrowed from various friends differs from what she told her accountant at the time and she did not fare at all well in cross examination on this matter at about T354. This makes it very difficult for me to accept the defendant's evidence as to the source of these funds as anything more than highly ephemeral.

The plaintiff's account is not much better. He says he received moneys from overseas which were the bulk of the moneys for Surry Hills. There is no doubt that on both accounts, that $50,000 came from Mr Petrou and that some moneys came from the business. Even taking the defendant's version, $52,500 of the $175,000 was sourced from Mr Theodossiou.

The position I am in on the evidence, because it is so ephemeral on both sides and because both the plaintiff and the defendant have shown themselves to be completely unreliable as witnesses, is that I just cannot say where the moneys came from except as to the borrowed moneys. I am afraid this is one of the few situations in my judicial career that I just have to say that the plaintiff has not shown that he has an equitable interest in Surry Hills beyond an equitable charge for the $52,500 constituting his share of loan moneys.
I now turn to whether any order should be made under <case> of the De Facto
Relationships Act.

I have held that there was a de facto relationship. I have considered that, generally speaking, both parties profited from the relationship and so far as the business is concerned, there was a partnership which has been dissolved, each party has taken up part of the old partnership business and there is no need to make any adjustment. However, I have also found that the defendant's interest in the Belmore and Surry Hills property should be subject to an equitable charge, in the first case, for at least $50,000 plus interest, and in the second case, $52,500 plus interest. Assuming that we are dealing with interest at the rate of about 12% and that the extra proportion of moneys paid to the mortgagees beyond a moiety is about $10,000, there would need to be an adjustment in 1997 dollars of about $190,000 Mr Theodossiou's way.

The philosophy behind <case> of the De Facto Relationships Act was recently re- examined by a five man Court of Appeal in Evans versus Marmont <case>; [(1997) 21 Fam LR 760]; DFC 95-184. By a three to two majority, the court determined that the proper construction of <case> of the De Facto Relationships
Act is that the court, when considering whether to adjust the interests with respect to the property of a de facto partner, may only have regard to - (a) the financial and non-financial contributions made directly or indirectly to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of property; and (b) the contributions made to the welfare of the other partner or to the children or homemaker contributions. The court overruled Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 27
NSWLR 728.] 
In the instant case there is no question of any homemaker contribution because both parties treated each other as business partners and there is no material to suggest that either of them spent any significant time making a home for each other.

It follows from what I have said above, that on strict principles of evidence and rules of equity, if the Act did not apply, the plaintiff would probably have an equitable charge over the two properties at Belmore and Surry Hills amounting to about $190,000.

Since the plaintiff was excluded from the properties in 1991, it would seem that the defendant has been receiving the profits and that the plaintiff, however, has had to pay at least some of the mortgage expenses himself. The plaintiff, in his statement of claim, claims 80% of both properties.

It seems to me that the interest allowed on the sums of money which the plaintiff has, even on the defendant's version, invested in the property, would approximately equal the nett after-tax benefit of the rents. However, some adjustment needs to be made in the plaintiff's favour because essentially the parties were operating a partnership business in which they were contributing equally and could reasonably expect to have half the profits equally and the benefaction to the defendant which resulted in the properties being put in her name and her receiving more than a moiety, was at least partly due to this factor. There were also other reasons such as hiding property away from people who might have a claim on it, or muddying the water in case anyone should ever be interested as to why the plaintiff had never filed an income tax return, or because of some problem with a bank, but even accepting that, part of the benefit that the defendant received was because of the relationship that then existed between the parties.

It is, I think, virtually impossible to completely unscramble the transactions between the parties. This is for a number of reasons. First, the majority of the evidence that is given is unreliable and the figures in bank statements etc are capable of more than one rational explanation. Secondly, the plaintiff deliberately did not keep proper books or accounts. Thirdly, I cannot accept statements such as the plaintiff allowed the defendant a "commission" of $500 a week. However, despite all that, it seems to me that there should be an adjustment of some $30,000 in the plaintiff's favour to take account of this factor.

In reaching the sum of $220,000 I have subsumed any claim that the plaintiff might otherwise have in equity.
I need say nothing more about the claim that the plaintiff may have to an equitable charge because his rights have been subsumed in the order I will make under <case> of the De Facto Relationships Act. I would merely record that if I should be later held to have erred in making an award to the plaintiff under that head, I would have made an order charging the defendant's properties with payment to the plaintiff of $190,000.
In summary, I have held there is a de facto relationship for the appropriate time and the court has jurisdiction to make an order under the
Act. I have held that both the plaintiff and the defendant are unreliable witnesses and most of the documentation proffered by them does not assist in resolution of the ultimate facts. I have also held that the probabilities are that they were partners of the business known as Xia Aussie Rose or some variation of that name, entitled to the capital and income of that business in equal shares. However, for all practical purposes, there was an informal dissolution in 1991 and each has appropriated the goodwill in setting up their own business since. The properties which are in the name of the defendant at
Belmore and Surry Hills, on any account, were paid for by moneys which flowed from the plaintiff or which must be taken as being the plaintiff's contribution and the parties never intended that on the break-up of their relationship, a windfall of that nature should be retained. Because of the parties' behaviour in keeping records and in moving moneys, it is impossible to say precisely what were the contributions made by the plaintiff to the properties which the defendant now holds. However, on the balance of probabilities, the contribution was at least $104,000, made no later than
February 1991 which, with interest at the court rates, would amount to $190,000 in round figures. Interest is appropriate as the defendant has been receiving the profits of those properties to the exclusion of the plaintiff.
In addition to that $190,000, there should be a moderate adjustment in favour of the plaintiff to take account of other contributions he has made from which the defendant has benefitted.

Accordingly, it is appropriate that an order be made in the plaintiff's favour under <case> of the De Facto Relationships Act that the defendant pay the plaintiff the sum of $220,000.

So far as costs are concerned, the ordinary rules apply to applications under the De Facto Relationships Act, that is, that costs ordinarily follow the event. The only special rule, Part 52 r24A, obviously does not apply to the instant case.

I believe that I should allow costs to be argued at a convenient time when the short minutes are brought in. I would think there is something to be said for the proposition that where one has a case which lasts for many days, where there is a tremendous amount of muddying of the waters, and unreliable evidence given by both parties, which essentially is the winding up of the commercial property affairs of people, that each party should pay their own costs. One reason for this is that the basis of the partnership rule is that people who are to participate equally in capital and income must participate equally in the costs of undoing their joint enterprise. Another factor that would enter into the equation is that the plaintiff claimed 80% of the joint properties and has ended up with something which may be considerably less than that. On the other hand, the plaintiff could well argue that he has been successful in the litigation and that he has obtained a substantial order. It may be too, that there have been some Calderbank letters or other relevant documents as to costs about which I presently know nothing.

Apart from the matter of costs, the matter will have to stand over for the form of order to be dealt with. At the moment, the plaintiff's position is protected by caveats or injunctions and it may be that some extension of these will be needed, pending the realization of the properties in order to pay out the plaintiff if that be necessary, or if there is an appeal by either or both parties, pending the disposal of the appeal.

Accordingly, at this stage I will merely publish these reasons and stand the matter over to 16 December 1997 at 9.30 am for short minutes to be brought in.
If the debate on the short minutes is going to last more than ten minutes then contact should be made with my Associate so that an endeavour can be made to find the time needed. Again, if 16 December is inconvenient to counsel, provided my Associate is notified no later than Friday 12 December, some other day may be able to be chosen. The short minutes should also provide for the fate of the exhibits.
 * * * 
