

Attorney General of New South Wales and Anor versus Kennedy Miller Television
Pty Limited and Anor Matter No Ca 40574/97 [1998] NSWSC 256 (30 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 August 1998 
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ANOR versus KENNEDY MILLER TELEVISION PTY
LIMITED & ANOR 
CA 40574/97 JUNE 1998 
PRIESTLEY JA, HANDLEY JA, POWELL JA 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION - SPERLING J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40574/97 ALD 30089/96 
DELIVERED: 30 JUNE 1998 
HEARING DATE: 25 FEBRUARY 1998 
PARTIES: ATTORNEY GENERAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ANOR versus KENNEDY MILLER TELEVISION PTY LIMITED & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY JA HANDLEY JA POWELL JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: P. WEBB QC / P.J. SAIDI / S. DOWLING 
Respondent: J.E. GRIFFITHS 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: I.V. KNIGHT, STATE CROWN SOLICITOR 
Respondent: (1) MALLESONS STEPHEN JAQUES 
LANDERER & CO 
CATCHWORDS: [LEGAL PROFESSION ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/) - COST ASSESSMENT - REASONS FOR ASSESSMENT 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 25 
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ANOR versus KENNEDY MILLER TELEVISION PTY LIMITED [LEGAL PROFESSION ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/) - COST ASSESSMENT - whether a cost assessor is obliged to provide reasons for an assessment.

Kennedy Miller Television Pty Limited (Kennedy) was successful in proceedings against Nine Network Pty Limited (Nine) in the Supreme Court and Court of
Appeal and costs orders were made in its favour - the parties not agreeing on the amount of costs payable, the matter was referred to Mr Lancken to assess costs pursuant to the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) - Mr
Lancken's determinations considerably reduced the costs claimed by Kennedy - requests from both Kennedy and Nine to Mr Lancken for his reasons were denied - a summons seeking relief in the nature of mandamus was heard by Sperling J who held that a Costs Assessor must provide reasons for his determinations - the Attorney-General sought leave to be added as a party, or in the alternative to appear as amicus curiae - leave was refused by Sperling J - leave to appeal was subsequently granted.

On appeal the appellant submitted that: when construing [Part
II](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p2)
Division 6 of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), there is no requirement that cost assessors provide reasons for their determinations.

Held: if costs assessors were not obliged to give reasons it could effectively negate the appeal provisions of [ss
L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208l.html) and [208M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208m.html); the legislation was put to the Legislative Council on the footing the new system should be "subject to appropriate rights of appeal to a judge"; (b) the aim of the new scheme, to be "faster, easier and cheaper, need not be hindered by an obligation to give brief reasons; [Part
II](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p2),
Division 6 is a clear example of the "special circumstance" alluded to by
Gibbs CJ (with whom Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ agreed) and Deane J in
Public Service Board of New South Wales versus Osmond as a result of which a person making an administrative decision must provide reasons; furthermore, when a statutory scheme shows no clear intention to the contrary, it should "be construed so as to impose upon the decision-maker an implied statutory duty to provide such reasons", Osmond as per Deane J; the "statement" of a senior cost assessor lodged with the court did not show that serious difficulties would arise should costs assessors be required to provide reasons; observations by Handley J on question whether function of costs assessor is judicial or administrative; on costs: the question of status of the Attorney-General and costs orders were connected. As the Attorney-General had appeared as amicus curiae, and since Mr Lancken had not taken an active role in the first proceedings, he should not have been ordered to pay costs; further, as Nine had taken an active role in the first proceedings, it should have an opportunity to be heard on the question whether it should bear any part of the cost burden.

Cases: 
Legal Profession Reform Act 1993, No 87 [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), No , [Part
II](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p2)
Division 6 [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s203.html), o8A, [208L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208l.html), [208M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208m.html) 
Legal Profession Regulation 1994 
Legal [Profession Amendment
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/paa227/), No 95 of 1996 
Hansard, 16 September 1993, pp 3277-3278 
Public Service Board of New South Wales versus Osmond [(1985) 159 CLR 656] 
Corporate Affairs Commission versus Bradley (1974) 1 NSWLR 391 
ORDERS
The reasons for judgment should be published at this point.
The appeals against Sperling J's: declaration that Mr Lancken was bound in law to provide reasons for his assessments; and order that Mr Lancken provide reasons in writing for his determinations should be dismissed.
Nine should be given twenty-one days from the publication of these reasons and the making of the orders to file submissions as it may wish on: whether this court should disturb the costs order made by Sperling J in the proceedings at first instance, and if so what orders should be substituted.
The other parties to the appeal have seven days longer, that is twenty- eight days, from the publications of the court's reasons and orders to file any further submissions regarding the same question of costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: Act No 87 of 1993 of the New South Wales Parliament was called the Legal Profession Reform Act. Among the changes made by this Act was the replacement of the longstanding system of taxation of costs by officers of the court with a system of assessment of costs by practitioners experienced in the practicalities of the costs of legal practice including the costs of litigation. 
The Attorney General of the day, Mr Hannaford, when the proposed legislation was read a second time in the Legislative Council, listed a number of defects in the existing system of taxation of costs. It was said to be "overly formal, legalistic and complex" (Hansard, 16 September 1993, p 3277). Matters to which particular attention was drawn were that the court officers who did the work of taxing costs were often transitory and thus not always particularly knowledgeable, the process was frequently an adversarial one, it took up far too much time and could also be costly. The Attorney General said that what was needed was "a faster, easier and cheaper system of review of bills of costs" (ibid at 3277). He continued: "The Legal Fees and Costs Board suggested that the system of taxation be replaced by a system of assessment of costs by practitioners well versed in the running of a legal practice. Such persons would be part-time assessors appointed by the Supreme Court. The Chief Justice has indicated his support for this proposal. In commenting on the recommendation of the Legal Fees and
Costs Board the Chief Justice noted `I would support the proposal that, subject to appropriate rights of appeal to a judge, taxation of costs be undertaken in the first instance by assessors taken from the ranks of legal practitioners, rather than by court officials who are public servants. I think it is fair to say that legal practitioners would be far more in touch with current rates payable in the market for legal services'." (ibid at 3277) 
Along with the new system of working out what amounts were to be paid pursuant to court orders following litigation that one party pay another's costs, the substance of the law was also changed. The Attorney General explained the reason for this: "The current system of taxation of party-party costs creates injustice and confusion. It means that even though a successful litigant is awarded costs against the other party he or she may be out of pocket for a significant amount. This is because party-party costs are those `necessary and proper' while solicitor-client costs `are all costs save those which are of an unreasonable amount or have been unreasonably incurred'. It is proposed to abolish this distinction and that, subject to the judicial discretion to vary the basis of awarding costs, the criterion for awarding costs should be those reasonably incurred. The client would then recover the full costs which he or she is required to pay other than any unreasonable costs. There is significant support for this proposal. The current system of taxation has been criticised by a number of judges over recent years." (ibid at 3278) 
The new system of assessment of costs came into operation on 1 July 1994. It was amended by Act No 95 of 1996, which was assented to on 26 November 1996.

Neither in the original or later form of the new system did the legislation require in so many words that a costs assessor should give reasons for his assessment. The present appeal raises the question whether the legislation implies that they should do so. The question has come to this court in the following way.

In 1990 Kennedy Miller Television Pty Limited (Kennedy) brought proceedings against Nine Network Pty Limited (Nine) in the Supreme Court. Judgment was handed down in 1993 in favour of Kennedy. Nine was ordered to pay Kennedy's costs. Nine appealed to the Court of Appeal. In 1994 the appeal was dismissed with costs. Kennedy and Nine did not agree on the amount of costs payable pursuant to the two court orders. Applications for the decisions of the amounts of costs to be paid to be referred to a costs assessor under the new scheme were filed in the Supreme Court Registry on 28 November 1995. The matters were referred for costs assessment to Mr S. Lancken. By notice dated December 1995, Mr Lancken asked Kennedy to forward to him and to serve a copy on Nine various details relating to the two bills of costs together with any submissions Kennedy wished to make. The notice said that oral submissions would be permitted only in exceptional circumstances and asked that all communications be in writing.

In reply to this notice, Kennedy's solicitors informed Mr Lancken that the bills of costs had been prepared in the form required prior to the introduction of the new system. The letter also said that those bills had been served on Nine's solicitors, from whom objections had been received in respect of which replies had been prepared. The letter said that those documents comprised the submissions that Kennedy wished to rely on.

In subsequent correspondence Mr Lancken requested further particulars from both Kennedy and Nine. Over a period, these were supplied.

On 30 April 1996 Mr Lancken issued certificates as to his determination of the costs in the two matters. The total costs claimed pursuant to the first instance costs order had been $654,653. Mr Lancken assessed a fair and reasonable amount as $426,891. This included both $1,530 being half his costs of assessment and $4,313, the fee paid for the application. The amount claimed pursuant to the costs order made in the court of appeal was $35,788. Mr
Lancken assessed a fair and reasonable amount as $23,159. This included the costs of the assessment including half of his own costs, which totalled $621, and the fee paid for the application, $195.

By letter dated 9 May 1996 the solicitors for Kennedy wrote to Mr Lancken, referring to the two certificates of 30 April and then saying: "It is not apparent from the Certificates as to Determination of Costs, which of the costs and disbursements claimed by Kennedy Miller were accepted, which were not, and to the extent that costs were accepted on a reduced basis, the amount of the reduced costs accepted. Nor is it apparent how the various disbursements claimed, including Counsel's fees and the fees and expenses of experts have been treated, nor whether interest on unpaid costs has been allowed and to what extent.

Kennedy Miller would appreciate a more detailed breakdown of the costs and disbursements accepted and rejected, and treatment of the interest component.

It was apparent from the requests for particulars issues by the Costs
Assessor, that the Assessor gave consideration to each of the amounts claimed by Kennedy Miller, as set out in the bills of costs prepared on behalf of
Kennedy Miller, the various objections to the amounts claimed, and the responses to those objections. Accordingly, we do not anticipate that this request will be unduly difficult or time consuming to respond to, we look forward to receiving the requested information." 
Mr Lancken replied by facsimile on 22 May 1996 saying that he was not prepared to provide the information requested, his task as a Costs Assessor had been completed and he was "not prepared to provide any further information in relation to the method of or reasons for assessment of the Bill of Costs".

Further requests from the solicitors were answered in the same way.

By summons dated 8 August 1996 Kennedy claimed an order in the nature of mandamus directing Mr Lancken to provide reasons in writing for his two determinations of the assessment of costs and, further or in the alternative, a declaration that Mr Lancken was obliged to provide reasons in writing for those two determinations. At first Mr Lancken was the only defendant named in the summons, but subsequently Nine was added.

Sperling J gave judgment on the summons on 1 August 1997. He noted that Mr
Lancken had filed a submitting appearance, that Kennedy and Nine had appeared by counsel, and that counsel had appeared for the Attorney General seeking that he be added as a party. Alternatively, counsel sought to appear as amicus curiae, or for Mr Lancken, in which last case, if it arose, counsel applied for leave to file an unqualified appearance. The only submission counsel for the Attorney General (or if it came to that, Mr Lancken) wished to make was to oppose Kennedy's contention that Mr Lancken was required to give reasons for his assessment. Sperling J deferred ruling on the standing he would afford to the Attorney General or Mr Lancken until he had decided the substantial matter in the proceedings, namely, whether Mr Lancken was required to give reasons for his assessments. Full submissions were made about this by counsel for the
Attorney General.

Sperling J , in the course of quite, (and properly) extensive reasons summarised the statutory provisions governing the new system, all to be found in Pt 11, Division 6 of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/); he referred to the requirements of the Legal Profession Regulation 1994; he outlined the legislative history of the old and the new systems; he mentioned the second reading speech of Mr Hannaford; he referred to earlier decisions by
Masters Malpass and Greenwood and Bell AJ to the effect that there was no obligation upon a costs assessor under the new system to give reasons; he reviewed the law relating to the question whether an administrative tribunal was or was not obliged to give reasons in particular circumstances; and then considered the submissions which were before him on this question.

Sperling J's conclusion was "that a Costs Assessor is bound to give reasons for his determination, specifying the items which have been reduced, by what amount and for what reason in each instance." 
He made a formal declaration and other orders accordingly.

Subsequently, both Mr Lancken and the Attorney General filed summonses for leave to appeal against Sperling J's orders. Leave was granted by Powell and
Cole JJA on 20 October 1997. In brief reasons, Powell JA recorded that the question sought to be argued if leave to appeal were granted was "whether or not a Costs Assessor may be required to give reasons for decisions made by him when assessing costs, when the person seeking those reasons is, obviously enough, contemplating an appeal to the Court, either, in respect of a question of law, or an application for leave to bring a general appeal." 
Powell JA then mentioned the differing answers that had been given to this question, and continued: "The reason why there are two Summonses is that the Claimant in the First
Summons is in fact the Costs Assessor who, prima facie, ought not to have been joined in any appeal in respect of a costs assessment, while the Claimant in the second Summons, is the Attorney General for New South Wales, who seeks to have the issue determined so that the varying decisions of the court may be reconciled." 
Leave was granted to both Mr Lancken and the Attorney General, their appeals were expedited and were directed to be heard together.

The argument in this court in support of the appeal traversed the material which Sperling J had set out in his reasons. Additionally, the court was referred to various parts of Mr Hannaford's second reading speech earlier mentioned. An argument was put that a Regulation supported the construction contended for. As to this last point I say only that I do not think the limited circumstances in which such an argument may be available are present here.

The main submission was that as a matter of construction there was nothing in
Division 6 of Pt 11 which required a costs assessor to give reasons, the costs assessor's assessments and the certificates he gave were made and given pursuant to the costs assessor's administrative function and there was nothing in the Act to displace the general rule in Public Service Board of New South
Wales versus Osmond [(1985) 159 CLR 656] that administrators need not give reasons.

In my view, this overall submission should not be accepted. My reasons for this opinion are generally the same as those stated by Sperling J, so I will not cover again all the ground that he has gone over in detail in his reasons.
He dealt with the case on the assumption that the costs assessor's function was administrative not judicial. I make the same assumption for the purposes of the appeal.

Sperling J accepted, as I also do, that the rights of appeal incorporated in the new assessment system point very powerfully towards the necessary implication construction contended for by Kennedy. The assessment process is begun by an application under <case>. Section 208L(1) provides that a party to an application dissatisfied with a decision of a costs assessor as to a matter of law arising in the assessment proceedings may appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision. Section 208M(1) provides that a party to an application relating to a bill of costs may seek leave of the Supreme Court to appeal against the determination of the application by a costs assessor.

I agree with Sperling J that the existence of these provisions makes an important difference in the statutory framework from that considered in
Osmond. Sperling J points out that although the reasons for decision in
Osmond were broadly stated, they must nevertheless be read in light of the particular statutory framework which raised the issue in that case, so that he did not read what Gibbs CJ (with whom Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ agreed) as having stated the opinion that there is no need for reasons where an appeal lies to a court (there being no such appeal in Osmond).

For myself, I do not think it necessary for the decision in the present case to rely on that restricted view of what it was that Osmond decided (although
Sperling J's view seems to me to be quite supportable). I simply rely on the positions that, first, Gibbs CJ was prepared to assume "that in special circumstances natural justice may require reasons to be given" (at 670), so that four of the five judges in Osmond left open the possibility that reasons might "in special circumstances" need to be given by a person making an administrative decision, and, second, Deane J, the fifth judge, went further, saying "the courts should be less reluctant than they would have been in times past to discern in statutory provisions a legislative intent that the particular decision maker should be under a duty to give reasons or to accept that special circumstances might arise in which contemporary standards of natural justice or procedural fair play demand that an administrative decision maker provide reasons for a decision to a person whose property, rights or legitimate expectations are adversely affected by it. Where such circumstances exist, statutory provisions conferring the relevant decision making power should, in the absence of a clear intent to the contrary, be construed so as to impose upon the decision maker an implied statutory duty to provide such reasons. As has been said, the circumstances in which natural justice or procedural fair play requires that an administrative decision-maker give reasons for his decisions are special, that is to say exceptional." (at 676) 
In my opinion Pt 11, Division 6 provides a particularly clear example of the kind of "special" situation spoken of by both Gibbs CJ and Deane J which brings into play Deane J's dictum that the "statutory provisions ... should, in the absence of a clear intent to the contrary, be construed so as to impose upon the decision-maker an implied statutory duty to provide such reasons" (at 676).

First, Mr Hannaford's second reading speech relied upon the support of the
Chief Justice for the proposed new system. Mr Hannaford properly made known to the Legislative Council that that support was "subject to appropriate rights of appeal to a judge". On that basis the Chief Justice's support was for the undertaking of the assessment of costs by the new style assessors "in the first instance".

Second, simply looking at ss 208L and 208M without reference to the second reading speech, it seems very clear that unless the costs assessors are to be obliged to give reasons for their determinations, the appeal provisions are likely to be, although not completely useless, so close to it as to negate the clear intent that in regard to questions of law at any rate a party dissatisfied with the costs assessor's decision should have a real and not largely illusory right of appeal.

Third, so it seems to me, when what was said in the Legislative Council concerning "appropriate rights of appeal to a judge" is taken into account, the conclusion becomes even clearer.

Arguments from practicality were raised against this view of the legislation.
It was said that the primary purposes of the new system, namely to be "faster, easier and cheaper" than the old, would be blocked, or at least hampered, if the obligation to give reasons were upheld.

Sperling J had dealt with this argument. He said: "It does not seem to me that what I have proposed would be particularly onerous or that it would materially increase the cost of the process. It may be preferable for assessors to anticipate the possibility of a request for reasons when processing the bill. In the ordinary course, the assessor would need to note against any item reduced the amount of the reduction or the reduced amount in order to be able to tally up the result. It would be easy enough to record the reason for the reduction in each instance at the same time. In each case, the reason must be readily to mind. Otherwise, the item would not have been reduced. In most instances, a word or two would suffice. A code could be devised for recurring reasons. I doubt that this would add much to the cost of the assessment. It would, in my view, be a reasonable incident of the assessment and chargeable as part of the assessment. If a request for reasons were made at a later time, little extra work would be required to produce the reasons in suitable form." 
It became apparent in the course of argument in this court that resistance to an obligation to give reasons was being transmitted to the court through the
Attorney General's submissions on behalf of costs assessors generally because they held the view that such an obligation would cause significant problems of time and expense which would not arise in the absence of the obligation. In the course of the argument, the court tried to discover either the factual basis or the reasoning behind this evidently genuine concern. The court was unable to obtain anything more specific by way of answer than contentions along the following lines: what a costs assessor is required to do, pursuant to <case>, in making a determination, is to determine a fair and reasonable amount; in arriving at that result a costs assessor must inter alia consider whether or not it was reasonable to do the work claimed for, (b) whether the work was carried out in a reasonable manner and (c) the fairness and reasonableness of the amount of the costs in relation to that work; in doing this, judgments were involved which an assessor would make in light of experience, sometimes very hard to put in words without intricate and lengthy explanation, which would cause cost and delay.

The lack of particularity in the submissions to this effect left the court in some difficulty in assessing their reality. The process described by Sperling
J in the passage from his reasons above set out seemed a workable method not involving the difficulties suggested by the appellant. The court was alive to the fact that the day to day experience of costs assessors might well result in their having a great deal more of realistic understanding of the situation than the members of the court (although this feeling was to some extent lessened by the inability of counsel to point to any specific difficulties caused by the method suggested by Sperling J).

Among the matters raised by the court in this connection was the lack of any material in the appeal papers upon which any kind of judgment could be formed regarding the factual assertions being made. This led to the making of an application by counsel for leave to put further evidence before the court. The problem associated with this whole area was then illustrated by counsel saying he had not been able to get instructions on what the evidence was that his client wanted to put before the court. The court realised that the time for getting such instructions had been short but nevertheless indicated reluctance to grant the application without some further basis for it. The matter was eventually left on the footing that the appellant might, after the conclusion of the argument, but before delivery of judgment, make formal application for the reception of further evidence.

What actually happened was that a week or so after the conclusion of the argument a "statement" by one of the senior costs assessors was lodged with the court. This statement contained a number of submissions and also detailed considerable factual material. Although the facts it contains are before the court irregularly, counsel for Kennedy contented himself with making that point in a further written submission in which also he pointed to the statement's unhelpfulness, for reasons I largely accept. Although the statement is informative it nowhere deals with the type of procedure suggested by Sperling J. In parts indeed, if for instance I understand par 35 correctly, what is said seems to be consistent with Sperling J's suggested method.
Reading the document as a whole reinforces rather than diminishes the impression I had upon reading Sperling J's reasons, that his suggestions were practical, and need not result in costs assessments taking significantly longer to do, or costing significantly more. Should I be wrong about this, I would still think the statutory implication clear, for the reasons earlier given. The idea that a costs assessor can, as in this case, reduce a bill of more than $600,000 by more than $200,000, without giving any reason, is most unattractive.

One thing that both the submissions at the hearing and those contained in the statement have made plain to me is that there is scope for policy guidelines to become established governing the way in which reasons are provided.
Sperling J's suggestions already go some distance towards that. Some matters mentioned in the statement indicate that something more detailed may be required in the interests of keeping costs and time wasting to a minimum.
Whether or not that is so does not arise for decision in the present appeal, where the question is the general one in respect of which leave was granted, is there an obligation upon costs assessors to give reasons for their determinations. As I have already said, my opinion is that the answer is clearly yes.

Other questions were raised for argument in the course of the oral submissions to the effect that difficulties in the method of charging by a costs assessor for further work done in answering a request for reasons indicated that a different construction of the statutory provisions should be adopted by the court. To me, the primary requirement for reasons is of sufficient strength to overcome any of the asserted difficulties, if they exist, which I am not at all sure is the case. If the suggested kind of difficulty does exist, my view is that it will be able to be accommodated within the present statutory and regulatory framework when assessors begin to do their assessments in compliance with the obligation to give reasons. If issues then arise which are thought to be of sufficient importance to warrant further proceedings in this court, then it will be better for this court to deal with them in light of a firm factual background and not now as quasi theoretical matters not directly raised in the present appeal.

Some further matters need to be dealt with in this appeal arising from the decision Sperling J made about parties following his decision on the principal question.

Sperling J refused the Attorney General's application to be made a party. He was of the view that the decision of this court in Corporate Affairs
Commission versus Bradley (1974) 1 NSWLR 391 meant to grant the application would not be a proper exercise of the court's power. He added that if that were not so he would in any event in the exercise of discretion not make the order sought. This was because the Attorney General had sought only to put legal argument, and that had been accomplished satisfactorily on the basis of the
Attorney General being regarded as amicus curiae. As a practical matter,
Sperling J said, the only purpose to be served by permitting the Attorney
General to become a party would be to provide him with a right to appeal. In the absence of the other parties being protected in relation to costs, which the Attorney General was not prepared to undertake to do, Sperling J thought that would be unfair.

He also refused Mr Lancken leave to change his conditional appearance to an unconditional one. He said he thought he had the power to do so but refused in the exercise of his discretion. His decision on the main point meant that Mr
Lancken had further duties to discharge. He said that Mr Lancken insofar as he had an interest in the outcome had had the benefit of everything that could be and was said by counsel for the Attorney General. The only purpose which he saw that could be served by granting the application would be to give Mr
Lancken a right of appeal on the merits of the case. This he thought was unfair if the other parties were not protected as to costs.

Following upon these decisions, Sperling J ordered Mr Lancken to pay Kennedy's costs; ordered the Attorney General to pay the costs of Kennedy and Nine of the Attorney General's application to be joined as a party, but only to the extent that their respective costs of the proceedings were increased by the application; ordered that Mr Lancken pay the costs of Kennedy and Nine of Mr
Lancken's application to change his conditional appearance to an unconditional one, but again only to the extent that their respective costs of the proceedings were increased by the application.

When the appeal opened in this court senior and junior counsel appeared for the Attorney General and the same junior counsel appeared for Mr Lancken. For
Mr Lancken, it was said in a written submission that he did not seek to prosecute the appeal actively but left it to the Attorney General other than in regard to Sperling J's costs order against Mr Lancken.

When counsel in this court turned to the questions raised by Sperling J's decision concerning the status of the Attorney General in the proceedings at first instance and the costs orders made against Mr Lancken, it became apparent that the questions of status and the costs orders were connected, and it was observed from the bench that one possible view was that since the
Attorney General in the event had only appeared as amicus curiae, and since Mr
Lancken had been the (administrative) decision maker and had not himself taken an active part in the first instance proceedings, he should not have been ordered to pay costs; and since Nine had apparently taken an active role in the first instance proceedings, it might have been the proper party to bear the burden of costs orders. Counsel for the Attorney General then said that his understanding was that Nine, in the appeal proceedings, had filed a submitting appearance except as to costs, notwithstanding which, they had not appeared. The court indicated that in the circumstances it would probably be requisite for Nine to be given notice of the possibility that had been raised.
Those present at the appeal all assented to this proposal.

My opinion is that we should (1) publish our reasons at this point, (2) order that the appeals against Sperling J's declaration that Mr Lancken was bound in law to provide reasons in writing for his two assessments and his order that
Mr Lancken provide reasons in writing for his two determinations, be dismissed and (3) also order that Nine be given twenty-one days from the publication of the court's reasons and the making of the orders dismissing the substantive appeals, to file such submissions as it may wish on the questions (a) should this court disturb the costs orders made by Sperling J in regard to the first instance proceedings, and if so, (b) what orders should be substituted; the other parties to the appeal to have seven days longer (that is twenty-eight days from the publication of the courts reasons and making of orders dismissing the substantive appeals) to file any further submissions any of them might wish to file in regard to the same questions of costs.

HANDLEY JA: In this appeal I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Priestley JA in draft form. I agree with his Honour's reasons, and on the assumption that a costs assessor is exercising an administrative function. I do not wish to add anything. This assumption was common ground before Sperling J and this Court. 
Although we did not have the benefit of argument on the question, I doubt whether the assumption was correct. Costs orders had been made in favour of
Kennedy Miller which created obligations in the nature of contingent debt.
Certificates of the costs assessor quantified these obligations, subject to appeal, and those certificates also enable the judgment creditor to fix the date on which the debt becomes payable.

The process of assessment under the Act and the Regulation thus enables the inchoate or contingent obligation created by a Court order to be converted into a legally enforceable judgment debt. It seems to me therefore that a costs assessor in assessing party and party costs is determining or at least working out the legal rights and duties of the parties under an order of the
Court and must therefore be exercising a judicial function.

If this is so it would be arguable that he has a duty to give reasons as an incident of his judicial functions, especially where an appeal lies to the
Supreme Court as of right on a question of law, and there is a general appeal by leave.

Subject to these remarks, which are necessarily tentative, I agree with the orders proposed by Priestley JA.

POWELL JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
