

Regina versus Hitchcock Matter No Cca 60182/98 [1998] NSWSC 341 (13 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
REGINA versus VICTOR GORDON HITCHCOCK 
CCA 60182/98 July 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Sully J, Ireland J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
On one of twelve counts of obtaining benefit by deception and related offences, the respondent was sentenced to a fixed term of seven months imprisonment. On the other eleven counts, the trial judge deferred passing sentence on the condition that the respondent enter into a recognizance in the sum of $1,000 and to be of good behaviour for three years, subject to a number of conditions. This is a Crown appeal against the inadequacy of sentence imposed.

Held: . Sentence not inadequate 
The trial judge in effect imposed a three-year fixed term less a six month
Cartwright deduction, and a three-year term during which the respondent was at risk of being re-sentenced for the other eleven counts, of which period some seven months would be spent in custody. His Honour did not in fact sentence for any more than one offence. The alleged inadequacy of this sentence must be assessed in light of the fact that a more significant sentence would be imposed if the respondent commits any further offences during the period of about two and a half years after his release.
 . Sufficient weight given to the objective gravity of the offences 
The Crown submission that this Honour was not aware of the objective gravity of the offences is rejected. Reference to gravity was made on a number of occasions in the course of his Honour's reasons on sentence.
 . Leniency appropriate 
It was open to his Honour to exercise his sentencing discretion with a view to leniency in the light of the judgment he made about the prospects for rehabilitation: R versus Osenkowski [(1982) 30 SASR 212] at -213; [(1982) 5 ACrimR 394.] 
ORDER 
Appeal dismissed.

JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: This is a Crown appeal pursuant to [s5D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against the sentence imposed on Victor Gordon Hitchcock by his Honour Judge Davidson QC of the District Court on 6 March 1998. 
On 16 December 1997, the respondent pleaded guilty to an indictment containing ten counts of obtaining benefit by deception and two counts of attempt to obtain benefit by deception, under s178BA of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) . A further 227 offences were asked to be taken into account on a Form 1, most of these offences were of a similar nature involving the obtaining of property by deception and the deceiving of banks to obtain cheques to be used fraudulently.

Section 178BA provides: "178BA(1) Whosoever by any deception dishonestly obtains for himself or another person any money or valuable thing or any financial advantage of any kind whatsoever shall be liable to imprisonment for five years." 
On 6 March 1998, his Honour received evidence and heard submissions on the matter of sentence. At that time the respondent had already spent twenty-three months in custody. His Honour imposed a fixed term of seven months imprisonment to commence on 6 March 1998, and to expire on 5 October 1998, with respect to one of the twelve counts.

On the other eleven counts on the indictment his Honour deferred passing sentence on the condition the respondent enter into a recognizance in the sum of $1,000 and to be of good behaviour for three years, subject to a number of conditions which will be referred to below.

The course of the dishonest conduct in which the respondent engaged involved his use of a number of aliases. With respect to some of the counts he falsely represented himself to be a Mr R J Hudson. With respect to other counts he purported to be a Mr R J Worthington, having produced false identification documents including a birth certificate in that name. With respect to other charges he purported to be a Mr Richard Vance, having produced pay slips, group certificates, an interim driver's licence and rent receipts in that name. With respect to other charges he purported to be a Mr Vince Jones. With respect to other charges he purported to be a Mr Todd J Thorn, having manufactured a birth certificate and driver's licence in that name. With respect to other charges he purported to be Mr David Walton and on other charges, a Mr Paul Lewis, again producing a birth certificate and driver's licence which he had falsely produced himself.

The chronological sequence of the offences was as follows: 
On 7 August 1995, at Bathurst pretending to be Mr R J Hudson, he obtained a computer and printer by presenting a false cheque in the sum of $3,650 knowing there were insufficient funds to meet the cheque.

On 25 August 1995, at Wagga Wagga, again as Mr R J Hudson, he obtained a refrigerator and other items in the amount of $4,065 knowing there were insufficient funds to meet the cheque.

On 7 November 1995, at Coffs Harbour using the name of R J Worthington, he obtained a computer and other items by presenting a false cheque for $5,690 knowing there were insufficient funds to meet the cheque.

On 7 November 1995, at Coffs Harbour, again using the name of R J
Worthington, he obtained a computer and camera with a false cheque in the sum of $5,585.

On 17 December 1995, at Gosford, purporting to be a Mr Richard Vance, he obtained a loan of $12,000 knowing that he would not be in a position to repay the loan and with that loan obtained a Nissan van.

On 18 December 1995 at Mona Vale he obtained two computers by falsely representing himself to be 
Mr R L Vance and presenting a false cheque in the sum of $4,700 knowing there were insufficient funds.

On 24 April 1996, at Toronto he obtained by deception a Ford Falcon motor vehicle by representing himself to be Todd J Thorn and presenting a false cheque in the sum of $19,000, knowing that there were insufficient funds to meet the cheque when it was presented for payment. This was a bank cheque made out for the amount of $5 which he had altered on the cheque to read $19,000.

This was the charge being count 3 in the indictment on which his Honour sentenced the respondent. On the other counts, his Honour deferred passing sentence under s558 of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

On 29 April 1996, at Granville he sold the Ford Falcon motor vehicle for $13,700 by falsely representing himself as the owner of the vehicle.

On 28 June 1996, at Pearl Beach using the name of Vince Jones, he obtained residential accommodation by presenting a false cheque in the amount of $3,148 in the knowledge there were insufficient funds to meet the cheque.

On 28 June 1996, again at Pearl Beach, he obtained two computers and two printers by falsely representing he was David Walton and presenting a false cheque in the amount of $8,448 to the person who delivered the computer equipment to the Pearl Beach location.

On 5 July 1996, at Cardiff he dishonestly attempted to obtain a Ford motor vehicle representing himself as Paul Lewis and attempting to pass a false cheque in the sum of $10,000. The cheque was a cheque form stolen from a
Mr L Joel.

On 6 July 1996, at Argenton he attempted to obtain a Nissan van by representing himself to be Mr Paul Lewis and attempting to pass a cheque in the sum of $11,000, again being one of the cheque forms stolen from Mr Joel.

As noted above the defendant admitted guilt to some 227 other charges involving substantial amounts of money. Although the precise total is difficult of computation, it is common ground before us that the total amount involved in all of the counts in the indictment and the Form 1 counts was of the order of $400,000. The victims of the various crimes lost something of the order of $300,000.

His Honour summarised the course of conduct in the following way: "The episode of criminality which is exhibited within those charges to which you have pleaded guilty and asked me to take into consideration is therefore, to say the least, substantial, and range from the years 1995 through a substantial part of 1996, and indeed from 1994 through to 1996." 
At another point his Honour concludes that the facts: "...indicates a persistent course of fraudulent conduct in which you employed various means to endeavour to ensure success over, as I have said, a considerable period of time. The objective circumstances therefore of these offences are correspondingly serious and call for a substantial and appropriate reaction from the court." 
It can be seen from the recitation of the counts in the indictment that the periods of the offences fall into two groups. One could be said to last from
August through to December of 1995, and another commencing in late April 1996, and continuing until July when the respondent was arrested for the last time.

There are comments in his Honour's reasons on sentence which suggest that his
Honour may have treated the matter as a single episode of criminality although it will be plain, as will subsequently appear, that there were at least two, and if one takes into account the Form 1 matters, perhaps three, episodes of criminality. It would have been within the range, and may still be within the range, to sentence the respondent to periods of imprisonment which were cumulative. This is a matter to which I will return.

In his reasons his Honour made reference to the fact that a number of offences were committed whilst the accused was on bail. He was first arrested on 3
March 1995, and his second arrest was on 19 December 1995. Accordingly, the offences in the chronological list in the indictment, which I have outlined above, which occurred after these two offences were committed whilst the respondent was on bail. His third arrest was on 8 July 1996, and he has remained in custody since that day.

His Honour outlined an extensive criminal history which commenced in the
Children's Court at the age of fifteen. Most of the offences related to property offences, charges of receiving and being an accessory after the fact in 1969, for taking and using a motor vehicle in 1969, for breaking, entering and stealing in 1970, 1971 and 1976. In 1980 he was convicted of forging and uttering. There were convictions for false pretences in both 1976 and 1984, of obtaining property by deception and unlawful possession of property in 1985.

There was also a conviction in 1979 for carnally knowing a girl under the age of sixteen and a charge of escape and possession of an unlicensed pistol in .

In New South Wales he had been last released on parole in 1989 and his Honour described that period of parole as a period during which: "You responded well to supervision and you appear to be someone with considerable energy and motivation which when channelled then to appropriate areas can bring legitimate rewards." 
The respondent has spent a number of periods in custody and subsequent periods of parole. As I have indicated he was last released to parole on 19 December , and successfully completed the parole period which expired on 8 August
Thereafter he was extradited to Queensland when he spent seven months in gaol. There was a period of some four years between the respondent's release from custody in Queensland in 1991 and the commission of the offences the subject of the indictment, although this period is reduced to some three years if one takes into account the offences admitted on the Form 1.

The respondent had established a plant nursery on the Central Coast at the end of 1991 and it appears his business encountered financial difficulty. It was the response to this failure that his Honour took into account in light of his previous history of incarceration and his resorting to amphetamines as a result of it.

During this period the respondent also formed a de facto relationship with a woman who had three children and those children, according to the pre-sentence report, treated the respondent as a father figure. However, after the failure of the business it appears that some time in 1993 he relocated, together with his de facto and her children, to Queensland, where he obtained employment, subsequently returning to New South Wales.

His Honour outlined a number of subjective considerations personal to the accused. He noted that there had been a history of substance abuse which, in the recent past, was confined to amphetamines. The respondent was seriously ill, particularly as a diabetic on insulin. There was a long history of institutionalisation commencing in his middle teenage years. The respondent had acknowledged his guilt and, according to his Honour, displayed strong feelings of guilt. The reports from the prison attest to his good behaviour and his commitment to an educational program.

His Honour spent part of his judgment outlining the various reports that he had heard and had tendered before him, including a detailed pre-sentence report from the Parole Service which included a passage as follows: "On his last release to parole in 1989 he responded well to supervision, had employment and was establishing himself in his local community. He appears to be someone with considerable energy and motivation, which when channelled into appropriate areas can bring legitimate rewards. He believes things go awry because he is unable to handle success. It may be more to do with his inability to handle the general vicissitudes of life." 
A number of recommendations were made in that report, most of which are reflected in his Honour's conditions on the recognizance.

His Honour also had before him a report of Mr George Klein, a behavioural scientist. According to his Honour there was a conclusion, which may appear somewhat surprising in view of the nature of the offences, but one which his
Honour formed on his own observation of the respondent in the witness box, which his Honour noted in his reasons: "Mr Klein offers the view that you are not, on the face of it at least, an especially manipulative or calculating person and indeed that is the impression that I got from you in the short visit that you made before me in the witness box today." 
There was before his Honour a document Ex H, which indicates matters described by his Honour as "substantially important in your favour so far as the present sentencing procedure is concerned". Exhibit H was provided to the court. It does indicate matters of a character which his Honour described. His Honour allowed a Cartwright discount of six months with respect to this matter and the quantum of that discount was not challenged before us.

In expressing his conclusions on sentence his Honour said: "...there is the objective seriousness of this course of criminal conduct on which you embarked during the years 1994 to 1996. There is nothing so far as your previous record is concerned which would entitle you to leniency. That is not to say that you're to be punished again for offences for which you have been punished in the past, but there is simply nothing there which suggests to me that you should be entitled to lenient treatment. I do recognise, however, that there does come to persons with your background, when they reach a certain stage in life, a realisation that further travel along the same path will simply result in a destruction of what is left of their time on this earth. It seems to me to be a fair and reasonable assessment on the basis of the reports that I have before me, that you may well have reached that age and have achieved the insight which necessarily would need to go with it if you are going to have any hope of rehabilitation." 
Putting aside certain special matters his Honour further concluded: "...the objective circumstances of these offences would, notwithstanding all the matters which have been advanced in your favour, to which I have referred, call for a substantial sentence. It is appropriate in this case that I should approach the matter on a totality basis. I take the view that the course of criminality in which you are involved was triggered firstly by the failure of your business venture which up to then had been highly commendable in light of your previous history of incarceration and your resort to amphetamines as a result of it. There is, therefore, a basis in my view for approaching the question of sentence on a totality basis. Leaving aside, as I have said, the time spent in custody and what I have referred to as exhibit H, it seems to me that an appropriate sentence would be one of four years with a three-year minimum term. As against a three-year minimum term and taking into consideration those matters which I have up to now left out of consideration, and giving you credit for the twenty-three months already spent in custody, that leaves thirteen months by way of a minimum term. The Cartwright deduction appropriately, so far as that thirteen months is concerned, having regard to the nature of the information contained in exhibit H, in my view would be six months, which would leave you seven months to be served by way of a minimum term.

What I propose to do is this. I propose to sentence you to seven months imprisonment on Count 3, taking into consideration the matters in Form 1, by way of a fixed term. In respect to the other charges I propose to place you on a recognizance with what I trust are suitable conditions, in order to give effect to what the experts seem to indicate are appropriate if there is to be any hope for rehabilitation for you." 
The conditions of recognizance included supervision and guidance of the
Probation and Parole Service, of psychological and psychiatric guidance, enrolment in a drug and alcohol intervention program conducted by the
Probation and Parole Service and consultation with an alcohol and other drug services counsellor.

In its submissions the Crown acknowledges the exceptional character of the
Crown appeal against sentence but nevertheless submitted the sentence imposed in this case was in error.

The Crown submits that the effective total period of imprisonment was thirty months and this was manifestly inadequate for the criminality of the offences. (See Griffiths versus The Queen (1977) 137 CLR 293 at 310; R v
Allpass [(1994) 72 ACrimR 561] at -3; Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295] at 300; R versus Barbara (unreported, NSWCCA, 24 February 1997) and R versus Wright [(1997) 93 ACrimR 48] at 53).

The Crown submits that his Honour must have given insufficient weight to the objective gravity of the offences, particularly the value of the property the subject of the offences, some $400,000 in total of which some $300,000 was lost to the victims and secondly, the degree of preparation and planning clearly involved, particularly in the assumption of the various false identities.

Reference was made to R versus Hawkins [(1989) 45 ACrimR 430] and R v
Mears, [(1991) 53 ACrimR 141.] 
The Crown submits an error was made when his Honour referred to the respondent's criminal history as a matter which disentitled him from leniency as distinct from emphasising the importance of factors such as deterrence in the process of sentencing. Reference was made to Veen <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 465] at 477.

The Crown submits his Honour erred by imposing a single sentence of imprisonment to deal with the entirety of the respondent's criminality. This involved a submission that the grounds should have required cumulative sentences. Reliance was placed on Wilkins [(1988) 38 ACrimR 445]; R v
Begnell, unreported NSWCCA, 26 November 1992, and Corbett [(1991) 52 ACrimR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%2052%20ACrimR%20112 "View LawCiteRecord" ) In this context also reliance was placed on the proposition that committing offences whilst on bail was an aggravating feature and that six of the offences on the indictment were committed whilst the respondent was on bail.
(See R versus Readman [(1990) 47 ACrimR 181] at 184;
R versus Kain [(1984) 38 SASR 309] at 312 and
R versus Lansdell, unreported, NSWCCA, 22 May 1995).

The Crown also submitted that his Honour erred in subtracting the
Cartwright deduction from the nominal minimum term rather than the total sentence. Reference was made to R versus Compton, unreported, NSWCCA 29 September , and R versus Moore and Wiebe, unreported, NSWCCA, 11 August 1992, unreported. Although there may have been force in this last submission and there is authority on which the Crown relied (that this may have been sufficient to justify intervention in this court), in the light of the absence of any challenge to the quantum of the deduction, this is not something that would have justified interfering with his Honour's decision by reason of this element alone. There has been no challenge to the exercise by his Honour of his discretion under s558 to defer passing sentence in respect of the counts on which he did so. Rather the focus of the criticism was directed to a passage in his Honour's reasoning which is not fully reflected in his ultimate sentence. His Honour indicated, on what he described as "a totality basis", the appropriate sentence would be one of four years with a three year minimum term and a one year additional term. This of course invokes the terminology of s5 of the Sentencing Act 1969 . However, what his Honour in fact did was to act under s6 of the Sentencing Act by imposing a fixed term for a single offence. There is no challenge to his Honour so acting under s6 or to the reasons he supplied for having done so.

If his Honour had in fact sentenced the respondent to a period of three years minimum term and a one year additional term without cumulating any sentences, so that this was the total sentence for the entire course of conduct, then there seems little doubt in my mind this would have been an extraordinarily lenient sentence and one which would have justified the intervention of this
Court. However, notwithstanding the example that his Honour gave of a three- year minimum term and a one-year additional term, what his Honour in fact did was impose a three-year fixed term with a six month Cartwright deduction and a three-year term during which the respondent was at risk of being re- sentenced for the other eleven counts, and of which some seven months would be spent in custody.

It is plain that his Honour was influenced by the prospect of rehabilitation, notwithstanding the very long criminal history of the respondent and also notwithstanding the series of property offences the subject of the indictment and as referred to in the Form 1.

In these circumstances it is not correct to say that the sentence involved an effective total period of imprisonment of only thirty months. Notwithstanding his Honour's reference to "a totality basis", which reference I have found some difficulty in understanding, his Honour did not in fact sentence for any more than one offence, albeit doing so in the context of the other offences.
The alleged manifest inadequacy of this sentence must be assessed in the context that a more significant sentence is open to be imposed and, quite clearly would be imposed, if the respondent commits any further offences during the period of two and a half years after his release.

In my opinion there is no basis for the submission that his Honour was not aware of the objective gravity of the offences. He made reference to this aspect on a number of occasions in the course of his reasons on sentence. His
Honour was also aware of the total amount involved. Perhaps there was not a precise mathematical calculation of the kind presented to this court, nevertheless there is no reason to believe that his Honour failed to take these matters into account. Nor was there any reason to suggest that his
Honour failed to take into account the degree of preparation and planning, particularly with respect to the assumption of the false identities to which his Honour made extensive reference.

The strength of the Crown's submissions was with respect to the necessity to impose cumulative sentences of a character which could in total exceed the maximum sentence for an individual offence, namely five years for a contravention of s178BA. That this was open to his Honour was conceded in this court. It remains open to a future sentencing judge if the terms of the recognizance are breached.

In an oft quoted passage in R versus Osenkowski [(1982) 30 SASR 212] at 212-13 and [(1982) 5 ACrimR 394] Chief Justice King said: "It is important that prosecution appeals should not be allowed to circumscribe sentencing discretion of judges. There must always be a place for the exercise of mercy where a judge's sympathies are reasonably excited by the circumstances of the case. There must always be a place for leniency which has traditionally been extended even to offenders with bad records when the judge forms the view almost intuitively in the case of experienced judges, that leniency at that particular stage of the offender's life might lead to reform." 
That passage appears to describe the course of his Honour's reasoning. His
Honour was conscious of the respondent's record but also expressed the view that leniency might lead to reform by reason of, to quote Chief Justice King, the "particular stage of the offender's life".

In this case this conclusion was, in my opinion, open to his Honour. The significance of the jeopardy in which the respondent will find himself for a period of two and a half years should not be under-estimated. If, in addition, to the sentence for any further offences, the respondent is open to a substantial additional sentence of a character which will clearly be cumulative for the eleven offences for which he has not yet been sentenced. A number of these offences are capable of being regarded as a separate group of offences, not in the same course of criminal conduct as the one offence for which he has so far been sentenced.

In the light of the reasons given by his Honour, in my view it was open for his Honour to take the view he did. The restriction on interfering with the discretion of a sentencing judge, as traditionally and frequently expressed, is in this case appropriate. The trial judge is an experienced judge who appears to have adopted an approach which could be seen to be a lenient one, but nevertheless, it was within his discretion to pass the sentence that he did.

In my view the appeal should be dismissed.

SULLY J: I agree. 
IRELAND J: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The order of the court is the appeal is dismissed. * * * 
