

Zaidi versus Health Care Complaints Commission Matter Nos Ca 40569/96; Ca /97 [1998] NSWSC 335 (17 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
MANSOOR HAIDER ZAIDI versus HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION 
CA 40569/96 
MANSOOR HAIDER ZAIDI versus HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION & ANOR 
CA 40242/97 July 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: MEDICAL TRIBUNAL 
FILE NO/S: CA 40569/96; CA 40242/97 
DELIVERED: 17 JULY 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 1, 2 APRIL 1998 
PARTIES: 
ZAIDI V HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION 
ZAIDI V HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, PRIESTLEY JA, POWELL JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P BRERETON 
Respondent: 1. A KATZMANN SC 
SUBMITTING 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: MORGAN ARDINO & CO 
Respondent:D SWAIN, HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION 
CATCHWORDS: 
Medicine - medical practitioners - discipline and removal from register -
Medical Tribunal - admissibility of similar fact evidence - procedure and appeal - appeal to Court from review by Medical Tribunal - Medical
Practitioners Act 1938 - [Medical Practice Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 47 
HEADNOTE 
Medicine - medical practitioners - discipline and removal from register - Medical Tribunal - admissibility of similar fact evidence - burden of proof - confession to misconduct not a necessary precondition to reinstatement 
Medicine - medical practitioners - discipline - procedure and appeal - appeal from Medical Tribunal to court - no right of appeal from decision of Medical Tribunal on a review application 
Medical Practitioners Act 1938 - [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) 
In 1990 the Medical Tribunal appointed under the Medical Practitioners Act ("the 1938 Act") heard and determined a complaint of professional misconduct against the appellant, who was then a registered medical practitioner. The Medical Tribunal held that the complaint made against the appellant regarding three alleged incidents of sexual assaults against three different patients had been established. An order was made that the appellant's name be removed from the Register of Medical Practitioners in New
South Wales.

The published Reasons of the Tribunal stated that the Tribunal was "comfortably satisfied" that the evidence of each of the three patients was to be preferred to the explanation offered by the appellant. Various reasons were given, including a form of similar fact reasoning. In 1994, the appellant applied to the Medical Tribunal for review by way of a re-instatement order pursuant to [ss92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s92.html) and [94](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s94.html) of the [Medical Practice Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). This application was refused. In May 1995 the appellant sought reinstatement pursuant to a further review. This application for re-instatement was refused on 29 August 1996, specifying a period of two years to elapse before any further application for re-instatement could be made.

On appeal, the 1990 decision was challenged on the basis that the Tribunal wrongly took into account similar fact evidence. Regarding the 1996 decision, the appellant argued that the Tribunal had failed to conduct a review of the decision in 1990 in accordance with law. Further, it was argued that in refusing reinstatement the Tribunal had wrongfully fettered itself by requiring the appellant to acknowledge guilt as a precondition to reinstatement. In response, the competency of the appeal was challenged, the respondents relying upon the decision in Rohatgi versus Health Care Complaints
Commission, Court of Appeal, unreported, 26 July 1996.

HELD, dismissing the application and appeal: 
The law with respect to the admissibility of similar fact evidence in criminal trials is not applicable to medical disciplinary proceedings before the Medical Tribunal in New South Wales.

Purnell versus Medical Board of Queensland, Supreme Court of Queensland, Court of Appeal, unreported, 15 August 1997; Bowen-James versus Walton, Court of Appeal, unreported, 5 August 1991, applied. 
Duncan versus Medical Practitioners Disciplinary Committee [[1986] 1 NZLR 513], distinguished. 
Confession to misconduct is not a necessary precondition to reinstatement.
However, there is no error in concluding that continuing vigorous challenge to clearly established guilt may be indicative of continuing unfitness.

Re Alger Hiss [333 NE 2d 429], considered. 
No right of appeal lies at the suit of an applicant for review from a decision of a Medical Tribunal on a review application.

Rohatgi versus Health Care Complaints Commission, Court of Appeal, Handley JA, unreported, 26 July 1996, followed. 
ORDER 
Application and appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
MASON P: In 1990 the Medical Tribunal appointed under the Medical Practitioners Act 1938 ("the 1938 Act") heard and determined a complaint of professional misconduct against the appellant, who was then a registered medical practitioner. The substance of the complaint was that he had sexually assaulted three of his female patients in the course of making medical examinations. The names of the patients have been suppressed. Patient A was allegedly assaulted in 1986, Patient N in 1988, and Patient D1 in 1990. The three complaints were found established. It was also found that the appellant had, between 23 April and 5 August 1990, been in breach of a condition imposed upon his registration on 12 April 1990 by the New South Wales Medical Board that, except in the case of an emergency, the appellant was not to see or treat any female except in the continuous presence of a person acceptable to the Board. These findings were announced on 13 December 1990. Orders were thereupon made that the appellant's name be removed from the Register of Medical Practitioners in New South Wales; that the period after which he may apply to a medical tribunal to be restored to the Register be a period of three years from that date; and in relation to costs. 
Shortly thereafter, apparently on the same day, the Tribunal published its
Reasons. They outline the matters of complaint and the evidence led by both sides. It was recognised that the decision in the inquiry turned fundamentally upon credibility issues. The Tribunal announced itself as "comfortably satisfied" that the evidence of each of the three patients was to be preferred to the explanation offered by the appellant. Various reasons were given, including what is now said to be inappropriate similar fact reasoning.

The Tribunal that made these orders in 1990 was constituted in accordance with s32M of the 1938 Act. Relevantly, the section required the Tribunal to consist of the Chairperson or a Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal (each of whom were
Judges of the District Court); two registered medical practitioners; and one lay person. The corresponding provisions of the [Medical Practice Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) ("the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/)") are identical: see [ss147](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s147.html)-[8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s8.html).

In 1988 and 1989 charges had been laid by the police against the appellant on various counts of sexual assault. These involved six patients, being Patients
A, D, G, J, N and S. The appellant was committed for trial in relation to all patients except J. On 25 October 1990, following a trial before Collins DCJ and a jury, verdicts of not guilty were returned on 11 of the 14 counts in the indictment, including all counts in respect of Patients D, G and S. There were verdicts of guilty in respect of two of the four charges concerning Patient N and one of the two charges concerning Patient A.

The appellant appealed to the Court of Criminal Appeal against his convictions and the ensuing sentence. On 27 November 1991 the convictions were quashed and a new trial was ordered: see Zaidi [(1991) 57 A Crim R 189.] At the retrial in relation to Patient A the appellant was acquitted. On 30 March the Director of Public Prosecutions informed the appellant that he did not propose to proceed with the retrial concerning Patient N.

In about June 1990 the appellant had also been charged with offences of sexual assault in relation to Patient D1. The appellant was committed for trial.
However the Director of Public Prosecutions decided not to proceed to trial and informed the appellant of this decision on 4 February 1993. In this and the earlier decision not to proceed to trial, the DPP had regard to the wishes of the patients concerned.

The upshot was that all of the criminal convictions were quashed and the appellant was acquitted or no-billed in respect of all criminal allegations proffered against him.

The Tribunal that heard the Complaint in 1990 ("the 1990 Tribunal") had indicated in its Reasons that it considered the verdicts in the criminal proceedings as "of no probative value in the inquiry" before the Tribunal.
Whether this represented a view of the law of evidence, or an assessment of the probative value of the particular material is unclear. The Tribunal has power to receive "as evidence" the verdict and findings of a jury in a criminal court where it is of the opinion that they are relevant to the proceedings (1938 Act, Schedule 4 cl 4; [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/),
Schedule 2 cl 4). Even without such a provision, it may be that a distinction should be drawn between a conviction and an acquittal. An acquittal by a jury turns upon failure to establish guilt beyond reasonable doubt, whereas the civil standard applies to proof in professional disciplinary matters:
Bannister versus Walton [(1993) 30 NSWLR 699] (special leave refused: see (1993) 22 Leg Rep page SL 1; Health Care Complaints
Commission versus Litchfield <case>; [(1997) 41 NSWLR 630]; McCarthy versus The Law Society of New South Wales [(1997) NSWLR 42] at 58. But, where guilt is established to the criminal standard, public policy suggests that so long as the conviction stands the facts necessarily established ought to be regarded as proved for the purpose of any civil proceedings (Lai versus Minister for Immigration <case>; [(1940) 63 CLR 691] at 702-3, 710. Contrast Public Trustee versus Fraser [(1987) NSWLR 433).] It is unnecessary to determine this in the appeal. What is clear is that the appellant suffered no prejudice by reason of the way in which the 1990 Tribunal regarded the verdicts in the criminal proceedings.

The appellant did not exercise any right of appeal or review conferred under ss32U or 32V respectively of the 1938 Act, prior to the repeal of that Act by the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/).
However, orders under the 1938 Act are treated for some purposes as if they were orders under the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/): see
Schedule 5 cl 13 of the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). As a result, the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) conferred rights of appeal [(s90)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s90.html) and of review [(s92)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s92.html) in relation to the 1990 Tribunal Decision. The former is required to be instituted within 28 days, or such longer period as the Court might allow in a particular case (1992 Act s90(2). See also 1938 Act, s32U(5) and Medical
Practitioners Regulations 1981, cl 25). The right of review is exercisable at any time, save that it may not be invoked while the terms of the order provide that an application for review may not be made, nor while an appeal is pending to the Supreme Court in respect of the same matter (1992 Act, s92(3) . See also 1938 Act, s32V(3)).

In 1994 the appellant applied to the Medical Tribunal for review by way of a re-instatement order pursuant to [ss92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s92.html) and [94](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s94.html) of the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). The appellant was unrepresented. The Tribunal which determined this application ("the 1994 Tribunal") refused the application on the ground that the appellant had failed to satisfy it on the balance of probabilities that the defects in character which led to the conduct requiring de-registration in 1990 had been overcome. The 1994 Tribunal declined to allow the appellant to re-litigate the issues determined against him in 1990. (Rohatgi versus Medical Tribunal of New
South Wales, Court of Appeal, unreported, 20 April 1994 (Rohatgi No ) had not yet been decided.) Nevertheless, the terms upon which his application for re-instatement was refused gave him some cause to expect that a further application, properly presented and after the receipt of counselling, might have prospects of success.

On 2 May 1995 the appellant sought reinstatement pursuant to a further review.
This time he had legal assistance. Various grounds were stated in the initiating Notice. Most of them addressed issues other than those found against the appellant by the 1990 Tribunal. Some grounds were obviously responsive to defects in the application that had been rejected by the 1994
Tribunal. And once again the appellant indicated that he sought to put in issue certain of the findings made by the 1990 Tribunal. The extent of the challenge which he raised on this occasion is a matter of controversy and I shall return to it.

Following several directions hearings designed to require the appellant to specify the bases of the challenge to the 1990 Tribunal decision, the re- instatement application came on for hearing in November 1995 before a Medical
Tribunal comprised of his Honour Judge B C M Wall QC (Deputy Chairperson),
Professor E Finch, Dr J Richards and Ms R Sexton (Members). There were further hearings in January and March 1996.

On 29 August 1996 the Tribunal (hereafter referred to as the "1996 Tribunal") refused the application for re-instatement, specifying a period of two years to elapse before any further application for re-instatement could be made.
(The Tribunal was divided equally, with the result that the decision of the
Deputy Chairperson constituted the decision of the Tribunal: see [s154(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s154.html)
It is nevertheless relevant to note that the "minority view" expressed by the two members of the Tribunal whose view did not prevail did not appear to turn upon rejection of the 1990 Tribunal's findings of misconduct.) 
On 28 September 1996 the appellant filed in the Court of Appeal a Notice of
Appeal Without Appointment challenging the 1996 Tribunal's decision. This
Notice of Appeal was filed within the 28 day period stipulated by [s90(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s90.html) of the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). The subsequently filed Notice of Appeal asserts that the decision is affected by various errors of law. The competency of the appeal has been challenged.

Responding defensively to the objection to competency, the appellant filed a
Summons on 1 May 1997 in which he sought various orders challenging the 1990 and 1996 Tribunal Decisions. In particular, orders were sought: (In the nature of certiorari) quashing the 1990 decision.
Extending the time for instituting an appeal from the 1990 decision and allowing such appeal, thereupon dismissing the Complaint.
(In the nature of certiorari) quashing the 1996 decision.
(In the nature of mandamus) ordering the Medical Tribunal to consider and determine the appellant's application for review of the 1990 decision.

The appeal and application were heard together. In each proceeding the contradictor is the Health Care Complaints Commission (hereafter referred to as "the respondent"). The Medical Tribunal is the second opponent in the application and it adopted a submitting stance.

Ultimately the issues which were pressed were: 
Challenge to the 1990 Tribunal Decision
Was there error of law on the face of the record or denial of procedural fairness, amenable to an order in the nature of certiorari, because the 1990
Tribunal wrongly took into account similar fact evidence given in respect of one patient as regards the complaint concerning another?
Alternatively, should the appellant be granted an extension of time to appeal with respect to the same matters? 
Challenges to the 1996 Tribunal Decision
Is the appeal competent?
Did the 1996 Tribunal err in failing to hold that the 1990 Tribunal had made the errors referred to in (A)(1) above?
Did the Tribunal fail to conduct a review of the 1990 Tribunal decision in accordance with law because: it was not concerned to reach its own conclusion on the evidence as to whether a complaint was proved to the requisite standard of proof; its function was only to determine whether it was reasonably open to the Tribunal to find the particulars of complaint proved, ie to determine whether there was evidence which, if accepted, could support the decision: it regarded itself constrained as if it were an appellate court, in applying the principles in Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167]; in refusing reinstatement, it wrongfully fettered itself by requiring the appellant to acknowledge guilt as a precondition to reinstatement; it erroneously held that conditions of practice proposed as the basis for reinstatement indicated a recognition of a significant level of risk.

CHALLENGE TO THE 1990 TRIBUNAL DECISION 
It is convenient to address the substance of the appellant's challenge to the decision, before addressing the procedural difficulties which he faces.

The appellant submits that the 1990 Tribunal erred in law (on the face of the record) and denied him procedural fairness. The complaint is that the Tribunal erroneously took into account, in considering each of the several particulars of complaint, evidence given in respect of the other particulars, when the conditions for admissibility of similar fact evidence in such matters were not satisfied. The critical passage in the Tribunal's Reasons was as follows: "Our principal reasons for preferring the evidence of the three patients are -
Mrs N and Miss D1 are convincing witnesses whose evidence was not shaken in cross-examination. Both ladies are mature women sexually experienced and not strangers to vaginal examination. In our opinion their age and experience and background leaves no room for mistake as to the nature and extent of the examination and conduct to which they were subjected. Both of them impressed all members of the Tribunal as being truthful witnesses who had no common interest or motive in what was a broadly similar experience in the surgery of the respondent.

Each of them made complaint, very shortly after the event, of the conduct of the respondent which was, in their minds, improper. In short, each of them sought immediate redress. The inconsistencies to which counsel for the respondent refers, in our opinion, are minor, mostly explained by the witness and do not detract from the substance of their complaints.

Although we do not have the benefit of personally assessing the demeanour of
Miss A, those inconsistencies to which counsel refers do not, in our opinion, cut down the weight of her evidence. They are explained in evidence eg at the time she was examined by the respondent she did not know the word clitoris.
Although she was only nineteen years of age at the time of the examination and not sexually experienced, her reaction to the examination she describes and her conduct in attending her local general practitioner and signing a letter of complaint, in general terms, to the Medical Board are actions which are consistent with the substance of the assertions she makes in respect of the respondent's conduct. Furthermore the conduct of which she complains does bear a degree of similarity to that of which the other women complain bearing in mind that she was a virgin. Again, there is no suggestion that her complaint arises from a cause common with Mrs N and Miss D1. The likelihood of these unrelated women of different backgrounds making false accusations against the same doctor seems to us to be remote.(emphasis added) 
These remarks are to be read against the background of the specific evidence of the three patients that had been recounted earlier in the Reasons. That evidence is summarised as follows: - Patient N was a married woman with children. She consulted the appellant complaining of headaches and pains in the stomach. She told the doctor of getting a green (vaginal) discharge. She was told to lie down on an examination table and to pull her top up and her skirt down. After examining her stomach with a stethoscope the appellant cupped his hand and squeezed her breasts several times. There was then prolonged digital stimulation of the vagina coupled with rubbing of the clitoris.
 - Patient D1 was a single woman aged 30. She reported a vaginal itch. The appellant's examination of her included prolonged vaginal stimulation (4 or 5 minutes) with a tube being moved in and out. Despite complaint of pain, this conduct was persisted in until the patient had an orgasm. During the examination her breasts were touched by the appellant.
 - Patient A was 19 when she consulted the appellant for the symptoms of a sore throat and a runny nose. Despite reporting these symptoms she was asked whether she was a virgin and told to lie on the examination table. There was prolonged digital rectal stimulation.

Before us there was debate as to whether the similarities between the three incidents would have justified a jury direction in criminal proceedings permitting the jury to have any regard to the evidence concerning one incident in assessing the strength of the evidence in another. I am content to assume that the criminal law's requirement that there should be no reasonable view of such evidence consistent with innocence (Pfennig versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 461)] was not satisfied. Nevertheless, it cannot be said that the process of reasoning engaged in by the Tribunal was irrational. What was common to the complaints made by the three women was that there was prolonged and unnecessary sexual stimulation of the patient. The fact that the location was different in relation to Patient A was explicable bearing in mind that she was a virgin.

The appellant relies upon statements of appellate courts in New Zealand and the United Kingdom to the effect that a medical disciplinary tribunal dealing with complaints of this nature is obliged to consider the evidence relating to each complaint separately, entirely uninfluenced by the evidence regarding other complaints except where, by analogy with the criminal law, the similar fact evidence has sufficient probative force to be taken into account: see
Duncan versus Medical Practitioners Disciplinary Committee [[1986] 1 NZLR ]
at 547; Lanford versus General Medical Council [[1990] 1 AC 13] at 22; Reza v General Medical Council [[1991] 1 AC 182] at 202.

In my view these principles do not apply in relation to disciplinary proceedings before the Medical Tribunal.

There are points of difference between disciplinary proceedings in the United
Kingdom and New Zealand on the one hand and in New South Wales on the other that lead me to be comfortable in distinguishing the decisions from those jurisdictions that are relied upon by the appellant.

The first difference is that the civil standard of proof applies in New South
Wales, whereas the criminal standard applies in those two jurisdictions or at least was considered to be applicable at the time when the statements relied upon were made: see Re A Medical Practitioner [[1959] NZLR 301] at 308;
Lanford versus General Medical Council [[1990] 1 AC 13] at 19-20 (dictum later disapproved of in McAllister versus General Medical Council [[1993] AC 388).] In Duncan at 547, Cooke P (delivering the judgment of himself, Richardson J, McMullin J and Somers J) referred to a supporting line of Canadian cases. The criminal standard of proof also appears to apply in
Canada with respect to disciplinary proceedings involving allegations of criminal misconduct: Re Schumiatcher and Law Society of Saskatchewan [(1966) 60 DLR(2d) 318] (leave to appeal refused: [61 DLR(2d) 520).] 
Secondly, the Medical Practitioners Disciplinary Committee in New Zealand and the Professional Conduct Committee of the General Medical Council in the
United Kingdom are constituted by medical practitioners and lay persons.
Unlike the Medical Tribunal of New South Wales they are not chaired by a judge. Legal assistance is received from a legal assessor.

A third distinction is that the Medical Tribunal of New South Wales is not bound to observe the rules of law governing the admission of evidence. It may inform itself of any matter in such manner as it thinks fit (1938 Act,
Schedule 4 cl 1; [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/),
Schedule 2 cl 1). Of course, procedural fairness must be afforded, but it is perfectly consistent with the concepts of procedural fairness to apply such a provision in relation to the admission or evaluation of evidence, at least where the rational persuasive power of one item of evidence touching the evaluation of another is not lacking. This point has been repeatedly emphasised in decisions of this court: see Bowen-James versus Walton, Court of Appeal, unreported, 5 August 1991 at page 6; Gill versus Walton [(1991) 25
NSWLR 190] at 217-8; McCarthy.

Propensity or similar fact evidence is not excluded in criminal trials because it lacks probative value. Rather this is done for policy reasons because evidence of behaviour indicating a criminal disposition on other occasions is "excluded because a jury is likely to regard it as proving too much and is for that reason likely to proceed upon prejudice rather than proof" Harriman v
The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 590] at 597 (Dawson J). See also Bargold Pty Ltd versus Mirror
Newspaper Ltd [[1981] 1 NSWLR 9] at 13; D
F Lyons Pty Ltd versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1991) 28 FCR 597] at 605.

The Queensland Court of Appeal recently considered the applicability of the rules governing the admission of similar fact evidence in the context of professional disciplinary proceedings similar to the present. In Purnell v
Medical Board of Queensland, Supreme Court of Queensland, Court of Appeal, unreported, 15 August 1997 the Court rejected the argument that the law with respect to the admissibility of similar fact evidence in criminal trials should be directly transposed to civil proceedings in a court or tribunal in which a judge is the trier of issues of fact. Fitzgerald P (with whose reasons
Helman J concurred) specified two significant differences between a criminal trial and proceedings of the Queensland Medical Assessment Tribunal. The first was the standard of proof. The civil standard applies in the Tribunal, albeit that the gravity of the facts to be proved must be recognised. It is only because proof beyond reasonable doubt is required in a criminal trial that similar fact evidence must be excluded if there is a reasonable view of the evidence, taken in the context of the prosecution case, which is consistent with the innocence of the accused: see Pfennig at 482-3. I respectfully agree. This reasoning is directly applicable to the Medical Tribunal in New
South Wales, because the same standard of proof applies: Bannister,
Litchfield.

The second reason given by Fitzgerald P was that the stringency of the similar fact evidence rule in criminal trials is based upon concern about the impact upon a lay jury of inadmissible prejudicial material. These concerns are absent where a judge is the trier of issues of fact.

There is a distinction between the Queensland situation and that applying in
New South Wales. Under the Medical Act 1939 (Qld) the tribunal that determines questions as to the conduct of a medical practitioner is constituted by a judge of the Supreme Court (s33(1)). Two assessors sit with the judge (s33(3)) with the duty to advise the judge what in their opinion is the proper determination of any question of fact arising before the tribunal (s33(4)).
However, the judge determines all questions of fact and law, but in determining questions of fact may give such effect as he thinks just to the opinion of the assessors (s33(5)). By contrast, fact finding by a Tribunal appointed to hear charges of professional misconduct under the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) is committed to the whole Tribunal, with the possibility that the president judicial officer may be in a minority (see [s154(2)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s154.html)
This is a significant point of distinction. It suggests that it would be prudent for the judge presiding over a particular tribunal to consider directing his or her fellow members that they should exercise particular care to consider the evidence on individual charges separately, unless satisfied that there was no collaboration between the several patients and that the peculiar features of one incident (if proved) lends compelling weight to the proof of another.

But while this is a council of prudence, I cannot hold that failure to give such a direction would necessarily amount to a miscarriage constituting an error of law and/or denial of procedural fairness. I reserve extreme cases, but this is not such a case. I have already indicated that the process of reasoning of the 1990 Tribunal (in which Judge Sinclair QC joined) is both rational and acceptable having regard to the facts of the case. And the similar fact comments were subsidiary to the principal findings on credibility, especially as regards N and D1. In Purnell the third member of the Court was Mackenzie J. He said (at pp5-6): "This is a case where identification of the person who allegedly did an act is not in dispute. The issue is whether the act complained of was done. Where this is the issue proof of the commission of an act on a particular person may become more certain if other witnesses testify that a similar act has been committed on them. Provided the complaints of the similar acts are made by witnesses who are truly independent of the complainant whose testimony is in issue, in the sense that collaboration between the complainant and the other witnesses and the possibility that the other witnesses' complaints are the product of suggestibility following the witnesses becoming aware of the complainant's complaint can be ruled out, it is unlikely that the various independent accounts are a coincidence. There may be some cases where other possible explanations consistent with innocence may need consideration, as in the present case where the effects of medication upon perception is an issue.
If it can be excluded, the basic proposition stated above operates. The strength of the inference will depend on the facts of the particular case. The number of complaints is not of itself critical. One similar allegation containing the same peculiar feature or features may have considerable weight in supporting a complainant's evidence. On the other hand where acts alleged do not contain any particularly unusual features but are similar, the fact that there are a number of allegations from different persons may assist in drawing an inference that the act with which the court or tribunal is concerned occurred to the required standard of proof. There is no doubt a spectrum of circumstances which require consideration on a case by case basis between those two positions.

Ultimately the question is whether the inference that the act complained of was committed upon the complainant can be properly drawn having due regard to the standard of proof applicable to the kind of case before the court or tribunal. Where credibility of a complainant's evidence is in issue the fact that complaints of similar acts have been made by other persons can provide strong support of the complainant's evidence in the absence of any factors diminishing the strength of the inference logically available from the fact that they were made independently of and unaffected by the complainant's own account." 
I would respectfully adopt these remarks and apply them to the particular facts of this case.

There is another distinction between the Queensland and New South Wales legislative scheme touching medical disciplinary proceedings. But it is one that reinforces the conclusion I have reached. Proceedings before the
Queensland Tribunal appear to be required to be conducted in accordance with the rules of evidence. Cf Re a Solicitor [[1932] QSR 33] in relation to legal practitioners. The whole discussion in Purnell appears to proceed on the basis that the rules of admissibility of evidence in civil proceedings apply. There is certainly no equivalent in Queensland of the provision in the 1992 Act empowering the Tribunal to inform itself of any matter in such manner as it thinks fit (Schedule 3, cl 1). (Nor is there reference to any such provision in the legislation considered in the New
Zealand and United Kingdom decisions relied upon by counsel for the appellant.) In Bowen-James versus Walton this Court said (at p6) that: "...it is in our view perfectly consistent with concepts of procedural fairness to apply a provision such as in cl 1 of Schedule 4 to the [1938]
Act to admit evidence which may not be legally admissible but which, nonetheless, possesses `rational persuasive power' in respect of an issue material to the proceedings." 
For these reasons the attack upon the decision of the 1990 Tribunal fails.

CONSEQUENCES OF FAILURE OF ATTACK ON 1990 TRIBUNAL DECISION 
This relieves us of the need to address the respondent's submission that the
Reasons of the 1990 Tribunal do not form part of the record for the purposes of an order in the nature of certiorari (cf 1938 Act, s32T(3),(4); Craig v
State of South Australia <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 163] at 181). (The appellant's Summons challenging the 1990 decision on the basis of error of law on the face of the record was filed the day before the commencement of legislation designed to modify the law as stated in Craig: see Courts Legislation Amendment Act 1996, Schedule .8[8].) 
Nor need we address the question whether the appellant should be granted leave extending the time for instituting an appeal from the 1990 decision. It is sufficient to observe that the appellant faced difficulties because of the very substantial lapse of time. The quashing of the 1990 decision would lead to a further hearing of a very stale matter in which the credibility of witnesses is critical. I should add, in response to a submission that there is an "unpalatable inconsistency" between the appellant's ultimate success in the criminal proceedings and the findings of the 1990 Tribunal, that such inconsistency is entirely explicable on the basis of differing standards of proof. The acquittal of a medical practitioner on criminal charges does not preclude the successful launching of disciplinary proceedings based on the same facts: Litchfield. These considerations apply a fortiori in relation to criminal charges that have been discontinued (as is the case with respect to patients N and D1) as distinct from resulting in acquittals.

The conclusion that no legal error occurred in 1990 also disposes of the submission that the 1996 Tribunal erred in arriving at the same view.

REMAINING CHALLENGES TO THE 1996 TRIBUNAL DECISION 
The remaining grounds upon which this decision have been challenged are :
Failure to conduct a review in accordance with law.
Erroneous holding that repentance is required.
Erroneous holding that proposed conditions recognise significant risks.

THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF REVIEW SOUGHT IN 1995-1996 
As indicated, there is controversy as to the extent to which the appellant put in issue the critical findings of the 1990 Tribunal when he sought review of the deregistration order in 1995.

The formal Application asserted the appellant's good character and referred to the dismissal or discontinuance of all criminal charges based on the conduct alleged against him. The Application was also based upon an assertion of present fitness, coupled with absence of a need for further community protection through deregistration. The appellant was directed to serve an "Issues Statement" setting out his points of claim. The document that was filed on 12 September 1995 did not directly challenge the findings of the 1990
Tribunal. What it said, relevantly, was: "6. It is not reasonable to require that the applicant acknowledge his guilt of the conduct found against him in the 1990 Inquiry.

PARTICULARS 
The applicant has been acquitted of criminal charges based on the conduct alleged against him in the 1990 Inquiry in the case of the patient A.

The Director of Public Prosecutions has filed no bill of indictment against the applicant in respect of the conduct alleged against him in the Inquiry in the cases of the patients D1 and N.

All criminal proceedings against him in respect of the matters the subject of the 1990 Inquiry have been resolved favourably to the applicant.

The applicant holds an honest belief upon reasonable grounds that he was not guilty of professional misconduct." 
The appellant was directed to supply further and better particulars including particulars of the grounds relied upon for the honest belief that he was not guilty of professional misconduct. The Further and Better Particulars were to the following effect: "1. The decision of the Medical Tribunal given on 13 December 1990 is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Particulars 
The complainant A was not available for cross-examination before the
Tribunal; 
The evidence of A at the District Court Trial, on which the Tribunal relied was inconsistent with her letter dated 29 December 1986 to the Medical
Board; 
Since the Inquiry, further evidence has become available affecting the credibility of A, namely previous medical records from Dr Cronin's practice; 
Further evidence has become available affecting the credibility of the complainant D1, revealing substantial inconsistencies in her evidence from time to time, namely:- statement given to Police dated 3April 1990; statement given to Police dated 25 April 1990; evidence given in the Local Court at Blacktown on 10 April 1991; 
Further evidence has become available affecting the credibility of the complainant N, which showed that she was a person whose experience of men in sexual matters was such that she had developed a much more than normal suspiciousness of men's motives and actions and was likely to overreact and read into male behaviour much more than was either intended or actually happening, namely:- [certain documents were specified] 
The reasonable grounds which found the applicant's honest belief referred to in paragraph 6(d) of the Points of Claim are:- that the applicant did not in fact engage in the conduct alleged and found against him; that allegations of such conduct have been resolved in his favour in the criminal prosecutions either by verdict of acquittal or by nolle prosequi; the credibility of the complainants A, D1 and N is affected by the matters referred to in paragraph 1 above.

At a directions hearing before Judge Wall on 4 October 1 995, counsel for the appellant confirmed that the application for review sought to go behind the judgment of the Tribunal on the basis of, in part, new evidence. The bases for the attack on the 1990 decision included the fact that it was "unsafe and unsatisfactory".

The review hearing commenced on 6 November 1995 and continued at various dates into 1996. The scope of the review was raised by counsel for the Health Care
Complaints Commission on 23 January 1996. At that stage it appears that the
Tribunal was concerned to clarify the basis of the challenge to the evidence from patient N. Para 1(e) of the Further and Better Particulars (set out above) had indicated that the findings concerning patient N were sought to be challenged by the tender of further documents originating in 1990 and 1991 which were said to affect the credibility of that complainant. Some at least of this material was said to be evidence that came to light after the decision of the 1990 Tribunal.

It is clear that the appellant's counsel was not seeking to have any of the patients recalled. He accepted, as he was bound to do, that the material upon which the findings of the 1990 Tribunal were based did not have to be proved afresh by the respondent. During the course of submissions, the presiding judge (Judge Wall QC) said: "As I understand it, the question for this review body is to consider whether or not there is anything in that material which would persuade the Tribunal, first, that the decision of the Tribunal in 1990 was not a just and correct decision. Secondly, even if we were of the view that the decision of the
Tribunal in 1990 was just and correct and that the findings were the appropriate findings to make in the light of the evidence before this review body, having regard to the evidence of what has transpired since 1990 and the position of the applicant at this time, and after taking into consideration the evidence both for his reinstatement and the evidence against his reinstatement, the Tribunal is minded to either reinstate him or refuse his application." (Transcript 23 January 1996 p318) 
There was no dissent from counsel for the appellant. Shortly after, counsel for the appellant indicated his understanding that the issues included reconsideration of the 1990 decision "to the extent that the Tribunal be satisfied that the original deregistration order should not have been made" .

So much is common ground in this appeal. The dispute relates to the scope of review sought by the appellant, and the bases upon which it was pressed.
Counsel for the respondent was urging that the relevant test for review should be that there was "no evidence" to support the decision of the 1990 Tribunal.
However counsel for the appellant was urging the Tribunal to take a broader approach to its review power. There are clear statements to this effect (eg Tr p344), and it is supported by the fact that the appellant was relying upon additional evidence said to attack the credibility of at least one of the patients. Counsel stood his ground in contending that the 1990 decision was reviewable on the "unsafe and unsatisfactory" ground applicable to a criminal conviction appeal in the Court of Criminal Appeal.

The matter of present dispute is whether counsel for the appellant accepted that such review should necessarily apply the principles in Abalos v
Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] in considering the credibility-based findings of the 1990
Tribunal. The matter is complicated by the fact that not all of the submissions have been transcribed.

Mr Brereton who appeared for the appellant in the Court of Appeal had represented him before the Tribunal in 1995 and 1996. He accepts that counsel for the respondent argued that Abalos applied. However he submits that it was never conceded on behalf of the appellant that the Tribunal was so confined. I have no hesitation in accepting this assurance from Mr Brereton.

To my mind the real question is whether the 1996 Tribunal erred in the approach which it adopted having regard to the Particulars that had been filed and the evidentiary material placed before it. As indicated, there was no request that the three patients should be recalled.

At this stage it is appropriate to turn to the reasons of the 1996 Tribunal.

The Tribunal reviewed the history of the matter, including the appellant's personal history both before and after the deregistration decision in 1990.

Reference was made to Rohatgi No 1 as determining the proper approach to the jurisdiction to review. It was noted that the Tribunal had power to go behind the earlier determination in order to consider whether it was just and correct either on its face or in the light of additional evidence. The
Tribunal noted that: "It is for the Tribunal in the exercise of its discretion to determine, in the circumstances of the case before it, whether and to what extent it will review the correctness of the Tribunal decision under challenge. Where the challenge to the correctness of the decision is made on the ground that it was not reasonably open to the Tribunal on the evidence to find the complaint proved it would be necessary to reconsider the findings and conclusions of the original Tribunal on their face. Where the challenge is made on the ground that the decision cannot be supported in the light of additional evidence not considered by the original Tribunal then it is for the Tribunal as the review body to consider whether it is appropriate to admit and consider this additional evidence and, if persuaded it should do so, to assess the probative value of this evidence to determine whether, had this evidence been considered by the original Tribunal or had been used as the basis for cross-examination as to credit of a material witness it would probably have led to a finding by the original Tribunal that the complaint had not been proved; or that otherwise the decision should be considered unsatisfactory and unsafe to act on." 
In my view this statement correctly summarises Rohatgi No 1. Very late in the hearing of the appeal, counsel for the respondent sought leave to challenge Rohatgi No 1. That leave was refused. A sufficient ground for refusal is the lateness of the application.

The Tribunal summarised the challenge to the correctness of the 1990 Tribunal decision in the following terms:
That on the evidence before it it was not reasonably open for the 1990
Tribunal to find to its comfortable satisfaction in accordance with the
Briginshaw versus Briginshaw test that the three particulars of complaint of professional misconduct concerning Patients A, N and D1 had been proved; the findings of the 1990 Tribunal of proved misconduct in relation to these three particulars were wrong and not supported by the evidence. Further, the 1990
Tribunal erred in its fact finding role by applying the "similar fact" rule of evidence in aid of proof of each particular of complaint.
Alternatively, that on a review of the material considered by the 1990
Tribunal and the additional evidentiary material presented at that inquiry it would not have been reasonably open to the 1990 Tribunal in the light of this body of evidence to find to its comfortable satisfaction that these three complaints had been proved.

The evidentiary material pertinent to the review was then adverted to. This involved analysis of the way in which the proceedings had been conducted in , including the manner in which it received the evidence of patient A (who had given evidence at earlier criminal proceedings) without the opportunity of observing patient A in the witness box before the Tribunal.

The Tribunal considered and rejected an attack on the earlier determination based upon misapplication of the "similar fact" rule of evidence. For reasons given earlier in this judgment, that conclusion was correct. But for more abundant caution, the Tribunal conducted its own review of the evidence after directing itself that the "similar fact" rule of evidence had no application.
The Tribunal gave a discrete consideration to the evidence in support of each of the three particulars of complaint. Having done so, it declined to rule that the decision of the 1990 Tribunal was unsafe or unsatisfactory.

The Tribunal then considered five particular criticisms of the course taken by the 1990 Tribunal, rejecting each of them in the light of the Tribunal's own review of the relevant evidence (including the additional material received into evidence in 1995). It is clear that the Tribunal was astute to consider the impact of the original and the fresh evidence upon the favourable assessment of the 1990 Tribunal of the credibility of the complainant patients.

It is clear that the Tribunal took into account the various criticisms advanced by counsel for the appellant in relation to the findings of fact by the 1990 Tribunal. However, it is equally clear that the Tribunal had regard to such additional evidence as was relied upon before concluding that this did not render the original determination unsatisfactory or unsafe.

In the course of this review, the Tribunal paid particular attention to the reasons given by the 1990 Tribunal for preferring the evidence of the patients over that of the doctor. It was necessary for the Tribunal to approach the matter this way, given that its jurisdiction to review the earlier determination had been invoked, but in a context where the patients were not sought to be recalled. (I emphasise that I am not inferring that the Tribunal was bound to have allowed them to have been recalled, if such application had been made.) 
At one stage in its reasons (page 35) the Tribunal noted that: "As a review body under the Act [it] is subject to the same judicial restraint as an appellate court. The powers of the Tribunal when conducting a review of the 1990 Tribunal's findings of fact based on its assessment of the credit of witnesses are very limited. Relevantly, these were Patients N and D1 and the applicant. The limitations of this restraint are set out in
Abalos...." 
These remarks must not be read out of context. It is not possible to construe them as a wrongful fettering of the powers of the Tribunal. After all,
Rohatgi No 1 had been carefully discussed earlier in the Reasons. More importantly, the Tribunal showed itself alive to the need to consider material placed before it that had not been available in 1990. The impact of that material was considered in the further context of a critical review of the process of reasoning adopted in 1990 in the formation of the critical credibility conclusions. These matters are addressed in a lengthy extract on pp17-36 of the Reasons.

In my view the approach adopted by the Tribunal, as summarised at page 36 of its Reasons, is consistent with Rohatgi No 1 and the manner in which the issues were presented to the Tribunal in 1995-1996. The Tribunal did not regard itself as fettered by the stringencies of Abalos, or otherwise fall into error in the manner in which it conducted its review of the merits of the earlier determination.

DID THE 1996 TRIBUNAL REQUIRE ADMISSION OF GUILT? 
A particular challenge to the determination of the 1996 Tribunal was the submission that it effectively required the appellant to admit his guilt as a condition of the favourable determination of his application. We were referred to the judgment of Tauro CJ of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in
Re Alger Hiss [333 NE 2d 429] at 437 (1975): "Simple fairness and fundamental justice demand that the person who believes he is innocent though convicted should not be required to confess guilt to a criminal act he honestly believes he did not commit. For him, a rule requiring admission of guilt and repentance creates a cruel quandary: he may stand mute and lose his opportunity; or he may cast aside his hard maintained scruples and, paradoxically, commit what he regards as perjury to prove his worthiness to practise law. Men who are honest would prefer to relinquish the opportunity conditioned by this rule: `Circumstances may be made to bring innocence under the penalties of the law. If so brought, escape by confession of guilt ... may be rejected, - preferring to be the victim of the law rather than its acknowledged transgressor - preferring death even to such certain infamy'.
Honest men would suffer permanent disbarment under such a rule. Others, less sure of their moral positions, would be tempted to believe to commit perjury by admitting to a non-existent offence (or to an offence they believe to be non-existent) to secure reinstatement. So regarded, this rule, intended to maintain the integrity of the Bar, would encourage corruption in these latter petitioners for reinstatement and, again paradoxically, might permit reinstatement of those least fit to serve." 
The majority view of the Tribunal was that, on the evidence presented to it, the appellant had failed to discharge the onus of proving to the Tribunal's satisfaction his present fitness to practise on solid and substantial grounds.
It accepted the arguments of counsel for the respondent in opposition to the application, describing them as "cogent".

Before turning to the passage to which objection is taken, it is appropriate to observe that the Tribunal stated the applicable principles in a manner which has attracted no criticism. The Tribunal observed (at pp 36-8) that in an application for reinstatement, the purpose of its jurisdiction remained protective and punitive; and that the applicant bore the onus of proof in seeking to displace an earlier decision which involved the judgment that the applicant was probably permanently unfit to have his name on the Register. The ultimate issue was stated to be one "whether the Tribunal can conclude on the basis of all the evidence that an applicant is now a fit and proper person" to be restored to the Register. The critical issue was the applicant's worthiness and reliability for the future. In making an assessment of this, the Tribunal noted that it could draw inferences from past conduct, particularly the conduct which led to removal from the Register.

As regards the appellant, the Tribunal referred to a large body of testimonials as to good character and professional competence, the evidence of the appellant, and expert evidence involving psychotherapy and psychiatric matters. The latter evidence included material suggesting a probable explanation for the sexual abuse of female patients (being the mental illness of depression exacerbated by serious health and financial problems).

The Tribunal then referred to the arguments advanced by counsel for the respondent in opposing the application for reinstatement. The suggested nexus between the appellant's misconduct and his depressive illness was disputed.
The credibility of his evidence and of the histories given to his treating specialists was challenged. It was contended that the appellant had not demonstrated to the Tribunal that he possessed any insight into his depressive illness. It was submitted that there was a significant risk of recurrence.

It is clear that the Tribunal wrestled with this aspect of review. Two members of the Tribunal accepted the case put forward on behalf of the appellant, and two rejected it. Those who rejected it included the Deputy Chairperson, with the result that his view prevailed: see [s154(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s154.html) of the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/).

The majority summarised their reasons at pp46-52. They indicated that the appellant had failed to discharge the onus which he bore, being a very heavy onus from a starting point of proved professional misconduct based upon sexual abuse of three patients. They expressed "considerable reservations" as to the expert evidence concerning continuing risk. Reasons were given, based upon the expert evidence. The conclusion is clearly one which was open to the
Tribunal in the light of the expert evidence.

The passage to which objection is taken appears at pp51-2 (the emphasis is the appellant's): "All four proved complaints deal with conduct of a kind which demonstrates the applicant was conscious of what he was doing, they were deliberate acts.
Two matters of considerable concern stand out: First, the applicant's sexual abuse of Patient D1 occurred at a time when similar sexual abuse of a number of other female patients had been the subject of complaints to the police and he was on bail on charges of sexual assault. This demonstrates that following complaints and public exposure of the misconduct, he either could not or would not control his aberrant behaviour. Secondly, he continues to claim to be totally innocent and that he is the victim of false and/or mistaken accusations. This claim must be rejected in the background of the proved complaints and is either fraudulent or an indication he has no insight into his misconduct. The suggestion that his insight may have been masked by a depressive illness is unconvincing. He has made no attempt to reform his character and has no insight into the need for reform. With this history, there is a real risk of him reoffending.

The misconduct arising from the disobedience of conditions of practice imposed by the Medical Board for the protection of female patients was wilful and has not been satisfactorily explained away. The explanation offered was partly to attribute blame to his solicitor for inadequate advice and partly a claim that the disobedience was justified because home calls should be treated as emergencies and for unexpected staff absences at the surgery. The disobedience was not isolated, was protracted and the excuses offered were unconvincing and we are unable to accept them with confidence." 
The appellant submits that this passage reveals that the majority acted on the supposed principle that an applicant for reinstatement whose name has previously been removed from the Register must accept that he was guilty of misconduct. I disagree. The sentence underlined does not say this. It is specific to the particular context of continuing claims to be innocent of conduct which was proved to have occurred to the requisite standard. The second paragraph of the passage quoted is clearly pertinent.

I would not disagree with the principle stated in the passage from Hiss that has been quoted. But the proposition which it states is a narrow one: confession is not a necessary precondition to reinstatement. ("Accordingly, we refuse to disqualify a petitioner for reinstatement solely because he continues to protest his innocence of the crime of which he was convicted":
Hiss at 437). I do not understand this Court ever to have asserted such a categorical proposition: see Dawson versus Law Society of New South Wales (Court of Appeal, unreported, 21 December 1989 per Kirby P (at p17) and
Mahoney JA (at pp6-7). This said, there is no error in concluding in a particular context that continuing vigorous challenge to clearly established guilt may be indicative of continuing unfitness on one or other of the grounds indicated in the sentence underlined.

CHALLENGE TO DECISION THAT PROPOSED CONDITIONS RECOGNISE SIGNIFICANT RISK 
The majority, in holding that the appellant had failed to discharge the onus of proving his present fitness to practise on solid and substantial grounds, said that the "highly restrictive nature of the ... conditions" proposed by the appellant indicate "a recognition of a significant level of risk". In his application for reinstatement, the appellant had offered to submit to such conditions as the Tribunal thought fit. These included a condition that he see female patients only in the company of a chaperone. The Tribunal's response was that the proposed conditions had "an Achilles' heel: Their efficacy depends on the applicant's willingness and/or capacity to comply with them.
Conditions of practice designed to protect patients from sexual abuse ultimately depend upon the integrity of the practitioner" (p 51).

In his written submissions, counsel for the appellant points out that the conditions were proposed, not by the appellant, but by the respondent commission, as a fall-back position if its opposition to the application failed. This submission is not disputed by senior counsel for the respondent.
Nevertheless the error is immaterial. The proposition remains good as a statement of fact in the present context, particularly in the light of the conclusion of the 1990 Tribunal that one of the complaints found established was that the appellant had been in breach of a condition imposed upon his registration on 12 April 1990 that, except in the case of an emergency, the appellant was not to see or treat any female except in the continuous presence of a person acceptable to the New South Wales Medical Board.

THE COMPETENCY OF THE APPEAL FROM THE DECISION OF THE 1996 TRIBUNAL 
It is strictly unnecessary to address this issue in the light of the foregoing reasons. Nevertheless, it is preferable to put the matter to rest to give the legislature an opportunity to redress any deficiency. (On this issue I express no view.) In Rohatgi versus Health Care Complaints Commission, Court of
Appeal, unreported, 26 July 1996 (Rohatgi No 2) Handley JA held that no right of appeal lay from a decision of a Medical Tribunal on a review application.

Rohatgi was a case like the present, where a medical practitioner who had been struck off the Register under the 1938 Act applied to the Tribunal for review in circumstances where the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) regulated the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and any consequential rights of appeal to this Court. Since the purported appeal was not commenced until after the Tribunal had completed its inquiry (another similarity to the present case) [s90(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s90.html) is the applicable provision. That subsection provides: "A person about whom a complaint is referred to the Tribunal, or the complainant, may appeal to the Supreme Court against: a decision of the Tribunal with respect to a point of law; or the exercise of any power by the Tribunal under Division 4 (Disciplinary
Powers of Committees and Tribunals) of [Part ."](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/index.html#p4) 
Handley JA held that, as an applicant for review, Dr Rohatgi was neither "a person about whom a complaint is referred to the Tribunal or the complainant". It was not enough that he had been the person about whom the original complaint was referred to the Tribunal that had initially struck him off. The word "is" in the opening part of [s90(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s90.html) is incompatible with such construction. The subject matter of the review inquiry was the application for review, and not the original complaint. There being no statutory conferral of a right of appeal, none existed: see
Victorian Stevedoring Pty Ltd versus Dignan <case>; [(1931) 46 CLR 73] at 108. Handley JA reinforced his decision by pointing out that no right of appeal existed in relation to the corresponding right of review found in the 1938 Act.

Counsel for the appellant challenged this decision. He relied upon dicta in
Rohatgi No 1 (per Mahoney AP at 19, 28), but these are at most obiter statements reserving a proposition that was not argued before the Court in
Rohatgi No 1. Next it was argued that the appellant remained "a person about whom a complaint is referred to the Tribunal". In my view this is hardly an apt description of the status of the appellant immediately after the final determination of the 1990 Tribunal. More importantly, it ignores the textual and contextual indications in s90(1) that the right of appeal is referable to (relevantly) a decision of the Tribunal with respect to a point of law in the hearing consequent upon the referral of the complaint. Other arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant indicate possible anomalies and apparently inexplicable discriminations in the legislative scheme. But these provide no justification for the Court finding a right of appeal where none exists.

Rohatgi No 2 was correctly decided. 
The application and the appeal should each be dismissed with costs.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Mason P and the orders he proposes. 
On the last matter discussed, the correctness of Rohatgi No 2, it seems to me the point is a troublesome one and should be considered by the legislature with a view to either (a) confirming by clarificatory amendment the position disclosed by Rohatgi No 2, or (b), if the legislature feels something different would be preferable, changing that position accordingly.

POWELL JA: I agree with Mason P. * * * 
