

Charles Anthony Zammitt versus Pasminco Aust Ltd [1998] NSWSC 1045 (25 October )

CHARLES ANTHONY ZAMMITT v. PASMINCO AUSTRALIA LIMITED & ORS /94 
WEDNESDAY 8 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Charles Anthony Zammitt, sues Pasminco Australia Limited and ZC Mines Pty. Limited, trading as Pasminco Mining, for damages for negligence in respect of injuries he sustained on 24 June 1992 whilst employed by the defendant and working underground as a boilermaker.

At the close of the evidence the defendant admitted negligence but maintained its defence of contributory negligence. As well, an issue was raised as to whether the plaintiff was limited to the measure of compensation provided by the Workers' Compensation Act or was entitled to the marginally more generous measure provided by the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).
Accordingly, the admission of negligence does not relieve me of the need to examine fairly closely the circumstances of the accident.

I find the following facts:-
From mid 1990 to the date of the accident the plaintiff was employed by the defendant initially as a miner on a six months renewable contract, then from November 1990 as a daily paid worker, multi-skilled, working sometimes as a miner, sometimes as a boilermaker.
He had completed a four year apprenticeship as a boilermaker at the Zinc
Corporation, then worked in that trade at Whyalla Shipyards for six years. He returned to Broken Hill in 1978 and worked for six years at Central Power
Station as a labourer and diesel engine dryer and then for two years in his own business selling frozen seafood wholesale and retail. Having sold that business, he was then out of work for about two years before obtaining employment as a contract miner with Western Mining in 1988.
In that employment he became classified as an experienced miner. He later transferred to Minenco Pty. Limited and then to CRE/ARD Contractors where he gained skills and experience in raise-boring. It was from there that he transferred to the defendant in 1990.
On 24 June 1992, the plaintiff was in a four man multi-skilled team comprising a tradesman, that is himself, a miner and two labourers. In accordance with the ordinary practice he, as the tradesman, was designated leading hand. The four were assigned to work on the 16 level, two of them
Rawlings and Tremelling, to a task referred to in the evidence as rock bolting and meshing. Just what that involved and where they were on the level in relation to the plaintiff and his mate, David Bow, does not appear from the evidence. The task to which the plaintiff and Mr. Bow were assigned related to the construction of a mesh wall, including a door set in a metal frame, the whole to create an explosive magazine. The particular task had been in progress for some time and the plaintiff had worked on it on an earlier shift.
The particular work to be performed by him in the exercise of his trade as a boilermaker on the date of the accident involved welding pieces of angle iron into position on either side of the doorway, evidently for the purpose of securing in place the steel mesh of which the wall was to be formed. The particular pieces of angle iron had to be affixed very close to the backs (that is, the roof of the mining chamber) at a height of about 12 feet above the excavated floor of that chamber.
The only means available for the plaintiff to gain access to that elevated work place comprised a mechanical loader, the bucket of which could be raised and utilised by the plaintiff as a work platform. The bucket of the loader could not, however, be elevated to a height sufficient for the plaintiff's purpose and when, on arrival at the plaintiff's workplace, the plaintiff became aware of that, he discussed with his offsider, Mr. Bow, what course of action should be followed.
The options to gain the necessary additional height were two. First, it was considered that the bucket could be filled with mullock, on which the plaintiff might stand to carry out his work. The second option was to construct on either side of the doorway a ramp, up which the loader could be driven. It was thought that, even if the bucket were filled with mullock, it would not give sufficient height, and the plaintiff, who was in charge of the operation at that level as leading hand, accepted Bow's advice that the best course would be to construct ramps. A ramp of about one metre high was constructed on the right-hand side of the doorway and, utilising the bucket of the loader as a work platform, the plaintiff completed his task of installing mesh, supported by angle iron, on the right-hand side of the doorway.
Bow then proceeded to construct a similar ramp on the left-hand side of the doorway and when that work was complete, the plaintiff loaded his welding gear into the bucket and got into the bucket and Bow, operating the controls of the machine, elevated the bucket to the required height and drove up the ramp to bring the plaintiff as close as possible to the job. The purpose was to carry out the work in similar fashion as had been done without incident on the right-hand side. It had been found that the bucket had a tendency to creep downward and also to tilt forward and in order to maintain a satisfactory work platform for the plaintiff, it was necessary that Bow constantly attend the controls of the loader to correct any such movement. In any event, according to Bow, it was a company regulation that one man remain at the controls of the loader while it was in use.
Because Rawlings and Tremelling were engaged in other duties which had their own urgency, it was not open to the plaintiff to call on either of them to act as his offsider in place of Bow who ordinarily would have filled that task, or to operate the loader (for which task Tremelling had qualified at the commencement of the same shift) freeing Bow to carry out his ordinary duty as offsider to the plaintiff.
The equipment which the plaintiff took with him into the bucket comprised oxyacetylene cutting gear, the cylinders being some distance away on the ground, and the gases being delivered by hoses to the torch which he had with him in the bucket, and a welding unit comprising a handpiece, into one end of which was to be inserted the welding rod or electrode and from the other end of which a lead ran back to the welding machine. The welding machine itself was plugged into a mains electrical power point and was moved as close to the work site as the length of the available lead permitted. That left it still some 30 metres or a little more from the point where the plaintiff was required to work in the elevated bucket. Two or more electrical leads were plugged together to connect his welding unit to the machine. Those leads had been subjected to wear and tear and damage; they had been repaired but not entirely effectively. They passed across wet ground and had themselves become wet.
The welding machine was fitted with a safety device known as a dead man switch which is not plugged into the welding machine but integrally connected to it, being wired into its electric circuits. The safety switch operates in this fashion, that when pressure is applied to the top of it, which is a mushroom shaped dome about four inches in diameter, current is delivered to the welder but as soon as the pressure is taken off the dead man switch the flow of current is immediately stopped.
In ordinary practice a welder would have the dead man on the floor or working platform on which he was standing to carry out a welding task and would maintain pressure on the switch by standing on it as he worked. If at any time he needed to move from his working position, for example to pick up a piece of material or a tool, the power to the handset would be automatically cut. Similarly, should he sustain any kind of accident and stumble or be thrown off the switch, it would operate to terminate the power supply, thus providing protection against electrical injury. In particular, should an electrical fault develop causing the operator to receive a shock, his voluntary or involuntary response would be expected to cause him to release the pressure on the dead man, thus turning off the power.
The lead from the welding machine to the dead man switch was only 15 metres in length and it was thus not possible for the plaintiff to have the dead man switch in the bucket which was serving as his working platform.
Relevant safety standards recognise that there may be work situations where conditions are such as not to allow a welder to have the dead man switch immediately available to be used by him in the manner described, for example, working in confined spaces, such as inside a tank or a chute or where work has to be done from a ladder or from any other surface, the nature of which would not allow the operator safely and conveniently to stand on the dead man switch while working. The work situation in which the plaintiff was placed was not itself such as to make it not possible for him to use the dead man switch as it was designed. The only reason why he did not have it available to be used as designed was that the available lead was too short. Replacement of that lead by a longer lead was not something which could be expected to be done on request in the course of a shift because it required the skilled services of an electrician to integrate it into the wiring circuit of the welding machine.
It was therefore reasonable that the plaintiff did not seek to have a longer lead provided but instead attempted to carry out the work with the equipment which was in fact available.
The procedure which was adopted was, probably without any specific discussion between them because they were both experienced men, that Mr. Bow took over the responsibility of operating the dead man switch.
Where the dead man switch is not operated by the welder himself but is remote from him and under the control of an offsider, common sense and good safe practice requires that that offsider be so positioned as to be able to observe closely the work that the welder is carrying out and to be in a position to receive directions or signals from the welder as to when he is to turn the power on or off by manipulation of the switch. The need for him to have clear vision of the welder and what he is doing is to enable the switch to be used for its prime purpose as a safety device, so that the power can be cut off, irrespective of whether the welding operator requests it, in the event of any situation of danger occurring. Safe working practice in the situation in which the plaintiff was required, first, that he should have the dead man switch with him in the bucket and secondly, if that was not possible, that it be operated by an offsider so positioned as to be able to observe closely what the plaintiff was doing. The offsider would need to be equipped with eye protection and probably something in the nature of a welding mask or helmet so that he could continue to observe what the operator was doing without the need to look away or cover his eyes.
Because there were only two men working at that place and because of the need that one man tend the controls of the loader, the only position from which Mr. Bow could operate the dead man switch was his position at the controls of the loader. Accordingly, he placed the switch on the console of the loader where he was able to maintain pressure upon it with one hand while operating the controls with the other. In that position, he was facing towards the back of the loader bucket and that created a substantial obstruction, preventing him from seeing more than the plaintiff's head and shoulders if the plaintiff should come to the back of the bucket to give him a signal or direction, and no more than just the plaintiff's head if the plaintiff was carrying out his welding work in an erect position. The actual work being done by the plaintiff was obscured from Mr. Bow's view by the plaintiff's own body as well as by the bucket. The consequence was that Mr. Bow was not in a position directly to observe anything that might happen other than that the plaintiff's head might, for whatever reason, cease or have ceased to be visible to him. Should that occur, he was not in a position to know whether it was the result of a voluntary or involuntary movement by the plaintiff.
Because he had nothing to protect his eyesight against the glare of the welding flame, Mr. Bow did not look directly towards the plaintiff but looked to one side, from which position he was, however, able to discern, from the presence or absence of the welding glow and, no doubt, noise, whether welding was or was not actually proceeding.
On occasions in the course of the work, when the plaintiff had completed a particular passage of work, the plaintiff went to the back of the bucket and indicated to Mr. Bow that he could release the dead man switch to turn off the power, and Mr. Bow responded accordingly. Where such had occurred, and the plaintiff was thereafter ready to resume welding, he made an appropriate signal to Mr. Bow who again restored the power. The plaintiff's evidence was that there was no such system of signalling but I am satisfied that in that his memory is at fault and I prefer Mr. Bow's evidence.
The plaintiff cut to size a piece of angle iron to be installed at the top of the mesh, did what else was necessary to prepare it for installation and then, holding it in place with his left hand, used the welder to tack it into position, that is by placing a couple of small beads of weld material to hold it in place while he checked it for level preparatory to fixing it permanently. Having tacked the angle iron in position in that fashion, he transferred the welding handpiece to his left hand to free his right hand to pick up his spirit level from the floor of the bucket. As I would understand it, at the time when he ceased to use the welding handpiece in the tacking operation, there would cease to be a glow visible to Mr. Bow, and the noise of the welding would cease. In the course of bending to pick up his spirit level, the plaintiff somehow allowed some surface of the welding rod (he says it was the side but it may have been the tip) to come in contact with the inner surface of his right forearm. He commenced to receive an electrical shock.
The shock caused him to be unable to release his grip on the handpiece and, on the contrary, caused him to double up so that he was curled around the handpiece with it held close to his body. The shock entering through his right forearm exited through the front of his throat and he sustained burns, fairly trivial to the forearm, quite serious to the neck. He attempted to call out to
Mr. Bow but was unable to utter a sound. He collapsed onto the floor of the bucket.
When Bow became aware not only that he could no longer see from the corner of his eye the glow of welding in progress, but also that he could not see the plaintiff, he removed his hand from the dead man switch in order to turn off the power, and running to the bucket, he observed the plaintiff lying on the floor of the bucket. He ran to the welding machine and turned it off and he returned to the controls of the loader to reverse it down the ramp and lower the bucket to the ground. Rawlings came over and they summoned a passing vehicle for assistance and in due course the plaintiff was taken to the surface and removed to hospital.
It is not possible to say for what precise period of time the plaintiff was subjected to an electrical charge between the time when he inadvertently brought the welding rod in contact with his arm and the time when Mr. Bow became aware of a problem. However, the probability is that Bow did not instantly become aware that something was wrong. The sight and sound of an on- going welding operation would have ceased as soon as the plaintiff finished the tacking job, but that alone would not necessarily have alerted Bow to an emergency, because the same would ordinarily occur from time to time during the operation. There then passed some time, no doubt only a moment, during which the plaintiff transferred the handpiece to his left hand and commenced the manoeuvre intended to secure the spirit level. The shock occurred at some stage after the plaintiff transferred the tool to his left hand, and probably as he was commencing to bend down, and he was probably already out of sight of
Mr. Bow by the time when the shock commenced. It is probably not the case that
Mr. Bow reacted instantly when the welding stopped. No doubt he was aware that the welding had stopped, but he would have expected that to occur from time to time as the plaintiff carried out his work in a normal way, and it was not until he realised both that the welding had ceased and that he could no longer see the back of the plaintiff's head that it would have occurred to him that there might be an emergency. I am satisfied therefore that the plaintiff received a shock for a period of time longer than would have been the case had he himself been operating the dead man switch in the preferred manner. It is entirely impossible, however, to say for how long the plaintiff was subjected to the shock. It may well have been some seconds; it is unlikely to have been as long as 15 seconds. I am satisfied that it was longer than the mere instant that would have passed had the dead man switch been used as intended.

Liability 
The system under which the plaintiff was carrying out the welding operation was unsafe. There was a foreseeable risk of injury by electric shock, generally because that risk exists where electrical equipment is in use in an industrial situation, but particularly here, where the working conditions were hot and humid, the plaintiff might be expected to perspire, the work area itself was wet and the welding leads had been subjected to a great deal of wear and tear, in consequence of which their external insulation was in places cut or worn and in some cases not adequately repaired. There was an obvious means by which the risk of injury to the plaintiff from electrical shock could have been reduced, if not entirely eliminated, namely the provision of a dead man switch available to be used by him in the particular location where he was working.

The defendant failed to provide that precaution in the sense that, although there was a dead man switch, no provision was made which would enable it to be used by the plaintiff in the bucket. The lead from the welding machine to the dead man switch was too short to allow that to happen unless the welding machine was moved a great deal closer. The welding machine could not be moved closer because it was not provided with a lead long enough to enable that to happen. There is no evidence as to whether there was any technical reason why the welding machine could not have been fitted with a longer lead to enable it to be brought closer to the workplace.

Although there was evidence that the provision of a longer lead between the welding machine and the dead man switch would not have been a simple matter of plugging in an extension, but would have required the services of an electrician to integrate a longer lead into the circuitry of the welding machine and/or of the switch, the evidence does not suggest any technical reason why that should not have been done.

The situation in which the work had to be carried out was such as to require some careful thought on the part of the employer as to how it might be safely done and as to what provision needed to be made of equipment to allow that to occur. The defendant's only answer seems to be that the employer left it to the plaintiff himself, as an experienced man and, during that shift at least, in charge of the operation, to devise a safe system of work. That was not, in the circumstances of this case, by any means an adequate discharge of the employer's obligation to take reasonable care for the safety of the plaintiff.
This was not the case of a simple task which might well be left to an experienced employee to carry out in accordance with the ordinary practice of his trade and his own experience. This was a situation involving the interaction of a number of factors, and it was the obligation of the employer to resolve the problems by laying out a system, by instructing the workers precisely what they were to do in the circumstances, and by ensuring the provision of adequate and effective equipment, and, if there was any reason why that could not be done, to take such other steps as were available to minimise the risk, particularly, in this case, providing a third man so that the dead man switch could be operated by somebody in a proper position to take action for the safety of the plaintiff if required.

The situation falls far short of one where the employer, aware of the plaintiff's experience and capacity, expressly charged him with the responsibility for laying down a safe system. No doubt, as Sholl, J. said in
Witham v. Shire of Bright <case>; [(1959) VR 790], such delegation may occur in particular circumstances, but where delegation to the plaintiff himself is relied upon as a discharge of the employer's duty of care to that plaintiff, it must include, as it seems to me, full authority to obtain the necessary equipment or materials or labour to enable the work to be done safely.

Consequently, it is my view that the defendant was clearly shown to have been negligent and the concession made on its behalf at the close of the evidence was inevitable.

Contributory Negligence 
At the close of the case, the defendant did not press any of the allegations of contributory negligence previously particularised, except this, that in as much as the plaintiff and Bow were operating under a system whereby the plaintiff could have the power cut off by signalling Bow to that effect, thus making his work area safe from electrical accident while he carried out any necessary work or manoeuvre, he was at serious fault in failing to make use of that system by having Bow cut off the power while he obtained his spirit level. Had he done that, it is said, the accident would never have happened. Accordingly, it was submitted, he should bear a significant share of the responsibility for the accident.

The submission is superficially attractive but ultimately I have concluded that it fails.

I have already indicated that I reject the plaintiff's evidence that there was no such system and that the operation of the dead man was left entirely to
Bow's discretion. That is absurd, and the plaintiff's assertion that such was the fact does him little credit. It is a matter on which, properly, the defendant places reliance in attacking, as it does, the credibility and reliability of the plaintiff's evidence generally, and I shall mention it again in that context.

Accepting that there was such a system, it does not seem to me that it was unreasonable for the plaintiff to refrain from calling for the power to be shut off on every occasion when, however briefly, he paused from his welding, nor on every occasion when, having paused, he needed to carry out some other manoeuvre in the work area before resuming. It is a matter of degree, I suppose. If he had to lay his welding handpiece down while he became fully engaged in some other activity for a time longer than just a few moments, reasonable care for his own safety would clearly call for the power to be turned off. At the other extreme, if he withdrew the welding rod from the work for a few moments to reposition his feet or to transfer it to the other hand, to alter his angle of attack, it would, I think, be absurd to suggest that he turned around to the back of the bucket to signal Mr. Bow. The risk of injury by making some other untoward electrical contact would be greater in signalling twice, that is for the power to be turned off and for the power to be turned on again, and for that purpose carrying the live tool towards the rear, and again, after the power came back on, carrying it back to the work spot, than it would be in simply staying where he was, making such an adjustment as was necessary, exercising care, of course, as he did, so that the rod made no untoward contact.

It is, as I say, a matter of degree. I cannot say that, for the moment he would expect it to take to reach for his level, even if he had to look to see where precisely it lay, it was unreasonable to allow the power to stay on.

I find in the circumstances no contributory negligence.
 [Motor Accidents Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) 
It is convenient at this stage to deal with Mr. Gross' submission that the accident was a motor accident within the meaning of the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). The Act contains this definition:- "Motor accident means an accident caused by the fault of the owner/driver of the motor vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle which causes the death or injury to a person." 
I assume, without deciding, that the loader in use on the date of the accident was a motor vehicle within the meaning of the Act.

I have considered the two recent judgments of the Court of Appeal to which Mr.
Gross referred me: NRMA Insurance v. New South Wales Grain Corporation and Mercantile Mutual Legal Insurance v. Moulding, both unreported judgments delivered on 8 December 1995.

I accept as, with respect, clearly correct the following passage from the judgment of Clarke, JA. in the NRMA case at p.4:- "I do not agree with the proposition that because it is proper to characterise the negligence as a failure to employ a safe system of work that that means that it is not negligence 'in the use of a vehicle'. Where, for instance, the unsafe system is in the manner of tying down a load so that it breaks free while it is actually being transported then, generally speaking, I see no reason why indemnity would be denied to an owner who became responsible in damages for personal injury as a consequence of that negligence. In other circumstances the employment of an unsafe system of work which incidentally involved the unloading of a vehicle may lead to a different result." 
And at p.9:- "There remains the final question, whether the plaintiff's injuries were caused by the owner's fault in the use of the vehicle? That is a question of fact which cannot be resolved by the application of a simple test. In some cases it will be relatively clear whether the fault was in the use of the vehicle. For instance, where the fault lies in the driving of a vehicle. Again where an owner's employee negligently secures a load on a truck so that part of it falls off during a journey and injures another person it is clear enough that the owner's fault would be 'in the use or operation of the vehicle'. They are both cases where the negligence occurs in the actual use of the vehicle.
Where, however, the owner is negligent in some aspect of an operation incidental to the actual use, such as the loading, the position is not so clear. It is settled that 'the incidents attending the actual use of the vehicle form part of its use' (Government Insurance Office of New South
Wales v. King <case>; [(1960-61) 104 CLR 93] at 96, per Dixon, CJ.) but it by no means follows that negligence in the unloading of a vehicle is necessarily 'in the use of' that vehicle.

Thus, for instance, proof that an employer instituted an unsafe system of unloading may or may not constitute negligence in the use or operation of a vehicle. It will depend on the relationship between the negligent act or omission and the vehicle. If the negligence lies in the unsafe placing of the load on the tray of the trailer of an articulated vehicle it will, in general, be correct to describe the fault as in the use or operation of that vehicle.
Where the negligence relates to some part of the unloading procedure distant from the vehicle then, as it seems to me, it would not be accurate to describe the negligence in the same way. These are again two extreme situations and there will almost certainly be others in which the position will not be so clear." 
Here the unsafe system of work was not a system of using the motor vehicle.
The fault of the defendant which caused the accident was in respect of the use of electric welding equipment in a work area so located that a necessary safety device could not be properly used in the absence of a longer set of leads, and in failing to provide such leads or a third worker. The fact that the system required the use of the vehicle does not mean that the fault of the employer which caused the plaintiff's injury was a fault in the use or operation of that vehicle.

I find that the plaintiff's injury was not caused by a motor accident within the meaning of the Act; and that he is not an injured person within the definition in that Act.

Accordingly, in due course, I will assess his damages pursuant to the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act, not the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).

Damages 
The plaintiff was taken to Broken Hill Base Hospital and allowed to leave after about 24 hours. His obvious immediate injury was the fairly trivial burn on the inside of his right forearm and the more substantial burns in the front of his throat which, at that stage, were very red and angry looking, but, with appropriate treatment initially, have healed leaving a relatively marginal cosmetic disability.

The plaintiff claims that within a few days after the accident he experienced pain in his right shoulder, his neck and his low back. However, there is no evidence other than that of the plaintiff himself to support the claim that the onset of any symptoms in his neck and low back was relatively soon after the accident. The earliest complaint in relation to the back is that recorded by Dr. Chapman on 14 January 1993, six or seven months after the accident, where he records:- "Right shoulder still sore, joints ache, right elbow aches, lower back pain, right wrist aches. In effect the shoulder pain which has been complained of from an early stage is still present. The new complaint of back pain is one of a number of complaints relating to various portions of the plaintiff's body." 
I should interpose at this stage to refer to an incident that happened towards the end of the evidence of Dr. Bracken when I indicated to the parties that they may see fit to ask me to disqualify myself because of my personal involvement in an electrocution. At that stage I anticipated, in the light of some questions that had been put to Dr. Bracken, that it may well be that the defendant was proposing to adduce medical evidence to the effect that it was not possible to explain multiple joint and muscle pains shortly after an electrical shock by reference to that shock. On the following day counsel for the defendant asked me to disqualify myself and after consideration I declined to do so at that stage.

First of all, at that stage it was not clear that evidence of the kind which I anticipated would be led; it was only if I were ultimately going to be asked to accept evidence which was quite contrary to my own experience that any problem would have arisen. Secondly, I was conscious of the fact that if the case were not to proceed at these sittings, the plaintiff would be faced with a delay of 12 months, so that although the doctrine of necessity (which requires a judge not to disqualify himself in some circumstances where otherwise it would be appropriate) did not strictly apply, nevertheless, there were practical reasons why I should remain in the case. I therefore deferred my decision at that stage. As it happened, no such evidence as I had anticipated was led on behalf of the defendant, so that it appeared to me that no occasion in fact existed for my disqualifying myself; and the fact is that no further application was made on behalf of the defendant.

I return to the description of the plaintiff's course. The only physical complaint documented at any stage earlier than that note in Dr. Chapman's notes on 14 January 1993 is the complaint of pain in the right shoulder, which was noted by Dr. Chapman on 10 July 1992, and the subject of consistent complaints after that, eventually causing the treating psychiatrist, Dr.
Yellowlees, to have such concern about it on 31 March 1993 as to lead to his referring the plaintiff to the orthopaedic clinic at the hospital. He was seen (I am not sure, whether at that clinic or elsewhere) on 21 April 1993 by an orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. J.M. Ellis, who diagnosed a condition of capsulitis of the shoulder which, on the history, he attributed to the accident.

Notwithstanding the attack which the defendant has made on the plaintiff's credibility in relation to his later complaints and his continuing symptoms and his alleged continuing incapacity, I see nothing in the evidence to cause me to doubt the veracity of the plaintiff's physical complaints in the early stages of his injury. There is no reason to believe that at that early date he was motivated or emotionally or psychologically driven to falsify physical symptoms or to experience symptoms which had no physical basis.

I find that he did sustain injury to the right shoulder, very likely in the presence of work related degenerative changes existing before the accident.

I cannot on the evidence reach a similar finding as to any injury to his neck or lower back. Mr. Gross spent some time very persuasively identifying various factors that might explain the absence of corroboration, from medical records and opinion, of the plaintiff's complaints of neck and back pain. They included the hypothesis that the doctors focused on his principal complaint, his shoulder; that he was better able to describe that set of symptoms than the others; that the neck and back pain were overshadowed because of his complaints of generalised joints and muscle pain; that because of generalised symptoms it was not until later in the piece the plaintiff identified specific areas in the neck and lower back as to the sites of the specific symptoms. All this is possible. I draw no inference adverse to the plaintiff from the lack of medical record affording such corroboration, but the fact remains there is no medical record of any account by him of such symptoms, and acceptance of the proposition that he injured his neck and back in the electrocution accident depends entirely on his own evidence.

It is very difficult to know to what extent one can rely on the uncorroborated evidence of the plaintiff as to the existence or severity of symptoms. My first impression of his demeanour was entirely favourable, but increasingly I came to suspect he was willing to make statements likely, or which he may have perceived likely, to advance his case irrespective of their truth or accuracy.
For example, as to the absence of an alternative vehicle to the loader, the
IT, and his claim that there was no system of signalling - in effect, on both points his evidence conflicted with that of Mr. Bow which I clearly prefer; his account of the conversations relating to his retrenchment, which was at odds with the clear and convincing evidence of Mr. Edwards, given frankly and without evasion; his claim to have done much to seek employment, which evaporated as soon as details of it were sought; his claim not to remember pain in the neck, and back injuries prior to this particular accident, as documented in medical records. Then one became aware of a lack of frankness on his part, especially when he failed to reveal, in talking of his work for or dealings with Mr. Robert Harris, the fact that even today he is continuing to assist Mr. Harris in the construction of curtain tracks. The fact, if frankly revealed, would in no way have harmed his case, but the failure to reveal it reflects badly on his credit.

I attach no significance to the possibility that he has inflated some claims for reduction in his income tax return. One does not approve of such conduct, but it seems to me to carry little weight in the determination of the issue of his credibility that arises here.

Finally, one has to consider the plaintiff's combative, even aggressive, unforthcoming, even evasive attitude in the course of his evidence generally.
He has been extraordinarily difficult to assess as a witness. His manner was, however, as it seemed to me, not that of the liar trying to make his case better by lying. He was combative, as I have said; unhelpful, unwilling to answer fully and frankly. It is a sort of behaviour that one sees time and again in cases where a convincing diagnosis of post traumatic stress disorder is advanced. As will appear, I am satisfied that this is the correct diagnosis of this plaintiff's condition, and again I can say that I found in the evidence nothing to cause me to doubt the genuineness of his earlier presentation when that diagnosis was first made, which I think was by Dr.
Yellowlees on 13 August 1992.

Such being the diagnosis, I am prepared to attribute much of the plaintiff's unsatisfactory behaviour in the witness box to that illness. I do not find that he is fraudulent. I do not find that he has deliberately set out to deceive. Nevertheless, his evidence is not reliable. Whatever the reason, whether it be post traumatic stress disorder or not, I simply cannot rely on his unaided evidence to prove the existence of symptoms, physical or psychological, at the present day, nor indeed for some time in the past.

Finally, I should add that while his wife has given corroborative evidence of a psychological illness, her evidence affords no corroboration of any back or neck problem occurring soon after the accident. She was not asked. I can only infer that if asked, any evidence that she gave would not have advanced the plaintiff's case.

In the result, I am simply not persuaded that any symptoms now present in the plaintiff's neck or lower back have any connection with the accident upon which he sues.

On the other hand, because there is in the medical evidence of Dr. Ellis, Dr.
Osti, Dr. Ormandy and Dr. Bracken evidence of a present and continuing disability in those parts of his body, together with the plaintiff's present complaint of disability in those parts, that must be taken into account in assessing his current and future losses as a significant element in the vicissitudes likely to affect him.

As to the shoulder, I am satisfied that he did injure it. I reject the evidence of Dr. Erikson that there is no continuing disability. There are medical opinions before and after his that make it difficult to accept his view. Those medical opinions offer, it is true, little in the way of current objective signs but the plaintiff has been consistent in his complaint. There is x-ray evidence of a pathology present which, in the opinion of some of the doctors, explains such complaints as he makes. Still, one is dependent on his evidence as to the severity of his disablement and I have no doubt that so far as they are physically produced, his symptoms are nowhere near as severe as he maintains.

I accept that, working as a welder or boilermaker, he would be likely to experience some pain and discomfort in his shoulder, but that is not the same, by any means, as the existence of an incapacity. I am not satisfied that he is unable to do the work of a welder. I am satisfied that, doing it, he would be subject to pain and discomfort. He may even lose the occasional day from work if his symptoms are aggravated by particular activities. I do not find, however, that any such loss of work time would be a result of the electrical injury; rather, it seems to me, that any such disability occurring from now on would be rather due to the degenerative state of his shoulder resulting from his many years of hard work.

So too, it appears to me, that should he need an operation in the future, and whether he would is problematical, given the doubt whether there is a physical basis for his symptoms, I am not satisfied that the need for any such operation, should it arise, could be said to be a consequence of his injury rather than of the ordinary progress of a pre-existing degenerative state.

I turn then to the psychological component of his disability. I can deal with this quite briefly. Accepting as truthful his early presentation, I accept the diagnosis of a post traumatic stress disorder. There is evidence not only from the plaintiff but from his wife and the two witnesses named Harris which tends to corroborate his continuing complaints in that regard, and the medical evidence of the existence of such a disorder in the plaintiff is all one way.
That disorder continues to the present time. It may have been prolonged because of his heart attack, which is unrelated to the accident, and/or because of his retrenchment, which is similarly unrelated; but that does not assist the defendant who remains liable for the consequences of the post traumatic stress disorder as long as it continues.

I am satisfied that he is still disabled by it. It has three features: a phobia in respect of underground work; a phobia in respect of the use of electrically powered tools or equipment; and thirdly, anxiety and depression, which is a likely cause of much of his continuing physical complaints.

The disorder is treatable, as to which I rely on the evidence of Dr. Klug. And it was responding well to treatment while such treatment was being made available, as to which I rely upon the evidence of Rosalie Donaldson. I see nothing in the evidence to suggest any treatment would overcome his phobia about underground work. He was already vulnerable to such at the time of the accident. I do not read the evidence of Dr. Klug as suggesting that the treatment which he prescribes could or would overcome that phobia.

My impression in relation to what I might call his electrical phobia is more optimistic. I am impressed, as I said, by the evidence of Miss Donaldson as to the improvement she was achieving. I note that Dr. Klug prescribed a course of treatment which he expected to last about three weeks. It seems to me that I would need to be cautious about finding that so brief a course of treatment would necessarily resolve his problems. The disorder seems to be well entrenched. It is continually reinforced by his continuing physical complaints, however caused, and in turn I believe it reinforces them. It may prove to require a longer or repeated periods of treatment and I think provision should be made on that basis.

I am satisfied that the probability is that the plaintiff, with treatment, will substantially regain his earning capacity. It may take a period of years.
I am not satisfied that he will ever regain the capacity to work underground.
I am persuaded that within the next three years he will be fit to work as a boilermaker/welder. It is necessary to make a fairly arbitrary assessment and, as will be seen when I come to actual figures, I propose to treat him as continuing to be totally disabled until his birthday in October of 1998.

Counsel for the defendant submitted that the plaintiff's failure to undertake the course of treatment proposed by Dr. Klug was a failure on his part to take reasonable steps to mitigate his damages. Section 151L of the Workers'
Compensation Act provides by subsection (1) that in assessing damages the court must consider the steps that have been taken, and that could reasonably have been or be taken by the injured worker to mitigate those damages.
Subsection (3) places the onus on the worker of proving that he had taken all reasonable steps to mitigate damages. The plaintiff was cross-examined about his failure to undergo the treatment. His response was to the effect that he would have had the treatment but that nobody had made an appointment for him to attend the same. This totally passive approach to the doctor's recommendation would in some circumstances clearly justify a finding that the person had not taken all reasonable steps to mitigate damages. However, given the nature of the plaintiff's illness, being a psychiatric condition, the responsibility of the defendant as his employer to provide and pay for treatment, the fact that the employer had done so for a period and then (as I understand to be the evidence of Ms. Donaldson) discontinued treatment in progress, and the fact that the plaintiff had been retrenched, I do not think that it was unreasonable that he adopted that passive role. In terms of s.151L(2), I note that the plaintiff had undergone such medical treatment as had been previously prescribed for him and in particular attended regularly for the counselling programme provided by Ms. Donaldson so long as the company was meeting the expenses, and had "duly co-operated in the procedures under the worker's general rehabilitation programme". The failure of the plaintiff to take any appropriate steps to find other employment after his retrenchment was not specifically relied on as a failure to mitigate; nor could it have in view of the findings I have made as to his capacity for work.

I am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of the case, the plaintiff did take such steps to mitigate damages as were reasonable to be taken by him.

In March 1992 the defendant company responded to economic pressures by restructuring its operations and reducing the number of its employees. I accept the evidence of Mr. Edwards that having determined how many workers were needed in each category, those available were divided, according to their skills, into two groups: those rated with greater skills and those rated with less skills, the former group to be retained, the latter to be retrenched; and that the plaintiff was allocated to the second group.

He was issued with a retrenchment notice but after representations by the plaintiff, and on his behalf by the union, on compassionate grounds, his retrenchment notice was withdrawn. He resumed work a week later.

As I have indicated, according to the practice which I have indicated, he became a leading hand. His continued employment in the mining industry was still vulnerable to the vicissitudes of that industry. Whether or not he had sustained injury, as he did, on 24 June 1992, the probability is that he would have been retrenched, as in fact he was, on or about 19 February 1993, on which date 494 members of the defendant's Broken Hill mining work force were retrenched, including 433 daily paid men.

The selection process was the same. I accept that the plaintiff was placed in the lower skilled group for reasons entirely related to his trades skill and not because he was still involved in rehabilitation. I am satisfied that had he been placed in the upper group so far as skill was concerned, his rehabilitation would have become a most relevant consideration, and he may well have not been retained unless the company was satisfied that he would, within a reasonable time, become fit once more for work; but once he had been classified, as I accept he was, into the lower group in any event, I am satisfied that the considerations of his continuing incapacity and his placement in the rehabilitation programme played no part in the decision to retrench him.

Had he been retrenched uninjured at that time, he would either have left
Broken Hill to seek employment elsewhere or would, as did others, have obtained employment in his trade as a boilermaker or welder with companies engaged in contracting work to the defendant and other mines in Broken Hill and elsewhere. Either way, he would thereafter have exercised his considerable earning capacity as and when work was available until he reached the age of 62 when, at the latest, he would probably have left the work force. The probability is that during the years from February 1993 until he attained the age of 62 on 25 October 2012 he would have had substantial periods of employment interspersed with less substantial periods when he was unable to find work.

In the light of those findings, I turn to the difficult question of assessment of damages. For practical purposes the Workers' Compensation Act requires that
I assess first the damages for non-economic loss, because s.151H precludes the award of damages for economic loss unless the worker has sustained a serious injury, and that is defined as one which attracts an award of damages for non- economic loss exceeding $49,450.

The award of damages for non-economic loss is governed by s.151G of the Act, which provides by subsection (2) and (3) as follows:- "(2) The amount of damages to be awarded for non-economic loss is to be a proportion, determined according to the severity of the non-economic loss, of the maximum amount which may be awarded.

The maximum amount which may be awarded for non-economic loss is $204,000, but the maximum amount may be awarded only in a most extreme case." 
The maximum amount which may be awarded for non-economic loss was an indexed amount. At the relevant date, it stood at $210,100; that being the amount which may be awarded only in a most extreme case. In the present case considerations relevant to the assessment of non-economic loss include the trauma of the terrifying accident underground, the pain and suffering inflicted by the burns themselves, the distressing post traumatic stress disorder, the loss for the period to date and for some time into the future of the satisfaction that a person may derive from working in a skilled trade, particularly one which he has followed for many years.

I need to take into account such physical symptoms as he has had in the right shoulder, and has still, and the need for what may well be a fairly distressing course of treatment for his psychological condition.

Taking all of those matters into account and determining his damages as a proportion of the maximum amount which may be awarded, I am satisfied that the appropriate proportion is more than one quarter but less than one third.

I allow as damages for non-economic loss the sum of $65,000. That figure being determined, the plaintiff is entitled to recover damages in respect of his economic loss. In respect of the period from 26 June 1992 to 19 February 1993, he lost earnings from his ordinary work amounting to $25,025. For work in the
Rehabilitation Centre he was paid $12,682. I will round that to $12,685 and allow for loss of earnings during that period $12,340.

From 19 February 1993 to date, he has lost the chance to work underground but there is no relevant wage differential between underground work and such surface work as may have been available to him either in the mining industry in Broken Hill or elsewhere or in contractors to the mining industry or in other employments. I assess his wage loss for that period, therefore, on the basis of the comparable earning figure agreed between the parties applicable throughout that period, a total of $133,618. The chance that he would in fact have found such work I assess at 80%, and I allow, therefore, in respect of wage loss during that period, $106,895. The total allowance therefore for wage loss to date is $119,235.

During the period from today to 25 October 1998 (which, in a very rough and ready way, I assess as the period when he will continue disabled while he seeks treatment for his psychological condition), I take the comparable wage loss to be $877.61 per week, and using a multiplier of 2.5 derived from the five percent tables, I calculate the present value of the loss, if it could be said that he would have worked full-time, as $107,507.22.

It is necessary to take into account, as an offset to that, not only the difficulties which may be expected to attend upon anybody seeking employment as a boilermaker in a heavy industry, but also, in his case particularly, the extent to which he may be disabled from work or disabled from obtaining employment by reason of the continuing problems of his neck and back of which he has given evidence and by reason of the fact that he has had a heart attack. There is no reason to assume that his work capacity is reduced by the fact that he has had that heart attack but it cannot be gainsaid that such a matter showing on his medical history may make him a less attractive employment proposition. I assess at 70% the chance that he would, but for his injuries, have obtained employment during that period and I allow in respect of loss of earnings during that period $75,255.

In respect of the period from 25 October 1998 until the plaintiff's notional retiring age at the age of 62, a period of 14 years, on the findings I have made, the only continuing disability affecting him during that period will be the psychological disorder, reduced by then to a phobia preventing him from working underground. The probability that he would ever have had work underground during that period is very slight in any event. So far as his other conditions go, they would not, in my opinion, be a source of disability or loss of earning capacity during that period. It is difficult to know in those circumstances what ought to be allowed in respect of the loss of capacity which his underground phobia represents. It seems to me that it is a situation in which nothing other than a very arbitrary assessment can be made, and I allow in respect of a loss of earning capacity during that period the sum of $15,000.

The total therefore for future loss of earning capacity is $90,255.

I have already indicated there is a claim for loss of superannuation. The parties have put some agreed figures before me. I note that that includes a continuing loss agreed at $56.70 per week which is to continue to age 62, but
I have to say that I cannot understand the calculation which has been placed before me, which appears to me to use an inappropriate multiplier for the period of 16.5 years involved. I have accordingly recalculated the loss at $33,148.50, and having regard to the factors which may have affected his capacity in any event to have found employment, I allow him 70% of that sum of $23,205.

The plaintiff will require some further medical treatment. I have already indicated a view that should his shoulder require an operation that would not be a result of the accident; and the same is true, to a large extent, of medication and/or physiotherapy which he may need for physical complaints. To the extent that some such treatment may be reasonably attributed to the injury to his shoulder and to the accident, I allow $10,000 in respect of that; and in respect of the proposed counselling recommended by Dr. Klug or other forms =of treatment that he recommends, noting that he prescribed three weeks treatment at about $300 per day, but noting what I have said earlier about the possibility or probability that rather more would be needed, I allow $10,000.
That is a total of $20,000 for future treatment.

The out-of-pocket expenses are agreed at $28,629.47. It is agreed that the plaintiff is entitled to recover pursuant to the decision in Fox v. Wood a further $17,397.83.

The total amounts therefore to be included in his verdict are: non economic loss - $65,000; past loss of earnings - $119,235; future loss of earnings - $90,255; superannuation - $23,205; future treatment - $20,000; agreed out-of- pockets - $28,629.47; Fox v. Wood - $17,397.83; a total of $363,722.30.

The defence under the Workers' Compensation Act, amounts to $97,776.10, and accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to a verdict of $265,956.20.

In view of the fact that counsel on both sides are involved in the other matter which is listed before me on Friday, I propose to stand this matter over for mention in Sydney on Friday to confirm the above calculations and to deal with any question of interest which may arise.

At this stage I will not enter judgment for the plaintiff but I will stand the matter over to Friday 10 May 1996.
 * * * 
