

Tallglen P/L and Anor versus Pay Tv Holdings P/L and Ors [1997] NSWSC 677 (31
December 1997) 
TALLGLEN PTY LTD & ANOR versus PAY TV HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ORS /96 
Thursday, 17 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
GILES CJ Comm D 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs began these proceedings by a summons filed on 20 September 1996. The return date for the summons was 25 October 1996, possibly so distant from the date of filing because two of the defendants are United States corporations. By a notice of motion filed on 9 October 1996, returnable on 11 October 1996, the fourth defendant applied for an order pursuant to Pt 31 r 2 of the Rules that a particular question, which it framed, be decided separately from and before all other questions in the proceedings. The application was supported or not opposed by all other defendants, but was opposed by the plaintiffs. For the reasons which follow, in my opinion the order should not be made.

The Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement 
The proceedings arise out of a joint venture for the provision of pay television and related services. The joint venture vehicle is Optus Vision Pty
Ltd. For present purposes the central agreement is the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement entered into on or about 19 May 1995, directed to the relationship of the joint venturers in the conduct of the affairs of Optus
Vision Pty Ltd.

The initial shareholders in Optus Vision Pty Ltd were to be, and are,
Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc (46.5 per cent), Optus Communications
Pty Ltd (46.5 per cent), Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd (5 per cent), and Tallglen
Pty Ltd (2 per cent). Each of those corporations, plus Optus Vision Pty Ltd, is a party to the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. Additional parties are
Optus Networks Pty Ltd and Optus Administration Pty Ltd.

Attention can be concentrated on parts of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement, a document of formidable complexity, dealing with changes in shareholdings. The evident intention is to control the issue of new shares or securities convertible into shares, and the transfer of shares and such securities, so that one or more of the joint venturers or entities with which it is associated will not gain a greater interest in the joint venture than the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement allows. The shares or other securities are globally referred to as Equity Securities. A Standstill Period is defined, meaning the period commencing on the date of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement and ending on 31 December 1997, and separate provisions are made for the issue and transfer of Equity Securities during the Standstill Period and after the Standstill Period. It is sufficient to refer only to the provision for the issue and transfer of Equity Securities during the Standstill Period.

As to the issue of Equity Securities, cl 12.12(a) provides that unless the board of Optus Vision Pty Ltd determines to the contrary in accordance with cl (which when followed through other provisions means by majority in number and not less than 90 per cent of all voting rights), no Equity Securities will be issued by Optus Vision Pty Ltd except in accordance with the Initial
Funding Program (sic) or the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. The Initial
Funding Program sets out the amount and timing of aggregate funds to be paid by shareholders to Optus Vision Pty Ltd over the period to May 1997, and other parts of cl 12 deal in some detail with the equity or loan capital contributions required. Apart from the issue of Equity Securities in accordance with the Initial Funding Program, the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement permits the issue of Equity Securities inter alia in the circumstances set out in cll 12.15 and 12.16, to which I shortly refer. As to the transfer of Equity Securities, by cl 18.1 a shareholder must not "Transfer any interest in all or any part of its Equity Securites" to any person except by a Transfer in accordance with one of a number of clauses.
"Transfer" is defined to mean "sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of or grant options or other rights over or in respect of (including but not limited to the establishment of a trust)". The clauses in accordance with which there may be a Transfer include cl 12.16: the other clauses are concerned with situations not arising in these proceedings.

By cl 12.15 Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc and Optus Communications
Pty Ltd may by joint notice in writing to Optus Vision Pty Ltd and the other shareholders "introduce one or more New Shareholders in" Optus Vision Pty
Ltd, subject to specified conditions. By cl 12.16 the introduction of the New
Shareholders will be achieved by the transfer of existing Equity Securities by
Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc or Optus Communications Pty Ltd, by the issue by Optus Vision Pty Ltd of Equity Securities, or by a combination of the two, at the joint election of Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc and
Optus Communications Pty Ltd, again subject to specified conditions. The conditions specified in cl 12.15 are extensive, those specified in cl 12.16 less so. They include, when read with other provisions, that the New
Shareholder must enter into a deed of accession, in effect becoming a party to the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. I do not otherwise set the conditions out because they are not explicitly relied on by the plaintiffs.

These provisions are supplemented by a general prohibition in cl 4.4 - "4.4 Each Shareholder must not: 
Transfer any interest in all or part of its Equity Securities to any person except in accordance with this Agreement; ...
 in any way attempt to make any Third Party a party to this Agreement or a participant in the Vision Business except in accordance with this
Agreement." "Third Party" is defined to mean a person that is not a party; "Vision
Business" is defined to mean the business of Optus Vision Pty Ltd contemplated by the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement and other agreements relevant to the joint venture, being the agreements to which I shortly refer as associated agreements. The reference to making a Third Party a party to the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement brings in the requirement and effect of the deed of accession into which a New Shareholder must enter.

By cl 23.1, a shareholder is in Default if inter alia it commits a breach, or attempts to commit a breach, of cl 4.4. If a shareholder is in Default then any other shareholder may within twenty business days give it a Default Notice specifying the Default, with copies served on each other shareholder (cl .2). That triggers a procedure by which the shareholders not in Default may acquire the Equity Securities of the shareholder in Default (cll 23.3-23.6).
By cl 23.8, all rights attaching to the Equity Securities of a shareholder in
Default, its rights of access to information under the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement, and "all rights of Directors appointed by the
Defaulting Shareholder and the alternates of those directors (including but not limited to rights of information, voting rights and the right to attend meetings)", are suspended from the date of giving the Default Notice until the acquisition of the Equity Securities is completed or the procedure has lapsed.

Clauses 26 and 27 provide for what are respectively described as the "Seven
Option" and the "Nine Option". By the Seven Option, Optus Vision Pty Ltd granted to Tallglen Pty Ltd an option to subscribe for Equity Securities taking its holding of Equity Securities to 15 per cent of the issued Equity
Securities, in a manner, on terms, and subject to qualifications and conditions which need not be set out. By the Nine Option a like option was granted to Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd for a holding of 20 per cent.

Associated agreements 
According to the summons the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement was part of a package, other components of which included agreements described as the Optus
Vision Joint Venture Seven Supply Agreement, the Sports Programming Licensing
Agreement, the Programming Distribution Joint Venture Agreement and the
MovieCo Side Agreement. It is alleged that the completion and continuing operation of each of these agreements is dependent upon the completion and continuing operation of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement in accordance with its terms. Additional parties to the associated agreements are
Sportsvision Australia Pty Ltd as a party to the Sports Programming Licensing
Agreement and ESPN, Inc as party to the Programming Distribution Joint Venture
Agreement. For present purposes it is unnecessary to go further into the associated agreements: they explain the inclusion of Sportsvision Australia
Pty Ltd and ESPN, Inc as defendants in the proceedings.

Also according to the summons, the obligations of Tallglen Pty Ltd under the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, the Sports Programming Licensing
Agreement, the Programming Distribution Joint Venture Agreement and the
MovieCo Side Agreement are guaranteed by Seven Network Ltd. The guarantees explain the inclusion of Seven Network Ltd as a plaintiff in the proceedings.

The PBL agreement 
Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc and Optus Communications Pty Ltd entered into an agreement dated 20 August 1996 with Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd. When the agreement was tendered an order was made that it be kept confidential to the parties and their lawyers, and in conformity with that confidentiality I give no more detail of the agreement and its contents than was disclosed in correspondence in evidence without an order for confidentiality or in open court in the course of submissions.

The PBL agreement (as I will call it) is concerned with the introduction of a subsidiary of Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd as a New Shareholder pursuant to cll 12.15 and 12.16 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. Its structure is the grant of an option for a specified period, upon the exercise of which
Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc and Optus Communications Pty Ltd will cause the transfer or issue to the subsidiary of equity in Optus Vision Pty
Ltd. Without specific evidence, it appears that Publishing and Broadcasting
Ltd is a holding company of or related company to Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd, so that in practical terms the transfer or issue to a subsidiary of Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd of equity in Optus Vision Pty Ltd would, assuming the other interests remained unchanged, increase what might be called the Channel interest in the joint venture at the expense of inter alia what might be called the Channel 7 interest held by Tallglen Pty Ltd (which appears to be a subsidiary of or related to Seven Network Ltd). Given the general intention in the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement earlier mentioned, the commercial occasion for these proceedings is at least in part understandable.

From correspondence in evidence, it appears that Mr Philip Saggers, a director of Optus Vision Pty Ltd representing the interests of Tallglen Pty Ltd, became aware of an arrangement between Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc,
Optus Communications Pty Ltd and Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd in the course of a meeting on other matters in the joint venture on 17 August 1996.
Solicitors exchanged letters disputing whether it was then agreed that documents relating to such an arrangement would be made available and whether, apart from an agreement, they should be or would be made available. In a letter dated 20 August 1996 the solicitors for Tallglen Pty Ltd asserted that the arrangement as then apprehended would be in breach of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement.

To that time the opposing solicitors had resisted giving any information about the arrangement. A letter dated 22 August 1996 from the Group General Counsel of Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd to the solicitors for Tallglen Pty Ltd, written on behalf of Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd and Pay TV Holdings Pty
Ltd, included - "In fact, Publishing and Broadcasting Limited (`PBL') has entered into binding agreements with Optus and CCI (`the Relevant Agreements') by which, amongst other things: each of Optus and CCI have granted to PBL a right, exerciseable in certain circumstances, and in the period from the expiry of the Option Period in respect of the Options of both [Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd] and [Tallglen Pty
Ltd] under the Optus Shareholders Agreement until 1 December 1996, to serve notice on each of Optus and CCI; and on receipt of such notice Optus and CCI are obliged to transfer or cause to be issued to a subsidiary of PBL, other than [Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd], a certain amount of shares in Optus Vision; and the amount of shares to be transfered is dependent, amongst other things, on whether or not [Tallglen Pty Ltd] has exercised its Option (as defined in the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement).
 
I note that the transfer or issue of shares referred to in (b) above is permitted by clause 12.15 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. Optus and CCI are obliged , on receipt of relevant notice from PBL, to effect the transfer or issue pursuant to and in accordance with clauses 12.15 and 12.16.
 
The Relevant Agreements, far from being inconsistent with the rights of [Tallglen Pty Ltd] under the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement (or any other agreement), expressly require Optus and CCI to act in accordance with their rights and obligations under the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement." 
A letter dated 22 August 1996 from the solicitors for Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc to the solicitors for Tallglen Pty Ltd stated - "1. Our client, together with Optus Communications Pty Limited (`Optus') has entered into documentation with Publishing and Brodcasting Limited (`PBL') which provides for, amongst other things: 
PBL being granted a right by each of Optus and our client, which is exercisable in certain circumstances, to serve a notice on our client and
Optus in the period commencing from the expiry of the Option Period in respect of the Options granted to each of Pay TV Holdings Pty Limited and Tallglen Pty
Limited under the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, and ending 1 December ; and upon receipt of such a notice each of Optus and our client are obliged to cause to be transferred or to be issued to a subsidiary of PBL, but not Pay
TV Holdings Pty Limited, certain shares in Optus Vision the number of which is dependent upon various contingencies, including whether or not Tallglen Pty
Limited has exercised the Option which it holds under the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement.
Clauses 12.15 and 12.16 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement expressly permit Optus and our client, in their discretion, to cause the transfer of shares, or issue of shares, to a party other than one of the existing shareholders.
Accordingly, the agreement between our client and Optus, on the one hand and PBL on the other hand, does not require our client or Optus to act in a manner contrary to the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement and for our client's part it does not intend to do so." 
A letter dated 22 August 1996 from the solicitors for Optus Communications
Pty Ltd, Optus Networks Pty Ltd and Optus Administration Pty Ltd to the solicitors for Tallglen Pty Ltd stated - "Notwithstanding this, Optus has instructed us to inform you that: * In consideration of PBL agreeing to exercise rights that it had under the agreements with Australis in favour of Optus Vision Pty Limited (`Vision'), our client and CCI agreed to grant rights to PBL (or its nominee subsidiary) in relation to Vision.
 * Those rights are subject to and consistent with the `options' granted to both Tallglen Pty Limited and Pay TV Holdings Pty Limited under the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement (`OV Shareholders Agreement').
 * Neither the grant of those rights or their exercise in accordance with their terms did or will result in a breach of the OV Shareholders Agreement.
 * In relation to the transactions recorded in that documentation: - no variation has been purported to have been made or is proposed to the
OV Shareholders Agreement, - no rights have been conferred on Pay TV Holdings Pty Limited, and - your clients' rights under the OV Shareholders Agreement have not been varied." 
On 13 September 1996 Tallglen Pty Ltd gave to Continental Cablevision of
Australia Inc, Optus Communications Pty Ltd and Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd
Default Notices pursuant to cl 23.2 of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement.

In relation to Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc the Default Notice asserted that that corporation had committed a breach or attempted to commit a breach of cll 4.4(a) and (c) of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, in that (as to cl 4.4(a)) it had Transferred to Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd or a subsidiary of Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd an interest in all or part of its Equity Securities by way of grant of an option or other rights over or in respect of its shares in Optus Vision Pty Ltd otherwise than in accordance with the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement and (as to cl 4.4(c)) it had made or attempted to make Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd or a subsidiary of
Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd a party to the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement or a participant in the Optus Vision Business otherwise than in accordance with the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. In relation to Optus
Communications Pty Ltd the same Default was alleged.

In relation to to Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd the Default Notice asserted that it had committed a breach or attempted to commit a breach of cl 4.4(c) of the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, in that it had made or attempted to make
Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd or a subsidiary of Publishing and Broadcasting
Ltd a party to the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement or a participant in the
Optus Vision Business otherwise than in accordance with the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement: it was added - "PBL [sic] has committed this breach or attempted to commit this breach by not exercising or purporting not to exercise its option under clause 27 of the
Agreement, in connection with a scheme, arrangement or understanding between, inter alia, Optus, Continental, PBL and Pay TV Holdings, whereby a subsidiary of PBL is to acquire shares in Optus Vision pursuant to the Relevant
Agreements referred to above otherwise than in accordance with the
Agreement." 
It seems that the reference to PBL should be to Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd.
"Relevant Agreements" was the draftsman's phrase for the agreement or agreements of which the letters of 22 August 1996 had spoken.

The proceedings 
So matters stood when the summons was filed on 20 September 1996. The plaintiffs are Tallglen Pty Ltd and Seven Network Ltd. The defendants are the other joint venturers, Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc, Optus
Communications Pty Ltd and Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd; the joint venture vehicle,
Optus Vision Pty Ltd; the additional parties to the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement, Optus Networks Pty Ltd and Optus Administration Pty Ltd; and the additional parties to the associated agreements, Sportsvision Australia Pty
Ltd and ESPN, Inc.

The plaintiffs' contentions in the summons first describe the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement, the associated agreements and the guarantees, and set out the initial shareholdings in Optus Vision Pty Ltd. Clauses 4.4(a), .12(a), 18.1, 12. 15 and 12.16 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement are referred to.

The first group of contentions is based on contract.

In para 12 of the contentions it is alleged - "On the proper construction of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, neither Pay TV Holdings nor any corporation which or person who is a Related
Corporation or Related Party thereto within the meaning of the said agreement is or may be treated as a new shareholder for the purposes of clause 12.15 and clause 12.16 of the said agreement." 
No particulars of this are given, and no express term of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement was identified in submissions as having this result.

In para 13 a similar allegation is made, not on the proper construction of the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement but as an implied term thereof. In this paragraph there is specific reference to Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd as an impermissible new shareholder. Particulars of the implication are set out in great detail in a schedule to the summons, in which there are canvassed inter alia many months of negotiations for the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement.

Allegations are then made that the restriction on new shareholders as affecting Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd, Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd and the related corporations or parties was fundamental to the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement, the associated agreements and the guarantees, and that each of Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd and its subsidiaries is a Related
Corporation or Related Party within the meaning of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement. After paragraphs adverting to the Seven Option and
Nine Option, the contentions then continue - "18. In or about August 1996 each of Continental and Optus Communications purported to enter into an agreement or agreements (`the Relevant
Agreements") with PBL to the effect, inter alia, that: each of Continental and Optus Communications granted to PBL a right, exercisable in certain circumstances, and in the period from the expiry of the option period in respect of both the Tallglen and the Pay TV Holdings Options until 1 December 1997, to serve notice on each of Continental and Optus
Communications on receipt of such notices, each of Continental and Optus Communications are obliged to transfer or to cause Optus Vision to issue, pursuant to and in accordance with clauses 12.15 and 12.16 of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement, to a subsidiary of PBL, other than Pay TV Holdings, a certain number of shares in Optus Vision and the number of shares to be transferred is dependent, amongst other things, on whether or not Tallglen has exercised the Tallglen Option.

Particulars 
The Plaintiffs are not able to give particulars of the Relevant
Agreement prior to discovery and inspection thereof save for the matters pleaded, which derive from a letter from PBL to the solicitors for the
Plaintiffs dated 22 August 22 August 1996.
In the premises: 
Continental and Optus Communications are and each of them is not entitled, pursuant to clause 12.15 or clause 12.16 of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement, to transfer or cause to be issued or allotted or to agree to transfer or cause to be issued or alloted Equity Securities in Optus
Vision to: any subsidiary of PBL any corporation which or person who is a Related Corporation or Related
Party to Pay TV Holdings or PBL within the meaning of the said agreement pursuant to the Relevant Agreements or otherwise; 
Optus Vision is not entitled to issue or allot, pursuant to clause 12.15 or clause 12.16 of the Optus Vision Agreement, Equity Securities in Optus
Vision to: any subsidiary of PBL any corporation which or person who is a Related Corporation or Related
Party to Pay TV Holdings or PBL within the meaning of the said agreement.
In the premises, the purported entry into the Relevant Agreements by
Continental and Optus Communications constituted a breach or alternatively an anticipated breach of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement.
In the premises: 
Tallglen is entitled to rescind the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement and the Related Agreements; 
Seven is entitled to terminate the Guarantees with effect as and from the time of the purported entry into the Relevant Agreements.
In the event and to the extent that effect is given to the Relevant
Agreements, then Tallglen will suffer loss and damage.

Particulars 
Tallglen will have lost the opportunity to exercise its rights, pursuant to clause 8.1A of the Programming Distribution Joint Venture Agreement dated May 1995, to buy from Pay TV Holdings 37.5% of Pay TV Holdings' Equity
Securities in Sportsvision; 
Optus Vision will have lost the opportunity, which arises consequent upon the exercise by Tallglen of the right referred to in paragraph (a) above, to purchase the remaining 62.5% of Pay TV Holdings' Equity Securities in
Sportsvision be reason of which Tallglen, as a shareholder in Optus Vision will have lost the opportunity of obtaining the benefit of Optus Visions's increased shareholding in Sportsvision; and 
Optus Vision will have lost the opportunity, which arises in the event
Tallglen has, but does not choose to exercise, the right referred to in paragraph (a) above, to purchase 100% of Pay TV Holdings' Equity Securities in
Sportsvision, by reason of which Tallglen, as a shareholder in Optus Vision will have lost the opportunity of obtaining the benefit of Optus Vision's increased shareholding in Sportsvision.

Further particulars will be provided after discovery and inspection are completed." 
The second group of contentions is based on estoppel. In para 23 of the contentions it is alleged that at all material times Tallglen Pty Ltd, Seven
Network Ltd, Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd, Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd,
Continental Communications of Australia Inc, Optus Communications Pty Ltd and
Optus Vision Pty Ltd conducted themselves in or in connection with the relevant parties entering into the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement on the agreed or assumed basis that neither Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd nor Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd nor any related corporation or party is or may be treated as a New Shareholder for the purposes of cl 12.15 and cl 12.16 of the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement. Particulars are given by reference to the schedule earlier mentioned. It is then alleged that each of Continental
Communications of Australia Inc, Optus Communications Pty Ltd, Optus Vision
Pty Ltd and Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd is estopped from asserting that it is entitled pursuant to cl 12.15 or cl 12.16 of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement to transfer, cause or permit the issue of, or issue (as the case may be) Equity Securities or any interest in Equity Securities in Optus Vision Pty
Ltd to any subsidiary of Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd or to any related corporation or party vis-a-vis Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd or Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd.

The third group of contentions takes up the provisions of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement relating to Default. After reference to cl 23 of the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, it is alleged that each of Continental
Communications of Australia Inc, Optus Communications Pty Ltd and Pay TV
Holdings Pty Ltd is in Default in that each has committed, or attempted to commit, a breach of cl 4.4 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. The
Defaults are said to be constituted by the entry into the Relevant Agreements as alleged in para 18 earlier set out, plus, in relation to Pay TV Holdings
Pty Ltd (and this returns to the Nine Option, in the summons called the Pay TV
Holdings Option) - "... by reason that, in connection with those matters, Pay TV Holdings has decided that it will not exercise the Pay TV Holdings Option ...." 
Particulars are given reflecting the Default Notice of 13 September 1996 - "Each of Continental and Optus Communications has transferred to PBL or a subsidiary of PBL an interest in all or part of their Equity Securities in
Optus Vision other than in accordance with the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement and has made or has attempted to make PBL or a subsidiary of PBL a party to that agreement or a participant in the Optus Vision Business, other than in accordance with that agreement.
 
Pay TV Holdings has made or has attempted to make PBL or a subsidiary of PBL a party to that agreement or a participant in the Optus Vision Business, other than in accordance with the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement." 
There is then reference to service of the Default Notices, and it is alleged that the Default Notices constitute valid notices to each of Continental
Communications of Australia Inc, Optus Communications Pty Ltd and Pay TV
Holdings Pty Ltd under cl 23.2 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement.

Relief is claimed by way of - declarations that on the proper construction of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement (apparently encompassing the alleged implied term)
Continental Communications Of Australia Inc and Optus Communications Pty Ltd are not entitled pursuant to cl 12.15 or cl 12.16 to transfer or to cause or permit Optus Vision Pty Ltd to issue Equity Securities or any interest in
Equity Securities in Optus Vision Pty Ltd to any subsidiary of Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd or any related corporation or party vis-a-vis Pay TV Holdings
Pty Ltd or Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, that Optus Vision Pty Ltd is not entitled to issue such Equity Securities or any interest therein pursuant to cl 12.15 or 12.16, and orders restraining each of these corporations accordingly; declarations to the same effect based on estoppel, plus a declaration that
Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd is estopped from asserting any right to cause
Continental Communications of Australia Inc and/or Optus Communications Pty
Ltd to transfer or cause or permit Optus Vision Pty Ltd to issue any Equity
Securities pursuant to cl 12.15 or 12.16 of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement; a declaration that Tallglen Pty Ltd is entitled to rescind the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement and the associated agreements; a declaration that Seven Network Ltd is entitled to terminate its guarantees; a declaration that by reason of the Default of each of Continental
Communications of Australia Inc, Optus Communications Pty Ltd and Pay TV
Holdings Pty Ltd, the Default Notices served by Tallglen Pty Ltd constituted valid notice to each of them under cl 23.2 of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement; damages; and costs.

No restraining orders are claimed in connection with the declarations based on estoppel, nor is any relief sought in relation to the consequences of service of the Default Notices. There might be some tension between claimed entitlements to rescind and enforcing the future operation of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement. Nothing was said of this in submissions, or otherwise as to the nature of the relief claimed.

The separate question 
The application is made in the following circumstances. First, no later than September 1996 Tallglen Pty Ltd took the position that all rights of the other parties to the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement "in respect of their
Equity Securities are suspended, including rights of access to information, voting rights and rights to attend meetings": these words are taken from its solicitors' letter to the other parties dated 19 September 1996. Secondly, following service of the Default Notices Tallglen Pty Ltd wrote by a letter dated 4 October 1996 to the other parties to the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement invoking the procedure for acquiring their Equity Securities.
Thirdly, Optus Vision Pty Ltd was to begin marketing a high yield bond issue in the United States bond market in the week commencing 14 October 1996, an issue for several hundred million dollars of major significance to that company's capital requirements. The advisers to the issue have recommended that the marketing be deferred until "the shareholder litigation between the
Seven Network and the other shareholders of Optus Vision" has been resolved.
Fourthly, preparations have been made to publicly list Optus Communications
Pty Ltd on the Australian Stock Exchange, amongst other reasons in order to raise capital in the order of $480,000,000 for the development of its business. It had been intended to proceed with the listing prior to the end of , for which purpose a prospectus must be lodged with the Australian Stock
Exchange by the end of October 1996 at the latest. The prospectus must include information the disclosure of which requires the consent of Optus Vision Pty
Ltd, and notices were issued on 3 October 1996 for a general meeting of Optus
Vision Pty Ltd to authorise the disclosure. If it be correct that the shareholding rights of the joint venturers other than Tallglen Pty Ltd can not now be exercised, there may be significant consequences for the listing. It can readily be accepted that until the plaintiffs' claims in these proceedings have been resolved, the other joint venturers and the joint venture itself face significant difficulties.

Optus Communications Pty Ltd proposed the following separate question - "Whether by entering into the agreement dated 20 August 1996 between
Publishing and Broadcasting Limited (`PBL'), Optus Communications Pty Limited (`Optus Communications') and Continental Cablevision of Australia [sic] (`Continental Cablevision') in the circumstances recited in Recital D to that agreement, any of Pay TV Holdings Pty Limited, (`Pay TV'), Continental
Cablevision or Optus Communications: transferred to any person any interest in all or part of its Equity
Securities; or in any way attempted to make PBL or a subsidiary of that Company other than Pay TV a party to that Agreement or a participant in the Vision Business within the meaning of either of clauses 4.4(a) or 4.4(c) of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement dated 19 May 1996." 
Although the only applicant is Optus Communications Pty Ltd, Continental
Cablevision of Australia Inc, Optus Networks Pty Ltd and Optus Administration
Pty Ltd appeared by the same solicitors and counsel and supported the application. Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd, Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, Optus
Vision Pty Ltd and Sportsvision Australia Pty Ltd also supported the application. ESPN, Inc was neutral.

The objective of Optus Communications Pty Ltd and those which support it is to have resolved at an early time whether the arrangement between Continental
Cablevision of Australia Inc, Optus Communications Pty Ltd and Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd gave rise to Default for the purposes of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement. If that be determined in the negative, it is said, any suspension of shareholders rights will go, the impediment to the listing of
Optus Communications Pty Ltd will be removed, the bond issue in the United
States can continue, and there will be no question of Tallglen Pty Ltd acquiring the interests of the other joint venturers by the procedure in the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. It was acknowledged, however, that the arrangement between Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc, Optus
Communications Pty Ltd and Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd would be likely to trouble the joint venturers in the future. The essence of Optus Communications
Pty Ltd's case on the separate question was that the arrangement did no more than confer an option, and that an option was not a Transfer within the meaning of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement and did not make the grantee of the option a party to the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement or a participant in the Vision Business. If the option were exercised, the position could well be otherwise: but, said Optus Communications Pty Ltd, that would be a question for another day.

Should the order be made? 
Part 31 r 2 of the Rules empowers the Court to make orders for the decision of any question separately from any other question, whether before, at or after any trial or further trial in the proceedings, and for the statement of a case and the question for decision. In the ordinary course all issues in proceedings should be decided at the one time, but separate decision of a question may be appropriate where, for example, the decision of the question is critical to the outcome of the proceedings and (at least if decided in one way) will bring the proceedings to an end. In particular circumstances the separate decision of a question may be appropriate even if it will not bring the proceedings to an end, such as where there is a strong prospect that the parties will agree upon the result when the core of their dispute is decided or where the decision will obviate unnecessary and expensive hearing of other questions, but such occasions must be carefully controlled lest fragmentation of the proceedings (particularly when the exercise of rights of appeal is borne in mind) brings delay, expense and hardship greater than that which the making of an order was intended to avoid. It is often the case that the need to make findings of fact for a decision of the separate question, especially findings which may involve issues of credit, tells strongly against the making of an order because related facts, and renewed issues of credit, will or may arise at a later stage in the proceedings. Experience teaches that it should be able to be seen with clarity that decision of a separate question will be beneficial in the conduct of the proceedings and the resolution of the parties' dispute.

I do not think that any more detailed examination of the principles upon which an order for separate decision of a question should be made is necessary, and indeed no submissions were made as to those principles. I have come to the clear view that the order sought by Optus Communications Pty Ltd should not be made.

First, the question proposed rests upon the effect of entry into what I have called the PBL agreement, the agreement of 20 August 1996. Paragraph 18 of the plaintiffs' contentions, in which they allege as the Relevant Agreements an arrangement between Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc, Optus
Communications Pty Ltd and Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, does not take up the PBL agreement. The wording of para 18 is understandable, since at the time the plaintiffs did not have the PBL agreement or know that the particular document existed, and it might be thought that production of the particular document would enable the parties to concentrate on its effect. However, the plaintiffs submitted that they could not be confident that the PBL agreement embodied the whole of the Relevant Agreements alleged, and said that they were entitled, and intended, to explore the arrangement of which they were told in the letter from Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd of 22 August 1996. I do not think that their suspicion of the PBL agreement can be thrust aside. The plaintiffs' first knowledge of the arrangement came on 17 August 1996, prior to the date of the PBL agreement, and while it may well be that the document was brought into existence as the definitive record of that which was under negotiation as at 17 August 1996 it is possible that there is more. The possibility is given some credence by the letter from Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd of 22 August 1996, written after the date of the PBL agreement, which attributes the arrangement taken up in para 18 of the contentions to "binding agreements" in the plural, and perhaps by the letters from the solicitors for Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc and the Optus companies of 22 August 1996 which refer to "documentation" and not, as might be expected, to one agreement. There was no evidence that the agreement of 20 August 1996 was the sole repository of the arrangement. It follows that a decision of the question proposed by Optus Communications Pty
Ltd would not resolve whether or not there was Default or lead to any other result in the proceedings. At the least, the separate decision would have to include determination of whether the Relevant Agreements went beyond the PBL agreement. There would be much more than a point or points of law, preparation and hearing time commensurate with resolving questions of fact would be required, and given the exploration of facts likely to be involved in the issues of implied term and estoppel there would in all probability be the difficulty in relation to findings of fact and credit earlier mentioned: certainly I am not satisfied that there would not.

Secondly, the question proposed addresses breach of cl 4.4(a) and cl 4.4(c) of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. The plaintiffs allege that as a matter of construction (para 12 of the contentions) or by reason of an implied term (para 13 of the contentions) neither Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd nor
Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd nor any related corporation or party "is or may be treated as a new shareholder for the purposes of clause 12.15 and clause 12.16" of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. If the construction be correct or there be such an implied term, then even if the Relevant
Agreements are to be found entirely in the PBL agreement the primary question will be whether the effect of the PBL agreement is that Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd or its subsidiary, if a related corporation or related party, is treated as a new shareholder for the purposes of the relevant clauses. An answer to the question proposed by Optus Communications Pty Ltd will not resolve that primary question, and so the central dispute will remain. It can not be resolved as a matter of construction because it must also be found whether there is the implied term. Illicit treatment of Pay TV Holdings Pty
Ltd, Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd or a related corporation or party may be simply ineffective, it may be a breach of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement although not caught by cl 4.4, or it may found breach of cl 4.4 because such treatment is, because illicit, not in accordance with the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement: there is certainly an arguable case for the last-mentioned view. Even if it would not constituted Default within the meaning of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, the plaintiffs' case includes that Tallglen Pty Ltd is entitled to rescind the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement and the associated agreements, and that Seven Network
Ltd is entitled to terminate the guarantees, because the treatment was breach of a fundamental term of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement compliance with which was also fundamental to the associated agreements and the guarantees. There may be difficulties in that case, but it can not be ignored.
Thus neither the issue of breach of cl 4.4 leading to Default nor the challenge to the continuation of the joint venture will be determined by the proposed question, a decision favourable to Optus Communications Pty Ltd and the other parties in the same interest on the proposed question will not, or not necessarily, resolve whether there has been Default, and even a resolution favourable to those parties on whether there has been Default is unlikely to fully, or even materially, solve their difficulties in relation to the listing and the bond issue. There would certainly remain major questions to be litigated in the proceedings, with no or no significant utility in the separate decision of the question proposed by Optus Communications Pty Ltd.

Thirdly, as an alternative the plaintiffs seek relief on the basis of an estoppel which, if established, would again throw up whether the Related
Agreements would amount to Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd or Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd or any related corporation or party being treated as a new shareholder for the purposes of cll 12.15 and 12.16 of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement. The same considerations as those in the previous paragraph arise. Further, the estoppel is alleged against Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd as well as against Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc,
Optus Communications Pty Ltd and Optus Vision Pty Ltd, and the relief claimed includes a declaration which, if made, would arguably preclude exercise of the option in the PBL agreement quite apart from its effect on anything similar in any other agreements comprising the Relevant Agreements. There is thus raised as an issue in the proceedings whether the exercise of the option in the PBL agreement or an option of a similar kind would give rise to contravention of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. An answer to the question proposed by
Optus Communications Pty Ltd would not resolve that issue, which is not a question for another day but a question for these proceedings. Even if it were a question for another day, but particularly when it is a question for these proceedings, dispute over the identity of and extent of interests of permitted joint venturers is likely to be material, and to remain an impediment, to the listing and the bond issue. For this added reason the utility of decision of the separate question is compromised.

Fourthly, the question proposed does not go beyond the effect of entry into the PBL agreement. The plaintiffs' case in relation to Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd differs from their case in relation to Continental Cablevision of Australia
Inc and Optus Communications Pty Ltd. The case against Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd includes Default by breach of cl 4.4 of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement constituted by its decision not to exercise the Nine Option/Pay TV
Holdings Option. Assuming for present purposes that the Relevant Agreements are wholly found within the PBL agreement, the breach by Pay TV Holdings Pty
Ltd is said to be its decision "in connection with" entry into that agreement - not entry into the agreement, to which it is not a party. Thus an answer to the question proposed by Optus Communications Pty Ltd will not resolve whether there was the breach alleged against Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd.
Whether there was Default on its part will remain to be decided. If its shareholders rights are suspended, they will remain suspended; if the procedure for acquisition of its Equity Securities has been properly invoked, the procedure will continue; and a five per cent interest in the joint venture will remain in dispute and material to the listing and the bond issue. The utility of decision of the separate question, leaving this unresolved, is further compromised.

In all the circumstances, I am not persuaded that I should make the order for separate decision sought by Optus Communications Pty Ltd: I am satisfied that
I should not. I am, of course, conscious of the practical impetus to the making of the application. One can not be unmindful of the commercial pressures arising between the joint venturers, but the order sought by Optus
Communications Pty Ltd is not the solution, even partial solution, to the difficulties I have described.

Orders 
I order that the fourth defendant's notice of motion filed on 9 October 1996 be dismissed. I reserve the costs of the application. The proceedings will remain listed on the original return date of 25 October 1996.

TALLGLEN PTY LTD & ANOR -v- PAY TV HOLDINGS PTY LTD & 8 ORS /96 
Monday, 3 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS ON THE CLAIM OF CLIENT LEGAL PRIVILEGE OF CONFIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS THE SUBJECT OF NOTICE TO PRODUCE 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs have given notice of an application for leave to further amend their summons and in support of that application rely upon the affidavit of Rebecca Anne Davies sworn 27 February 1997 (the Davies affidavit). This has drawn from the third defendant a notice to produce documents described by reference to pars 3, 12, 30, 32, 33 and 35 of the Davies affidavit in addition to documents of a wider description, namely, "Any advice received by Mr Hughes QC by Freehills and/or Seven and/or Tallglen in these proceedings.
 (Par 3(i)) 
All documents whether by way of correspondence, letter, file note, memoranda, diary note, advices, including all legal advice evidencing, recording, relating to and/or constituting the following: 
Any advice provided by Counsel briefed by Freehills in these proceedings to Tallglen and/or Seven in respect of the conduct of Optus Vision and/or the
Shareholder Defendants towards Tallglen and/or Seven; 
Any advice provided by Freehills whether in these proceedings or otherwise to Tallglen and/or Seven in respect of the conduct of Optus Vision and/or the
Shareholder Defendants towards Tallglen and/or Seven from the period 19 May to date.
 (Par 4)" 
Set out below are the relevant paragraphs of the Davies affidavit followed in each case by the description of the documents the subject of the notice to produce given by reference to that paragraph.

Par 3 of the Davies affidavit: "(Phillip Saggers a director of the first plaintiff) instructed my firm to make further inquiries about the matters raised at the meeting of 17 August (of directors of the fifth defendant), and in particular, to seek copies of the documents relating to agreements ("PBL Agreement") between Optus
Communications ("Optus"), Continental CableVision Inc ("CCI") and Publishing & Broadcasting Limited ("PBL") both in relation to shares in Optus Vision and in relation to Australis or companies associated with Australis. Annexed hereto and marked "A" is a copy of a letter written to the shareholder defendants dated 19 August 1996." 
Par 1 of the notice to produce: "All documents including file notes, letters, diary notes, correspondence and memoranda relating to the instructions received by Mr Phillip Saggers referred to in paragraph 3 of the Affidavit of Rebecca Anne Davies dated 27 February ("the Davies affidavit")." 
Par 12 of the Davies affidavit: "At this stage, we did not have details of the agreements other than as set out with most particularity in Mr McLachlan's letter of 23 August 1996, a copy of which is annexed in annexure "J" to this affidavit. On the basis of that information, instructions I had received as to the course of negotiations between the parties which led to the signing of the Optus Vision shareholders' agreement on 19 May 1995 (OVSA), and advice of Counsel, proceedings were commenced on 20 September 1996 to seek relief in relation to the arrangements as we then understood them, including seeking orders to restrain the implementation of the agreements that had been reached, on the basis that the agreements constituted breaches of the OVSA." 
Par 2 of the notice to produce: "All documents evidencing, recording and/or constituting the instructions received as to the course of negotiations between the parties which led to the signing of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement on 19 May 1995 referred to in paragraph 12 of the Davies Affidavit and all documents evidencing, recording and/or constituting the advice of counsel referred to in paragraph of the Davies Affidavit." 
Par 30 of the Davies affidavit: "Not long after I was first instructed, I was conscious of and regularly gave consideration to the issues which arose on the plaintiffs' instructions in respect of various complaints about the conduct of Optus Vision and the shareholder defendants towards the plaintiffs. I gave consideration to the possibility of obtaining relief in relation to that conduct, based on allegations of oppression of a minority shareholders, breach of fiduciary duty, or of conspiracy. From time to time the possibility of the Second PBL
Agreement being pleaded to in order to particularise a case of that kind was considered by myself and my firm. However, whenever such a possibility was raised with the various counsel who were from time to time briefed in the proceedings, counsel consistently advised that the case as pleaded was a narrowly-based case and that it should be pursued to its conclusion before any other allegations were pursued in separate later proceedings. At no time before 23 February 1997 did I or my firm advert to the possibility that such later proceedings might be struck out on the basis of the principle in the
Anshun case, nor had any counsel briefed for the plaintiffs advised in relation to this question." 
Par 3 of the notice to produce: "All documents whether by way of correspondence, letter, file note, memoranda, diary note, advices, including all legal advice evidencing, recording, relating to and/or constituting the following: 
Consideration by Freehill Hollingdale & Page ("Freehills") in respect to the conduct of Optus Vision Pty Limited ("Optus Vision") and/or the conduct of Optus Communications Pty Limited ("Optus") and/or
Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc ("CCI") and/or Pay TV Holdings
Pty Limited ("Pay TV") towards Tallglen Pty Limited ("Tallglen") and/or Seven Network Limited ("Seven") (CCI, Optus and Pay TV collectively known as "the Shareholder Defendants") referred to in paragraph 30 of the
Davies Affidavit; 
Any advice provided by Freehills to Tallglen and/or Seven or any representative of Tallglen and/or Seven in respect of the conduct of Optus
Vision and/or the Shareholder Defendants referred to in paragraph 30 of the
Davies affidavit; 
The consideration given by Freehills to the possibility of obtaining relief in respect of the conduct of the Shareholder Defendants referred to in paragraph 30 of the Davies Affidavit; 
Any advice from counsel to Freehills and/or Tallglen and/or Seven referred to in paragraph 30 of the Davies Affidavit;" 
Par 32 of the Davies affidavit: "On 21 February 1997, Mr Gyles QC was occupied in relation to another matter until lunchtime. I conferred with him in the afternoon, and at that conference he advised that he (was) now considering the evidence in respect of the conduct of Optus Vision towards the plaintiff, which had hitherto been thought of as discrete and part of further later proceedings, now appeared to him to be directly relevant to the present proceedings." 
Par 3(e) of the notice to produce: "The advice of Mr Gyles QC referred to in paragraph 32 of the Davies
Affidavit;" 
Par 33 of the Davies affidavit: "On Sunday 23 February 1997, I conferred with Mr Gyles QC and Mr Finch about the plaintiffs' case in general, and the matters raised in the file note of Dr
Switkowski and Mr Simpson's statement. Mr Gyles advised that this matter, together with the other confidential matters referred to in this affidavit, might constitute further bases for an attack by the plaintiffs on the second
PBL agreement. Mr Gyles also raised for the first time, problems arising from the principles in Anshun's case." 
Par 3(f) of the Notice to produce: "The advice of Mr Gyles QC and/or Mr Finch referred to in paragraph 33 of the
Davies Affidavit;" 
Par 35 of the Davies affidavit: "On Monday 24 February 1997, I conferred with the representatives of the plaintiffs and obtained instructions to further consider the issues raised by
Mr Gyles the previous evening. On Monday evening and Tuesday morning, 24 and February 1997, Mr Gules advised that the plaintiffs should amend the pleadings in the present case and raise further issues arising from the conduct of the shareholder defendants, and that failure to do so would in his view, give rise to a significant issue of Anshun estoppel." 
Pars 3(g) and 3(h) of the notice to produce: "The instructions received by Tallglen and/or Seven as to the matters referred to in paragraph 35 of the Davies Affidavit; 
The advice received by Freehills and/or Seven and/or Tallglen as to the matters referred to in paragraph 35 of the Davies Affidavit;" 
The plaintiffs were called upon to answer the notice to produce on Friday 28
February 1997. At that time each of the defendants had informed the Court that they would not be in a position to respond to the plaintiffs' application for leave to amend until 2:00 pm on Monday 3 March 1997. At the conclusion of the hearing on 28 February 1997, which concerned other issues, the plaintiffs informed the Court that, without prejudice to any right that they may have to move to set aside the notice to produce, some documentation had been provided by them to the third defendant in answer to the notice to produce and further documentation was being gathered. In order to enable the process of production of documents to progress over the intervening weekend, without giving the parties a full opportunity to address on the matter, I identified the categories of documents in respect of which I considered the plaintiff should be required to produce and adjourned further argument on the matter until :00 am on 3 March 1997. Before the Court adjourned on 28 February, counsel for the fourth, sixth and seventh defendants foreshadowed that a related notice to produce would be given to the plaintiffs and that the bona fides of the plaintiffs' application for leave to amend would be put in issue.

Such a notice to produce was provided to the Court on 3 March 1997 after determination of the questions raised by the third defendant's notice to produce had been resolved in the manner that follows.

During the course of preliminary argument on 28 February counsel for the third defendant relied on what it was contended was express waiver of legal professional privilege in the relevant paragraphs of the Davies affidavit. It seems to me that with the advent of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) such questions should be examined on the basis that the principles of that Act should be treated as applying derivatively to claims of privilege made in respect of documents the subject of a notice to produce. Clearly, those provisions do not apply directly to such a question, addressing questions as to the admissibility of evidence and not directly questions of waiver of legal professional privilege in the context of production of documents on subpoena or pursuant to notice to produce. See Telstra Corp versus Australis Media Holdings & Ors (McLelland CJ in Eq, 20 February 1997, unreported).

Approached in that way, the question posed by the plaintiffs' objection to production of the subject documents requires to be expressed in terms of whether "client legal privilege" has been lost by a knowing and voluntary disclosure of the substance of the subject matter of that privilege by a "client or party" or whether the substance of that material has been disclosed "with the express or implied consent of the client, or party". On a first reading of those sub-sections one is struck by the apparent overlapping and inconsistency between the two provisions. In resolving the apparent difficulty of construction I have been greatly assisted by the observations of McLelland
CJ in Eq in Telstra (26 February 1997, unreported) with which I am in complete agreement. Related questions are whether, by reason of the loss of client legal privilege by the application of [ss (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) or (4), there is a loss of client legal privilege in relation to related communications or documents under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s126.html) and, generally, whether production and inspection of the documents in respect of which client legal privilege would be otherwise lost should be denied on the grounds that the Court would refuse to admit evidence of that material in the exercise of the general discretion conferred by [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html)
This last referred to question would appear to raise considerations of fairness analogous with that concept of fairness determinative of the question whether there has been implied or imputed waiver of legal professional privilege as expounded in Attorney-General (NT) versus Maurice <case>; <case>; [(1995) 185 CLR 83:] the principal difference appearing to lie in the fact that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) would apply to a communication or document in respect of which client legal privilege had been lost by a voluntary and knowing disclosure within the meaning of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) where as Maurice and Ng were concerned with implied or imputed or limited waiver of legal professional privilege. In this case the defendants rely upon both [ss (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) and (4).

In order to properly examine the applicable principles as derived from the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) provisions, I think the first step is to identify the relevant issues raised in this application and the manner in which those issues have been addressed in the Davies affidavit. As I understand the nature of the application for leave to amend, the plaintiffs seek the exercise of the Court's discretion on the basis that the details of the 1996 transactions, which have given rise to these proceedings, were provided to the plaintiffs over a protracted period, hedged with restrictions as to confidentiality and possibly tainted by misdescription. Although it will be necessary to consider in more detail the procedural history of these proceedings on the application for leave to amend, for present purposes, it is sufficient to note that when proceedings were first instituted by the plaintiffs on 20 September 1996, relief was limited to questions of construction, estoppel, the validity of certain default notices, whether the first plaintiff was entitled to rescind and whether the second plaintiff was entitled to terminate certain guarantees: all questions related to an agreement involving the parties and to which I will refer as the joint venture agreement. Pursuant to leave granted on 1 November 1996 that relief was extended to claims for rectification, raising, in substance, the material relied upon in relation to the claim in estoppel. There was a further amendment to the summons pursuant to leave granted on 12 February 1997 which, in effect, extended the relief sought to entitlements claimed by the first plaintiff in respect of a second set of default notices given on 22 January pursuant to the joint venture agreement.

The issues in the proceedings centre upon the nature and effect of transactions entered into by certain of the defendants in 1996. I refer to these as the 1996 transactions. The Davies affidavit contains a narrative which includes a schedule outlining the way in which the information concerning the 1996 transactions and the circumstances in which they were affected was received by the plaintiffs or their solicitors. This narrative included the discovery by the defendants of certain file notes on 20 February and the provision by the defendants of certain proposed statements of evidence on 10 February and 24 February 1997.

I have quoted pars 32, 33 and 35 of the Davies Affidavit. I interpret those paragraphs to disclose:
Prior to 21 February 1997 the plaintiffs were aware that the circumstances in which the 1996 transactions were affected may give rise to an entitlement to relief not presently pleaded in these proceedings.
That possible further entitlement could be pursued in later proceedings to the subject litigation.
The issues raised in these proceedings were discrete to the point that they did not rely upon the circumstances in which the 1996 transactions were effected, such as to preclude the plaintiffs from relying upon those circumstances in pursuit of other relief in later proceedings.
On 21 February 1997 senior counsel for the plaintiff advised that the circumstances surrounding the 1996 transactions and related matters may be relevant to both the relief sought in these proceedings and in any contemplated later proceedings.
On 23 February 1997 counsel advised the plaintiffs' solicitors that consideration should be given to the possibility of an Anshun estoppel being raised as an answer to any further contemplated proceedings. I interpret this to mean that counsel advised that the circumstances surrounding the 1996 transactions were relevant to the relief sought in these proceedings and so could give rise to an Anshun estoppel defence to later proceedings dependant, at least in part, upon proof of those circumstances.
On 24 February 1997 counsel advised that the issues raised in these proceedings were of such a nature as to "give rise to a significant issue of
Anshun estoppel" in other contemplated later proceedings. The nature of the other possible relief that could be sought in subsequent further proceedings was described in par 3 of the Davies affidavit as "oppression of a minority shareholder, breach of fiduciary duty, or of conspiracy". That paragraph contains the further assertion that prior to 23 February 1997 (which I take to be a reference to the matters referred to in pars 32, 33 and 35 of the Davies affidavit) counsel had "consistently advised that the case as pleaded was a narrowly-based case and that it should be pursued to its conclusion before any other allegations were pursued in separate later proceedings" and that the solicitors for the plaintiff had not adverted to the possibility of an Anshun estoppel being raised as an answer to such later proceedings - in particular no counsel briefed on behalf of the plaintiffs "advised in relation to this question." 
Summarising those matters, the application for leave to amend appears to be based upon the grounds that when these proceedings were instituted and, thereafter, until immediately prior to the commencement of the hearing of these proceedings, it was thought that the issue raised in these proceedings were discrete, in that they did not depend upon proof of the circumstances in which the 1996 transactions were entered into to such an extent that further contemplated proceedings based upon those circumstances would be met by an
Anshun estoppel: that with the collection of further information during the process of discovery and the service of statements of evidence and with the retention of senior counsel presently appearing for the plaintiffs, that view was brought into question by the advice of senior counsel that the circumstances surrounding the execution of the 1996 transactions were relevant in the present proceedings to an extent that there was a significant issue of
Anshun estoppel available in answer to any further contemplated proceedings based on those circumstances.

How that might be so is reflected in the particulars of the proposed amendment which are as follows: "(i) The purpose and effect of the Agreements and each of them was not to assist with the funding of contributions to Optus Vision under Clause 12 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement but in substance was to re-negotiate the terms of the Pay TV Holdings Option to the advantage of and in order to reward Pay TV Holdings or companies related thereto, including PBL,, Optus
Communications and CCI to the detriment and/or exclusion of each of Tallglen,
Seven and Optus Vision in that: 
None of the Agreements provided for any obligations to fund Optus Vision; 
The Agreements are in substance and effect a new option or other right in respect of shares in Optus Vision, granted to PBL, effective only after
Tallglen and Pay TV Holdings Options had expired; 
The price of the exercise of the option by issue is below that provided for in the Pay TV Holdings Option and the issue price nominated in the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement; 
By providing for a promise by Pay TV Holdings not to exercise the Pay TV
Holdings option rather than service of a Termination Notice pursuant to the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement so tending to mislead Tallglen, Seven and
Optus Vision as to the true position; 
The right was to be exercised after the expiration of the Tallglen option; and 
The Back-to-back Agreement has the effect that PBL indirectly has shares in the rewards provided for by the Agreements with Optus and CCI.

The Agreements were entered into and the antecedent negotiations therefor were clandestine and intended to be concealed from the plaintiff and the Board of Optus Vision, and when revealed, were revealed in a deceptive and misleading manner.

The Agreements had the purpose and effect of destroying the rights and opportunities of the plaintiff and Optus Vision as set out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) hereof.

The Agreements were a reward to PBL for offering an opportunity to Optus
Vision to enter a joint venture with Australis which should have been offered to Optus Vision in the first place." 
On that analysis I think it follows that the plaintiffs adopted a tactic of proceeding upon the limited issues reflected in the contentions in these proceedings, leaving open their option to pursue any entitlement, other than those claimed in these proceedings, to later proceedings. In making that decision their solicitors were advised by counsel not to expand the pleadings to raise other issues, and that advice was not accompanied by any further advice that such other proceedings could be met by an Anshun estoppel: that this advice persisted until the events referred to in the Davies affidavit commencing on the afternoon of 21 February 1997.

I think it follows from that description of the subject matter of the Davies affidavit that there has been a voluntary and knowing disclosure by the plaintiffs' agent or an express disclosure with the consent of the plaintiffs in circumstances which lead to a loss of client legal privilege. Immediately,
I think, the plaintiffs must be taken to have lost client legal privilege by the disclosure of the substance of the advice of counsel retained on behalf of the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs' case should be limited to the "narrowly- based case and that it should be pursued to its conclusion before any other allegations were pursued in separate later proceedings". Moreover I think the same finding should be made as to the substance of the advice of Mr Gyles QC given on 21 February, as disclosed in par 32, his further advice of 23
February, as disclosed in par 33 and the advice of Mr Gyles of 24 and 25
February 1997, as disclosed in par 35. In each case I think records of the instructions of the plaintiffs' solicitors seeking those advices also fall within the boundaries of lost client legal privilege. Having regard to the relationship of [ss (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) and (4), I consider that records relaying the advices of counsel particularised above to the plaintiffs should be treated as no longer attracting client legal privilege.

In contrast with that disclosure I do not regard the first two sentences of par 30 as a disclosure of the contents of any confidential communication or document within the meaning of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html)
Nor do I consider the material referred to in those two paragraphs as giving rise to any loss of client legal privilege as a related communication or document which considerations inherent in the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s126.html), may give rise to. Accordingly I do not require production of the documents the subject of pars 3(a) and (c) of the notice to produce.

As to the disclosure in par 3 of instructions being received from the plaintiffs, I regard that statement in the Davies affidavit as introductory and explanatory of the letter which was sent by the plaintiffs' solicitor to the shareholder defendants in the joint venture agreement on 19 August 1996.
Even if it could be held that there was sufficient disclosure of the confidential communication or document by par 3, so as to release it from client legal privilege, its limited operation in the limited issues relevant to this interlocutory application are such that I would exercise my discretion in not requiring production or inspection of the documents the subject of par of the notice to produce: in this respect having recourse to principles of fairness to be derived from [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) 
Par 12 of the Davies affidavit makes reference to the information received from the fifth defendant, instructions received concerning the surrounding circumstances of the shareholders agreement and advice of counsel which preceded the commencement of proceedings on 20 September 1996. The substance of those instructions and of that advice is not disclosed and I would not require production of the documents referred to in par 2 of the notice to produce. If the correct interpretation of that paragraph required a contrary conclusion as to disclosure I would not require production of the documents the subject of par 2 of the notice to produce in the exercise of my discretion, having regard to the passing nature of the references and to the limited nature of the issues involved in this interlocutory application.

I have expressed my views as to the nature of the disclosure contained in pars , 32, 33 and 35 of the Davies affidavit and of the effect of considerations to be derived from [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s126.html) and [135](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html). I do not require the plaintiffs to provide any other documents than those in respect of which I have expressed the view that there has been the requisite disclosure of the confidential communication or document. It has been stated by senior counsel on behalf of the fourth, sixth and seventh defendants that the bona fides of this application are in issue and that he wishes to challenge the credibility of the deponent to the Davies affidavit. It seems to me that little may turn on the bona fides of the application if, by that challenge, it is meant that the application for leave to amend has a secondary commercial objective aimed at harming the commercial interests of the defendants. In my view, if the plaintiffs have at their disposal legitimate legal avenues that they may wish to exploit, the fact that they may have commercial objectives which are perceived by the defendants as unfairly prejudicial to them may not be a consideration that carries great weight in the pending application for leave to amend. That is not to say that recognition by the plaintiffs of the availability of other causes of action than those raised in these proceedings for some time prior to the making of the application for leave to amend has no relevance.

I have expressed my view of the content and operation of the first two sentences of par 30 of the Davies affidavit. So far as documents are sought to be produced pursuant to pars 3 (a) and (c) I am of the view that there has been no substantial disclosure of confidential communications or documents such as to justify production and inspection of those documents by the defendants. Furthermore, I do not regard the documents the subject of those paragraphs in the notice to produce to be required to be produced by the application of principles to be derived from [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s126.html), particularly having regard to the limited issues raised on this interlocutory application and the use to which the subject material in the first two sentences in par 30 may be relied upon. If I am wrong in so approaching the question of disclosure or of related communications or documents, having regard to the matters to which I have last referred, I would not require production and inspection of the subject documents in the exercise of a discretion along the lines of the principles to be derived from [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) 
As to the matter raised by par 3(b) of the notice to produce, to the extent that the records evidence the relaying to the plaintiffs of the advices in respect of which I have held disclosure has taken place under pars 30, 32, 33 and 35, those records should be produced as referred to above.

Since these rulings were announced the fourth, sixth and seventh defendants seek further rulings on its notice to produce. In respect of that notice it is my view that pars 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 have been addressed in reasons dealing with the third defendant's notice to produce. As to par 2, I consider that the subject matter of that par should be produced, limited to consideration of the relevant advices referred to in the second part of par 30 of the Davies affidavit. As to par 8, the reference in par 36 of the Davies affidavit is one made in passing; its relevance is far from central to the limited issues to be addressed on the application for leave to amend to the point that: 
The paragraph, in my opinion, does not amount to sufficient disclosure to cause a loss of client legal privilege.

If I am wrong in that conclusion, having regard to the matters to which I have last referred, in the exercise of my discretion I would not require production of the subject documents.
 
TALLGLEN PTY LTD V OPTUS VISION PTY LIMITED; ZYGMUNT SWITKOWSKI, DAVID AMER,
JAMES PACKER, PHILIP SAGGERS, MARTIN HANNES, THOMAS PARDUN, NANCY HAWTHORNE,
JAMES MCLACHLAN, TED PRETTY AND CHARLES MILLER; ANZ BANKING GROUP LIMITED; ABN
AMRO AUSTRALIA LIMITED; TORONTO DOMINION AUSTRALIA LIMITED; ROYAL BANK OF
CANADA; DEUTSCHE AUSTRALIA LIMITED; DEUTSCHE BANK AG /96 
FRIDAY 7 MARCH 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter, I granted leave to serve short notice of the summons this morning returnable for 9.50 am. That application was made ex-parte on the basis that there was a proposed meeting of directors of the 5th defendant in the principal proceedings before me which had been originally set down for 8:00 am this morning, but in respect of which an injunction has been granted by his Honour Mr Justice Hodgson of the Equity Division injuncting the holding of that meeting until 10:00 am today.

The summons, in respect of which leave to serve short notice was given, seeks an order that the first defendant named in that summons, namely Optus Vision
Pty Ltd, and each of the second defendants, they being persons purporting to act as directors of the first defendant, be restrained from resolving to enter into security arrangements over the assets of the first defendant until further order. The other defendants in the summons are several banks who have been and are involved in the provision of substantial financial facilities to the first defendant.
 ..................

The basis upon which the relief sought in the summons, or, more accurately, the basis upon which interim relief has been sought by the plaintiff Tallglen, has been expressed slightly differently on the two occasions in which it has been before me, but I do not regard that difference as of significance.

On the application for short leave, it was on the basis that the proposed meeting of directors was: One, that inadequate notice of the proposed meeting had been given; two, that the directors purporting to act as the board of directors of Optus Vision were acting in breach of the Optus Vision shareholders' agreement. The reference to that agreement is well understood by the parties. The only exception to that challenge being the power to act as director by one, Mr Phillip Saggers, who is appointed by Tallglen, the plaintiff. The third ground is that the lending banks would be involved in inducing a breach of contract if they entered the proposed arrangements.

In the proceedings before me today, the first ground I did not understand to be pressed, rather than a ground that there is insufficient information provided to the directors to enable them to discharge their duties in considering the business to be dealt with at the proposed meeting of directors.

From time to time during the course of this morning, I have extended the time of the injunction granted by his Honour Mr Justice Hodgson and then later by myself until 12 noon; and I propose to further extend that time until 12.15, again on the usual undertaking.

It is, I think, quite apparent from the opposition by the defendants to these proceedings that time would be required to enable those defendants to support a case of prejudice which would involve outlining, I think in some detail, ..........
 ......... I think the defendants are clearly entitled to have the opportunity of placing that material before me.

Each of the defendants has stated that for the court to grant the injunction, even on an interim basis as sought by the plaintiff, prejudice of the kind I have just referred to would occur.

It also occurs to me that the grounds upon which the application is made, or more particularly the second ground, is one which has been available and has been well known to be available to the plaintiff for several months; at least,
I think, dating back to the time when default notices were put in place and the machinery provided by the Optus shareholders' agreement was put in motion for the acquisition by the plaintiff of the shares of allegedly defaulting shareholders.

Apart from what has been stated from the bar table of statements asserting its such rights either in correspondence or in board meetings of Optus Vision, no steps have been taken to prevent the directors appointed by allegedly defaulting shareholders from acting in the ordinary course of the business of
Optus Vision until today.

In those circumstances, it seemed to me that, having regard to the stated position of the banks, .......... that, having regard to the time that has lapsed since the events which have given any rights to the plaintiff to act in the manner which has prompted it to bring this application, the only way of satisfactorily dealing with this matter today was to give the plaintiff the opportunity of stating its position and possibly of putting before me such evidence as would support it that would sufficiently explain the delay, as I have described it, in enforcing any alleged rights under the shareholders' agreement against the directors, in particular of Optus Vision, and to satisfy me that on the balance of convenience, having regard to the banks' position, why an interim injunction should go.

It would be quite impractical, I think, as I may have stated, to permit the defendants to have an adjournment to put these matters before me in evidentiary form. That course, I think, would defeat the whole purpose of the determination of this current issue.

I think there is only one other matter that I should advert to. Mr Gyles was in the course of pursuing those submissions when, and in the course of those submissions had offered what I describe as speculation as to the contents of the proposed security documents. When those submissions were made, I was under the impression that one of the defendants, Mr Saggers, had not sighted the subject security document. In response to a requirement by me directed to
Optus Vision, counsel for Optus Vision, to produce that security document, it was provided with a covering facsimile of 6 March and it was stated from the bar table it had been faxed with the security document to Mr Phillip Saggers on 6 March. Mr Gyles made it clear that he had no such instructions from Mr
Saggers for whom he did not act, but, in any event, shortly thereafter stated that the matter as asserted by counsel for Optus Vision was not correct in so far as it was said that Mr Saggers had received the security documents.

In the circumstances, I returned the facsimile and the attached security document to Optus Vision and did not require its production when called for by counsel for the plaintiff. I did so for the reason that it seemed to me that the submissions of counsel, which I have described as being of a speculative nature as to the content of that document, should be put into the context of the fact that the security document had been faxed to Mr Saggers on 6 March
It may be that Mr Saggers did not receive the document. I simply do not know. But, in those circumstances, it seemed to me that no good purpose would be served for the present considerations by proceeding with a scrutiny of the contents of the security document by the plaintiff who is not a director of
Optus Vision. At that stage, Mr Gyles withdrew from making any further submissions, although persists in the application.

For the reasons which I have earlier outlined, I think that on the balance of convenience in any event, but also having regard to the delay that the plaintiff has been guilty of in seeking to secure, by injunction, its claimed rights in respect of the conduct of the affairs of Optus Vision at its board level, I should not permit the injunction to lie on an interim basis which would have the effect of precluding consideration by the Optus Vision board of the resolutions as presently contemplated at the meeting which presumably will now take place later today, unless some other court takes a contrary view to that which I have expressed.

In the circumstances, I decline to grant any further interim relief.

By consent, I stand the summons over for any further hearing until 2pm, 7
March 1997.

TALLGLEN PTY LTD & ANOR versus PAY TV HOLDINGS PTY LTD & 8 ORS /96 
Friday, 7 March 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT ON APPLICATION TO USE DOCUMENTS FOR EXTRANEOUS PURPOSE: 
HIS HONOUR: The nature of this application and the general approach to be adopted to it, I outlined at the commencement of proceedings on 6 March 1997. The approach there outlined I think proved to be justified by the course which the application then took. I think it was accepted by the parties that the subject matter of the produced documents were no longer relevant, if they ever were relevant, to the application for leave to amend and were not relevant to any issues in the proceedings, as they stand, or if leave is given to amend. It was also accepted by the parties that, subject to what I will describe as the exception as to iniquity, the principles to be applied on this application were those collected in the decision of Giles CJ in Comm D in Ampolex Limited -v- Perpetual Trustee Company (unreported, 12 September 1995) and of Bainton J in Capital Television Group Ltd & Anor -v- Northern Rivers Television Pty Ltd (unreported, 4 September 1995). The exception as to iniquity is a shorthand reference to the principles the subject of extensive review by Sheppard J in Allied Mills Industries Pty Ltd -v- Trade Practices Commission [(1981) 34 ACTR 105.] In brief, those cases recognised a class of material which reflected reprehensible conduct and which, in the public interest, should not have the protection of confidentiality normally attaching to documents produced under compulsion by due legal process. How those principles were sought to be invoked on the application emerged from the description by counsel for the plaintiffs of the contents of the produced documents as ones which indicated that there may be a conspiracy to defraud the plaintiffs involving several major lending institutions, the two principal shareholders in the fifth defendant and the fifth defendant, through their various representatives, including solicitors of prominent legal partnerships. The nature of the possible fraud involved what I think was no higher than speculation that, in relation to a recent draw down of some $15,000,000 by the fifth defendant against existing facilities and by the provision of a further $50,000,000 on security on 7 March 1997, there would be established a regime which would present the lending banks with the opportunity of appointing a receiver if, for example, there was a change in ownership of shareholding in the fifth defendant. The pertinence of that piece of speculation lies in the operation of the machinery for acquisition of defaulting shareholders' equity securities in the fifth defendant under the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement of 19 May 1995. Under that agreement transfers of equity securities in the fifth defendant may take place in favour of the first plaintiff, either on 7 March or 10 March 1997. 
I do not propose to review the material in the produced documents which is said to foster that possibility of a conspiracy to defraud. A schedule of the main references in that material upon which reliance is placed by the plaintiffs has been provided by counsel for the plaintiffs and placed with the bundle of produced documents which I have marked exhibit A on the application.
There is no dispute that the funds to which I have referred have been provided or are in the process of being provided by the lending banks and that security for such facilities is to be provided. I think it is reasonable to infer from the produced documents that the events under contemplation by the fifth defendant and its principal shareholders and lenders are seen as unpalatable to the plaintiffs. However, in my opinion, the material to which I have been referred and the remainder of the produced documents to which I have had regard, do not reflect conduct which could be described reasonably as conduct of a kind attracting the application of the principles under consideration in
Allied Mills.

Absent conduct of that kind it seems to me that no sufficient reason has been shown which persuades me that the produced documents should be released from the confidentiality attaching to them and in particular that no sufficient reason has been advanced to permit that material to be considered for an extraneous use of the kind envisaged on behalf of the plaintiffs. The defendants have described as fanciful descriptions of the suspected conduct of the relevant defendants as being engaged in a fraudulent conspiracy. I am inclined to agree. That is far from saying that what may be presently under contemplation by the defendants and the lenders to the fifth defendant does not involve arrangements which will ensure that monies advanced under existing facilities and to be advanced under those facilities are secured where presently they may not be secured and that those arrangements are seen as financially detrimental to the plaintiffs: particularly, if it is ultimately held that the default notices given by the plaintiff and the acquisition of the allegedly defaulting shareholders equity securities are held to be valid.
At the same time, it is difficult to see how the granting of security for monies lent to the fifth defendant by the lending banks should be seen as prejudicial to any legitimate relevant interests, there being no suggestion on this application of the misapplication of funds so obtained by the fifth defendant. Moreover, if the provision of security would place the lending banks in a position to appoint a receiver in the event of default under that security - on the assumption that no like right presently exists - and even if that right could be activated by a default consisting of a change of ownership in shareholding in the fifth defendant, I would still not see that as sufficient ground for permitting the extraneous use of the produced material.
If such security covenants are given for valid commercial reasons, then no injustice is suffered by the plaintiff. If such arrangements are made pursuant to a fraudulent conspiracy which counsel for the plaintiffs has speculated upon, then, regardless of my view that the material produced would not support in any material way such a case, the consequences of any such conduct, in my view, would be readily remediable by a claim for damages.

In brief, none of these matters justify, in my view, the release of the produced documents from the confidentiality attaching to them. It has been stated by counsel for the plaintiffs that release of that confidentiality would not necessarily lead to the institution of proceedings and that its release would at least permit the executives of the plaintiffs to seek appropriate assurances from the executives of the fifth defendant or from its board. I regard that possibility, in the context of the commercial disputes that exists amongst the parties to these proceedings, to be a reference to the first step in the institution of further legal proceedings.

For those reasons I am satisfied that both the implied and express confidentiality attaching to the produced documents should not be modified in any way so as to permit their extraneous use in the manner outlined by counsel on behalf of the plaintiffs and I so order and order the plaintiffs to pay the defendants' costs of the application.
 
TALLGLEN PTY LTD & ORS V PAY TV HOLDINGS PTY LTD & 8 ORS /96 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
JUDGMENT ON ACCESS TO FIFTH DEFENDANT'S DOCUMENTS PRODUCED ON THE PLAINTIFFS NOTICE TO PRODUCE OF 3 MARCH 1997 (referring to p 447 of the transcript.) 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were listed as a matter of priority over other pending proceedings having regard to the considerable commercial importance of the outcome to the participants. The hearing commenced on Monday 24 February 1997. On 27 February 1997, notice of motion was given by the plaintiffs for leave to amend their summons; the hearing of that application having occupied most of the court's time since then. During the course of the hearing of that application, which is yet incomplete, the plaintiffs gave notice to the fifth defendant to produce the following documents for the purpose of evidence.
 "1. All financial information produced to the Optus Vision Pty Limited ("Optus
Vision") board at the board meeting held on 24 February 1997;
All notes made by Joan Malkin during or in relation to the Optus Vision board meeting held on 24 February 1997;
Any board minutes, in draft or in final form, of the Optus Vision board meeting held on 24 February 1997;
All documents constituting or evidencing any submissions, correspondence or communications between or on behalf of Optus Vision and financiers in relation to: 
The effect of the Plaintiffs' proposed amendment; and 
Further drawdowns or additional funding sought by or on behalf of Optus
Vision within the last month." 
Those documents were produced and made available for inspection by the parties on undertakings as to confidentiality. Plaintiffs' counsel now wish to be relieved of the restrictions imposed by those undertakings which, in effect, preclude the plaintiffs' legal representatives divulging the contents of the produced documents to their clients.

It has been stated by senior counsel for the plaintiffs that their release from those undertakings is urgent, is required to enable consideration to be given to other proceedings and that this application should be heard ex parte.
The nature of the urgency, the nature of the possible further proceedings, the possible parties to any such proceedings have not been divulged.

Without the existence of the express restrictions on the use to which the produced documents may be put, it is clear that the plaintiffs, if given unrestricted access to the produced documents, would require leave for their use as foreshadowed by senior counsel.

I think it is reasonably clear that the contents of the produced documents, having regard to the course which the application for leave to amend has taken, are no longer relevant to that application; indeed, none of the material is in evidence except to the extent that it may have been used for the purpose of affidavit evidence read during the course of the application.
It is also reasonably clear that the material in the produced documents is not relevant to any issue in the proceedings.

Accordingly, I take the view that the appropriate approach to be adopted on this present application is to treat it as one in which the plaintiffs seek access to the produced documents for the purpose of considering its use in relation to or for the purpose of the institution of other proceedings and seek leave to so use it.

Approached in that way, I think the authorities clearly establish the onus on the part of the plaintiffs to establish why, in the interests of justice, the plaintiffs should be permitted the extraneous use of the produced documents; and in respect of such an application, I think it is equally clear that the party producing the documents is entitled to be heard and, if necessary, by leave, other parties with sufficient interest in the subject matter.

Having regard to the nature of the material produced, I would grant leave to those parties who have shareholding interests in the fifth defendant to appear on this application.

TALLGLEN PTY LTD & ANOR -v- PAY TV HOLDINGS PTY LTD & 8 ORS /96 
Monday, 10 March 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT IN THE APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO AMEND 
HIS HONOUR: In these reasons I have adopted the terms set out in the schedule to these reasons which identifies the meanings attributed to those terms. By their notice of motion dated 27 February 1997 the plaintiffs gave notice of an application for leave to amend the further amended summons. That application had been foreshadowed on 26 February 1997 when an outline of the proposed amendments was circulated amongst the defendants by counsel for the plaintiffs. The amendments as proposed in the notice of motion represented a revised version of that document and, during the course of the hearing of the application for leave to amend, the plaintiffs submitted a further revised form of amendment as follows: "Summons 
B. In the alternative, an order that the joint venture constituted by the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement and the Transaction Agreements referred to therein be wound-up and dissolved and a Receiver appointed to get in and sell by public tender the assets and undertaking of the joint venture including, but not limited to: 
The equity securities held by each party in Optus Vision; 
The rights to exercise such options as are provided for in the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement and the Transaction Agreements; 
The equity securities held by Optus Vision in each of Sportsvision
Australia Pty Limited (Sportsvision) and MovieVision Pty Limited and all rights attached thereto; and 
The interests of Optus Vision in any Agreements between Optus Vision and each of Sportsvision and Movievision.
 and to distribute the proceeds, after payment of all proper liabilities, pro rata according to the entitlements of the parties.

Contentions
If (which is not admitted) Continental and Optus Communications or either of them is entitled or bound to transfer or cause or permit Optus Vision to issue or allot or to agree to transfer or to cause or permit Optus Vision to issue or allot equity securities or any interest in equity securities in Optus
Vision to any subsidiary of PBL by virtue of the first PBL Agreement, the
Termination Agreement, the Second PBL Agreement or the Back-to-back Agreement (together hereinafter called the Agreements) or any one or more of them, any such transfer, issue or allotment would constitute 
A fraud of the power granted by Clauses 12.15 and 12.16.

A use of the power granted by Clauses 12.15 and 12.16 for a purpose collateral and foreign to the purpose for which the power was granted 
Unconscionable conduct by each and all of the parties concerned in such transfer, issue or allotment.

A breach of the obligations of good faith owed by each of the parties to the Optus Vision joint venture one to the other.

An unreasonable exercise of the power granted by Clauses 12.15 and 12.16 
In fraud of Tallglen and Seven in equity.

In fraud of Optus Vision in equity.

Particulars 
The purpose and effect of the Agreements and each of them was not to assist with the funding of contributions to Optus Vision under Clause 12 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement but in substance was to re-negotiate the terms of the Pay TV Holdings Option to the advantage of and in order to reward Pay TV Holdings or companies related thereto, including PBL,, Optus
Communications and CCI to the detriment and/or exclusion of each of Tallglen,
Seven and Optus Vision in that: 
None of the Agreements provided for any obligations to fund Optus Vision; 
The Agreements are in substance and effect a new option or other right in respect of shares in Optus Vision, granted to PBL, effective only after
Tallglen and Pay TV Holdings Options had expired; 
The price of the exercise of the option by issue is below that provided for in the Pay TV Holdings Option and the issue price nominated in the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement; 
By providing for a promise by Pay TV Holdings not to exercise the Pay TV
Holdings option rather than service of a Termination Notice pursuant to the
Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement so tending to mislead Tallglen, Seven and
Optus Vision as to the true position; 
The right was to be exercised after the expiration of the Tallglen option; and 
The Agreements were entered into and the antecedent negotiations therefor were concluded in a clandestine manner and were intended to be concealed from the plaintiff and the Board of Optus Vision and, when revealed, were revealed in a deceptive and misleading manner.

The Agreements had the purpose and effect of destroying the rights and opportunities of the plaintiff and Optus Vision as set out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) hereof.
 ~~(iv) The Agreements were a reward to PBL for offering an opportunity to
Optus Vision to enter a joint venture with Australis which should have been offered to Optus Vision in the first place.~~ ~~~~
The matters alleged in paragraph 35 hereof are inconsistent with and have, together with statements by counsel for Optus Communications in open
Court on 25 February 1997, destroyed the trust and confidence necessary for the maintenance of the joint venture constituted by the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement and have thereby destroyed the substratum of the joint venture." (MFI 4) 
Accompanying that version was a statement of the "purpose of the amendments" which was in the following terms: "The purpose of the proposed amendments is to ensure that the present consequences of the Agreements (as defined in the Summons) so far as the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement is concerned are dealt with in these proceedings. It is desirable and convenient that this should occur, and it is necessary that this should occur because of the possible application of issue estoppel and the principles enunciated in Anshun -v- Port of Melbourne
Authority otherwise.

Proposed paragraph 35 of the Contentions sets out facts and matters in support of the relief claimed in paragraphs 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 11A of the
Summons. Proposed paragraph 36 sets out facts and matters in support of the relief claimed in paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 of the Summons, and in support of the relief claimed in proposed paragraph 11B of the Summons.

The plaintiffs contend that if (contrary to their submission) there is any difficulty in dealing expeditiously with all or any issues arising in the case as sought to be amended, then that is properly dealt with by management of this case by appropriate directions. Issues have already been split, and all parties have reserved their positions in relation to later disputes arising out of the default procedure. This position has special force if new litigation involving Optus Vision does have any adverse collateral consequences upon it.

If it is to be contended by any defendant that other ramifications of the
Agreements should also be dealt with in these proceedings (such as proceedings under the Corporations Law), it should come forward and say so now so that the plaintiffs and the Court may make sensible decisions ~~discussions~~ as to the matter without playing blind poker or Russian roulette.

The plaintiffs will formulate and state their position in relation to not proceeding in relation to any of the amendments when there is a clear statement of the position of each defendant on estoppel." (MFI 4) 
The reference in that statement to the splitting of issues for determination during the course of case management of these proceedings needs amplification.
The matter was set down for hearing on 20 December 1996 "on liability only with the details of an order for separate determination to be worked out and the orders to be made on 12 February 1997". On that date, when the matter of the separate question to be tried came before the Court, the matter was addressed in the following way: "FINCH: ... The next matter is the separate hearing on damages, perhaps ore accurately described as a separate question application.

Mr Meagher has circulated, amongst the parties, some short minutes. I think everyone has had some opportunity to look at them and generally, if I could hand them up, I am aware of no dissent from their current form, but I think it is fair to say that not everyone has had a long time to look at every word. I do not know whether it is sufficient for your Honour to leave the matter like this. But so far as I am aware the parties are generally in agreement with what is proposed there. It might be useful to reserve to each of them the ability to make some detailed comments over the next few days amongst themselves in case an detailed issue arises, but generally speaking everyone is happy with that format.

HIS HONOUR: I have only had a few seconds to look at it. The short minutes take the form that a number of enumerated questions be decided before all other questions in the proceedings rather than the form that everything except damages be decided first.

FINCH: Yes.

HIS HONOUR: It may well be perfectly acceptable, if not, ideal way of doing things, but it has the potential that if these enumerated questions are answered someone then later on says "Ah, but wait a minute, there is another question relevant to liability" I wonder, therefore, whether one needs some kind of assurance or satisfaction that these are the only questions relevant to liability, and perhaps some kind of statement as part of this document, which may be difficult, that if the questions are answered in this way then there is a certain result like proceedings fail; if the questions are answered a different way then there is a different result, namely, that there will then be an enquiry into damages or something of that kind.

FINCH: That is the sort of issue we thought the parties might want to cogitate over on the next few days.

HIS HONOUR: Must confess I would not be entirely happy with the approach of enumerating the prior questions without some kind of assurance or satisfaction of that kind, Mr Finch.

FINCH: We appreciate what your Honour says about that. I think all parties saw some benefit, as your Honour has indicated, in listing the questions that are to be addressed, and not just excising those which are not.

HIS HONOUR: It is very good, provided there can be the assurance or satisfaction.

FINCH: Essentially what it does at the moment is excise damages, and also it is important to note, given your Honour's remarks, it excises the question of relief against forfeiture. The reason for relief against forfeiture being excised is that all the parties take the view that it is very likely that that question will require some addressing, the question of numbers, that is the valuation of the various assets in dispute, and perhaps it is fair to say that they are matters which are not agreed, and it may be difficult to address the question of relief against forfeiture prior to the resolution of questions about the valuation of the business and other matters related thereto. For that reason it was thought difficult, if not impossible, to ask the court to determine the question of relief against forfeiture in the absence of some evidence about the sort of dollars that are going to be involved. Now it may be that the parties eventually disagree about that, but that is the reason it is not there.

HIS HONOUR: I would need to become more familiar, again, than I am at present, with the issues to be happy to the excising of relief against forfeiture, to be blunt, Mr Finch, because I would be concerned that there will might be sub issues on the issue of relief against forfeiture which, according to the desirable approach, that these things should be dealt with together with all other issues other than that what might be called pure quantification of damages.

FINCH: We appreciate your Honour's concern, because it does of course go to liability and ideally this hearing is to address all matters of liability, not leaving any outstanding.

HIS HONOUR: That is undoubtedly right, so that people know where they are at the end of the hearing, or at least to the end of the judgment.

FINCH: We will see if we can address that matter over the next few days. If your Honour defers making any order pursuant to [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p31) [rule 2."](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s2.html) (T4.54 - 6.33) 
The matter next came before me on 18 February 1997 when I made the following orders: "By consent, the Court orders pursuant to [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p31),
Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules that the following questions be decided separately and after all other questions in the proceedings -
In the event that it is held that either one or more of the following agreements (the First PBL Agreement, the Termination Agreement, the Second PBL
Agreement and the Back to Back Agreement), or entry into one or more of those agreements, constitutes a breach or an anticipatory breach of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement whether Tallglen Pty Limited is entitled to damages and, if so, what is the quantum of those damages (paragraph 12 of Further
Amended Summons).
Whether the service by Tallglen Pty Limited of Default Notices on Optus
Communications Pty Limited and Continental Cablevision of Australia, Inc on or about 13 September 1996 and/or 22 January 1997 was a breach of the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement entitling Optus Communications Pty Limited and
Continental Cablevision of Australia, Inc to damages and, if so, the quantum of those damages (paragraph 3 of Second Cross-Claim).
Whether in the event Tallglen Pty Limited was to give to all or any of
Optus Communications Pty Limited, Continental Cablevision of Australia, Inc and Pay TV Holdings Pty Limited a Default Acquisition Notice within the meaning of clause 23.6 of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, all or any of them is entitled to be relieved against the acquisition of the Equity
Securities held by each of them in Optus Vision Pty Limited and, if so, on what terms (paragraph 2 of First Cross-Claim; paragraph 2 of Second Cross-
Claim)." (Pars 1-3 of the Short Minutes (Version 2) dated 18 February 1997) 
I declined at that point to further exclude the following question: "4. Whether the provision of clauses 23.5 and 23.6 of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement constitute a penalty and as such are unenforceable." (Par 4 of the Short Minutes (Version 2) dated 18 February 1997) deferring consideration of that matter until I was satisfied that it was appropriate to exclude that question.

It should be noted that, although it was stated to be by consent, the plaintiffs consented to the exclusion of the first two numbered questions and raised no objection to the exclusion of the third numbered question. It was realised and accepted by all parties that the making of an order in those terms did not achieve the objective which the Chief Judge had contemplated in setting down the matter for hearing on questions other than that of damages.
However, it was agreed by all parties that it was in their respective interests to have a separate determination of questions in accordance with my order of 18 February 1997, notwithstanding that the determination of those separate questions would still leave to be determined a number of other issues in addition to that relating to damages.

In my interlocutory judgment of 3 March concerning the production by the plaintiffs of confidential documents, I briefly outlined the amendments to the summons which had been made pursuant to the leave of the Court. For the purpose of this application I think it is sufficient to note that the amendments were made on 4 November 1996 and 12 February 1997, without objection, and that they maintained the confines of the case to questions related to construction, rectification, estoppel, rescission and damages arising under the joint venture shareholders agreement. The amendments reflected the progressive discovery to the plaintiffs of the 1996 arrangements.

There had been an earlier attempt by Optus Communications to obtain an order for the separate determination of a question in the proceedings, namely: "Whether by entering into the agreement dated 20 August 1996 between
Publishing and Broadcasting Limited (`PBL'), Optus Communications Pty Limited (`Optus Communication') and Continental Cablevision of Australia [sic] (`Continental Cablevision') in the circumstances recited in Recital D to that agreement, any of Pay TV Holdings Pty Limited (`Pay TV'), Continental
Cablevision or Optus Communications: transferred to any person any interest in all or part of its Equity
Securities; or in any way attempted to make PBL or a subsidiary of that Company other than Pay TV a party to that Agreement or a participant in the Vision Business within the meaning of either of clauses 4.4(a) or 4.4(c) of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement dated 19 May 1996." 
I think the reasons for judgment of Giles CJ in Comm D of 17 October 1996, in refusing that application, provide a useful backdrop to the amendments to the plaintiffs' summons which followed and to the later case management involving an order pursuant to Pt 31 of the Supreme Court Rules. The passages to which
I refer in those reasons are as follows: "First, the question proposed rests upon the effect of entry into what I have called the PBL agreement, the agreement of 20 August 1996. Paragraph 18 of the plaintiffs' contentions, in which they allege as the Relevant Agreements an arrangement between Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc, Optus
Communications Pty Ltd and Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, does not take up the PBL agreement. The wording of para 18 is understandable, since at the time the plaintiffs did not have the PBL agreement or know that the particular document existed, and it might be though that production of the particular document would enable the parties to concentrate on its effect. However, the plaintiffs submitted that they could not be confident that the PBL agreement embodied the whole of the Relevant Agreements alleged, and said that they were entitled, and intended, to explore the arrangement of which they were told in the letter from Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd of 22 August 1996. I do not think that their suspicion of the PBL agreement can be thrust aside. The plaintiffs' first knowledge of the arrangement came on 17 August 1996, prior to the date of the PBL agreement, and while it may well be that the document was brought into existence as the definitive record of that which was under negotiation as at 17 August 1996 it is possible that there is more. The possibility is given some credence by the letter from Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd of 22 August 1996, written after the date of the PBL agreement, which attributes the arrangement taken up in para 18 of the contentions to "binding agreements" in the plural, and perhaps by the letters from the solicitors for Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc and the Optus companies of 22 August 1996 which refer to "documentation" and not, as might be expected, to one agreement. There was no evidence that the agreement of 20 August 1996 was the sole repository of the arrangement. It follows that a decision of the question proposed by Optus Communications Pty
Ltd would not resolve whether or not there was Default or lead to any other result in the proceedings. At the least, the separate decision would have to include determination of whether the Relevant Agreements went beyond the PBL agreement. There would be much more that a point or points of law, preparation and hearing time commensurate with resolving questions of fact would be required, and given the exploration of facts likely to be involved in the issues of implied term and estoppel there would in all probability be the difficulty in relation to findings of fact and credit earlier mentioned: certainly I am not satisfied that there would not.

Secondly, the question proposed addresses breach of cl 4.4(a) and cl 4.4(c) of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. The plaintiffs allege that as a matter of construction (para 12 of the contentions) or by reason of an implied term (para 13 of the contentions) neither Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd nor
Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd nor any related corporation or party "is or may be treated as a new shareholder for the purposes of clause 12.15 and clause 12.16" of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. If the construction be correct or there be such an implied term, then even if the Relevant
Agreements are to be found entirely in the PBL agreement the primary question will be whether the effect of the PBL agreement is that Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd or its subsidiary, if a related corporation or related party, is treated as a new shareholder for the purposes of the relevant clauses. An answer to the question proposed by Optus Communications Pty Ltd will not resolve that primary question, and so the central dispute will remain. It can not be resolved as a matter of construction because it must also be found whether there is an implied term. Illicit treatment of Pay TV Holdings Pty
Ltd, Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd or a related corporation or party may be simply ineffective, it may be a breach of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement although not caught by cl 4.4, or it may found breach of cl 4.4 because such treatment is, because illicit, not in accordance with the Optus
Vision Shareholders Agreement: there is certainly an arguable case for the lastmentioned view. Even if it would not constituted Default within the meaning of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, the plaintiffs' case includes that Tallglen Pty Ltd is entitled to rescind the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement and the associated agreements, and that Seven Network
Ltd is entitled to terminate the guarantees, because the treatment was breach of a fundamental term of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement compliance with which was also fundamental to the associated agreements and the guarantees. There may be difficulties in that case, but it can not be ignored.
Thus neither the issue of breach of cl 4.4 leading to Default nor the challenge to the continuation of the joint venture will not be determined by the proposed question, a decision favourable to Optus Communications Pty Ltd and the other parties in the same interest on the proposed question will not, or not necessarily, resolve whether there has been Default, and even a resolution favourable to those parties on whether there has been Default is unlikely to fully, or even materially, solve their difficulties in relation to the listing and the bond issue. There would certainly remain major questions to be litigated in the proceedings, with no or no significant utility in the separate decision of the question proposed by Optus Communications Pty Ltd.

Thirdly, as an alternative the plaintiffs seek relief on the basis of an estoppel which, if established, would again throw up whether the Related
Agreements would amount to Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd or Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd or any related corporation or party being treated as a new shareholder for the purposes of cll 12.15 and 12.16 of the Optus Vision
Shareholders Agreement. The same considerations as those in the previous paragraph arise. Further, the estoppel is alleged against Publishing and
Broadcasting Ltd as well as against Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc,
Optus Communications Pty Ltd and Optus Vision Pty Ltd, and the relief claimed includes a declaration which, if made, would arguably preclude exercise of the option in the PBL agreement quite apart from its effect on anything similar in any other agreements comprising the Relevant Agreements. There is thus raised as an issue in the proceedings whether the exercise of the option in the PBL agreement or an option of a similar kind would give rise to contravention of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement. An answer to the question proposed by
Optus Communications Pty Ltd would not resolve that issue, which is not a question for another day but a question for these proceedings. Even if it were a question for another day, but particularly when it is a question for these proceedings, dispute over the identity of and extent of interests of permitted joint venturers is likely to be material, and to remain an impediment, to the listing and the bond issue. For this added reason the utility of the decision of the separate question is compromised.

Fourthly, the question proposed does not go beyond the effect of entry into the PBL agreement. The plaintiffs' case in relation to Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd differs from their case in relation to Continental Cablevision of Australia
Inc and Optus Communications Pty Ltd. The case against Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd includes Default by breach of cl 4.4 of the Optus Vision Shareholders
Agreement constituted by its decision not to exercise the Nine Option/Pay TV
Holdings Option. Assuming for present purposes that the Relevant Agreements are wholly found within the PBL agreement, the breach by Pay TV Holdings Pty
Ltd is said to be its decision "in connection with" entry into that agreement - not entry into the agreement, to which it is not a party. Thus an answer to the question proposed by Optus Communications Pty Ltd will not resolve whether there was the breach alleged against Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd. Whether there was Default on its part will remain to be decided." (Emphasis added) (Pp 24 - 28) 
References in those reasons to "the listing and the bond issue" are references to a proposed public listing of Optus Communications on the Australian Stock
Exchange and to the proposed marketing of a bond issue by Optus Vision on the
United States bond market, the timing of both being said to be dependant upon early resolution of the disputes so far as they concerned the 1996 arrangements. The reference to "Relevant Agreements" is an adoption of the phrase as used in the plaintiffs' contentions to describe what was then known of the 1996 arrangements. Of particular interest to the present application is the passage emphasised. That is a reference to par 27 of the plaintiffs' contentions and it reflects his Honour's view of the possible ambit of par 27 which, I think, is at variance with the position adopted by the defendants but at one with a tentative view I had reached of the ambit of par 27 independently of his Honour's reasons.

However, in that context, it may be noted that when the matter came before the
Chief Judge on 29 November 1996 it was seen by counsel for the plaintiffs as "very largely a document case" which needed "some commentary" and during the same directions hearing counsel for Optus Communications foreshadowed a further application for an order pursuant to Pt 31 in the following terms: "... Your Honour would recall on the application for a separate question, there was an issue raised as to whether the relevant agreements were conceded by what is described as the PBL agreement of 20 August or whether there was some other arrangement between the parties. We would want a direction by the time discovery is completed the plaintiffs indicate whether they are going to say the relevant agreement is other than recorded in the PBL agreement, because if the position is there is not going to be a factual issue about that, we may want to again seek to urge the Court to deal with aspect of the default question because of the difficulties it is causing not only my client in relation to the float but also Optus Vision in relation to the operations and functions of its board." (From 20 November 1996, T6.50 - 7.5) 
At that stage it would seem matters extraneous to the written agreements involved in the 1996 arrangements were not seen as looming large in the issues raised in the proceedings. The particulars now sought to be raised, on the application for leave to amend, raise questions as to the use of the provisions of the joint venture shareholders agreement for a purpose said to be foreign to their intended purpose, as to the circumstances surrounding the entering into of the agreements involved in the 1996 arrangement and as to the nature of those agreements.

I have approached the application on the basis that the factual issues sought to be raised on the amendment have not hitherto been raised on a strict reading of the plaintiffs' case, as presently pleaded: thus conforming to that extent with the defendants' views as to the present ambit of the contentions.

Nevertheless, I have come to the conclusion that the plaintiffs should be permitted to raise the factual matters set out in the particulars of the proposed amendment in aid of the relief presently sought and in support of any arguable case, not presently pleaded, that the defendants are not entitled to give effect to the agreements involved in the 1996 arrangements, according to their terms. By way of illustration, I consider that the plaintiffs should be given leave to amend to include those particulars as part of the particulars of pars 18 and 18A of the contentions. On my view of the pleadings that would enable the plaintiffs to rely upon the nature and circumstances of the 1996 arrangements in aid of contentions 19-22 and 27.

In my opinion the contentions so amended would enable the plaintiffs to present a case of breach including one based upon an unreasonable use of the powers conferred by the joint venture shareholders agreement, or one, not of breach, but based upon an entitlement to relief against the alleged abuse of those powers. It will be necessary to refer to those matters in more detail in the course of these reasons.

In response to a succinct submission by Mr Sher QC for Optus Communications and others, to resort to orthodoxy in the determination of this application, I propose to address each of the matters raised by him, as elaborated by Mr
Meagher SC of senior counsel appearing with him, and as supported in various ways by the remaining defendants, all of whom opposed the granting of the application.

Bona fides of the application and explanation for delay: Much of this argument was foreshadowed on the issues that arose on the notice to produce given to the plaintiffs for the production of documents to which conventionally client legal privilege would attach. The Davies affidavit had been filed on behalf of the plaintiffs in support of their application for leave to amend. The subject matter of that affidavit traced the course of the conduct of the plaintiffs' case so far as it concerned the consideration given to causes of action other than those the subject of these proceedings. It was contended by the defendants that the Davies affidavit had the effect of loss of client legal privilege within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/): hence the notice to produce. On 3 March 1997 I delivered my reasons outlining the extent to which, in my view, that privilege had been lost. In the course of those reasons I outlined in general terms the plaintiffs' case on the amendment application as proffered by the Davies affidavit. For convenience the relevant paragraphs of those reasons are repeated below: "1. Prior to 21 February 1997 the plaintiffs were aware that the circumstances in which the 1996 transactions were affected may give rise to an entitlement to relief not presently pleaded in these proceedings.
That possible further entitlement could be pursued in later proceedings to the subject litigation.
The issues raised in these proceedings were discrete to the point that they did not rely upon the circumstances in which the 1996 transactions were effected, such as to preclude the plaintiffs from relying upon those circumstances in pursuit of other relief in later proceedings.
On 21 February 1997 senior counsel for the plaintiff advised that the circumstances surrounding the 1996 transactions and related matters may be relevant to both the relief sought in these proceedings and in any contemplated later proceedings.
On 23 February 1997 counsel advised the plaintiffs' solicitors that consideration should be given to the possibility of an Anshun estoppel being raised as an answer to any further contemplated proceedings. I interpret this to mean that counsel advised that the circumstances surrounding the 1996 transactions were relevant to the relief sought in these proceedings and so could give rise to an Anshun estoppel defence to later proceedings dependant, at least in part, upon proof of those circumstances.
On 24 February 1997 counsel advised that the issues raised in these proceedings were of such a nature as to "give rise to a significant issue of
Anshun estoppel" in other contemplated later proceedings. The nature of the other possible relief that could be sought in subsequent further proceedings was described in par 3 of the Davies affidavit as "oppression of a minority shareholder, breach of fiduciary duty, or of conspiracy". That paragraph contains the further assertion that prior to 23 February 1997 (which I take to be a reference to the matters referred to in pars 32, 33 and 35 of the Davies affidavit) counsel had "consistently advised that the case as pleaded was a narrowly-based case and that it should be pursued to its conclusion before any other allegations were pursued in separate later proceedings" and that the solicitors for the plaintiff had not adverted to the possibility of an Anshun estoppel being raised as an answer to such later proceedings - in particular no counsel briefed on behalf of the plaintiffs "advised in relation to this question." 
Summarising those matters, the application for leave to amend appears to be based upon the grounds that when these proceedings were instituted and, thereafter, until immediately prior to the commencement of the hearing of these proceedings, it was thought that the issue raised in these proceedings were discrete, in that they did not depend upon proof of the circumstances in which the 1996 transactions were entered into to such an extent that further contemplated proceedings based upon those circumstances would be met by an
Anshun estoppel: that with the collection of further information during the process of discovery and the service of statements of evidence and with the retention of senior counsel presently appearing for the plaintiffs, that view was brought into question by the advice of senior counsel that the circumstances surrounding the execution of the 1996 transactions were relevant in the present proceedings to an extent that there was a significant issue of
Anshun estoppel available in answer to any further contemplated proceedings based on those circumstances." (Pp 6-8 of the reasons for judgment handed down on 3 March 1997) 
As a consequence of my ruling on privilege, the documents, now comprising exhibit 5 on the application for leave to amend, were produced and were the subject of cross-examination of Davies by Mr Sher. This material then formed the basis of Mr Sher's submission that the application for leave to amend was not made bona fide, a submission expressed as follows: "SHER: ... Might I just say this at the outset that the attack that we make on this amendment is that it is not made bona fide and we, in saying that, we are attacking the bona fides of the plaintiffs, not their legal advisors and that will be made clear in the course of arguments as to how we say mala fides of the plaintiff is evidenced by what has happened." (T425.33 - .38) 
Exhibit 5 consisted of a large number of internal memoranda of Freehills dating back, notably, to a memorandum of 14 March 1996 which records notes of a conference between a partner of Freehills and a director within the Seven
Group. It records the intention of Stokes to examine the "prospect of litigating against Optus Vision and Geoffrey Cousins in relation to a range of issues". The issues were noted as follows: "1. Conspiracy or inducement to enter into the Optus Vision arrangements.
Favouring of Channel Nine.
The conflict Geoffrey Cousins has by virtue of his position on the PBL and the Optus Vision Board.
Kerry Stokes wants us to look at the correspondence leading up to entry into the Optus Vision arrangements and any undertakings/misrepresentations that were given in relation to things that have not yet been met.
Kerry Stokes thinks it would be strategically useful in the Fox/Nine litigation to join Optus Vision. He says that the Union is part of the Fox deal for Nine. Optus Vision and Nine both knew/discussed Nine's entitlement to the Union. We should look at the Deed for Assurance and the other document attached to the Fox writ against Seven and News. Query whether there should be a cross-claim against Nine and Optus Vision.
We should talk with Clayton Utz about this.
We then discussed the Union, where there should probably, according to
Kerry Stokes be a cross claim against PBL and Optus Vision and potentially
Cousins.
Further there should be a complaint in relation to Super League.
Finally, there should be a complaint in relation to the way Optus Vision had badly dealt with councils over the overhead wiring issue.
Kerry Stokes thinks there may be a breach of the local content obligation in the Seven Supply Agreement. Apparently they are not using us and they are using Village to buy Australian movies.
Also, we should include the PBL/Australis situation.
Another thing that should go into the list of issues is that the world movies channel that Kerry Stokes has with SBS is being supplied to FoxTel at $6.50 per month, $4.00 of which goes to Kerry Stokes, Optus Vision offered them 50c for the channel." (Exhibit 5, tab 3, pars 1-12) 
A memoranda of 16 May 1996 reviewed some of these "issues" under various headings, including the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), the
Corporations Law, including a derivative action under <case>, the joint venture shareholders agreement "and other agreements". A later memorandum recorded consideration of an oppression suit. Most of these matters were covered in a letter of advice by Freehills to Seven of 24 July 1996. I think it is sufficient to note that it covered a very wide range of disputes concerning Optus Vision and Seven and involving Cousins whose position on the boards of PBL and Optus Vision was seen as involving a possible case of conflict of interest.

Notes of August 1996 reveal that consideration was given to the winding up, presumably, of Optus Vision or the withdrawal of Seven from Optus Vision.
These and related matters were included in discussions in conference with counsel during that month. The notes of these conferences if nothing else, reveal great dissatisfaction by Seven with its role in Optus Vision and a desire to undo existing programme supply arrangements between the two organisations. Considerations of this kind were linked with examination of the relationships between the parties as one possibility involving fiduciary duties and with the possibility of instituting an oppression suit or "query w'up action".

I think it is apparent from the notes of the August conferences that significant difficulty in pursuing some, at least, of the possible causes of action was envisaged and that some of that difficulty related to the paucity of information available to Seven's advisers. The memorandum of Leanne Norman of 28 August 1996 illustrates this.

Memoranda during October 1996 reveal, however, that matters such as breach of fiduciary duty, oppression of a minority shareholder were still on Seven's agenda, even though not pursued in these proceedings which had been commenced on 20 September 1996. Prior to the commencement of those proceedings the memorandum of Rachel Clippingdale of 9 September 1996 addressed the minds of the Freehills legal team to the implication of not including a challenge to the validity of a certain board meeting of Optus Vision in the contemplated proceedings in the following terms: "1. Incorporate the issue of invalid meeting into main case. This will slow down preparation and the trial.
Commence separate proceedings. This could then be used as a bargaining chip in later negotiations. Let progress through the court system in the usual way, although other side may seek to expedite.
Commence no proceedings, but reserve our rights." (Exhibit 5, tab 26, p 2, pars 1-3) 
Another memorandum of 13 September 1996 contemplated a letter of advice to
Seven "to accompany pleadings including advising re causes of action not presently "pleaded" ".

I think the following note, which appears to record attendances upon Stokes and Rice, is quite significant in understanding the decision to initiate these proceedings on a limited basis.
 "Stokes fire all guns (except if seems to dangerous) 
Gary Rice current state of pleading - maybe sep act by PS re brd mtge; not enough info for oppression come to the view no interlocutory relief - better course is to seek fast hearing later in year or early next year - a good deal of commercial urgency" 
This was followed by a note of 19 September 1996 which records "(Stokes) wants to get to court as quickly as possible." 
At the same time, it is clear from internal memoranda that, after the commencement of these proceedings, Freehills continued to give consideration to questions involving fiduciary duties owed to Seven, the validity of board meetings conducted by Optus Vision, oppression of a minority, questions of judicial receivership pending court determinations and the possible insolvency of Optus Vision. These considerations persisted throughout the remainder of into February 1997 to a time shortly before the commencement of the hearing of these proceedings.

Davies was cross-examined on the contents of exhibit 5 covering, for the most part, the material outlined above. She explained that a number of other actions were still under contemplation by Seven in the following passage: "Q. Are you considering bringing the following actions, and in relation to the
Australis matter: An action against the directors of Optus Vision for breach of directors' duties. Is that under consideration? 
A. It's under consideration.

Q. And may well be brought? 
A. May well be brought.

Q. An action against the directors of Optus Vision and Optus Communications and CCI for breach of fiduciary duty or breach of an constructive trust in relation to the back to back agreements? 
A. Yes.

Q. And an oppression action based on a fraud on the minority against all the parties to the joint venture other than yourselves? 
A. Other than my client, yes, that's also being considered.

Q. They're three cause of actions under consideration which may yet be brought? 
A. Yes." (T352.27 - .49) 
However, I am satisfied that in respect of the period up to the week prior to the commencement of this hearing, the substance of par 30 of the Davies affidavit is substantiated by, or is consistent with, the contents of Exhibit [5. Par 30] is in the following terms: "Not long after I was first instructed, I was conscious of and regularly gave consideration to the issues which arose on the plaintiffs' instructions in respect of various complaints about the conduct of Optus Vision and the shareholder defendants towards the plaintiffs. I gave consideration to the possibility of obtaining relief in relation to that conduct, based on allegations of oppression of a minority shareholder, breach of fiduciary duty, or of conspiracy. From time to time the possibility of the Second PBL
Agreement being pleaded to in order to particularise a case of that kind was considered by myself and my firm. However, whenever such a possibility was raised with the various counsel who were from time to time briefed in the proceedings, counsel consistently advised that the case as pleaded was a narrowly-based case and that it should be pursued to its conclusion before any other allegations were pursued in separate later proceedings. At no time before 23 February 1997 did I or my firm advert to the possibility that such later proceedings might be struck out on the basis of the principle in the
Anshun case, nor had any counsel briefed for the plaintiffs advised in relation to this question." 
Furthermore, Davies, whose credit was in no way attacked by Mr Sher, confirmed in cross-examination that the implications of the "principle in the Anshun case" was not adverted to in that period. When cross-examined on the purported reservation of rights by Seven in respect of causes of action not raised in these proceedings, she gave the following evidence: "Q. Isn't it. Well how do you reserve your rights if you don't issue proceedings? 
A. There could have been proceedings afterwards.

Q. But isn't Anshun a problem? 
A. It was no perceived to be a problem at that point.

Q. Why would you reserve your rights if Anshun wasn't a problem? 
A. It wasn't looked at in that way at all.

Q. Wasn't it? 
A. No, Anshun was not mentioned.

Q. Let's face it, Miss Davies', you have heard of Anshun's case long before this case came up? 
A. I have.

Q. And it is fair to say that it comes up frequently in the commercial litigation concept? 
A. It does.

Q. Are you telling his Honour that not one single person in Freehills turned their mind, when they were talking about reserving their rights, to the Anshun problem? 
A. No, that is correct, we didn't.

Q. Not a single one - no one to your knowledge even adverted to it? 
A. No one adverted to it.

Q. Nor did any counsel? 
A. Nor did any counsel.

Q. Experienced they may be, no one uttered a word about it? 
A. No one uttered a word about it." (T339.40 - 340.17) 
The circumstances in which the need to seek the subject amendment were set out in paragraphs 32 to 25 of the Davies affidavit. In my opinion, that sequence of events is also confirmed by the notes of conferences with counsel commencing on 23 February 1997 and by Davies explanation of the impact of material recently received from the defendants and which included the documents contained in exhibit A, with specific emphasis on those documents numbered 30, 31, and 37 to 39. The plaintiffs have satisfied me that the application has been made in good faith and in the circumstances evidenced by
Davies.

Although it may seem a little surprising that earlier consideration was not given to the implications of the Anshun principle, I think the explanation lies in the fact that the issues, as initially pleaded, were seen as a discrete set of issues and separate from the considerations given to questions of oppression and the like. I also accept the evidence of Davies that the very recent receipt of material from the defendants including the second Falloon statement, that of Simpson, and the bundle of documents comprised in exhibit A have all contributed to the realisation that there may lie an arguable case along the lines of the proposed amendment and that such a case may founder on the Anshun principle if not raised in these proceedings.

Accordingly I am satisfied that a) the application has been made bona fide b) a satisfactory explanation has been offered for the lateness of the subject application.

I do not regard the letter of Saggers to his co-directors of Optus Vision of 2
March 1997 nor the evidence of the approach by Stokes to one of Optus Vision's lenders on 15 November 1996 as bringing those conclusions into question.

Prejudice to the defendants: The third question raised by the defendants is that of prejudice to them occasioned by the granting of the application. I think it is accepted by the plaintiffs that the application should fail if the granting of leave resulted in a significant interruption to the hearing of these proceedings. The case management has proceeded on the basis that commercial considerations dictate that the hearing of these proceedings be expedited. However, the course that the case management has taken, in my opinion, facilitates the accommodation of an amendment to the plaintiffs' summons to raise questions concerning the surrounding circumstances and the purpose of the agreements involved in the 1996 arrangements. Optus communications and related interests sought to "defuse" the application by offering not to rely upon Anshun estoppel in any separate proceedings brought by the plaintiffs based upon a case as contemplated in the proposed amendment.
While that offered concession removed the necessity from the plaintiffs viewpoint, of the plaintiffs amending their summons, it underscored the undesirability, from the Court's approach to this litigation, of having those factual issues raised in separate proceedings. I think it is almost beyond argument that the factual issues which the plaintiffs seek to raise, if they are to be properly raised, should be heard in these proceedings. Putting aside the form of the proposed amendment, I think the real question is whether the factual issues which the plaintiffs wish to raise may be determined as part of the questions the subject of the [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p31) order of 18 February 1997. My view is that the factual issues set out in the particulars of the proposed amendment are readily capable of being addressed by the defendants with probably no interruption to the further hearing of this case. Little evidence has been tendered by the defendants on this aspect.
There is the evidence of the Platford affidavit filed on behalf of Continental identifying the need to confer with a resident of the United States and attend to discovery.

However, concentrating for the moment on the factual matters raised in the particulars of the proposed amendment, I consider that the question of further discovery is not a serious impediment to the defendants' expeditious preparation of a case to meet those matters. Nor do I think that the prompt obtaining of any necessary further statements is unreasonably beyond the resources of the defendants.

I am very much fortified in these views by a) The statement on behalf of the plaintiffs that all witness statements upon which they would seek to rely have been filed.
 b) The factual matters contained in the particulars have been addressed, in a limited way, in the Falloon second statement and that of Simpson.
 c) At least in the case of some of the defendants, it appears that little or no further discovery would be necessary.
 d) The plaintiffs' case may continue to be presented during which time the defendants will have the opportunity to address the additional factual matters.
 e) The course of this hearing has taken will ensure that it will overrun the estimate given to the Court by the parties with the result, as I have indicated during the hearing, that there may be some interruption to the hearing to avoid cancellation of the hearing of other cases fixed for hearing in the coming weeks. Any such interruption may be put to good use by the parties.

If I am wrong in this assessment and the determination of the proposed additional factual issues proved to be unmanageable within the determination of the [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p31) questions the subject of the 18 February 1997 order, then those additional issues could be left for later determination. In such an eventuality, the parties would be no worse off than had the issues been made the subject of separate proceedings - taking advantage of Optus Communications' concession on the Anshun question - and, at least the issues would eventually be heard in these proceedings where, in my opinion, they belong.

Futility of the Application: The defendants contend that the proposed amendments suffer from a failure to propound a case that is fairly arguable and in some respects are vexatious as they fail to "identify the real issues".

As to the relief sought in par 11B of the proposed amendment, it was submitted by Mr Meagher SC that it is untenable in law and has no basis in fact. As to the absence of any factual basis, Mr Meagher referred to the financial statements of Tallglen which, it was submitted were quite inconsistent with
Tallglen holding its equity securities in Optus Vision as a joint venturer. It was stated that Seven's published accounts were to like effect.

It was further submitted that the assets which the plaintiffs would have sold as part of the winding up of a joint venture go far beyond what could be regarded as joint venture assets. There was a more fundamental problem, it was submitted: the joint venture, was nowhere defined. It was said to be constituted in part by certain "transaction Agreements", but those agreements were not identified. In my opinion, much of these criticisms are well founded.
However, I am of the view that, the pursuit of such relief, even in modified form to meet those considerations, would cause issues which the defendants would be entitled to meet by adducing evidence as to the conduct of the parties to the joint venture going well beyond the limited factual issues raised in the particulars of the proposed amendment.

Further, as I indicated during the course of submissions, I regard the seeking of such relief as unnecessarily raising possible adverse commercial consequences to Optus Vision.

I note that amongst the issues excised from the [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p31) determination is the plaintiffs' claim to be entitled to rescind. If that issue ever comes to be determined it may be an appropriate time to consider alternative relief such as is sought to be raised by par 11B. At this stage, however, I am satisfied that any leave to amend should not include a claim for relief in terms of par 11B. For similar reasons, I think paragraph 36 of the proposed contentions should go.

Mr Meagher also addressed the terms of proposed contention par 35. I do not propose to restate those submissions. I am satisfied that par 35 cannot stand.
It is clear, for example, from sub-paragraph (e) that reliance is placed upon a construction of the joint venture shareholders agreement which, at law, would preclude Continental and Optus Communications from transferring or issuing equity securities pursuant to the agreement involved in the 1996 arrangements. Yet the opening words of par 35 assume the opposite. In my view par 35 is internally inconsistent and should not be allowed.

Further, I regard what has been described as the `scatter gun' approach of subparagraphs (a) to (g) as confusing and lacking in a statement of the premises founding such allegations, as distinct from the particulars afforded to par 35.

However, I am of the opinion that the plaintiffs should have leave to amend to rely upon the factual matters contained in the particulars of the proposed amendment. In my view that could be achieved by amending the contentions of the summons by alleging as pars 18B, 18C and 18D the allegations made in pars , (ii) and (iii) respectively of the particulars of the proposed amendments (modified to conform with existing terminology of the summons) and amending par 27 of the contentions to add "18A, 18B, 18C and 18D" after the figure "18" in that paragraph.

I am also of the view that the plaintiffs should be at liberty to:
Amend the contentions to state the premises upon which it is alleged that limitations exist upon the exercise of powers under Clauses 12.15 and 12.16 of the joint venture shareholders agreement, the extent of those limitations, and the premises, namely those stated in pars 18, 18A and the particulars of the proposed amendment, which it is alleged represent an impermissible use of those powers.
Make consequential amendments to the relief claimed consistent with the rulings in these reasons.

Inherent in those rulings are my view that the plaintiffs have a fairly arguable case based upon the nature and construction of the joint venture shareholders agreement and related agreements to support contentions founded on the purpose of the powers conferred by Clauses 12.15 and 12.16 and upon limitations upon the exercise of those powers founded upon considerations of reasonableness and upon a duty to act in good faith, consistently with the provisions of clause 33(b) of the joint venture shareholders agreement.

I have not found it necessary to address the further particular submissions of other counsel for the defendants. However, I note that the manner in which the plaintiffs are required to plead their further amendments will address the submissions of Mr Tobias QC as to the present inadequacy of particulars. It follows from these reasons that the plaintiffs will be required to complete their case to closure without any further delay, noting that a full week has been lost upon a succession of applications in these proceedings and by one in a related action. The plaintiffs are directed to bring in short minutes annexing a form of second further amended summons in accordance with these reasons. The plaintiffs are to pay the defendants' costs of the application and costs caused by and incidental to the subject amendment.
 o0o 
SCHEDULE - Joint venture shareholder agreement: the Optus Vision Joint Venture - Optus
Vision Shareholder Agreement dated 19 May 1995 - related agreements: agreements executed contemporaneously with the joint venture shareholders agreement.
 - the 1996 arrangements: the arrangements surrounding the execution of the agreements referred to in pars 18 and 18A of the Further Amended Summons, including those agreements.
 - Optus Communications: Optus Communications Pty Ltd - Optus Vision: Optus Vision Pty Ltd - Davies: Rebecca Anne Davies - Davies Affidavit: Davies affidavit sworn 27 February 1997 - Freehills: Freehill Hollingdale & Page - Seven Group: Corporations within the Seven Network Ltd group - Seven: Seven Network Ltd - Tallglen: Tallglen Pty Ltd - Saggers: Phillip Patrick Saggers - Stokes: Kerry Stokes - Cousins: Geoffrey Cousins - Rice: Gary Rice - PBL: Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd - Falloon: Nicholas Graham Falloon - Second Falloon statement: Falloon statement of 22 February 1997 - Platford: Colleen Anne Platford - Platford affidavit: Platford affidavit sworn 3 March 1997 - Continental: Continental Cablevision of Australia Inc * * * 
