

Smits versus Buckworth Matter No 3869/96 [1997] NSWSC 422 (22 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 6 March 1998 
Smits versus Buckworth /96 September 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /96 - SMITS V BUCKWORTH 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs are solicitors. They carried out legal work for a company, Howship Holdings Pty Ltd, to which I will refer merely as "Howship" upon the instructions of a Mr Baird. 
On 28 October 1993, the plaintiffs rendered a memorandum of costs, a copy of which is set out as Appendix A. This was accompanied by a memorandum of disbursements totalling $529.88. At Mr Baird's request, further particulars of the sum claimed in Appendix A were provided by letters dated 27 March 1996 and May 1996. The solicitors then served a statutory demand on Howship. Howship applied to set aside the statutory demand, but its application was made out of time and I dismissed it (reported as Howship Holdings Pty Ltd v
Leslie <case>; [(1996) 21 ACSR 440).] Thereafter the solicitors sought to wind up Howship in the
Federal Court, where those proceedings are still pending.

On 23 August 1996, Lena Ruggero, the "Proper Officer" of this Court under the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), received an application by Howship for assessment of those costs. She went through the appropriate procedures and referred the matter, File No 90734 of , to a person who returned it because he knew one of the solicitors involved. Ms Ruggero then reassigned the matter to Mr Buckworth to assess the costs.

On 5 September 1996, Howship filed three further applications for assessment of costs. File No 90826 of 1996 was created in respect of a memorandum of costs of Howship re the National Australia Bank, which is Appendix R to these reasons. File No 90827 of 1996 was created in respect of a matter of an enquiry by the ICAC. The bill gave particulars of time then charged 52 hours at $350 an hour, totalling $18,200. The final bill, which was numbered 90828 of 1996 was marked "Re Tax Minimisation and Finance Applications". It gave details of time spent and charged 31 hours at $350 a hour, totalling $10,850.
The bills 90826/7/8 were rendered in April/May 1996. In each case, Ms Ruggero went through the prescribed procedure, and in accordance with practice, assigned the assessment of costs in these matters also to the defendant, Mr
Buckworth.

The defendant, Mr Buckworth, is a barrister. The Law Almanac shows that he was admitted as such in 1978. Before then, again according to the Law Almanac, he had extensive experience as a solicitor.

The solicitors' response to the application was filed with the Court on 18
September 1996 and on 24 September 1996 the applications were referred to Mr
Buckworth by the Court. On 30 September, Mr Buckworth sent two memoranda to the solicitors which are set out as Appendices H and I to these reasons (I have, for convenience, used the annexure letters referred to in the principal affidavit filed on behalf of the solicitors).

The solicitors challenge Mr Buckworth's ability to require them to "serve and file bills in a form which enable an assessment to be made" as mentioned in
Appendix H. They told Mr Buckworth this on 11 October 1996. They said in 90734 that the bills related primarily to the negotiation and documentation of a complex joint venture for a development at Fern Bay, Newcastle. They advised
Mr Buckworth that the evidence in the winding up proceedings in the Federal
Court set out Mr Baird's complaints with reference to an item by item debate on the correctness of the accounts, and also contained copies of all relevant file notes of the solicitors. The solicitors ended their letter as follows: "Accordingly, it would be a significant waste of the resources and unnecessary duplication if the parties are required to reproduce such evidence, which has been given under oath. In the interests of expediency, it is much easier to furnish a copy of the relevant parts of those Affidavits to the Assessor. That is what has been done.
 "Please let us know if you require anything further." 
Mr Buckworth replied on 17 October: "A bill or bills in proper form are required. They are to [be] filed and served on or before 31 instant. No further submissions will be accepted on that component of the assessment proceedings." 
I should note at this stage that there was also another aspect of the matter on which the solicitors and Mr Buckworth took different views. In the application, Howship had said that the costs, the subject of the application, were included in a bill of costs constituted by letter dated 27 March 1996.
The application suggested that the material was not a bill of costs, and did not provide sufficient details to enable the client to understand just what was the work for which it had to pay. In paragraph 3 of the solicitors' response to the application filed on 18 September 1996, they contended that the client had waived or was estopped from taking that point in view of its conduct after receiving the memorandum of fees. It will be noted in Appendix H that Mr Buckworth said, "The submission at para 3 of the Response is not accepted. No further submissions will be accepted on this subject." In his memorandum of 17 October 1996, Mr Buckworth reaffirmed this attitude.

The solicitors then wrote to Mr Buckworth on 21 October 1996, pointing out that it was not necessary for him to deal with paragraph 3 of the response, as no determination had been sought from him. They said, "That would require a separate application to a Court. It is sufficient to note that we do not regard ourselves as being bound by your purported determination. The application can proceed in any event without prejudice thereto." The solicitors then said that they considered that the particulars which had already been supplied were those required to be included in the bill of costs and submitted that Mr Buckworth was not to determine the application until he had given a reasonable opportunity to the solicitors to make submissions and given due consideration to those submissions. They contested his right to determine that no further submissions would be accepted on a component of the assessment.

To this Mr Buckworth replied on the same day that he had made a determination rejecting the submission in paragraph 3, but if the solicitors considered that they had any further submissions relevant to that determination, they could make them within ten days. He confirmed that his determination directing that an itemised bill in proper form be prepared still stood.

After further correspondence, Mr Buckworth confirmed that his view was the "bills" were not in a form to enable an assessment to be made and he would not assess "until you have complied with my request to provide bills in proper assessable form." The letter also said, "It is regrettable that you have taken the stand that you have in this matter and have even become increasingly discourteous. Your threats are noted. Such will not have the result you are clearly attempting to avoid: that is my assessing this and the associated matters. The fact that a judge or costs assessor, or any decision maker, makes a decision during proceedings with which you do not agree is not a basis for seeking the disqualification of that decision maker." 
On 29 October 1996, the solicitors said, "We attempted ... to explain to you as dispassionately as possible the advice we had received and which we accept.
Your description of that letter as `increasingly discourteous', and the tone adopted by you in your `Notice', provide further evidence, if it be needed, of inalienable prejudice against the Respondents.
 "We reject your apparent views of the law. We are fortified in our own views by the decision of Barr, AJ in Action Australia Pty Ltd versus Michael Frankel & Co (unreported, 24 April 1995) onto the track of which you kindly put us. We note your refusal to perform the function of an Assessor. Rather than maintain this undignified debate, we shall have the matter resolved by the
Court." 
The only response to this was that Mr Buckworth sent the solicitors "with compliments" on 30 October 1996, a series of pages which purport to come from the College of Law's Costing Update.

The summons in the present proceedings was filed on 31 October 1996. It sought a declaration that the defendant, Mr Buckworth, had been bound to determine the applications in 90734, 90826, 90827 and 90828, an order restraining Mr
Buckworth from proceeding to determine those applications, or alternatively, a writ of common law prohibition to have the same effect.

Howship did not wish to become involved in the proceedings. The Attorney
General was granted leave to intervene and he was the proper contradictor at the hearing which took place before me on 8 August 1997. On that occasion Mr S
J Archer appeared for the solicitors and Mr P Webb QC and Mr D Cowan for the
Attorney General.

The proceedings were reduced to two basic issues: 
A. whether Mr Buckworth could demand that a bill of costs "in proper form" be provided; and 
B. whether prohibition or some like remedy should go.

The Crown Solicitor sought particulars of the solicitors' claim. On the first aspect of the case, the solicitors advised that: the bill of costs was a "bill of costs" as defined in [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s173.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) for the purposes of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p11) of that Act; the applicant having sought assessment of the "bill of costs", it is not open to a costs assessor to determine that the document was not a bill of costs; (c) it is not the function of a costs assessor to determine whether the document submitted to him for assessment is or is not a bill of costs; and nothing in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p11) of the Act empowers a costs assessor to require a barrister or solicitor to provide a bill of costs in form different from that delivered to the client.

As to (b), the solicitors relied on a reasonable apprehension of bias brought about because of the demands of the assessor, the fact that the assessor gave no credible reason for his insistence that documents in a different form be submitted to him in place of the bill of costs, the assessor's tone, manner and contents of his communications, his refusal to receive or entertain submissions before he decided matters against them and his high-handed attitude.

I will deal with issues A and B in turn.

A. It is necessary to set out or refer to various parts of the [Legal
Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), as amended. This Act commenced on 1 January 1988 and replaced the Legal
Practitioners Act, 1898, as amended, as the statute governing the rights and obligations of barristers and solicitors, particularly as to the moderation of solicitors' costs. The Legal Profession Reform Act 1993 substituted a new Part into the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), replacing the former Part which had dealt with taxation of costs. I was invited to read the Minister's Second Reading Speech when introducing this Act and there being no objection from the solicitors, I have done so. I do not, however, consider that there is anything in that speech which really assists in the resolution of the present problems.

In the review which follows, I am referring to the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) in force before the amendments made by Act 95 of 1996 which only came into effect on 1
April, 1997. Section 173(1) defines "bill of costs" as meaning "A bill of costs for providing legal services, and includes a memorandum of fees".
Section 174 then provides, so far as is relevant: "174(1) This Part gives the following rights to any client of a barrister or solicitor: ...
 the client need not pay the barrister's or solicitor's bill until it has been assessed by a costs assessor if the client is not given the information about how costs will be charged (Division 2) ...

Nothing in this section confers any additional rights on a client or derogates from any rights conferred on a client under this Part." 
It is also necessary to set out portions of ss 182, 192, 193, 203, 207, 208 and 208S.
 "182(2) A barrister or solicitor who fails to make a disclosure in accordance with this Division ... may not maintain proceedings for the recovery of the costs unless the costs have been assessed under Division 6." "192(1) Proceedings for the recovery of costs by a barrister or solicitor for providing legal services must not be commenced or maintained against any person unless at least 30 days have passed since a bill for those costs was given to the person in accordance with this Division." "193(1) The regulations may make provision for or with respect to the form of, and the particulars to be included in, bills of costs.

A bill of costs may be described as a memorandum of fees or in any other way authorised by the regulations." "199(1) A client who is given a bill of costs may apply to the proper officer of the Supreme Court for an assessment of the whole of, or any part of, those costs. ...

If any costs have been paid without a bill of costs, the client may nevertheless apply for an assessment. For that purpose the request for payment by the barrister or solicitor is taken to be the bill of costs." "203(1) An application for assessment is to be made in the form prescribed by the regulations ..." "207(1) A costs assessor may, by notice in writing, require the applicant or any barrister, solicitor or client concerned to produce any relevant documents of or held by the person in respect of the matter.

The costs assessor may require, by any such notice, further particulars to be furnished by the applicant, barrister, solicitor or client as to instructions given to, or work done by, the barrister or solicitor or any other legal practitioner in respect of the matter." "208(1) A costs assessor must not determine an application for assessment unless the costs assessor: has given both the applicant and any barrister, solicitor or client or other person concerned a reasonable opportunity to make written submissions to the costs assessor in relation to the application; and has given due consideration to any submissions so made.

In considering an application, a costs assessor is not bound by rules of evidence and may inform himself or herself on any matter in such manner as he or she thinks fit.

For the purposes of determining whether an application for assessment may be or is required to be made ... a costs assessor may determine any of the following: whether or not disclosure has been made in accordance with 
Division 2 ... ; whether a costs agreement exists, and its terms." 
Sections 208A and 208B deal with matters to be considered by costs assessors in assessing bills of costs. Section 208C empowers costs assessors to decline to assess bills of costs if certain costs agreements are in place. Section
S(4) provides: "A costs assessor is not an officer of the Court when acting as a costs assessor." 
It is to be noted that the definition of bills of costs in <case>, apart from noting that the expression includes memorandum of fees, defines the expression in terms of itself.

The expression "bills of costs" was the title to Part V of the 1898 Act and was also used in <case> and <case> of the 1987 Act before 1993. The expression was well understood. As Cullen, CJ said, in giving the judgment of the Full
Court in Ex parte Farmers' Fertilizers Corporation Ltd <case>; [(1916) 16 SR 645], , "The authorities ... show what is meant is a detailed account showing the specific items of work done, and the specific charges allocated to each of those." The authorities under the 1898 Act were again reviewed by Bowen, CJ in
Eq in Florence Investments Pty Ltd versus HG Slater & Co [[1975] 2 NSWLR ]
and at 402, his Honour said, "In order to constitute a bill in accordance with this legislative provision, an account must be such that it gave the client such reasonable information as would enable him to take advice as to its taxation; it need not be so explicit on the face of it as to enable a solicitor at once to say, without further enquiry, whether the charges were proper; it was material to consider what information was in the client's own possession ..." 
The Court of Appeal in Zizza versus Seymour [[1976] 2 NSWLR 135], 136, applied Ex parte Farmers Fertilizers Corp and held that a lump sum bill which did not comply with what Cullen, CJ had said was not a bill. In Swane v Marsh 18 October 1978, unreported, the Court of Appeal affirmed this view saying that in Zizza's case the majority had "expressed a deliberate view as to the requirements of a `bill' of costs within the meaning of <case> of the Legal Practitioners Act." Hutley, JA dealt with the history of solicitors' bills derived from Christian: A Short History of Solicitors (Reeves & Turner London 1896) p 114 in showing that the rule that solicitors had to render a bill and wait a month before suing on it was of most ancient origin.

The classic definition of bill of costs was applied in cases after the 1993 amendment; see for instance Action Australia Pty Ltd versus Frankel, Barr, AJ December 1994, unreported. However, on 12 May 1995, Regulation 22A commenced. That regulation, made for the purposes of <case> of the Act, set out the particulars that are to be included in a bill of costs. The particulars seem to eliminate the need for setting out a line by line statement of the date on which each item of work was done as had been mainly required by the traditional law because Regulation 22A provided that the bill was to specify the work done and the period over which that work was done. Even before that regulation, the judgment of Barr, AJ, as his Honour then was, accepted that a solicitor may send a bill itemising the days on which various pieces of work were done together with a time billing report showing what solicitor did the work, what was his or her rate and how much time was spent.

It is easy to be side-tracked into an academic discussion as to what is a bill of costs within the meaning of <case> of the Act as substituted in 1993.
However, Mr Webb QC and Mr Cowan say that it does not matter very much. This is because under the Act it is not the bill of costs which is sent for assessment but it is costs that are sent for assessment (vide <case>). Even in sections such as 208A which prescribe the matters which assessors must consider, the legislature refers to "an application relating to a bill of costs". Furthermore, there are some deemed bills of costs. Thus, under s (3), if the client has paid money to his lawyers without a bill of costs, the request for payment is taken to be a bill of costs. So a solicitor may say to a client, "I will defend you on a charge of having more than the prescribed concentration of alcohol in your blood for $1,000 cash in advance". The client says "OK" and hands over $1,000. The solicitor's statement will be a bill of costs.

Accordingly, the only significance that a bill of costs has is that the solicitor may not sue under <case> until he has served a signed bill of costs.
The process of assessment of costs is, however, one which may be carried out though there is not a bill of costs in the ordinary form at all.

I examined <case> in Parramatta River Lodge Pty Ltd versus Sunman (1991) 5 BPR
That case was decided before the 1993 amendments, but dealt with the situation where a mortgagor was liable to pay a mortgagee's legal costs and how far a mortgagee could waive a "proper" bill of costs. My decision dealt with a situation where there was a common law ability to waive a proper bill of costs which could not be exercised if a third party was liable to pay the bill. Although <case> defines "client" to include a person who is party to a costs agreement, it is probable that the expression still covers people such as mortgagors who have to pay a mortgagee's legal bill. If this is so, then one can still get the situation where, if a solicitor demands of the mortgagee payment of a certain sum and the mortgagee agrees, the mortgagor can apply to the court to appoint an assessor even though there are no details at all as to the work that was done by the solicitor for the mortgagee.

Accordingly, I would agree with Mr Webb QC's submissions that under the assessment provisions of the 1993 Act, the provision of a bill of costs (or deemed bill of costs) merely (a) triggers the "client's" rights to make an application for assessment of costs; or (b) if no such application is made, removes a barrier to the solicitor recovering his or her costs in the court.
Accordingly, the jurisdiction of the costs assessor does not depend on whether a proper bill of costs was delivered.

Were it not for one matter, it would be unnecessary to pursue this matter any further. However, the matter that needs to be pursued is whether the costs assessor has determined in his correspondence that the objection in paragraph of the solicitors' response, that Howship had waived any bill of costs, was incorrect.

The format of Part 11 is odd in that it allows an assessor to assess the fair and reasonable costs that are payable by the client after due consideration of submissions, but does not appear to have to give reasons for any determination. There is an appeal, on a matter of law arising in the proceedings, to the Supreme Court (s 208L), and there is also an appeal with leave to the Supreme Court (s 208M). Section 208J provides that the costs assessor is to issue to each party a certificate that sets out his or her determination. Regulation 26I specifies the contents of that certificate. The only mention of giving reasons in that regulation is under sub-regulations (b) and 1(c), that if he or she declines to assess a bill of costs under s
C, or determines that a term of a costs agreement is unjust, then the certificate is to set out the basis for doing so. It would seem to follow that no reasons need be specified for any other part of the determination.

It is to be noted that the only power given to the costs assessor to make a determination, at least in a case such as the present, is to make a determination as to the amount of costs that is fair and reasonable and who should pay those costs plus a determination under <case> as to interest (vide
Regulation 26I). There does not appear to be a power to make determinations along the way. This is because <case> says that on making a determination, a certificate has got to issue and the only certificates that can issue are certificates as to the amount of the costs. This construction is weakened by s
L, which seems to suggest that there will be a decision as to a matter of law arising in the proceedings before the costs assessor.

Generally speaking, unless a statute shows an intention to confer jurisdiction to determine a collateral matter, the decision of that tribunal does not create any estoppel: Ex parte Amalgamated Engineering Union; Re Jackson <case>; [(1937) 38 SR 13.]
However, some administrative tribunals can make findings which will operate as an issue estoppel such as the Fair Rents Board in NSW (Gibbs versus McCorquodale [(1950) 67 WN 169).]
Probably a decision by a costs assessor along the way does not give rise to an issue estoppel; see Cachia versus Isaacs [(1985) 3 NSWLR 366], but it is most unwise for a tribunal of this nature to decide collateral questions which are not necessary for its final determination, particularly when it does not need to give reasons.

Returning to the main point of the dispute, the assessor insisted that the solicitors file a bill in a "proper form". Mr Archer submits he had no power to do so.

The only power that the assessor would have to make such a direction is found in <case>, a power to order further particulars. Mr Archer put that requiring the solicitors to put the bill into "proper form" could not come under that head. Mr Webb QC and Mr Cowan submitted otherwise. They submitted that it is always the case that a tribunal can insist that the parties put the material upon which the tribunal is asked to adjudicate into a form which the tribunal can readily assess. Furthermore, they submitted that what the assessor required was indeed within the scope of the word "particulars" in s (2).

There is no doubt at all, as was agreed by both sides during argument, that the assessor could have so structured his request as to constitute particulars. For instance, he could have asked for the dates and the work done on those dates and the time taken etc. Indeed, the author of the College of
Law notes upon which Mr Buckworth relies, says, "It may be however, that in genuine disputes, an assessor would effectively compel production of a bill under the guise of further particulars. ... Such particulars could well be necessary to form a realistic appraisal of reasonableness of time taken where all that is initially provided is only general details and an aggregate of hours." This is not, however, what the assessor has done in the instant case.

So far as the question of construing the word "particulars" in <case> is concerned, I believe one gets some help from the cases on pleadings although these are not directly in point. Those cases make a very clear distinction between the pleadings, the particulars and the evidence. The pleadings are the formulation of the claim, the particulars give details as to the material facts that have been pleaded and the evidence is the means by which those facts are to be proved. While they flesh out a pleading, particulars do not compensate for a defective pleading: Bruce versus Odhams Press Ltd [[1936] 1
KB 697], -3 and H 1976 Nominees Pty Ltd versus Galli <case>; [(1979) 30 ALR 181.] 
The ordinary dictionary meaning of the word "particulars" is "detailed information"; see counsels' argument in Royal Bank of Canada versus Inland
Revenue Commissioners [[1972] Ch 665], 667.
Furthermore, the further particulars in <case> are further particulars as to instructions given to or work done by the lawyer in respect of the matter.
This must mean detailed information as to that work, it does not involve the form in which that information is to be presented.

At this stage, this really merges with the first point as to whether there is an inherent power in a tribunal to require that information be submitted in a particular format.

I put to Mr Webb QC that not even a court can require this. He informed me that courts do this every day, for instance, ordering, in a building case, that parties furnish a Scott Schedule. Nowadays, provisions such as Part 26 of the Supreme Court Rules invest a court with power to make directions of this nature. However, it is clear that even before Part 26 and its equivalent in other courts was inserted in the Rules, courts did make this sort of direction. Each court, whether superior or inferior, has an inherent power to make rules of practice to ensure that justice is done; see eg O'Toole v
Scott [[1965] AC 939] and Bogeta Pty Ltd versus Wales [[1977] 1 NSWLR 139], 149 and generally, Mason, The Inherent Jurisdiction of the Court [(1983) 57 ALJ .] 
Being a person who has been afflicted on many occasions by being presented with heaps of unindexed material, "conveniently" put together in lever arch files, I have often thought of saying that unless I am given proper assistance in finding the gold in amongst the dross, I will not admit them into evidence.
I have, however, hung back because I doubted whether [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s11.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) or the inherent powers of the court were sufficient to enable me to disregard evidence. Practically speaking, it is also necessary for judges to realize that demands to put material into orderly form may very well involve litigants in an expensive procedure and if too much is demanded, the costs of the litigation become even greater. However, as Mr Webb QC points out, this is really a proper reason for not exercising a discretion rather than denying that the discretion exists. Certainly, superior courts can decline to give a decision until the case is put in order; see Attorney-General versus Wentworth [(1991) 24 NSWLR 347], 350.

However, on the other side of the line, it is quite clear that judges have no power to compel a party in a civil case to proffer certain evidence, or control over the order in which the party calls witnesses. Might it not be argued, therefore, that if there is no power to have witnesses called in a logical order, there is no power to order that written material be presented in a logical order? 
Mr Webb QC says that this is really asking the wrong question. He says that parties to curial proceedings have the right to present their case in their own way, but that has nothing to do with the power of a court or tribunal to ensure that it is in a position to do justice by having the material put before it in an orderly fashion.

Although I had some doubt at the hearing as to whether Mr Webb QC's submissions were correct, on more mature consideration I consider they are and that both courts and tribunals have an inherent power to require material to be placed before them in a way in which they are able to absorb the material, subject, of course, to the overriding discretion not to insist on that occurring, particularly in cases where the parties would suffer hardship if the requirement were made.

However, how does this impinge on the present case? First, I consider that the request to put the material into the format of a bill of costs is not a request for particulars within the meaning of <case>. It is not a request for further information as to the dispute; it is asking that the dispute be formulated in a particular way.

Secondly, the question is whether the inherent power of the tribunal to have the case presented in a logical way is subsumed in the statutory power under s to require documents or to require particulars. It must also be remembered that there is an additional power in <case> for the assessor to inform himself or herself on any matter in such a manner as he or she thinks fit. It must be remembered too that the 1993 Act was setting up a completely new procedure. It was not a situation such as O'Toole versus Scott where there was a pre-existing discretion upon which the legislature placed some clarification. It seems to me that the specific powers given in <case> and s indicate that in so far as those powers are given, they cover the field.
It would seem to me completely otiose to specify that the assessor is to have certain powers to get particulars or documents if the legislature intended that he or she should have a completely broad inherent power to require reformulation of the case. Accordingly, in my view the assessor does not have the power to order a party to reformulate the claim.

The Act seems to proceed on the basis that the assessor is to be paid, if need be, out of moneys from the statutory interest account and that he or she can determine who is to pay the costs of the assessment (s 208F(4)).

It seems to me, accordingly, that the proper construction of the legislation is that the implied power of the tribunal to order its process is restricted by the express words of <case> and <case> and that whilst it has powers to make the sort of directions that Mr Buckworth has made in Appendix I to these reasons (except perhaps direction H requiring bills to be signed and dated), it has no power to require any particular form of bill of costs to be submitted.

I am reinforced in this view by the decision of Barr, AJ in Action
Australia Pty Ltd versus Frankel (No 2) (24 April 1995 unreported). That case also concerned Mr Buckworth as an assessor. The learned Judge in that case had to deal with a suggestion that the client's bringing of the proceedings were justified because it had acted on the rulings made by Mr Buckworth. Mr
Buckworth had in that case expressed the view that there was no bill of costs because the collection of documents submitted to him were not individually and collectively signed and that the documents were incapable of understanding and assessment as a bill of costs in the form presented. Barr, AJ, ordering that the client pay indemnity costs, simply said, "I disagree with the two reasons put forward by Mr Buckworth in his letter and I think that his conclusion was wrong." It seems that, despite this, the assessor is still adhering to his earlier views.

Accordingly, I am of the view that it was not open to the assessor to require the solicitors to put their bill of costs "in proper form". It was, however, competent for the assessor, if he considered it appropriate, to ask for particulars which may have elicited much the same information, so long as the particulars were directed to the matters mentioned in <case> of the Act.

B. As de Smith, Woolf & Jowell, Judicial Review of Administrative
Action 5th ed (Sweet & Maxwell London 1995) say at p 622 para 14-015, "Prohibition is one of the oldest writs known to the law." Its early use was to limit the jurisdiction of courts outside the Royal Court system such as ecclesiastical courts. At 14-019 p 624, the learned authors say that "Certiorari and prohibition established themselves as the most important remedies in administrative law because in the latter part of the 17th century local administration was free from effective supervision by the central government." As new administrative bodies were formed, the courts took the view that prohibition could properly issue to administrative bodies where
Parliament had made no express provision for another method of challenge (de Smith 14-021 p 625). "If the act or decision was of a judicial character, its validity could be challenged by certiorari or prohibition" (ibid 14-023 p 626).

Modern superior courts in Australia may grant prohibition in four situations, where there is an excess of jurisdiction by a body against whom prohibition lies; (2) where such body denies natural justice; (3) where there is an error of law apparent on the face of the record; and (4) where the decision has been obtained by fraud or collusion (see Benjafield &
Whitmore, Australian Administrative Law 3rd ed pp 207-209 (LBC Sydney ). The present application is brought under the second head, it being alleged that natural justice is being denied because the defendant was acting in such a way that his conduct would excite, in the minds of the parties or in reasonable members of the public, a reasonable apprehension that he might not bring an unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the matter before him; vide
R versus Watson; ex parte Armstrong <case>; [(1976) 136 CLR 248]; Livesey versus NSW Bar Association <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 288.] 
Although certiorari to quash and prohibition ordinarily put an end to proceedings, both parties envisaged that if prohibition were granted against
Mr Buckworth, the assessment could proceed before a fresh assessor. I think that prohibition can issue in such a form, though I am not aware of any reported case where this has occurred. A new trial has been ordered as an auxiliary order to certiorari usually only when mandamus is also sought: R v Kent Justices [[1936] 1 KB 547], but probably generally, R versus Northumberland Appeal Tribunal; Ex p Shaw <case>; [[1952] 1 KB 338], 354 and R versus Industrial Appeals Court; Ex p Henry Berry & Co (Australasia) Ltd <case>; [[1955] VLR 156], 165. Furthermore, prohibition can issue in a conditional or limited form so as to do justice to the individual case, see eg Ex p
Roxburgh <case>; [(1919) 19 SR 375.] 
Mr Archer says that the situation of a costs assessor is not unlike a referee appointed by the court under Part 72 of the Rules. With such people, one looks at not only their misstatement or misconception, but also the process or path by which they come to make the impugned pronouncements (Gas & Fuel
Corporation of Victoria versus Wood Hall Ltd <case>; [[1978] VR 385], 398-9). The analogy between referees and costs assessors must not be pressed too far as it is now clear that a costs assessor is bound to give fully detailed reasons for his or her determination: Kennedy Miller
Television Pty Ltd versus Lancken (Sperling, J, 1 August 1997, unreported) (noted by S Patteson in her article Assessors must give Reasons (1996) Law Society Journal No 6 p 26).

The concept of natural justice with such people will vary with particular circumstances having regard to what is required to achieve fairness between the parties in the particular circumstances: Xureb versus Viola [(1989) 18
NSWLR 453], 468. An example of denial of natural justice is found where the decision maker expresses support for a policy with such degree of intransigence and intemperance as to portray a mind closed against reasoned argument; see R versus Marion City; ex parte Independent Grocers Co-operative
Ltd [(1984) 37 SASR 436.] See also
R versus Secretary of State for the Environment; ex parte Brent LBC [[1982]
QB 593], .

However, it must always be remembered that in this type of case, the court requires a "high degree of probability that the tribunal involved will be so far prejudiced as to be incapable of a fair judgment": Ex p Burnett; Re
Wurth [(1955) 72 WN 457], and see R versus London County Council; Ex p Empire Theatres [(1894) 71
LT 638](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281894%29%2071%20LT%20638 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 639.

In R versus Australian Stevedoring Industry Board; ex parte Norman Stevedoring
Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1953) 88 CLR 100], 116, four Justices of the High Court said that in a case where actual bias was alleged, "as distinguished from a bias through interest, before it amounts to a disqualification it is necessary that there should be strong grounds for supposing that the ... officer has so acted that he cannot be expected fairly to discharge his duties. Bias must be `real'. The officer must so have conducted himself that a high probability arises of a bias inconsistent with the fair performance of his duties, with the result that a substantial distrust of the result must exist in the minds of reasonable persons." 
The solicitors say in the instant case that the assessor's mind is closed.
Further they say that in the setting of a situation where the assessor is not bound to give reasons, a party has good cause to be even more apprehensive than in other cases because it may be very difficult to establish that the decision itself was affected by actual bias.

As to this last point, there was some discussion in argument as to whether the assessor could be compelled to give reasons. The Act, in <case>, allows an appeal where the assessor has made a decision on a matter of law. It is hard to see how an appeal could be satisfactorily conducted if there were no means of finding out the reasons for the assessor's decision. It may be that this is why <case> is in the legislation, to allow appeals generally when one can see that the mere fact of decision raises queries.

Sometimes with this type of decision maker, the court allows interrogatories at least to determine what was the raw material before the decision maker where no transcript has been kept and where no other way exists by which the existence of that material can be established: Zukerman versus Law Society of
NSW [[1982] 1 NSWLR 568], 575. Sometimes the court may issue a "please explain" certiorari to gain the reasons. However, often, there is a public policy reason against requiring an administrative decision maker to produce his or her reasons; see Nathanson,"Probing the Mind of the Administrator"  <case>; [421 US 560] . Professor Davis deals with the problem in his Administrative
Law Treatise Vol 3 (KC Davis Publishing Co San Diego 1980) at pp 285 and following, where he says that whilst the Supreme Court of the USA has laid it down that a court "may require the administrative officials who participated in the decision to give testimony explaining their action": Citizens to
Preserve Overton Park versus Volpe <case>; [401 US 402], 420 , US courts generally do not require administrative decision makers to provide details of the reasoning process by which they reached their decision.
See particularly, Davis op cit Vol 3 at p 297. This brief review of the authorities indicates that it is safer to proceed on the basis that if a costs assessor does not volunteer his or her reasons for a determination, those reasons will not be able to be compulsorily obtained, though I would prefer to keep the matter open for when it directly arises.

The solicitors say that they rely on the following matters as demonstrating that the defendant has such a closed mind that a member of the public would have a reasonable apprehension that he might not bring an unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the matter before him.

His statements, which are described as peremptory and highhanded, in rejecting the submissions as to para 3 of the solicitors' response out of hand and his insistence that he would accept no more submissions on those matters.

The fact that the assessor seems to have formulated his own unique rules for determining costs assessments, see Appendix I.

The defendant's notice of 17 October 1996 that further submissions had not affected his mind and that no further submissions would be accepted on the form of the bills, which notice is described by the solicitors as couched in "intransigent and dismissive terms".

The offence taken by the assessor in his notice of 21 October 1996, which is described by the solicitors as taking up an obdurate position.

The terms of personal affront and the insistence upon untenable views of the law contained in the notice of 29 October 1996.

The despatch to the solicitors of the College of Law notes on costs assessors without comment or covering letter, apparently with the intention of representing that such article supported the assessor's position in some way; and 
The adoption in respect of applications 90826/7/8 of the same position as that taken in the first matter.

As to the this, Mr Webb QC and Mr Cowan say that there is no evidence to show that the costs assessor might be partial. He was met with a situation where the client had said that it did not understand the way the solicitors had charged and the assessor was being pressed with a whole lot of papers instead of the facts being presented to him in an easily digestible form. The assessor was well able to mould procedures for the due conduct of his enquiry and did so. Even if he erred in respect to just what he could require the solicitors to do, that does not show that he had a closed mind or denied natural justice.
Indeed, the correspondence shows that from time to time the assessor did make it clear that despite the fact that he had said no further submissions would be accepted, if there was anything usefully to be said, he would listen to it.

Mr Webb QC also put that there was no suggestion that the solicitors didn't understand the position the assessor was taking. They just did not wish to expend the time and energy in putting their case in the form the assessor wished, but rather would have him find his way through the affidavits and other material.

I was referred by counsel to most of the leading cases in the area of alleged judicial bias that had been decided by the High Court and the Court of Appeal in recent years, but it is not necessary for me to look at the authorities in any greater detail than what has been done.

One of the matters that troubled me and I mentioned it to counsel during argument, was that the correspondence from the solicitors, to my mind, demonstrated what is popularly called "judge baiting", that is, a litigant or his or her legal representative, usually when seeking to avoid a particular judge presiding, so moulds submissions that a volatile judge will make some utterance which will disqualify himself. I generally take the view that where a party has deliberately set out to bait the decision maker and the decision maker rises to the bait, that is less likely to be a case of bias than one where the decision maker coolly and calmly shows that he or she is prejudiced against a party. However, Mr Archer denied that his clients were "judge baiting" and said that actually the boot was on the other foot, Mr Buckworth was baiting his clients.

With respect, it does seem to me that these solicitors, who were acting for themselves and who had obviously spent many years and much time and effort in endeavouring to recover their fees, did address their comments to the assessor in less moderate language than might always be the case. On the other hand, the assessor appears to have adopted an imperious tone right from the beginning. This tone is out of kilter with what parties in modern disputes expect of their adjudicator.

Having said this, however, it does not seem to me that the assessor stepped over the line where an ordinary member of the community would think that he had completely closed his mind and was likely to decide the matter against the solicitors. A judge who expresses annoyance that parties or counsel have not assisted him or her in submissions of law or have left the judge personally to go through piles of papers without assistance does not thereby give any reasonable person the appearance of pre-judgment or bias. It was unwise for the assessor to say that no further submissions would be considered on certain matters at an early stage, because he had one task and that was to make a final decision as to what were the fair and reasonable costs. He could indicate as judges often do, that he was unlikely to be assisted by further submissions unless they covered new ground, but that really is as far as he should have gone. However, the fact that the assessor said that he would not receive further submissions on what really were subsidiary matters does not, to my mind, show a closed mind with respect to the final matter for determination. Moreover, I accept what Mr Webb QC says, that when one looks at the whole of the correspondence, the assessor did indicate that if there was something more to be said, he would listen.

In all the circumstances, I do not find that the solicitors have established that the assessor was biased.

It follows that I should make a declaration in appropriate terms that the assessor is not able to demand that the solicitors produce bills of costs in any particular form before he proceeds with the assessment. If the parties agree, I will make subsidiary declarations to carry out what is in these reasons. I will not, however, make any order for prohibition or injunction.
The preferable course is now to stand the matter over so that these reasons can be considered and short minutes brought in, and I would assume that at the time when short minutes are brought in, the question of costs can be debated.

I will formally fix 16 October 1997 at 9.30 am for the short minutes to be brought in, but if counsel contact my Associate no later than 9 October, some more convenient Tuesday or Thursday at 9.30 am can be fixed in lieu.
 * * * 
