

Currey versus Sutherland Shire Council and Ors Matter No Ca 40545/96 [1998]
NSWSC 398 (22 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
JULIE ANN CURREY versus SUTHERLAND SHIRE COUNCIL & ORS 
CA 40545/96 September 1998 
Mason P, Handley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: LAND AND ENVIRONMENT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES - PEARLMAN J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40545/96; LEC 40093/96 
DELIVERED: 22 September 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 27 August 1998 
PARTIES: Julie Ann CURREY versus SUTHERLAND SHIRE COUNCIL and ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, HANDLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P McClellan QC/B Preston 
Respondent 1: S B Austin QC/D R Parry 
Respondent 2: n/a 
Respondent 3: W R Davison SC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: John C Dobson 
Respondent 1: Abbott Tout 
Respondent 2: Willis & Bowring 
Respondent 3: Willis & Bowring 
CATCHWORDS: 
DEVELOPMENT CONSENT - validity -whether consent obtained contrary to <case>(b), [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) - whether Council failed to consider relevant matters - inference raised by absence of evidence of consideration - operation of prohibition 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 21 
Julie Ann CURREY versus SUTHERLAND SHIRE COUNCIL and ORS 
The appellant challenged the validity of a development consent granted by the
Sutherland Shire Council on 30 January 1996. The consent related to a development application to subdivide land (Lot 4) into 3 lots. Access to two of the lots was by an existing right of way over Lot 1. [Section (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s77.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) (the
Act) requires that a development application can only be made with the written consent of each owner of the land to which the development application relates.

The trial judge held that Lot 1 was not land to which the development application applied. In her opinion, the mere fact that Lot 1 was to be used for access did not make it land to which the development application related and the development application did not propose any works on Lot 1.

Her Honour declined to draw an inference that the Council had failed to address its mind to cll 19(5) and (6) of the Sutherland Local Environmental
Plan 1993 (the LEP) and the prohibition contained therein. Accordingly, the
Council had power to grant the consent.

The appeal raises two issues:
Whether the written consent of the owner of the land, on which part of the development was to be carried out, was not obtained contrary to s (1)(b) of the Act.
Whether the Council failed to consider the relevant matter in cll 19(5) and (6) of the LEP with the consequence that the consent was contrary to the requirement to refuse consent in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s91.html) of the Act.

Held:
The subject matter of the development application was the subdivision of Lot 4 into 3 lots. It did not include any works on Lot 1 and the consent of the owner of Lot 1 to the development application was not required.
Clauses 19(5) and (6) of the LEP contain a prohibition on the development of land which has a Foreshore Building Line unless the Council is satisfied that any building between the line and the high water mark will be removed (unless cl 19(4) applies). There is a proviso in cl 19(6) which states that cl 19(5) does not apply if the Council is satisfied that the removal of the boatshed would be inconsistent with, or not necessary to achieve the objectives set out in cl (1).

The consideration of cl 19(5) and its exception in cl 19(6) should occur before the weighing of the merit considerations under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s90.html) of the Act. In the absence of any other evidence, the inference should be drawn that the Council did not address its mind to cl 19(5) and (6) and, accordingly, the prohibition operated and the development was prohibited under [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s91.html) of the Act.

North Sydney Council versus Ligon 302 Pty Limited <case>; [(1995) 185 CLR 470] 
Parramatta City Council versus Hale [(1982) 47 LGRA 319] 
Somerville versus Dalby [(1990) 69 LGRA 422] 
Clifford versus Wyong Shire Council [(1996) 89 LGERA 240] applied 
ORDERS . Appeal upheld.
 . Declare that the Development Consent 95/1021 for subdivision approval of the subdivision of Lot 4 in Deposited Plan 205947 granted by the 1st respondent on or about 29 January 1996 is invalid. . 1st and 3rd respondents to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if otherwise entitled.
 . 1st respondent to pay the costs of the appellant at first instance.

JULIE ANN CURREY v SUTHERLAND SHIRE COUNCIL & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Stein JA. 
Julie Ann CURREY versus SUTHERLAND SHIRE COUNCIL & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Stein JA. 
Julie Ann CURREY versus SUTHERLAND SHIRE COUNCIL and ORS 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: 
INTRODUCTION: 
The appellant, Ms Currey, challenged the validity of a development consent for a subdivision granted on 30 January 1996 by the Sutherland Shire Council (the first respondent).The challenge, by way of judicial review, extended to six grounds and was heard by Pearlman J, the Chief Judge of the Land and
Environment Court. Her Honour, in a judgment published on 22 August 1996, rejected the claim and dismissed the application. The appeal from her Honour's decision is confined to two grounds. First, that the written consent of the owner of land on which part of the development, the subject of the application, was to be carried out, was not obtained contrary to [s (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s77.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) (the
Act). Second, that the Council failed to consider the relevant matter in cl (5) and (6) of the Sutherland Local Environmental Plan 1993 (the LEP) with the consequence that the consent was contrary to the requirement to refuse consent in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s91.html) of the Act.

LACK OF CONSENT BY OWNER OF LOT 1 
The development application proposed the subdivision of Lot 4 DP 205947 into 3 lots to be numbered 410, 411 and 412. Access to Lot 411 was to be via a right of carriageway to Goobarah Road. Access for Lots 410 and 412 was to be by an existing right of way burdening proposed Lots 411 and 412 and existing Lot 1 in DP 205947 to Woolooware Road.
 [Section (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s77.html) of the Act requires that a development application can only be made with the written consent of each `owner of the land to which that development application relates'. Pearlman J held that Lot 1 was not land to which the development application related for two reasons. First, that the mere fact that Lot 1 was to be used for access for the subdivision did not make it land to which the application related having regard to North Sydney Council v
Ligon 302 Pty Limited <case>; [(1995) 185 CLR 470.] Second, although the Council imposed conditions of consent requiring work to be done on the access, the development application did not propose any works on Lot 1 and confined any works to the land sought to be subdivided.

It is the submission of senior counsel for the appellant that the concreting of the access over Lot 1 was always part of the development application.
Reliance is placed on plans of the proposed subdivision showing that the right of way over Lot 1 was `to be constructed in full width concrete'. [AB 83, 138]
It is said that her Honour failed to refer to these plans.

In my opinion, the appellant's submission that the development application is invalid because it lacks the consent of the owner of Lot 1 is misconceived.
This is apparent from answering the following question. What was the subject matter of the development application? When this is examined, it is abundantly clear that it is the subdivision of Lot 4 into 3 lots. The development application did not encompass Lot 1, nor did the Council grant consent to carry out development on Lot 1.

The plans upon which the appellant relies were not submitted with the development application. The proposed plan of subdivision submitted with the development application in August 1995 did not indicate any works on Lot 1.
The subdivision was confined to Lot 4 (being divided into 3 new allotments).

The plans to be found at AB 83 and 138 came about as follows. On 3 November the Council sought further information from the applicant. It was entitled to do so by reason of cl 47 of the Environmental Planning and
Assessment Regulation 1994. The letter sought a 'detailed survey ... showing the precise location of the existing driveway ... on the subject land'. It continued `Also, the precise location of the right-of-way accessing Lot 412 from Woolooware Road South. In this respect the survey work requested should identify the location of the physical pavement construction and the position of the abutting trees'. By way of response the applicant surveyor lodged a survey plan comprising 2 sheets. Sheet 1 shows the existing right of way through Lot 1. Within the right of way the plan noted in brackets `to be constructed in full width concrete'.

The information in the survey was relevant to the Council's consideration of the application under <case> of the Act, in particular subparagraphs 1(h) and (i) thereof. It was not a development application with respect to Lot 1, nor was it part of the development application for the subdivision lodged in
August 1995. Indeed, it is not apparent that there was any reliance on the survey plan before her Honour, nor any submission on the basis of the plan.

Be that as it may, it is plain that the development application was for a subdivision of land in accordance with a proposed plan (to be found at AB ). That plan was confined to the land to be subdivided and proposed no development on Lot 1. Further, the development application was accompanied by a letter from the applicant dated 31 July 1995. [AB 66 - 67] The development application specifically referred to the attached letter. Inter alia, the letter stated: 
The existing right of way access from Woolooware Road which presently services three lots - lots 4, 5 and 6 DP 205947 - is to be upgraded within the applicants land [my emphasis added] by widening to accommodate two way traffic and by improving sight lines in the vicinity of the blind corners.

It further stated: 
It is proposed to have access from Woolooware Road by right of carriageway in common with lots 5 and 6 DP 205947 but this right of carriageway is proposed to be widened to a minimum of 6 metres within the applicants land [emphasis again added].

Thus, the letter was incorporated into the development application, see Hope
JA in Auburn Municipal Council versus Szabo [(1971) 67 LGRA 427.] 
Accordingly, it is plain that the development application did not include any works on Lot 1 and the consent of the owner of that allotment to the making of the development application was not required.

Before departing this issue, two matters should be briefly mentioned. Contrary to the submission of the appellant North Sydney Council versus Ligon 302 Pty
Limited cannot assist her here, nor can it be distinguished. At 476 the High
Court said: 
When a development application is made for consent to a specified development, the land to which the application `relates' must therefore be the land on which the specified development is proposed to be carried out.

Lastly, the fact that the Council imposed a condition requiring work to be carried out on land outside the subdivision does not give rise to its notional inclusion within the development application, see Hope JA in Grace Bros v
Willoughby Municipal Council [(1980) 44 LGRA 422] at 425.

CLAUSE 19 OF THE LEP 
Section 91(2) of the Act provides: 
Notwithstanding subsection (1), the consent authority shall refuse an application where the development referred to therein, being the subdivision of land, would if carried out result in a contravention of an environmental planning instrument or of this Act, whether arising in relation to that or any other development.

The relevant environmental planning instrument is the Sutherland LEP 1993. The relevant parts of clause 19 entitled `Foreshore building lines' are reproduced below: ) The objectives of this clause are: a) preservation and enhancement of the natural features and vegetation of the area where the land meets the water; b) restoration of the land below the foreshore building line, so far as practicable, to a natural state, with a minimum intrusion of man-made structures; c) no development below the foreshore building line other than development excepted by this clause; d) a significant reduction in the number of structures below the foreshore building line, particularly on redevelopment; e) conservation and enhancement of water-front development of heritage value; and f) avoidance of pollution of, or adverse ecological effects on, the waterways.
 ...
 ) A person must not erect a building or carry out a work on land between a foreshore building line and the tidal water in respect of which the line is fixed.
 ) However, subclause 3) does not apply to: a) single storey boat sheds; b) boat launching and slipping facilities; c) below ground swimming pools; d) works, including mechanical works, to enable pedestrian access; e) landscaping and barbecues; f) jetties; and g) swimming enclosures.
 ) The council must not consent to development on an allotment of land having a foreshore building line, unless it is satisfied that the following buildings or works (if any) will be removed before, or within a reasonable time after, the development is carried out: a) any building or work on the allotment between the line and the present mean high water mark, not being a building or work specified in subclause 4), or b) any building or work below the present mean high water mark, being a building or work on the allotment or on land adjacent to the allotment which is in the same ownership as the allotment or to which the owner or occupier of the allotment has some form of occupancy rights.
 ) However, subclause 5) does not apply to a building or work if the council is satisfied that requiring removal of the building or work: a) would be inconsistent with any of the objectives of this clause; b) is not necessary to achieve the objectives of this clause; or c) is unreasonable or unnecessary in the circumstances of the case, having regard to the provisions of any relevant development control plan.
 ...
 ) To avoid doubt, State Environmental Planning Policy No 1 - 
Development Standards applies to a foreshore building line in the same way as it applies to a development standard.

It may be seen that cl 19 (5) contains a prohibition on development on land having a Foreshore Building Line unless, relevantly, it is satisfied that any building between the line and the high water mark (not being a building specified in cl 19(4)) be removed.

Lot 410 is a waterfront lot to Burraneer Bay. It contains a foreshore building line and between that line and the high water mark is an existing two storey boatshed. This means that cl 19(5) applies since cl 19(4) excludes single storey boatsheds, not double storey ones.

Nonetheless, cl 19(6) contains a proviso to cl 19(5). The latter does not apply if the Council is satisfied that requiring the removal of the boatshed would be inconsistent with or not necessary to achieve the objectives in cl (1). Alternatively, that it is unnecessary or unreasonable to remove the building having regard to any relevant development control plan. There does not appear to be any such development control plan but it matters not since cl (8) makes State Environmental Planning Policy No 1 - Development Standards (SEPP 1) applicable to a foreshore building line as if it was a development standard.

The appellant submits that the Council was required to consider cl 19(5) and of the LEP prior to addressing other relevant <case> considerations because it contained a prohibition. Mr McClellan QC, on behalf of the appellant, submits that on the evidence, the inference should be drawn that the Council never addressed its mind to the clauses. Therefore, it had no power to grant the consent that it did, that is without a condition requiring the removal of the existing 2 storey boatshed. Pearlman J declined to draw the inference.

I turn to her Honour's judgment. Pearlman J correctly found that unless cl (6) applied, the Council was required to refuse the application or be satisfied that the boatshed would be removed. She noted that neither the development application nor the Council officer's report furnished to the
Council, made any reference to cl 19(5) and (6). Nor was any condition imposed in the consent requiring the removal of the boatshed.

Her Honour observed that the officer's report contained a discussion of the issues arising on the application, annexed a history of the preceding applications and a copy of a judgment of Talbot J in previous proceedings. She noted that Talbot J had refused a 4 lot subdivision for the same site but approved a separate application for the construction of a new dwelling on Lot and the renovation of the existing boatshed.

The judge continued: 
The council officer's report and its annexures contained the following references to cl 19 and the boatshed and residence: * Under the heading "Statutory Consideration", the council officer noted that the site is "... affected by a 30 metre Foreshore Building Line pursuant to Clause 19 [of the LEP] ..."; * The council officer referred to the annexed judgment, noting that Talbot J had granted development consent "for the erection of a new residence and renovated boatshed"; * The summary of the history of the site also drew attention to the development application to which Talbot J had granted consent, noting that it was "for the construction of a new dwelling and renovation of the existing boatshed"; * In the judgment, Talbot J noted, at p 10, that "the existing boatshed will be reduced in shape and size ...". [AB 226 - 227] 
Her Honour concluded that there was material before the Council which would have enabled it to be satisfied that requiring removal of the boatshed was not necessary to achieve the objective in cl 19(1)(c). She added: 
That material consisted of the references in the council officer's report to renovation of the boatshed by reduction in size, as well as the councillors' general knowledge of the provisions of the LEP, the history of development of the site and of the content of previous development applications. [AB 227] 
In declining to draw the inference that the Council failed to address cl 19(5) and (6) of the LEP, Pearlman J noted the reference in the officer's report to the site having a foreshore building line pursuant to cl 19 of the LEP. This led to a presumption that the contents of cl 19 was within the general knowledge of the councillors. Her Honour cited Parramatta City Council versus Hale [(1982) 47 LGRA 319] at 345 and Somerville versus Dalby [(1990) 69 LGRA 422] at 429.
Consequently, in her Honour's opinion, Council must be taken to be aware of the relevant provisions of the clause.

THE MATERIAL BEFORE THE COUNCIL 
It is necessary to examine what relevant material was before the Council when it took the decision to grant development consent.

The development application made specific reference to the decision of Talbot
J. So did the covering letter referred to earlier. Neither document referred to cl 19 or the existing boatshed. The proposed subdivision plan did not include the foreshore building line or the existing boatshed.

The report of the officer submitted to the Council for its decision needs to be carefully examined. It commences with a reference to the need to vary the subdivision development standards of the Council. It is agreed that this is a reference to a variation in Council's subdivision code and not to cl 19 of the
LEP. The officer then sets out six issues for the Council's consideration.
None of these touch on cl 19 or the foreshore building line. The first page of the report indicates that the proposal is `considered acceptable in terms of an assessment pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s90.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) '.
Approval, subject to suggested conditions, is recommended.

The officer then refers to the protracted history of the site outlined in
Appendix A to his report. Reference is made to Talbot J's decision on the previous subdivision application and that judgment is attached as Appendix B to the report.

After describing the site and the zoning, the officer draws attention to the m foreshore building line. He refers to an existing 2 storey boatshed on the water's edge within the foreshore building line.

Under `Statutory Consideration' the report refers to the zoning under the LEP and adds, `The land is also affected by a 30 metre Foreshore Building Line pursuant to Clause 19 of SLEP 1993'.

Under the heading `Statement of Compliance', the report again refers to Talbot
J's judgment and notes that his Honour had granted consent to a new residence and renovated boatshed. It was also noted that the judge's development consent was dependant on the creation of Lot 410 (see Condition 9 to Talbot J's consent).

The report then proceeds to summarise and briefly examine the objections to the subdivision application lodged with Council. The officer then returns to the six issues originally posed on page 1. These are addressed in some detail, including the variation to Council's subdivision code.

Thereafter, follows the `Conclusion' to the report. It includes the following: 
The proposal is a permissible form of development within the Residential 2(e2) zone and generally complies with the standards and objectives of Council's
Local Environmental Plan, 1993 and Subdivision Code, and is therefore recommended for approval subject to conditions.

Appendix `A' is a 4 page summary history of the site dating back to 1970. It makes reference to the foreshore building line.

Appendix `B' is the judgment of Talbot J of 29 March 1995 in Patrial Holdings
Pty Limited versus Sutherland Shire Council. It should be noted the cl 19 to which his Honour refers in the judgment is not the current cl 19 with which we are concerned. The more or less equivalent clause in the LEP at the time of his
Honour's decision was cl 21.

In his judgment Talbot J stated that the proposed dwelling was to be built within the Foreshore Building Line. In this context he noted: 
The existing boat shed will be reduced in shape and size thereby reducing the combined impact of the built forms when viewed from the waterway.

Talbot J went on to set out the objectives of the Foreshore Building Line in cl 21(3) of the LEP (as it then stood). These are the same as cl 19(1) of the current LEP with which we are concerned. His Honour concluded that the proposal was an appropriate solution for development of the site and the SEPP objection to compliance with the Foreshore Building Line should be upheld.

CONSIDERATION 
In approaching the exercise of power under clause 19, its fundamental policy objective should be kept in mind. That is, to preserve and enhance waterfront land (within the foreshore building line) and to significantly reduce the number of buildings below the line. This opportunity is to be particularly taken on redevelopment, hence cl 19(3) and (5).

It is common ground that cl 19(5) operates unless its application is excepted by sub cl (6). Accordingly, unless cl 19(6) applied, the Council had to either refuse consent or be satisfied that the boatshed would be removed.
Satisfaction with the criteria in cl 19(5) and (6) comes before the weighing of the merit considerations under <case> of the Act, see Clifford versus Wyong Shire
Council [(1996) 89 LGERA 240.] 
In the absence of any other evidence, should the inference have been drawn that the Council never addressed its mind to cl 19(5) and (6) and accordingly, that it had no power to grant consent in the terms it did? 
Did the officer's report to the Council, including the appendices, provide material which favoured the conclusion (drawn by Pearlman J) that the inference should not be drawn? What knowledge of the LEP should be attributed to the councillors? These are some of the questions which need to be examined.

In Parramatta City Council versus Hale, Moffitt P asked whether it could be inferred that the Council had failed to consider a relevant fact. His Honour said that while this placed a difficult onus on a challenger, and the inference should be drawn only after anxious consideration, if it was available to be drawn, the court should not hesitate.

The President noted that the inference may be drawn from the totality of events. A Council may adopt its officer's recommendations `provided in doing so it is aware from the report or from some other source, for example its general knowledge, of all the relevant <case> matters'. [Emphasis added]
Moffitt P added that by adopting the recommendations, the Council takes into consideration the matters referred to in the report. If the recommendations are adopted without debate, there is no reason for drawing the inference in relation to the matters referred to, and those within the general knowledge of the Council. However, in the end it is the collegiate body which must take the matters into consideration (at 346).

In Somerville versus Dalby Hemmings J referred to Hale. His Honour noted (at ) that the court was being asked to draw the inference that in the absence of written reference in the reports considered by Council of certain matters, such matters were not taken into account. Hemmings J said that there was no duty to refer specifically to all matters to be considered or assessed but it is usually sufficient `to refer only to the most important matters or those having determining weight'. His Honour then noted that the consideration by the council is not limited to the written reports before it. `Each member of council may be assumed to bring individual expertise and local knowledge to the consideration of the application'.

Accepting the reference by Moffitt P to a council's `general knowledge' and
Hemmings J's mention of councillor's `individual expertise and local knowledge', two remarks pertinent to this appeal may be made. First, other than the report and its appendices, there was no evidence of what occurred at the council meeting or what other knowledge any councillor might have brought to the application. Second, while it may be reasonable to assume that councillors will have a general knowledge of their principal planning instrument, there is no reason to assume that such knowledge will extend to the detail of a provision such as cl 19 of the LEP or the processes to be traversed in order to apply cl 19(5) and (6).

In my opinion, the part which a councillor's inferred knowledge can properly play in this case is small, save for an understanding of some of the history of the site and the earlier subdivision application and appeal heard by Talbot
J.

Whether the inference should be drawn comes down essentially to the report and its recommendations (and the appendices) which were before the Council and upon which it based its decision.

The Council and the third respondent place reliance on the judgment of Talbot
J which was before the Council. In particular, they argue that his judgment was such that the Council could be satisfied that requiring the removal of the boatshed was not necessary to achieve the objectives of cl 19(1). Also, emphasis is placed on his Honour's approval of the reduction in shape and size of the 2 storey boatshed only 9 months before its decision on 30 January 1996.
This is all the more so, submits Mr Austin QC on behalf of the Council, since the Lot 410 before Talbot J is identical to that considered in the current application. Although Talbot J was addressing a different clause (cl 21) it was in essentially similar terms to cl 19. Reliance is also placed upon his
Honour's upholding the SEPP 1 objection to the Foreshore Building Line development standard on the basis that the objectives of the clause were achieved notwithstanding the non-compliance.

As against this submission, the appellant argues that since a Council has a duty to make up its own mind, it cannot rely upon the previous decision by another consent authority in respect of a different application. Clause 19(5) requires the consideration of the particular application before Council and the Council forming the appropriate satisfaction under cl 19(5) and (6).

In my opinion, a Council can take account of a relevant consideration by reference to a previous decision. But this does not mean that it does not have to address the issue itself. The previous decision may have great relevance but it needs to be enlivened in the consideration of the application before it for decision.

However, the previous decision would need to be sufficiently explicit on the relevant issue before its adoption could satisfy the duty to take that issue into consideration. A fair reading of Talbot J's decision does not meet this requirement. All the Council had before it was his Honour's judgment. It needs to be emphasised that cl 19(5) is in the nature of a prohibition (see North
Sydney Council versus Mayoh Pty Limited (No2) [(1990) 71 LGRA 222).] The clause provides a pre-condition to the exercise of the power, as did the previous cl (6) considered by Talbot J. However, his Honour does not spell out the detail of his approach. His reference to SEPP 1 appears to be to the relaxation of the Foreshore Building Line as a development standard rather than to the issue of the boatshed and its removal under cl 21(6). Talbot J did not explicitly address all of the components of cl 21 of the previous plan which are reflected in cl 19(5) and (6).

If the Council had gone through the reasoning process necessary to apply cl (5) and (6), it might have concluded that the removal of the whole boatshed was not necessary to achieve the clause objectives provided it was reduced to a single storey, which would be consistent with the objectives. If that had been its conclusion, it would be necessary to impose a condition to that effect. The fact that it did not do so is indicative that the Council did not undertake the required decision making process under the clause. The imposition of a condition would be necessary because if the approved subdivision is carried into effect, there is no requirement to remove the boatshed, in whole or part, unless required by the condition. There is no obligation on the third respondent, or any subsequent owner of the consent granted by Talbot J, to carry it into effect. Indeed, the consent could lapse without having been acted upon.

It is important to note (as I mentioned before) that the consideration of cl (5) and its exception in cl 19(6), comes before any merit considerations under <case> are weighed, Clifford versus Wyong Shire Council at 249, 251 and 252.
Clause 19(5) is a prohibition on certain development within the foreshore building line unless the Council is satisfied that the offending building will be removed. The exception in clause 19(6) requires Council's satisfaction that the removal of the building would not be inconsistent with the clause objectives and was unnecessary to achieve those objectives, or is unreasonable or unnecessary having regard to the provisions of any relevant development control plan. This consideration requires some positive attention by the
Council. It would include consideration of the boatshed and its location, the clause objectives and the exercise arising under cl 19(6)(a), (b) and (c).

Was it enough that the officer's report contained a reference to cl 19 and the
Foreshore Building Line? In my opinion, it was not. Without some elucidation of the relevance of cl 19 to the application and the need to consider the existing 2 storey boatshed in the context of cl 19(5) and (6), the bare reference to cl 19 was capable of misleading the Council in its required task.
This is principally because the report failed to refer to the prohibition in cl 19(5).

Indeed, it may be observed from my earlier discussion of the report, that cl was never identified as an issue for the Council. Far from it, any councillor coming to the report (read with the appendices) would be likely to assume that there was no issue arising under cl 19 necessary to be addressed.
Councillors would most likely be unaware of the prohibition contained therein or of the need to consider the possible exception under cl 19(6). Both cl (5) and (6) require the Council to be satisfied. The rolled-up conclusion to the report would also be likely to lead members of the Council to believe that the application complied with the LEP. There is, in fact, nothing in the report or its appendices to alert the Council to the need to address cl 19(5) and (6) (in order to overcome the prohibition in cl 19(5)) before proceeding to assess the merits of the application.

In my view, the inference should be drawn that the Council failed to address the precondition in cl 19(5). Accordingly, the prohibition operated and the development was prohibited under <case> of the Act. The Council simply adopted the officer's recommendation which did not frame the question necessary to be addressed.

During argument the court raised with the parties whether there was any issue of discretion regarding the making of a declaration of invalidity of the consent. The respondents answered in the affirmative. However, this could be an important question, and given that there was no notice of contention and the issue had not been addressed in the submissions, it should not be entertained.

I would uphold the appeal and make the declaration sought in paragraph B of the amended notice of appeal. The first and third respondents should pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and have a certificate under the Suitors'
Fund Act if otherwise entitled. The first respondent should be ordered to pay the costs of the appellant at first instance.
 * * * 
