

NSW Crime Commission versus Mohammed Hassen Besodi [1997] NSWSC 3 (17 January )

NSW CRIME COMMISSION V MOHAMMED HASSEN BESODI /96 
FRIDAY 17 JANUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By a notice of motion filed this morning in Court, Miss Ziba Faiz Mohammed seeks certain relief pursuant to section 10(5)(a) and (b) of the Drug Trafficking (Civil Proceedings) Act 1990 ["the Act"]. The respondent to the notice of motion is the New South Wales Crime Commission.

The background to the present application is as follows. By orders made on 19
July 1996 and entered on 22 July 1996 this Court made, pursuant to section 10 of the Act, a restraining order, the effect of which, put simply, is to restrain any dealing by anybody in connection with certain stipulated property owned by one Mohammed Hassen Besodi.

The stipulated property, again speaking simply, comprises a house; a motor car; an amount of some $1,600 spread over three Westpac Bank accounts; what is described as "the business known as Besodi Exports and Imports"; and a fund of cash comprising some $72,000 in Australian currency, and further amounts of various foreign currencies.

The applicant is married to Mr Besodi. They married in December 1994 and separated in September 1995. There is one child of the marriage, a daughter, born on 7 April 1996. It would seem that the applicant and Mr Besodi are permanently estranged.

In December 1995 the applicant filed in the Local Court at Manly an application for spouse maintenance and urgent child support. Eventually, and on 18 June 1996, orders were made in that Court, of which it is sufficient to say for present purposes that they provided for the payment by Mr Besodi to the applicant of a stipulated amount of weekly maintenance for herself, and of a stipulated weekly maintenance for the child of the marriage; a lump sum in connection with birth expenses; and an amount for costs.

On 17 July 1996 Mr Besodi lodged an appeal to the Family Court. Eventually, and on 11 November 1996, Cohen J of the Family Court transferred that appeal and certain associated proceedings to this Court pursuant to the current
Commonwealth/State Cross Vesting legislation. It seems that there remains current in the Family Court an application by the applicant against her husband for a property settlement as distinct from a periodic maintenance order.

The present application has been conducted on both sides of the record upon the basis that, essentially, the applicant seeks to have provision made for her by this Court out of the cash funds to which I have earlier referred.

The present application has been conducted, as well and on both sides of the record, upon the footing that the available relevant evidence is such as to make a cogent prima facie case for the proposition that the cash funds of which I have been speaking are the proceeds of illicit drug trafficking. The present application is opposed by the New South Wales Crime Commission upon, broadly speaking, three bases.

They are first, that as a matter of public policy it would be inappropriate for this Court to grant any relief of the kind now sought by the applicant.
Secondly, that in any event, the applicant bears an onus to make a positive case in support of the relief that she seeks, and that she has not done so in the sense that she has not demonstrated an absence of alternative sources of support to the cash funds now restrained by this Court's order, and to which she seeks to have access. Thirdly, that in so far as the application rests upon section 10(5)(b) of the Act the applicant lacks the requisite legal standing to seek such relief.

It is convenient to deal first with the third of those three matters. Section (5) of the Act is in the following terms: "(5) A restraining order may, at the time it is made or at a later time, make provision for meeting out of the property, or a specified part of the property, to which the order applies all or any of the following: the reasonable living expenses of any person whose interests in property are subject to the restraining order (including the reasonable living expenses of any dependants); the reasonable legal expenses of any person whose interests in property are subject to the restraining order, being expenses incurred in connection with the application for the restraining order or an application for a confiscation order, or incurred in defending a criminal charge." 
An application based upon paragraph (b) requires the applicant to establish that the applicant has "interests in property", which interests are at the time of application "subject to the restraining order". The notion of an "interest in property" is defined specifically in section 7 of the Act.
Relevantly for the present purpose it is so defined in subsection (1) and as follows: "In this Act, a reference to an interest of a person in property is a reference to: an interest the person has in real or personal property; or a chose in action enforceable at the suit of the person; or an interest of the person that is within a class of interests prescribed as interests in property for the purposes of this Act." 
It is contended for the applicant that she satisfies at least the requirements of paragraph (b), in that the orders which she has obtained in the Local Court in Manly, and which have not been stayed in their operation, give rise in her to such a chose in action as is referred to in paragraph (b). I agree that that is so.

It then becomes necessary to consider whether the "interests in property" as thus defined are "subject to the restraining order". In my opinion they plainly are not. It is true that the practical operation of the orders giving rise to the chose in action of which I have spoken, and the practical enforcement otherwise of that chose in action, might be defeated by reason of the operation in fact of the current restraining order that this Court has made. That does not seem to me, however, to be at all the same thing as saying that the relevant chose in action itself is in the requisite statutory sense "subject to the restraining order" made by this Court. The retraining order in its terms does not purport to affect any "interest in property" save interests particular to Mr Besodi.

The result, in my opinion, is that the applicant is not able to bring herself on the given facts within the preconditions that are established by section (5)(b) of the Act, for the exercise by this Court of the powers conferred upon it by that particular provision.

As to the respondent's' submission that the applicant has not discharged the relevant onus of proof, I am of the opinion that she has sufficiently established that although not destitute, she is in fact living in straitened financial circumstances. I am satisfied, moreover, that the available evidence, such as it is, does not suggest that it would be fair to approach this aspect of the present application upon the basis that the applicant might reasonably be supposed to be in a position to put before the Court more detailed material than she has put forward concerning either her own available sources of income and support, or the resources, otherwise than those which are the subject of the restraining order made by this Court, of her husband.I think that the correct principle to be applied in that regard is that stated by Dixon CJ in Hampton Court Limited versus Crooks (1975) 97CLR 367 at 371-372.

Insofar as the applicant's present claim for relief rests upon section (5)(a), it is, I think, appropriate to make two preliminary observations.

First, there is in paragraph (a), as there is not in paragraph (b), a specific reference to "dependants" of a person whose property is subject to a restraining order under the Act. It is a nice question whether paragraph (a) was intended to confer an autonomous right to relief upon the "dependant" in a particular case, rather than upon the actual proprietor of the property subject to the particular restraining order. As it happens, it is not necessary in the present case to canvass that question for the reason that the
New South Wales Crime Commission has not taken the point in opposition to the present applicant's claim.

Secondly, there is a question whether, in considering an application by a dependant, the question of hardship is relevant at all; and if it is, whether it is relevant in the same way as is undoubtedly the case in an application to which section 24 of the Act applies. I think that it must be the case that if a dependant has in law an autonomous right to make an application under paragraph (a) then there must be a right to put forward hardship, at least as an element to be considered. I so approach the present application.

I do not approach the present application upon the basis that section 24 has any immediate application, as plainly it does not; nor do I approach the present application upon the basis that there is to be found in section 24 some principle which can be applied, as it were by a process of parity of reasoning, to the very different situation of an application concerning a restraining order, and made under Part 2 of the Act, as distinct from an application concerning a confiscation order and made under Part 3 of the Act.

I have been referred during the course of argument to two decisions, in particular, of this Court. One is a first instance decision of Badgery-Parker
J: State Drug Crime Commission of New South Wales versus Ukja & Anor (unreported; 20 December 1990). The other is a decision of the Court of Appeal of this Court: New South Wales Crime Commission versus Youyan (1993) 31NSWLR 34.

It is, I think, not possible to say of those decisions that they establish anything more than that the discretion which the Court has to grant or to withhold relief under section 10(5)(a) is a wide-ranging judicial discretion, the exercise of which in a particular case will necessarily depend upon the given circumstances of that case.

The decision of the Court of Appeal, certainly, suggests some considerations which seem to me to be relevant to the present application. They are stated by the Court of Appeal as being the apparent strength of the prosecution case against the alleged offender; the size of the property involved; the probable amount that will be released if orders are made in terms of the relief sought; and the effect of the making of any orders upon what is described by the Court of Appeal as "the achievement of the purposes of the Act which is to restrain the disposal of property, to abide orders under the Act following the completion of proceedings." [31 NSWLR, 50.] 
It seems to me that the balance relevant to be struck for present purposes can be defined as follows.

In favour of granting the application are the following considerations:
The applicant is, as I find on the probabilities, not destitute; but, as I have earlier said, is living in financially straitened circumstances.
Part of the reason why she is living in such financially straitened circumstances is her inability to enforce in any practical way orders which are current in her favour in the Local Court at Manly.
As matters stand and until the orders of the Local Court are either stayed or overturned, the applicant is entitled to the fruits of those orders.
There is no suggestion that the applicant herself was in any way party to, or otherwise privy to, any illegal drug trafficking dealings of her husband.
.What I have said about the applicant herself must of course apply mutatis mutandis to the child of the marriage, who is also "a dependant" for the purpose of section 10(5)(a).

On the other side of the relevant balance are the following considerations:
The applicant is not entirely without redress in respect of the orders made in the Local Court. It is open to her, for example, to appeal to the
Appeal Division of the Family Court from the order made by Cohen J of that
Court. It is open to her, as well, to seek, upon the basis of some proper cause shown, an expedited hearing in this Court of the questions cross vested in this Court by reason of the orders made by Cohen J of the Family Court. I appreciate, and it is fair to acknowledge, that those avenues of redress are likely to involve both cost and time; and to entail, on those accounts, continuing hardship to the applicant and her daughter. Nonetheless, it is the case that the applicant does not stand wholly without redress, save redress in the form that she now seeks.
There is a public interest to ensure that the policy of Parliament in enacting the Act is not frustrated by a too liberal use of the powers conferred by section 10(5). It is the manifest policy of the legislature and, indeed, of the particular legislation, that illicit drug trafficking is to be stamped out.

One of the ways in which it is to be stamped out is by providing a draconian procedure by means of which a person who does traffic illicitly in drugs will not only face the sanctions of the criminal law, but will have his or her property dealt with both in terms of interim restraint, and in terms of ultimate confiscation, in a way which will ensure that the person, the offender in question, does not think it worthwhile to gamble a gaol sentence against the subsequent enjoyment of substantial secreted assets derived from those criminal activities.

Plainly such a consideration is not of itself a definitive bar to any application of the present kind. Were it otherwise section 10(5) would have no useful work to do. It remains, however, that the public policy of which I have spoken, and the public interests which that policy is designed to protect, have been publicly recognised by Parliament as legitimate and cogent. This is,
I consider, a very significant factor to be borne in mind in such a case as the present.
The granting of the present application will have the effect of conferring upon Mr Besodi a benefit to which, as matters stand, he has not been shown to have either a moral or a legal entitlement. It is true that the benefit is, so to speak, a collateral benefit; but it is in my opinion a real one nonetheless.

The too ready granting of applications of the present kind would entail that a person who had been shown by apparently credible evidence to be an illicit drug trafficker would be able, in effect, to have the benefit of his restrained property by simply refusing to support his dependants, upon the basis that they could be supported properly by the making of an order under section 10(5)(a).

As with the more general matter of public policy of which I have already spoken the present consideration, too, cannot be of itself definitive, or it would wholly defeat the purpose of section 10(5). Nonetheless, it is, in my view, a substantial consideration in such a case as the present.
The granting of the present application will entail the conferment upon the applicant of a benefit to which she has no particular legal entitlement, and in my view no real moral entitlement. It is true, as has been urged on her behalf, that her material circumstances are such as to attract the sympathy of the Court. It is urged on her behalf that there is something wrong with the notion that if she is deserving of some assistance in her present plight, she should not get it in the form of access permitted by this Court to funds which are part of the property of her husband, who is refusing obdurately to discharge his lawful obligations to her.

It is, I think, necessary to be careful in dealing with such a submission, because, as I have now said more than once, the evidence satisfies me that the applicant's personal material circumstances are straitened, and such as to elicit a proper measure of sympathy.

It is necessary in such a case, -and, as I think, to be careful to remember, - that if, indeed, the funds in question are reasonably to be supposed to be the proceeds of illicit drug trafficking, then nobody, unless perhaps the victims of the trafficking who have paid over the funds in the first place, can be regarded in any sense that I would find acceptable, as having a moral entitlement to draw upon those moneys as though they were normal legitimate funds available in the normal legitimate course of things for normal legitimate living expences. They are not; and it is, I think, important to understand that such a view entails that the applicant, however much her circumstances might attract sympathy, does not have some basic entrenched rights, moral or legal, to have access to these funds, tainted, as I am satisfied on the available evidence they probably are, by reason of illicit drug trafficking.

The exercise in any case of a discretion of the kind here relevant entails, it must be acknowledged, an ultimate balancing of competing factors and interests as to which it is possible that reasonable minds might differ. I am comfortable in the view that a fair balance of what I see as the competing considerations would not justify the Court in exercising its discretion in the present case in favour of the applicant.

For the whole of the foregoing reasons I propose to dismiss the notice of motion. The notice of motion will be dismissed with costs. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
