

Efg Australia Limited and Anor versus David Ian Kennedy and Ors No. 3056/95
Practice [1995] NSWSC 58 (6 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
BRYSON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 2 August 1995 #DATE 2:8:1995 #ADD 6:10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff       A. Archibald QC and
J. Allsop SC 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff      Corrs Chambers Westgarth 
Counsel for 3rd and 4th Defendants   C. Curtis 
Solicitors for 3rd and 4th Defendants Colin W. Love and Co 
Counsel for 5th-8th Defendants     P. Dowdy 
Solicitors for 5th-8th Defendants
Henry Davis York
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
BRYSON J This morning Mr Archibald QC and Mr Allsop SC applied to me, in private chambers, for relief in the nature of an Anton Piller discovery at the commencement of the proceedings. The documents I have seen are: Form of
Statement of Claim; Notice of Motion; form of undertakings offered and the affidavit of John Francis O'Grady sworn 2
August 1995. I have also been shown some of the exhibits referred to by Mr O'Grady, the details of which bear closely on the application, although for some other exhibits I have accepted that they support, in form, the conclusions given by Mr O'Grady. In dealing with the facts I can only consider the prima facie position and I cannot come to any concluded findings.
The affidavit shows that the plaintiffs have a prima facie case for recovery of large sums in respect of secret commissions in the transactions described by Mr O'Grady. The nature of the conduct immediately raises the possibility that there have been many similar transactions and the need for investigation. The sums involved cannot be clearly seen but obviously they are large, in the order of some hundreds of thousands of dollars and perhaps millions.
An Anton Piller order would involve my authorising and requiring production and inspection of documents in the next few hours or tomorrow at four different premises at Penrith, Mosman, West Ryde and the AMP Centre in
Sydney, and attendances by numbers of persons and also supervising solicitors (whom I have been informed are available from a firm not otherwise involved and not representing the plaintiffs).
Counsel pointed out to me observations of Lord Denning, Master of the
Rolls, in Yousif versus Salama and Anor [(1980) 1 WLR 1540] at 1542. His Lordship said: "In many cases such an order would not be granted. But in this case there is evidence (if it is accepted) which shows the first defendant to be untrustworthy. The plaintiff has a legitimate fear that the documents will be destroyed. In the circumstances, it seems to me that it would be proper to make an Anton Piller order to the effect that the plaintiff's solicitor would be enabled to go and get the documents - take them into his personal custody for a while - make copies of them - and then return the originals to the defendant".
That case related to two files and a desk diary which the plaintiff had actually seen and in respect of which, after a defendant had produced them for inspection and they had been returned, the plaintiff later developed an apprehension that they would be destroyed. It was a relatively simple exercise to secure a few documents which were known to exist. The grounds for that apprehension do not appear fully from the report and the judgments do not refer to any such event as a threat to destroy them or signs of impending flight. Lord Denning pointed out (1542): "It can do no harm to the first defendant at all. If he is honest, he will produce-the documents in any case.
If he is dishonest, that is all the more reason why the order should be made".
I must respectfully say that these observations were made relatively early in judicial experience of Anton Piller orders and that, in my view, it is now appropriate to show greater caution and restraint.
Lord Denning did not contemplate the complex procedures which have evolved in England, set out in
Practice Direction (1994) 4 All
ER.52.
Brightman LJ dealt with the matter in the briefest way in terms which do not reveal at all the ground for apprehension but Lord Justice Donaldson dissented and referred to the harm which such an order may do, and said , "... I think this is a
Draconian power which should be used in only exceptional cases".
In Gianitsios versus Karagiannis and ors (1986) 7 Intellectual
Property Reports , Young J made observations which show the caution with which such applications are approached. His Honour's observations and citations show his view that such orders are extreme and are for extreme cases.
This court has responded with caution to applications for Anton Piller discovery, and the caution with which such applications are received has, if anything, increased with the passage of years and the accumulation of experience. In their nature, Anton Piller discoveries are disruptive to the business of defendants, involving access by others and usually removal or isolation of business records. Further, this disruption comes without notice, as the first step in litigation known to defendants.
A further source of difficulty has been the wide spread of information, which defendants regard as confidential and relating only to their business, to persons associated, in one one way or another, with other interests, so that there is a need for the court to take further measures to control the dissemination or use of such information.
Other elements which have been encountered in experience are the impact of shock and surprise, and impulsive behavior in response to such intrusive proceedings without notice. The possibility exists of forcible resistance and breach of the peace. I approach the application with considerable caution.
Plaintiff's counsel has pointed out that there is a prima facie case of a pattern of behaviour over an extended period in which well-paid persons in high positions, with high responsibilities, have dishonestly betrayed fundamental elements of the trust imposed on them as part of the relationship between employer and employee. Counsel said, correctly, that the conduct alleged would strike at the heart of the relationship. He also pointed to its continuation over an extended period of many months or some years.
Counsel contended that the circumstances give proper foundation for concern that reprehensible behaviour would also be indulged in with respect to impeding access to documents and information, and observed that a person who is untrustworthy in such an important respect is likely to behave in an untrustworthy way with respect to discovery, production of documents and verification of lists.
Counsel also observed that this is not a case where the plaintiffs are seeking to intrude into affairs or business which are not their own or are distant from their own business. He contended that the court should not be hesitant out of respect for interests of defendants which are at a distance from those of the plaintiffs, as the substantial activity in the course of which breaches of trust occurred was activity in furtherance of the plaintiffs' own business, not a discrete or separate business. Counsel said that the evidence showed a flagrant defiance of duties and suggested a propensity to engage in such conduct in other respects.
There is prima facie support for these observations. Relatively large sums are involved and they offer correspondingly strong inducement to engage in dishonest behavior to conceal them.
The plaintiffs' case, supported by prima facie evidence, is that there has been a long-continued course of disloyalty and dishonesty, not only in respect of taking commission without the approbation of principals, but also in the respects dealt with in paragraphs 14 and 15 of Mr O'Grady's affidavit which seem to show that land was sold, in one instance, for less than the sum for which it might have been sold, so as to make an increased profit available to a company related to a defendant.
I approach the application on the basis that the ordinary procedure of the court, whether for small matters or large matters and even for matters in which the allegations are severe and involve breaches of trust and dishonesty, is that parties have a duty to produce relevant documents on discovery and verify lists of them, and that the court will enforce that duty. It is not the ordinary approach taken by the court that it is attributed to defendants that they will probably defy their duty to give discovery or that they could well destroy or conceal documents.
The ordinary course should be departed from where there is some substantial ground for expecting that there will be extraordinary behaviour with respect to discovery. I would look for some ground going beyond the indications of dishonesty involved in this case, a ground which would show that active concealment or measures which are criminal or in the nature of criminal conduct should reasonably be feared.
Examples of what I would look for are instances of destroying or concealing documents, threats to do so or signs of preparation to flee. I do not attempt to define the cases where the ordinary course should be departed from, as the decision must remain discretionary and there must be a capacity for a decision which responds to the facts in evidence. Anton Piller orders are for extreme cases: there probably could be a wide range of extreme cases but this is not one.
Mr O'Grady, in the last passage in his affidavit, swears to his belief that there is a real danger that any documents associated with proper dealings will be put out of the reach of the plaintiffs. In my view there is a basis for this belief and there is such a danger but when I try to assess the extent of the danger,
I see that it is based on general considerations which must exist in many cases and in every case where secret commissions are sought to be recovered, and there is no reason for making it the ordinary course that such proceedings open with Anton Piller orders.
My conclusion has been that while there is a basis for giving early attention to the production and discovery of documents and to their security, it would not be appropriate to make an Anton Piller order without notice to the defendants as the first step in the litigation. I refuse that part of the application. However, there are other orders in the nature of Mareva relief which should be made immediately on undertakings and I will do that later today when counsel brings back a redraft of the orders sought. Further, the application relating to discovery is obviously urgent and when an amended notice of motion is produced I will give directions for it to be returnable before me at 10.00 AM on Friday 4 August 1995 and I will abridge time for service so that it may be served today or early on Thursday 3 August.
The application may be brought back to me by counsel in private chambers later today.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/58.html  
