

Neubacher versus Good [2003] NSWSC 379 (2 May 2003) 
Last Updated: 7 May 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Neubacher versus Good <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2380/03  
HEARING DATE{S): 01/05/03  
JUDGMENT DATE: 02/05/2003  
PARTIES: 
Diana Neubacher in her capacity as representive of the estate of John Dawson
Taylor (deceased) - Plaintiff 
Kim Lenore Good in her capacity as representative of the estate of Eleanor
Frances Taylor (deceased) - Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: Barrett J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr J R Dupree - Plaintiff 
Mr A C Todd - Defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
L C Muriniti & Associates - Plaintiff 
Swaab Attorneys - Defendant  
CATCHWORDS: 
TORRENS SYSTEM - caveats - who may lodge - one of two joint tenants assumed to have killed other intentionally and wrongfully - assumed wrongdoer died soon after assumed victim - beneficial accrual to assumed wrongdoer precluded by forfeiture rule - undivided half share accruing held upon constructive trust for estate of assumed victim - whether caveat by executrix of assumed victim precludes registration of executrix of assumed wrongdoer as proprietor by transmission - whether caveat should be removed  
ACTS CITED:  [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/), ss.74F, 74H(5)(a), 93, 96  
DECISION: 
Plaintiff entitled to be registered as proprietor by transmission as executrix. Summons otherwise dismissed.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
BARRETT J  
FRIDAY 2 MAY 2003  /03 - DIANA NEUBACHER IN HER CAPACITY AS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF JOHN DAWSON TAYLOR (DECEASED) versus KIM LENORE GOOD IN HER CAPACITY AS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF ELEANOR FRANCES TAYLOR (DECEASED)  
JUDGMENT  The plaintiff seeks an order requiring the defendant to deliver to her a withdrawal of caveat 85877138 which has been entered in respect of land at
Rouse Hill, being the land in folio identifier, 210/208203. Mr Dupree of counsel, who appeared for the plaintiff, made it clear that the jurisdiction sought to be invoked is that conferred by s.74MA of the [[Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) ](/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/).  The relevant folio of the register shows the registered proprietors of the land in question to be John Dawson Taylor and Eleanor Frances Taylor as joint tenants. The caveat is dated 10 May 2002 and was lodged by the defendant, Kim
Lenore Good, a daughter of Mr Taylor and Mrs Taylor. The principal issue ventilated upon the hearing of the application concerns the existence and validity of the estate or interest claimed by the caveator.  Certain of the central facts may be briefly stated. Mrs Taylor died on 17
April 2002. Mr Taylor died at a later time on the same day. By his will, Mr
Taylor appointed the plaintiff as his executrix. Probate of his will (also dated 17 April 2002) was granted to the plaintiff on 30 August 2002. The defendant is named as executrix in Mrs Taylor's will. A grant of probate was made to her on 9 October 2002. It was agreed by the parties, without admissions by either of them, that the court should assume, for the purposes of the present application only, that Mr Taylor intentionally and unlawfully killed Mrs Taylor.  It is the circumstance reflected by this assumption that underlies the caveat lodged by the defendant. The estate or interest claimed by the defendant in her caveat is described in the annexure to the caveat as follows:  "An equitable interest as to the whole of the land or alternatively an equitable half interest in the said land as Executrix of the Will of the late
Eleanor Frances Taylor, which interest arises by reason of the unlawful homicide of the late Eleanor Frances Taylor by John Dawson Taylor, the joint tenant, subsequently deceased."  The estate or interest thus described is stated in the caveat to have arisen by virtue of the following facts:  "On 17 April 2002, John Dawson Taylor killed the late Eleanor Frances Taylor and thereupon committed suicide, the persons having been joint tenants in respect of the subject property, thereby giving rise to the equitable interest due to the unconscionable conduct of John Dawson Taylor in the unlawful homicide of the deceased."  The plaintiff proposes to lodge in respect of the property an application for registration by transmission, asserting her status as executrix of the will of Mr Taylor. The form of this application is in evidence. The proposed application is an application under s.93 of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) by the plaintiff as executrix. Because of the existence of the defendant's caveat, the plaintiff apprehends that the transmission application will not be granted by the Registrar General.  The assumption concerning Mrs Taylor's death on the basis of which the application was heard brings into play the so called "forfeiture rule", that is, the principle of law or public policy said to be traceable to the time of
Justinian (see the discussion by Mahoney JA in Troja versus Troja [(1993) 33
NSWLR 269)] that a person may not benefit from his or her criminal act. I am not called upon to decide whether, on the facts, that rule applies here.
The assumption agreed for the strictly limited purposes of this application causes me to proceed on the footing that it does apply in relation to the death of Mrs Taylor, insofar as that death may have caused benefit to accrue to Mr Taylor.  In the absence of the assumed character of Mrs Taylor's death, there would have been no doubt that, upon that death, Mrs Taylor's interest as one of two joint tenants accrued automatically to Mr Taylor by virtue of his jus accrescendi or right of survivorship. The submission made on behalf of the plaintiff is, in effect, that that position pertains even though, on the assumption as to the nature of Mrs Taylor's death, the forfeiture rule came into play. Mr Dupree's argument was that, while the forfeiture rule might well have come into operation on the assumption that applies for the purposes of the proceedings, it is not an operation that precludes the claim of the plaintiff to be registered as proprietor by transmission or to deal with the property in her fiduciary capacity; and that any estate or interest that might, in the circumstances, have accrued to the defendant as executor of the will of Mrs Taylor would not be of such a nature as to justify a caveat forbidding recognition of the transmission application or any such dealing.  The operation of the forfeiture rule in circumstances of joint tenancy was examined by Jacobs JA (with whom Wallace P and Mason JA agreed) in Rasmanis v Jurewitsch [(1969) 70 SR 407.]
His Honour rejected the possibility that the felonious slaying of one joint tenant by the other had effected a severance of the joint tenancy:  "I find difficulty in the concept of severance even in equity being effected simply by the homicide. This would, as it were, add a new category of severance by homicide."  
Two parcels of land were in issue in that case. The wrongdoer and the victim held one parcel as joint tenants. The second parcel was held by those two persons and a third as joint tenants. In relation to the first parcel (the one held in circumstances corresponding with those assumed in this case), the
Court of Appeal held that, in order to accommodate and give effect to the forfeiture rule, equity must deny the wrongdoer the benefit of the accretion that would, in the ordinary course, flow to him by survivorship and that this should be done by recognising or imposing a constructive trust requiring the wrongdoer to hold the accretion upon trust for the estate of the victim.  That authority leads to the result in this case, at least according to the agreed assumption, that, immediately before his death, Mr Taylor was recognised as entitled to be the sole registered proprietor (that being the effect of his right of survivorship) but that, while that position prevailed at law, the benefit of the enlargement did not accrue to him beneficially and the interest of Mrs Taylor's estate, pursuant to the constructive trust, prevailed in equity. In summary, therefore, Mr Taylor was, immediately before his death, entitled to be recorded as the sole registered proprietor of the land but was regarded in equity as holding it upon trust for himself and Mrs
Taylor's estate in equal shares. Mrs Taylor's estate must accordingly be regarded as the owner in equity of an undivided one half share in the land.  But where, one must ask, does that leave the plaintiff's application to be registered as proprietor by transmission? Section 74H(5)(a) of the [Real
Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) is in the following terms:  "Except in so far as it otherwise specifies, a caveat lodged under section 74F to protect a particular legal or equitable estate or interest in land, or a particular right arising out of a restrictive covenant, does not prohibit the
Registrar-General from recording in the Register with respect to the same land:  an application made under section 93 by an executor, administrator or trustee in respect of the estate or interest of a deceased registered proprietor."  
This section says in clear terms that a s.74F caveat, as the defendant's is, does not prohibit the Registrar General from recording in the register an application made under s.93 by an executor in respect of the estate or interest of a deceased registered proprietor, unless the caveat itself otherwise specifies.  The defendant's caveat is expressed to prohibit "the recording in the register of any dealing other than a plan affecting the estate or interest claimed by the caveator and set out in schedule 1". Given these terms, the caveat does not seem to me to be one which "otherwise specifies" as mentioned in s.74H(5). It may be that a s.93 transmission application is a "dealing" as defined by the Act, but even assuming that it is, it cannot be regarded as one "affecting" the estate or interest the defendant claims in the caveat. This is because of s.96 which deals specifically with the position of a "fiduciary" (which must include an executor) registered as proprietor pursuant to s.93.
The effect of s.96 is that an executor registered by transmission holds the estate or interest in respect of which the s.93 registration is effected "in trust for the persons for whom and purposes for which that estate or interest is applicable by law". Section 93 registration therefore cannot impinge upon or affect the interest claimed by the present defendant in her caveat. Because of s.96, that interest (if it exists), being an equitable interest under a constructive trust, will be accommodated and preserved in the defendant despite the plaintiff's becoming registered as proprietor and therefore will not be affected by her becoming proprietor.  Subject to the position just described in relation to the transmission application, however, the consequences of the forfeiture rule, as already outlined, must mean that, on the assumption with which I am dealing, the defendant, as Mrs Taylor's executrix, has an equitable interest in the land.
The plaintiff is taken to hold it upon trust for the estate of Mr Taylor as to one undivided half share and for the estate of Mrs Taylor as to one undivided half share, so that the defendant, as the legal personal representative of Mrs
Taylor, rightly asserts the interest thus attributable to Mrs Taylor's estate.
That interest is clearly capable of supporting the defendant's caveat, with the result that, if any order to remove the caveat is to be made, it must be referable to factors other than the non-existence of a caveatable interest. I am working here on the agreed assumption as to a key part of the facts. The correct characterisation of the position is therefore that the asserted estate or interest of the caveator will be established if and when that assumption is proved to be warranted and that in the meantime the caveat should be regarded as one that may have substance.  In such a case, the approach taken by the court would normally be to order removal of the caveat unless the caveator takes proceedings to establish and enforce the claimed interest, since it is for the person asserting the interest to discharge the burden of establishing its existence: see Re
Mitchell [(1902) 19 WN 161];
Re Little; Ex parte Thorne's Bankstown Estate Ltd <case>; [(1929) 29 SR 401];
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation versus Corwest Management Pty Ltd [[1978] WAR .] In this instance, however, the defendant has already commenced such proceedings.
She did so by a statement of claim filed on 26 November 2002 in proceedings /02. I am informed by counsel that that matter is listed for hearing by
Gzell J on 18 July 2003.  In these circumstances, I consider the correct outcome to be that the caveat should be allowed to stand pending determination of the proceedings instituted by the caveator, unless some particularly strong factor going to the balance of convenience indicates to the contrary. The caveator's suit will determine whether the asserted estate or interest in truth exists and in the ordinary course the status quo should continue until that determination is made.  The plaintiff points to one factor which, it is submitted, should tilt the balance of convenience in her favour. On 9 April 2003, she entered into a contract for the sale of the property for a price of $2.4 million under which a deposit of $120,000 has been paid. The plaintiff says that she should be allowed to complete the sale and, if the defendant does have any interest, that interest can be regarded as subsisting in the proceeds of sale. The defendant's position, however, is that she has had no opportunity to examine the sale and in particular the adequacy of the price. There is also a concern that proceeds of sale may be applied to the detriment of Mrs Taylor's estate in meeting separate debts of Mr Taylor.  It is significant that the contract, which is in evidence, contains a special condition disclosing the existence and nature of the separate proceedings brought by the defendant. The special condition provides for a period of six months from the date of contract, that is, until 9 October 2003, for the present plaintiff, as vendor, to obtain registration by transmission and removal of the defendant's caveat. If those two objectives are achieved within that period, completion must take place within the following 21 days.
If both the objectives are not achieved within the six months, either party may rescind.  The defendant's separate suit is, as I have said, expected to be heard by
Gzell J on 18 July 2003. It is therefore highly likely that the defendant's claim in respect of the property will have been resolved one way or the other before 9 October 2003 so that, depending on the result, the contract may take its preordained course to either completion or rescission. The existence of the contract therefore does not affect the balance of convenience in any way that would indicate a need to remove the caveat.  It was also submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that all parties will be better off if the sale is completed promptly, so that the proceeds can be invested to advantage. Against that, however, there is the point that the property is apparently vacant and so might presumably be let. Also, any advantage to which the plaintiff points in this respect cannot outweigh the need to see the status quo preserved pending resolution of the position by means of the separate proceedings already in train. The plaintiff has not made out her case for an order for the removal of the defendant's caveat.  I have not so far mentioned the first claim in the plaintiff's summons, being a claim for an order that the plaintiff is entitled to be registered as the proprietor of the property. In view of what I have said about ss.93 and
H(5)(a) and the terms of the prohibition in the defendant's caveat, I am satisfied that the caveat does not operate as a barrier to registration of the plaintiff by transmission in her capacity as Mr Taylor's executrix and that she is entitled to be registered accordingly as the proprietor of the property - although she will, of course, hold it in a purely fiduciary capacity subject to such interest by way of constructive trust as the defendant may ultimately establish.  In the result, therefore, I make order 1 in the summons but with the words "by transmission and in her capacity as executrix of the will of John Dawson
Taylor (deceased)" inserted after the word "registered". Otherwise, the summons is dismissed. Since the argument before me was concerned wholly with the maintaining of the defendant's caveat, as to which she has been successful, the plaintiff is ordered to pay the defendant's costs.  
LAST UPDATED: 05/05/2003 * * * 
