

Regina versus Mlacic Matter No Cca 60600/97 [1998] NSWSC 226 (25 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 June 1998 
REGINA versus BRANKO MLACIC /97 May 1998 
Studdert J, Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, Branko Mlacic, seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Phelan in the District Court at Wollongong on 31 October 1997. The applicant had pleaded guilty before his Honour on 15 September 1997 to a charge of having knowingly taken part in the supply of a prohibited drug between 29 May 1996 and 2 July 1996. The drug was heroin. 
The applicant was sentenced to a minimum term of three years penal servitude to commence on 15 September 1997 and to expire on 14 September 2000. His
Honour set an additional term of one year commencing on 15 September 2000. His
Honour also took into account a number of scheduled matters including many offences of driving whilst disqualified. He also took into account a matter of possession of a prohibited drug, namely five grams of cannabis, a matter of goods in custody relating to a sum in excess of $4000 in the applicant's possession and a further matter of goods in custody pertaining to a Makita brand planer. Apart from the sentence imposed his Honour also disqualified the applicant from driving for a period of two years.

The relevant facts may be shortly stated. Between 29 May 1996 and 2 July 1996 police intercepted more than 230 calls on the applicant's mobile phone. The conversations that took place plainly related to the supply of heroin and police conservatively estimated, and the judge seems to have acted on this estimate, that over the period in question the applicant supplied somewhere between forty and seventy-five grams of heroin. There was evidence of observations of the applicant on a number of occasions engaged in the actual supply to customers. The amounts supplied were small, none of them exceeding .5 grams.

As his Honour observed, taking the lower range in the estimate of forty grams, this would have involved the applicant in some eighty dealings or more. Those figures by way of broad range, both in terms of the estimates with which his
Honour was provided and the calculations that his Honour based upon them, did not permit of precise quantification and I do not understand from the terms of his Honour's remarks on sentence, that his Honour treated the number of dealings to have been established with any degree of mathematical precision.

His Honour's conclusion was that the applicant was involved in a relatively sophisticated organisation, employing a mobile phone and he had people working for him including two men who the judge was called upon to sentence in relation to the very same charges to that upon which the applicant was sentenced.

One of those men drove the applicant around to deliver drugs because of the applicant's driving disqualification which, as the matters indicated on the schedule reveal, did not at all times discourage the applicant from driving a motor vehicle.

The maximum penalty to which the applicant was exposed was one of fifteen years imprisonment and/or a monetary penalty of 2000 penalty units.

The applicant is thirty-two years of age. He claimed that he had a heroin habit and that he separated from his de facto wife after he began to supply heroin which he bought, split and then sold some and used some. He said that he was always "stoned" whilst he was supplying but the sentencing judge expressed scepticism, which to my mind is borne out by the applicant's assertion that he was heavily into heroin. The judge made no finding that he was not so addicted but rather was sceptical about the assertion to that effect. As his Honour pointed out, the coherence of the telephone calls which were recorded is reflective of somebody who knew what was going on and Det
Leckey gave evidence to the effect that the applicant did not give the appearance of a person who was addicted to heroin as he claimed.

This police officer was engaged in the surveillance of the applicant during the period within which the offence charged was committed, and his evidence was that from the detective's observation the applicant never exhibited any of the traits which the detective had experienced with people who were regular or semi-regular heroin users.

His Honour appears to have accepted that evidence from Det Leckey, as indeed the judge was entitled to do.

The applicant had a criminal record which was not, relatively speaking, a serious one. His Honour took into account a pre-sentence report which confirmed that the applicant had been a hard-working individual. His Honour considered that there were real prospects for rehabilitation.

A number of matters have been raised by Mr Ramage of Queen's Counsel and which, it is submitted, reflect error by the learned sentencing judge.

Firstly, it was submitted that the sentence was manifestly excessive. The
Court's attention has been drawn to sentencing statistics and the conclusion is invited that the sentence which was imposed was towards the top of the sentencing range. Be that as it may, by reference to those statistics, and they have to be approached with a degree of caution since subjective features of any case must be brought into account, it does not seem to me that a reference to those statistics is indicative of error here. Particularly is that so, it seems to me, because his Honour was here dealing with a case not of an isolated element of misconduct but rather with systematic supply in what his Honour found to be, and I quote his words, "a blatant operation".

Mr Ramage further submitted that the sentence offended against principles of parity expressed in Lowe versus The Queen. It is submitted that the sentences on the co-accused reflect disparity such as would justify the applicant in having a sense of grievance if his sentence remains undisturbed. It is to be observed that his Honour sentenced the two co-offenders and he did so on the same day that he sentenced the applicant.

His Honour was alert to and made findings as to the roles which the three men played and to the distinctions in these roles. In sentencing the offender
Davies, the judge treated him as being a chauffeur to the applicant in return for the supply of heroin to feed Davies' addiction. His Honour found that
Davies was very much under the applicant's influence and he also found that his level of criminality was under that of the applicant. His Honour carefully recorded Davies' subjective circumstances and there were those that were favourable to him. One of those was the dramatic change in Davies' behaviour following his arrest and the judge sentenced him to eighteen months imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention. In my opinion there was good cause to distinguish Davies and the applicant on the findings which the learned judge made.

The same applies to the offender Lamovsek. His Honour found that Lamovsek was in a lesser category of involvement than the applicant and this is the basis upon which he indicated he was going to deal with that offender. Specifically his Honour said of Lamovsek: "It appears to me from the statement of facts and the other materials that he was to some degree peripheral to what was happening although more involved than the man Davies whom I have just dealt with. Indeed it seems implicit in the material before the Court that he was running his own show, nevertheless the evidence in relation to these matters puts him in a somewhat lesser category of involvement than the prisoner Mlacic and I propose to deal with him on that assumption." 
That was an available conclusion to the judge to make as the tribunal of fact.
Once again the subjective circumstances differed in his case and so it was that the judge sentenced him to a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months.

In my opinion consideration of the criminality of the three men and their differing subjective features does afford sufficient justification for the differing sentences which his Honour imposed on the three offenders and reading the sentencing remarks in their entirety makes it clear that his
Honour was alert to this and so distinguished the three cases. The argument based on Lowe fails.

It was then submitted that the sentencing process was flawed by the following errors: 
A failure to give adequate weight to the appellant's plea and to the remorse reflected in it and to the appellant's evidence; 
That the judge appeared to have taken a view that the quantity of the drug involved was almost seventy-five grams; 
That the applicant was not a heavy user of heroin; 
That he was untruthful in his assertion that he and his wife had separated because of the heroin addiction; 
That he was untruthful in his assertion that he attended Community
Services classes.

I do not find errors in those respects to have been established or indeed in any one of them. So far as the plea was concerned his Honour was alert to it, he had specifically adverted to it and it is not to be assumed that it was not given proper weight. The sentence imposed does not suggest failure to give it proper weight.

Reading the remarks as a whole, it seems to me that the approach that the judge took was to regard the quantity of heroin which the applicant supplied as being between forty and seventy-five grams. Based on those figures, he made estimates of dealings. He concluded his sentencing remarks by saying: "At the very most the amount of heroin involved was seventy-five grams." 
I do not think that a fair reading of the remarks invites the conclusion that his Honour ignored the lower point of the range of estimates expressed in the evidence. Now it seems to me that a close reading of the remarks indicates that his Honour approached the sentencing task accepting as the range that expressed by the police officers in the course of evidence.

The other findings complained of were available to the judge.

Finally it is submitted that the judge gave inadequate weight to the applicant's record and prospects of rehabilitation, and to the fact that this was the applicant's first prison sentence which would have an effect not only on him but on his family. Again I cannot accept this submission. As far as the impact on the applicant's family is concerned, this regrettably is an inevitable consequence where an offender with dependents is sent to prison, but it is only in exceptional cases that this warrants a reduction in what otherwise would be a proper sentence: see Edwards [90 A CrimR 510.] No such exceptional circumstances were pointed to in this case.

As to the remaining matters identified by Mr Ramage, I detect no error in the remarks on sentence where his Honour adverted to matters which he took into account. This was a stern sentence but this was a serious offence.

As I observed earlier, I do not regard the sentence as manifestly excessive and I detect no error in his Honour's approach.

I would grant leave to appeal in this case but I consider the appeal should be dismissed.

CARRUTHERS A-J: I agree. 
STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court then will be those that I have proposed. * * * 
