

Jaffers and Ors versus Chief Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences [1996] NSWSC 478 (9 October 1996) 
JAFFERS & ORS V CHIEF COMMISSIONER FOR BUSINESS FRANCHISE LICENCES /93 ALD 30030/89 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY AP COLE JA ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS:BUSINESS FRANCHISE LICENCES (TOBACCO) ACT - TOBACCO TAKEN INTO CUSTODY BY INSPECTOR 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
BUSINESS FRANCHISE LICENCES (TOBACCO) ACT - tobacco taken into Chief
Commissioner's custody by inspector - one proceeding brought by four plaintiffs to recover $400,000 proceeds of insurance claim by Commissioner after theft of tobacco - each plaintiff claimed to have purchased a separate parcel of the tobacco taken into custody - trial judge awards $36,691 to plaintiffs collectively - trial judge had found plaintiffs had not satisfied him as to their individual ownership (or purchase) of any tobacco - nor that it was possible for him to say which of the plaintiffs had owned any particular quantity of tobacco - appeal by plaintiffs and cross appeal by
Chief Commissioner - 
Held: 1. plaintiff's appeal must be dismissed because of trial judge's non satisfaction about ownership - 2. Chief Commissioner's cross appeal upheld - no evidentiary or other support for collective or joint ownership by plaintiffs of any part of the tobacco.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed.
Judgment for the appellants below set aside.
Judgment for the Chief Commissioner entered in the proceedings below.
Appellants to pay the Chief Commissioner's costs both of the appeal and of the trial.
Moneys paid in by the Chief Commissioner should be returned to the Chief
Commissioner.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY AP: These proceedings arise from actions taken by the Chief Commissioner and his inspectors pursuant to their powers under the Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) Act, which I will simply call "the Act".

In 1988, pursuant to their powers under the Act, the Commissioner and his inspectors took possession of a considerable quantity of tobacco. The circumstances in which that happened and the course of the proceedings which were later instituted by the present appellants in order to recover the money value into which some of the tobacco had been transmuted or some proportion of that money value are fully set out in the reasons for judgment of Hodgson J who heard the proceedings at first instance.

The appellants - four in number - brought their proceedings before Hodgson J by the one statement of claim. However, that statement of claim contained four individual claims by each of the appellants severally. The appellants had a partial success in the proceedings at first instance. The overall claim made in the statement of claim was for an amount in the region of $400,000. The order made by the judge was that there should be judgment for the plaintiffs (the appellants) and, as he made clear in his reasons, he meant by that judgment for the plaintiffs collectively, in the sum of $36,691 plus interest from 1989 to the date of judgment in 1993.

The appellants appealed seeking a new trial, as I understand their notice of appeal. At all events their objective was eventually to recover a much larger sum than the $36,000 adjudged to them by Hodgson J.

The Chief Commissioner, who was the defendant in the proceedings below, filed a cross-appeal the object of which was to have the judgment in favour of the appellants set aside and instead sought judgment in favour of the Chief
Commissioner.

The facts underlying the decision by Hodgson J are somewhat complex. The point raised on appeal was a single one, in the sense that the consequences which the appellants were hoping would flow from their appeal all depended upon the court's acceptance of the first point which was sought to be argued which related to the admissibility of evidence of what the driver of the truck from which the tobacco was impounded had said about the destination of the truck at, or very closely near, the time of the taking of the tobacco by the
Commissioner and his inspectors.

Because of the way the argument developed in the appeal it will not be necessary to set out in the court's reasons for judgment any of the details of what led up to the judgment of Hodgson J. It is sufficient to say that the appellants' claims were beyond question founded upon assertions that each of them severally had been the owner of a portion of the tobacco seized, and each of them severally was seeking to obtain the appropriate proportion of the money in the Commissioner's hands representing the tobacco, that is, each of them was claiming that part of the sum attributable to the tobacco in the
Commissioner's hands which corresponded to his claimed ownership of the specified tobacco that had been in the truck at the time the tobacco was taken into custody by the Commissioner.

Before Hodgson J each of the appellants gave evidence seeking to show his ownership of a particular part of the consignment which had been taken into custody by the Commissioner. The stories they told in support of their claims contained a number of features which led the trial judge not to accept any of them. On matters of credibility of the kind which are peculiarly within the province of trial judges Hodgson J found he did not rely on any aspect of the evidence of any of the appellants unless corroborated by other particular evidence or the general circumstances of the case.

In a later part of his reasons he said he did not think it was possible for him to say which of the appellants owned any particular quantity of tobacco.
That finding, taken together with what he had earlier said concerning the credibility of the appellants in regard to matters unconnected with the evidence of the driver, can lead only to the conclusion that each of the appellants at the trial had failed to establish his individual, several, case.
Those conclusions meant that each of the appellants failed on the threshold of his case.

The judge had followed his statement that he could not say which of the plaintiffs owned any quantity of tobacco by adding - "but I think I can give judgment for the plaintiffs collectively". That is what he did. The actual terms of his substantive order were: "I order that there should be judgment for the plaintiffs in the sum of $36,691.10, plus interest." 
This judgment can only be a judgment entered in favour of the plaintiffs jointly.

In circumstances where each appellant was making an individual claim and the evidence given by each appellant supported his individual claim, and none of the evidence given by any of the appellants founded a conclusion of joint ownership by any combination of the four of them, of any part of the tobacco which had been taken into custody by the Commissioner, it was not open to the trial judge to enter the judgment which he did.

I should here go back to say that the appellants' claims were put on two bases at the trial. One was that they had complied with the requirements of section of the Act by producing a correct record in compliance with section 63 and that that alone entitled them to recover their money now representing the tobacco which the Commissioner had taken into custody. The other basis was that the Commissioner was holding the money for the true owners and that they were individually entitled to the proportion of the money representing their respective several ownerships of the tobacco.

There can be no doubt that on the first basis the appellants had to fail in their appeal because of the judge's findings of fact, findings of fact which he had made unconnected with the evidence of the driver of the truck. The record upon which the appellants were relying was incorrect in various respects, the primary one for present purposes being the statement of the purchaser of the tobacco. I have been speaking of "ownership" till now. In the way the case was conducted the appellants were asserting that they were severally purchasers and thus the owners, and in what I have said so far the word "owner" is interchangeable with the word "purchaser" for purposes of the Act and these reasons.

The second basis, which can be compendiously called the "money had and received" basis also depended for its viability upon proof by the individual appellants of their status as owners and purchasers of the tobacco at the time it was taken into custody. The reasons I have already stated concerning the judge's findings of fact make it inevitable that the appellants' money had and received claim, on the basis upon which they presented the claim, had to fail.
It is absolutely clear that the judge was not satisfied that any individual had made out any case in respect of any particular portion of the tobacco.

That brings me to the point that became the point of debate on the part of the appellants this morning. When the question came up in the course of discussion of how it was possible for the judgment to be entered collectively for plaintiffs who were bringing proceedings severally, it was submitted that, although the pleadings did not support any collective case, it may have been that the course taken at the trial left it open to the judge to arrive at the decision that he did. Counsel for the appellants had not been at the trial and was perfectly straightforward with the court in saying he was not able to assert that the trial had in fact taken the course which would have enabled the judge to make the judgment which he did. He put his submission on the basis of possibility and submitted further that if that possibility could not be excluded by reference to the materials before the court the appropriate course to take would be for the matter to be returned to the Administrative
Law Division for the outstanding questions to be clarified.

It sometimes happens that the way in which cases are decided does not reflect the pleadings that are in the record. It is not uncommon for a case to take a course which separates itself from the pleadings and in which the parties contest issues which do not arise on the pleadings. When such cases as that come on appeal the court must always be careful to see that it is dealing in the appeal with the issues that were actually fought between the parties.
Amendments to bring the record into conformity with what has actually happened are sometimes allowed to be made at very late stages in proceedings. Cases of that kind, however, are cases where the judge and the parties have all joined in the pursuit and decision of issues.

The present case does not appear to be one anything like that type. The court has the pleadings and all the evidence that was given. As I said earlier the evidence does not furnish any foothold for a finding of joint ownership or joint purchase by the appellants or any of them of any part of the tobacco.
Their cases were really quite the contrary.

Thus the position that emerged was that the appeal would have to fail because of the failure on the part of the appellants to establish the ownership or purchases they were asserting. The cross-appeal must succeed for the same reason. This does not appear to have been recognised by the parties prior to the commencement of the hearing of the appeal today. However, once the point came up in the course of discussion there seemed to be no answer the appellants could give to it.

The court recognises it must be careful not to be too dogmatic about what has happened at a trial when, as here, it went over several days and it is obviously impossible for the trial judge to have recorded in his reasons everything that happened in the course of evidence and argument.

In the present case, however, the trial judge's reasons appear to have been very carefully and thoroughly prepared and set out at some length both the factual cases of the appellants and the submissions that were put both on behalf of the appellants and of the Chief Commissioner before the trial judge.
There is not the slightest sign anywhere of a case having been made of joint ownership or purchase.

The short conclusion from what I have said is that the appeal must fail and the cross-appeal must be upheld.

In reaching this conclusion I have not dealt with what was to have been the principal point to be argued for the appellants, namely, the admissibility for the purposes for which he used it by Hodgson J of the statements of the driver of the vehicle from which the tobacco was taken into custody.

The point concerning the consequences of the failure of the appellants to satisfy the trial judge about their individual cases of ownership or purchase is one which, once seen and upheld, puts an end to both the appeal and the cross-appeal at a stage prior to that at which it would become necessary to consider the admissibility point.

There were a number of other points which might have arisen if the initial difficulty of the failure by the appellants on their several cases to show ownership or purchase could have been surmounted by the appellants but, since those difficulties cannot be surmounted and since they are in my opinion fatal to success on the appeal and fatal to the order the judge made which is attacked in the cross-appeal, there is no need to say anything further about them.

In my opinion, therefore, the appeal should be dismissed, the cross-appeal should be upheld and judgment should be entered for the Chief Commissioner. In the cross-appeal this involves setting aside the judgment in favour of the appellants, so the formal orders would be: appeal dismissed; judgment for the appellants below set aside; judgment for the Chief Commissioner entered in the proceedings below.

COLE JA: I agree with the judgment just delivered.

ABADEE AJA: I also agree.

PRIESTLEY AP: The court's orders will therefore be those I proposed. The costs orders will be that the parties I have called the appellants in my reasons are to pay the Chief Commissioner's costs both of the appeal and of the trial. The court further orders that the moneys paid in by the Chief Commissioner should be returned to the Chief Commissioner.
 * * * 
