

Bechara versus Stubbs Matter No 20908/96 [1997] NSWSC 396 (12 September 1997) 
Bechara versus Stubbs /96 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - Bechara versus Stubbs 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 11 December 1994, the plaintiff suffered personal injuries in a motor vehicle accident. In these proceedings, he propounds a claim in damages. Since early 1997, the defendant has sought to make arrangements for the plaintiff to attend at a Vocational Capacity Centre for the purpose of a functional and vocational assessment. The plaintiff opposes attending any such assessment. 
The plaintiff's claim was referred to arbitration. It came before the arbitrator on 13 April 1997. On 2 May 1997, an Award was given. The defendant has sought a rehearing. The proceedings have been placed in the holding list.
There is material which suggests that it may not be listed for hearing in this
Court during the next five months. However, the proceedings are a candidate for transfer to the District Court. A transfer could see an earlier hearing.

In June 1997, the defendant brought a Notice of Motion. It sought orders for the attendance by the plaintiff for examination at the Centre. The application came before me on 24 June 1997. As I was not satisfied that the evidence then before me justified the making of an order, I declined to do so.

By Notice of Motion filed on 14 August 1997, the defendant brings a fresh application. The orders sought included the following: "(1) The plaintiff's cause of action be stayed until such time as the plaintiff attends for examination and testing by the Vocational Capacity
Centre as arranged by the defendant.

That the plaintiff attend the Vocational Capacity Centre of Level 5, 83
Mount Street, North Sydney on Tuesday, 23 September 1997 between 9.30am and .30pm and Wednesday, 24 September 1997 between 11.30am and 12.30pm for examination and testing." 
It is said that the defendant requires the plaintiff to be medically examined and tested for the purpose of assessing his residual earning capacity. The defendant relies on an affidavit sworn by Pip Lazaris. The plaintiff relies on an affidavit sworn by Paul Grant. A document entitled, "Joint Statement of
Specific Matters of Fact and Law That Are Really in Dispute" has been prepared and signed by the legal representatives of the parties. It is dated 9 July
It contains the following:- "(1) Duration of any incapacity.

Quantum of future economic loss.

Non-economic loss.

Is plaintiff entitled to post-economic loss in respect of sick pay paid.

Actual difference between the plaintiff's earnings and those of a sergeant or a person of higher rank in the Police Force." 
At all material times the plaintiff has been a member of the Police Force.
Following the accident, he was off work until 20 December 1994. Thereafter, he resumed on light duties. There have been numerous absences from work. He continues on light duties. Apart from a claim for continuing partial loss of salary, there is also a claim for, inter alia, loss of job prospects and promotional opportunities.

The affidavit sworn by Pip Lazaris contains the following:- "25. Functional capacity evaluations are conducted by qualified physiotherapists who work in the area of occupational health and rehabilitation. The physiotherapist who will assess the plaintiff at the
Vocational Capacity Centre is Pamela Johnston. A copy of her curriculum vitae is attached and marked 'N'.
The functional capacity assessment provides comprehensive testing of a person's ability to perform work-related tasks. Performance is rated and abilities and limitations are compared to tasks required in job descriptions.
It includes assessment of ability to lift and carry weight, hand co- ordination, dexterity and grip strength. Sitting and standing tolerances, balance, walking, use of stairs and ladders, and flexibility and mobility of the trunk and lower limbs are also evaluated. The assessment is objective, based on the therapist's knowledge of physical movement, body mechanics, balance and posture. This avoids a subjective result which can occur if the plaintiff attempts to control the assessment situation through their own perceptions of their physical capabilities. Inconsistencies in physical performance and symptom embellishment clearly identified as is motivation to perform physical activities.
The assessment is carried out over two days, three hours on day one and up to two hours on day two. The second day provides the opportunity to evaluate work tolerances and gives the plaintiff the opportunity to comment on how they are feeling from a physical perspective after participating in day one.
The vocational assessment is conducted by relevantly qualified vocational psychologists. The psychologist who will assess the plaintiff at the
Vocational Capacity Centre is Robert Pryor. A copy of his curriculum vitae is annexed and marked 'O'.
The vocational assessment is a psychological assessment of intellectual aptitudes and abilities and work preferences. This data is combined with an analysis of skills gained from previous work and hobby associated activities.
Jobs are analysed by skill level and a comparison can be made for job suitability and retraining potential. A full vocational assessment involves participation of the plaintiff in up to four hours of assessment.
Both assessors discuss their findings which when integrated provide information regarding suitable work options and rehabilitation needs that may be required to facilitate a return to appropriate work for the plaintiff." 
Rule 5 in Division 1 of Part 25 of the Supreme Court Rules contains provisions enabling the Court to make orders for the medical examination of a person.
Rule 7B in Division 1A of that Part of the Rules contains provisions which enable the Court to make orders for testing a party for the purposes of assessing the extent of impairment of the party's earning capacity including an order to submit to tests pursuant to the direction of a medical practitioner during a specified period and at a specified place.

Rule 1 is, inter alia, a definition provision. It contains definitions, inter alia, of "medical examination" and "medical expert". "Medical expert" is defined to include "physiotherapists and psychologists".

It is perhaps unnecessary to explore the question of which of the rules 5 or (B) should be looked to in this case. In my view, the Court clearly has power to make the orders sought. This does not seem to be a matter in issue between the parties.

Each of the rules confers a judicial discretion on the Court. It is to be exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The applicant seeking an order bears the onus of satisfying the Court that the order should be made.

The relevant circumstances would usually include matters such as the utility of the making of an order, the delay in seeking an order, the explanation offered for any delay and prejudice.

The question of the making of orders for medical examinations has been the subject of consideration in past cases. Whilst these cases might afford guidance, it must be remembered that each case will turn on its own particular circumstances. The past decisions may well have been made in the context of a rule of the Court having different terminology.

At this stage, it is convenient to deal with two specific matters relied on by the plaintiff. The first concerns a matter of notice. It is common ground that no specific notice or examination has been served since the proceedings were last before me. It is said that the service of such a notice is a procedural requirement to the making of an order. I do not accept that submission. It seems to me that an order can be made pursuant to rule 5, whether or not any notice pursuant to rule 2 has been served.

The second concerns a matter of estoppel. The submission has been reduced to writing in an Outline of Submissions. The plaintiff relies on various decisions, including a decision of Sperling J in Wentworth versus Rogers &
Anor (unreported, 28 April 1995). In the circumstances of this case, I am not presently satisfied that the principles relied upon by the plaintiff have application. It is a question on which I would have appreciated further argument. In any event, it is unnecessary to further pursue that matter.

I return to the circumstances of this case. If an order is made, the plaintiff will have to submit to testing over a period of two days. I remain unpersuaded that the testing will prove to be of significant benefit in the circumstances of this case. The application is made at a late stage. The matter has already been to arbitration. The material that can be relied on to explain delay is seriously deficient (inter alia, the period prior to early 1997).

In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the defendant has discharged the onus of demonstrating entitlement to the relief sought. I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The defendant is to pay the costs of the application.

Because of the duplicity of the two applications, I order that the plaintiff have liberty to proceed forthwith to have the costs of this application assessed.
 * * * 
