

Haddon versus Forsyth [2011] NSWSC 123 (8 March 2011) 
Last Updated: 20 June 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Haddon versus Forsyth  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): March 2010; 23 March 2010; 24 March 2010; 25 March 2010; 26 March 2010; 29
March 2010; 30 March 2010; 31 March 2010; 1 April 2010; 6 April 2010; 7 April ; 8 April 2010; 9 April 2010; 21 April 2010; 23 April 2010  
Decision Date: March 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Before: 
Simpson J  
Decision:
Verdict for the defendants. 
The plaintiff pay the defendants' costs.  
Catchwords: 
DEFAMATION - trial by judge alone on all issues - publication of emails - imputations of sexual harassment and conduct warranting complaints of unwanted sexual advances - limited number of recipients - each recipient had knowledge and a close association with events concerned in publication 
DEFAMATION - defences - substantial truth - meaning of "sexual harassment" - whether conduct properly characterised as sexual harassment - whether conduct warranted complaints of unwanted sexual advances - contextual truth - <case> [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/da200599/) - pleading back - imputations pleaded on behalf of plaintiff significantly more serious 
DEFAMATION - defence of honest opinion - [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/da200599/s31.html) [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/da200599/) - defence fails - clear statement of facts - not a matter of public interest 
DEFAMATION - common law qualified privilege - statements made in pursuance of duty or interest - proper identification of subject matter - approach to determining extent of interest - incidental recipients - reciprocity - "pressing need" test not applied - [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/da200599/s30.html) [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/da200599/) - reasonableness of conduct - plea of malice - whether privileged occasion used for improper purpose 
DEFAMATION - publication - email - where recipients of publication are also co-authors - electronic communication - whether co-authors can be recipients for the purpose of defamation law 
DAMAGES - evidence of hurt and distress - damage to reputation - publication within limited circle 
WORDS & PHRASES - "sexual harassment" - ordinary meaning  
Legislation Cited: [Anti-Discrimination Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/)  [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/)  [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/da200599/)  [Sex Discrimination Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/) (Cth)  [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/)  
Cases Cited: 
Adam versus Ward <case>; <case>; <case>; <case> 
Cooke versus Plauen Holdings Pty Ltd <case> 
Farquhar versus Bottom <case> 
Hall versus A & A Sheiban Pty Ltd <case>; <case> 
Lloyd versus David Syme and Co Ltd <case> 
Poniatowska versus Hickinbotham <case> 
Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd versus Parker [(1992) 29 NSWLR 448] 
Reader's Digest Services Pty Ltd versus Lamb <case>; <case> 
Toogood versus Spyring <case>; [(1834) 1 Cr M & R 181]  
Texts Cited: 
Gatley on Libel and Slander, Sweet & Maxwell, 11th ed 
Macquarie Dictionary 
Oxford English Dictionary 
The New Shorter Oxford Dictionary  
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Bruce Haddon (Plaintiff) 
The Right Reverend Robert Forsyth (First defendant) 
The Reverend Dominic Steele (Second defendant) 
Evan Batten (Third defendant)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
Counsel: 
S Wheelhouse SC/R Potter (Plaintiff) 
K P Smark SC/S T Chrysanthou (Defendants)  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors: 
DLA Phillips Fox (Plaintiff) 
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers (Defendants)  
File number(s): /297442  
Publication Restriction: 
Judgment 
The subject matter of these proceedings is two (almost identical) email communications, of the same date (15 February 2008) each of which, the plaintiff claims, conveyed imputations that defamed him. The content of the emails is set out below at [5].  
The plaintiff is Bruce Alexander Haddon. The defendants, initially, were named as the Right Reverend Robert Forsyth (first defendant), who was and is the Anglican Bishop of South Sydney; the Reverend Dominic Steele (second defendant), who was and is an ordained Minister of the Church of England; and Evan Batten (third defendant), who was and is an active member of the Church of England.  
On 18 February 2010, the proceedings against Bishop Forsyth were discontinued. However, throughout the proceedings, the remaining defendants, the Reverend Steele and Evan Batten, were referred to as the second and third defendants. In order to avoid confusion I will refer to them by name. In the interests of consistency I will also refer to the plaintiff by name.  
The proceedings are governed by the [Defamation Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/da200599/) ("the Act"). No party elected for trial by jury and, accordingly, all issues are to be decided in these proceedings, including whether any or all of the imputations of which the plaintiff complains was or were conveyed, and, if so, was or were defamatory of him (cf [Defamation Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) ("the [1974 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/)"), [s 7A).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html)  
Each email gave as the subject line:  "I need to ask you not to join us this Sunday night" 
I reproduce the content of the second: "Dear Bruce, 
We were disappointed that after Dominic and Evan's meeting with you last
Sunday (10.2) where you agreed to a requested conduct-agreement in regards to relations with women, you broke that agreement a number of times after church finished on Sunday night.

In the meeting on Sunday Dominic and Evan raised concerns about your conduct towards women and your negative theological impact on our church family.

You will remember that after a number of complaints from women Dominic and
Evan asked you to: not to lead conversations towards sexual matters or make comments to women about their appearance, dress, weight, tan, hair, body shape, legs, neck etc.
 not to touch or kiss women at church.
 not to focus your social interactions on women and to avoid women new to church.
 to focus your social interactive time with men of long standing in our church fellowship.

Given that, after agreeing to that conduct-agreement, you broke it a number of times 90 minutes later, I need to ask you not to join us this Sunday night - while we work out how to approach this problem.

Also, we think it would be best if you didn't plan to join us on the church weekend away later this month.

Thanks for your assistance in this matter.

Yours, 
Dominic Steele (Minister), Frag Woodall, Rob Taylor, Pinghan Chua (Wardens),
Evan Batten (Church Councillor)"
The "Bruce" to whom the email is directed is Mr Haddon himself. As will appear below, the email was copied to a number of other recipients.  
Mr Haddon claims that each email conveyed five imputations defamatory of him; given the similarity of the two emails, it is hardly surprising that the imputations are pleaded in identical terms. The imputations pleaded are:  "1. the Plaintiff sexually harassed female members of a church congregation by introducing inappropriate sexual topics into his conversation with them; the Plaintiff sexually harassed female members of a church congregation by inappropriately touching and kissing them; the Plaintiff so conducted himself towards female members of a church congregation to warrant complaints being made against him that he had made unwanted sexual advances to them; the Plaintiff is a sexual predator who preys upon female members of a church congregation; the plaintiff is unfit to be a member of his church as he behaved in an offensive manner towards a number of female members of the congregation."
In their defence the defendants deny that the content of the emails was capable of carrying, or did in fact carry, the imputations pleaded, and deny that that content was capable of being, or was in fact, defamatory of the plaintiff.  
In addition, they plead a variety of specific defences, as follows:  * (i) truth, as provided by [s 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s25.html) of the Act;  * (ii) contextual truth, as provided by [s 26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s26.html) thereof;  * (iii) fair comment at common law;  * (iv) honest opinion, as provided by [s 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s31.html) of the Act;  * (v) qualified privilege at common law;  * (vi) qualified privilege, as provided by [s 30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s30.html) of the Act.  
A final matter of defence is somewhat unusual. It is that a number of the individuals said to have been recipients of the second email were in fact co-authors of it and therefore not recipients for the purposes of the law of defamation.  
By way of response to the defences of qualified privilege at common law and pursuant to statute, the plaintiff pleads that, in publishing the emails, the defendants were actuated by malice. By way of response to the defences of fair comment at common law, and honest opinion under [s 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s31.html) of the Act, the plaintiff pleads that neither defendant honestly held the opinion said to be represented in the publications.  
As I have indicated above, the defendants have denied that the emails were capable of conveying, or that they did in fact convey, any of those imputations. They have also denied that any imputation, if conveyed, was capable of, or did in fact, defame Mr Haddon. Accordingly, these are the first questions for resolution. 
Defamatory meaning 
The basis on which juries are traditionally directed in respect of whether a publication conveys defamatory imputations is well known. The test is that of "the ordinary reasonable reader/viewer/listener". A defamatory imputation is conveyed by the publication if it can reasonably be postulated that the "the ordinary reasonable reader/viewer/listener" would consider that the publication conveyed that meaning. "The ordinary reasonable reader/viewer/listener" is said to be of fair average intelligence, fair minded, not overly suspicious, not "avid for scandal", not nave, not searching for strained or forced meanings, and one who reads the entirety of the publication of which complaint is made: Farquhar versus Bottom [[1980] 2 NSWLR 380]  
That evidence might cloud this issue was the thinking behind the 1995 enactment of [s 7A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html) of the [1974 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/), now repealed: see also Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd versus Parker [(1992) 29 NSWLR 448] at 456, 473.  
In Lamb , Brennan J (as he then was, and with whom Gibbs CJ and Stephen, Murphy and Wilson JJ agreed) said:  "Whether the alleged libel is established depends upon the understanding of the hypothetical referees who are taken to have a uniform view of the meaning of the language used, and upon the standards, moral or social, by which they evaluate the imputation they understand to have been made. They are taken to share a moral or social standard by which to judge the defamatory character of that imputation ... being a standard common to society generally ..." (p 506, internal references omitted) 
Later, his Honour said: "The defamatory nature of an imputation is ascertained by reference to general community standards, not by reference to sectional attitudes." (p 507) 
His Honour added that, notwithstanding that, a particular impact of a defamatory imputation may be proved. This, of course, was in relation to the assessment of damages.
In the circumstances of the present case, the exercise has a degree of artificiality. As will become apparent from what I write below, the emails in this case were published to an extraordinarily limited number of recipients, each of whom had a close association with the environment in which they were published, and in which the events with which they were concerned took place. Most, if not all, had at least some prior knowledge of the relevant facts and circumstances. It might, therefore, be expected that they would read the emails differently from the "ordinary reasonable reader" or "hypothetical referee" who did not have that inside knowledge.  
However, the law is plain, and my duty is to approach the determination of whether or not any imputation pleaded was conveyed by reference to the "ordinary reasonable reader" or the "hypothetical referee", as though the email had been picked up off the street by a casual passer by who had the attributes I have outlined above: Parker , p 455.  
It is therefore convenient to deal with that issue at this stage. Given that the two emails are virtually identical, for this purpose they can be treated as a single entity.  
It is relevant to take into account the nature of the publication. In this respect, I bear in mind that the publication is plainly of a serious nature, likely to command careful attention from its recipients. It is not a transient publication, but one that can be retained on the computer for re-reading, or printed in a permanent form. Its tone is relevant; it is earnest and restrained in its terms. There is no hyperbole, no emotional overtone or undertone.  
Two aspects of the written submissions filed on behalf of the defendants need to be noted.  
In para 99, it was submitted that the email would not have been read as expressing a concluded position, since the events to which specific reference was made (an unspecified event scheduled for Sunday, 15 February, and "the church weekend later this month") were short term, and the suggestion that Mr Haddon absent himself from those events "while we work out how to approach this problem" did not suggest that the problem which had arisen was regarded as insoluble. None of this is to the point, though it may be true. The issue is merely whether, on a fair reading of the email, an ordinary reasonable reader would consider that Mr Haddon had been accused of conduct of the kind set out in any or all of the five pleaded imputations.  
A similar response must be made to the submissions made in para 103, to the effect that the ordinary reasonable reader of the email would consider that the subject matter was an asserted breach of a "conduct-agreement", and not specific forms of conduct the subject of what is asserted to have been "a number of complaints from women". It is perfectly plain that the ordinary reasonable reader would regard "the conduct-agreement" as encompassing that very kind of behaviour, and that the email asserted that Mr Haddon had engaged in that behaviour, and further, that in breaching the agreement he had repeated conduct of that kind.  
I turn now to the individual imputations. It will be necessary to deal at some length with the first; the others may be dealt with more briefly.  
Imputation 1: "the Plaintiff sexually harassed female members of a church congregation by introducing inappropriate sexual topics into his conversation with them" 
I am satisfied, contrary to the arguments advanced on behalf of the defendants, that this imputation was clearly conveyed. In advancing those arguments, counsel for the defendants engaged in a minute analysis of the language of the email quite unsuited to the task of identifying what meanings the ordinary reasonable reader or the hypothetical referee might read into it; they made particular reference to what does not appear in the email.  
They began by dividing the imputation into two component parts:  * that Mr Haddon behaved in a particular way (by, inappropriately, introducing matters of a sexual nature into conversations with women); that this behaviour constituted sexual harassment.  
I accept that that is a correct approach.
In an attempt to anticipate what would be put on behalf of Mr Haddon, they then constructed, against themselves, a hypothetical proposition: this was that Mr Haddon advanced his case on the basis that the paragraph lettered (a) in the email together with the assertion that Mr Haddon had breached the conduct agreement, conveyed the imputation; alternatively or additionally, that sub-paragraph (a), read with the assertion of complaints from women, conveyed the imputation.  
The argument that then followed was based upon a false premise. That was that the imputation as pleaded accused Mr Haddon of sexual harassment, specifically by introducing inappropriate sexual topics into his conversations on 10 February 2008 . Counsel then argued that the email could not be so construed, because it was conspicuously silent as to which aspects of the conduct agreement Mr Haddon was said to have broken.  
Two things defeat this proposition. Firstly, the imputation is not confined to conduct on 10 February. It is more general, and accuses Mr Haddon of conduct of that kind in general terms. As counsel for the defendants acknowledged, the ordinary reasonable reader would infer, by reason of the specific terms of the conduct agreement set out in paragraphs (a) to (d), that Mr Haddon had, prior to 10 February, been guilty of conduct of an unsatisfactory kind towards women. That is sufficient to establish that the first part of the imputation was conveyed.  
Even if that were not so, and the imputation was confined to conduct said to have been engaged in on 10 February, I would be satisfied that it was conveyed. The inference drawn by the ordinary reasonable reader may not be sufficient to withstand the scrutiny of legal analysis, but that is not the correct approach to the question of whether an imputation is conveyed.  
In clear enough terms, the email asserts that Mr Haddon had been guilty of conduct of the kind specified in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), and further asserts that he had, on 10 February, broken that agreement. It is a reasonable inference (though not, possibly what the author intended to convey) that Mr Haddon had breached each of the specific terms mentioned. The email does state that he broke the agreement "a number of times".  
It was then argued that the words "after a number of complaints from women", together with the request that Mr Haddon not lead conversations towards sexual matters, could not convey the imputation because:  "... it would not be reasonable for the reader to conclude that each and every one of those requests corresponded to specific prior conduct by the plaintiff." (para 113) 
This contention is entirely unsustainable. There is no reason to think, and the ordinary reasonable reader would have no reason to think, that "Dominic" and "Evan" (the signature line would indicate to the ordinary reasonable reader that these were Mr Steele and Mr Batten) requested of Mr Haddon an agreement not to engage in specific forms of conduct unless they also asserted that he had in the past engaged in conduct of that kind; nor would the ordinary reasonable reader think that Mr Haddon would have agreed to such a request unless accused of behaviour of that kind. The very fact that the email asserts that he had been requested (and had agreed) not to engage in conduct meeting that description shows that the author was asserting that, on previous occasions, he had engaged in conduct of that kind.
Counsel then attacked the second component, the notion of sexual harassment. They argued, firstly, that to the ordinary reasonable reader the notion of (sexual) harassment involves an element of an intention (although they followed this by a recognition that, since the enactment of legislation concerning sexual harassment, the ordinary reasonable reader may have a more sophisticated understanding of the concept). They then argued (para 117) that, leaving aside the issue of intention, the notion of sexual harassment usually requires some element of power or coercion, and is inapplicable in a social setting.  
To my mind this demonstrates a lack of understanding of common notions of sexual harassment. I emphasise that what I am about to say is not drawn from any technicalities concerning the construction of Commonwealth or State legislation relevant to sexual harassment. For this purpose, I am concerned with what is perceived in the community generally as sexual harassment. It is true that sexual harassment too often does involve the abuse of a power relationship. But it is not always so. It may well, and often does, involve persistent sexual approaches or comments or references or other behaviour by a person of equal or even lower power or status; in some cases, power and status are irrelevant. But to engage in this argument is to fall into the very error that underlies the defendants' argument - that sexual harassment has a technical meaning. It is probably true, as the defendants acknowledged in their oral submissions, that the enactment of laws concerning sexual harassment have had the effect of broadening the understanding of what constitutes sexual harassment. But the term as used in the imputation is not confined to what might, under that legislation, be held to be unlawful conduct. The ordinary reasonable reader understands, in a non-technical, non-legal sense, the notion of sexual harassment. It includes, or can include, repeated sexual innuendo in conversation or personal comments that have sexual overtones.  
I am quite satisfied that the email conveyed the imputation that Mr Haddon engaged in conduct fitting the description of sexual harassment by introducing inappropriate sexual topics into his conversations with women. This imputation was conveyed.  
Despite that part of the pleading that denies that the imputations, if conveyed, were defamatory, no argument was directed to that proposition. The imputation was clearly defamatory.  
Imputation 2: "the Plaintiff sexually harassed female members of a church congregation by inappropriately touching and kissing them" 
As the defendants' submission acknowledged, the issues that arise in relation to this imputation are similar to those arose in relation to Imputation 1. They can therefore be treated more briefly, but with the same result. This imputation was conveyed, and was defamatory.  
Imputation 3: "the Plaintiff so conducted himself towards female members of a church congregation to warrant complaints being made against him that he had made unwanted sexual advances to them" 
This imputation also has two component parts. Again, the first part asserts conduct against Mr Haddon, although here the nature of the conduct is not specified; the second part concerns the characterisation of that conduct as warranting complaints of the kind specified.  
The defendants' submissions implicitly accepted that the email conveys at least part of this imputation - that is, that some female members of CIM had complained of Mr Haddon's conduct, and that some of those complaints were warranted. That is correct - the email expressly refers to complaints, and, by stating, in effect, that the complaints had been taken up by what the reader might infer to be the church hierarchy, and that "how to approach this problem" was under consideration, it clearly implies that the complaints were taken seriously (and therefore warranted). Counsel for the defendants accepted that such a finding is not a finding that the complaints would, on investigation, be found to be substantiated. The point of contention concerns the words "that he had made unwanted sexual advances" to the women.  
The paragraphs lettered (a) to (c) in the email identify, with some specificity, the kind of conduct of which Mr Haddon was accused. The question that next arises is whether that conduct could properly be read as making "sexual advances". What is, in the mind of the ordinary reasonable reader, a "sexual advance"? It is, in my opinion, something more than sexual harassment (although sexual harassment may include unwanted sexual advances, it does not necessarily do so). It involves some kind of proposition or invitation to engage in sexual activity. In the email, Mr Haddon is accused of:  * inappropriate sexual conversations; * touching and kissing women; * focusing his social interaction on women.  
Strictly, none of these necessarily involves an invitation or proposition to engage in sexual activity. If those accusations were being analysed in a different context, for example in a criminal trial, it may well be that the onus of proof would not be discharged. But that is not the present exercise. In particular, the reference to "touching and kissing" does carry, to the ordinary reasonable reader, the notion of sexual advances - sexual advances that are plainly unwanted because they are the subject of complaint. And it is to be borne in mind that the imputation is not that Mr Haddon in fact made sexual advances to women, but, rather, that his conduct was such as to "warrant" complaints of that nature (although, I appreciate, that may be a fine point of interpretation not apparent to the ordinary reasonable reader).  
On balance, I am satisfied that this imputation was conveyed and was defamatory.  
Imputation 4: "the Plaintiff is a sexual predator who preys upon female members of a church congregation" 
There is only one component of this imputation - that of predatoriness. The words "sexual predator" and "preys upon" are merely different parts of speech representing the same concept.  
This imputation can only have been conveyed by a combination of the accusations contained in paragraphs (a) - (d) of the email.  
The notion of "sexual predation" is of a significantly higher order than that of sexual harassment. (If that were not so, the imputation would fall foul of UCPR 14.30(3), prohibiting the pleading of imputations that do not differ in substance.)  
Resort to the Macquarie Dictionary provides little assistance. In any event, I am mindful that this exercise ought not to place too much reliance upon dictionary definitions. What is at issue is what "the ordinary reasonable reader" would make of the email. The notion of predatory conduct must incorporate, at the very least, "taking advantage of", or the use of superior power, of whatever kind, in order to subjugate or exploit the victim. In my opinion, the email falls well short of accusing Mr Haddon of predatory conduct. I find that this imputation was not conveyed.  
Imputation 5: "the plaintiff is unfit to be a member of his church as he behaved in an offensive manner towards a number of female members of the congregation " 
I am satisfied that this imputation was not conveyed. There is nothing in the email that suggests that Mr Haddon is unfit to be a member of the congregation; rather, Mr Haddon is invited to absent himself from two events, as a temporary measure, to allow the church hierarchy an opportunity to "work out how to approach this problem". What underlies the email is the attempt to work towards a resolution of what was plainly perceived to be a problem. There is no suggestion of "unfitness".  
I am satisfied that this imputation was not conveyed.  
Factual background 
The events relevant to the proceedings began in 2004 and continued until February 2008. By reason of the quantity of evidence called, the account of the factual background will necessarily be lengthy and detailed. A remarkable volume of correspondence, almost all of it by email, was generated over that period. Much of it is necessary to understand what culminated in the two emails the subject of the proceedings, and, further, to understand the defences raised on behalf of the defendants.  
Mr Haddon is (as are all the main players in these proceedings) a committed Christian and a member of the Church of England. He was born in about 1950 (his precise date of birth was not given) and was, as at 15 February 2008, 58 years of age. He became actively involved in the Church of England in 1968. Over the next three and a half decades he engaged in various branches in the Church.  
In the first half of 2004 Mr Haddon was involved with St Thomas' Anglican Church in North Sydney. By July of that year he found that congregation uncongenial. Essentially, I infer, he found it somewhat conservative. He regarded (and regards) himself as a progressive Christian. He has an active and intellectual interest in matters of theology.  
A friend suggested that he contact Mr Steele, who was then the Minister of St Aidan's Anglican Church in Annandale. At St Aidan's, Mr Steele conducted two regular weekly services: the first, on Sunday mornings, was called Annandale Community Church ("ACC") and the second, conducted in the evening, was called "Christians in the Media" ("CIM"). As its name implies, the latter had a focus on members who were professionally engaged in the media. This congregation was predominantly made up of young people.  
St Aidan's had some formal structure. It had a church council, of six members, partly elected by members of the church, and partly appointed by the Minister. The function of the council was to consult on decision-making by the Minister (although as to what kinds of issues was not spelled out) (Exs 27, 28). Between 2005 and March 2008 Mr Batten was a member of the council. St Aidan's also had three wardens, two of whom were elected by the members, and one appointed by the Minister. The wardens were responsible for property and finance matters (T 469). As at the date relevant to these proceedings (15 February 2008) the wardens included (or were) Robert Taylor, Frag Woodall and Pinghan Chua. There were also members of staff (to whom I will refer in due course) (T 469). In addition, there were assistant ministers and trainee ministers of whom Ed Francis and Steve Lister were two.  
Mr Steele had the benefit of a circle of women advisers who undertook special responsibilities for "women's ministry". For the reasons I give below, I will refer to them by initials. In 2008, these included CP (also known as CS), SB, JL and LM. Some were paid staff members. In addition, MB was regarded as "a key lay member" of the women's ministry.  
Acting on the advice of his friend, Mr Haddon did contact Mr Steele. He told Mr Steele that he (Mr Steele) had been recommended to him (Mr Haddon) as somebody with whom he could discuss theological matters. Mr Steele planned to drive to Kurrajong that afternoon, and invited Mr Haddon to join him. Mr Haddon did. He told Mr Steele that he was uncomfortable with the theology at St Thomas', mentioning, in particular, "the authority of the Scriptures", "the virgin birth", and "did Jesus do miracles?" as issues of concern to him.  
On the Sunday after his meeting with Mr Steele, Mr Haddon attended the CIM service. On 26 July 2004 he wrote Mr Steele a letter (handwritten) (Ex 1). Apart from a reference to the relative youthfulness of the congregation, the letter is, on its face, somewhat cryptic. In the light of other evidence, it can be seen to contain allusions to Mr Haddon's progressive, even radical, theological position.  
At least in retrospect, this letter can be seen as a signal by Mr Haddon that he questioned some doctrines of the Church of England, and the adherence to the literal truth of some parts of the bible. That that was the case subsequently became abundantly clear.  
In September Mr Haddon attended a ski weekend with members of CIM. On the bus trip Mr Haddon and Mr Steele had some further discussions. Again, Mr Haddon signalled his disagreement with some conservative Christian views. From January 2005 he became a regular attender at the evening CIM service. He also joined a Wednesday night bible study group, initially that held in the home of two members of the church, Mick and Michelle Chiew. He had a number of meetings with Mr Steele over coffee. Matters of theology were regularly discussed. It became apparent to Mr Steele that his theological views and those of Mr Haddon diverged significantly. For example, Mr Steele firmly believed in the literal truth of the Christian doctrine of the virgin birth; Mr Haddon preferred to treat the doctrine as symbolic.  
Mr Haddon began communicating with Mr Steele (again on matters of theology) by email. One (Ex 23) he signed as "President, Sydney's closet anglican liberals!!".  
Another matter on which the views of the two diverged concerned the Christian position on extra- or pre-marital sex. Mr Haddon expressed the view that, because there were more Christian women than Christian men, the evangelical teaching that sex outside of marriage was sinful had the effect of "condemning to a lifetime of celibacy" some women. He considered that "tragic and cruel", and advocated a more accepting position. Mr Steele differed. (In his evidence, Mr Haddon disclaimed adherence to that view, and denied having expressed it. As I explain below, however, the weight of the evidence establishes to my satisfaction that that was the view that he expressed, and the view that he held.)  
On joining CIM Mr Haddon met Mr Batten, who welcomed him into the group. At that time, Mr Haddon was not aware of any particular office that Mr Batten held, but, as time went on, he became aware that Mr Batten was a member of the council. He appears to have been a close confidant of Mr Steele.  
Mr Haddon became actively involved, not just in attending the services and bible study groups, but also in the social life of CIM, which appears to have been vigorous. He attended parties, a number of weddings, and other social events, all associated with CIM and its members. Very quickly he came to regard the members as his friends.  
Mr Haddon became involved as more than a mere member of the congregation or participant in the services. He took on what are called "ministries" - particular duties in the church. One such "ministry" was greeting people at the door of the church, with a particular eye for newcomers. His role was to make them welcome and involve them in the social events that regularly followed the service. (Attendance at a hotel across the road from the church was such a regular event that the hotel came to be known as "the annexe".) Mr Haddon perceived himself as successful and popular in performing this function. He produced documentation in which he was congratulated on his performance (T 12, Ex D).  
However, all was not well. Mr Haddon's conduct, in two respects, was the cause of growing concern, particularly in the mind of Mr Steele. These, briefly, were the theological views that Mr Haddon expressed, and issue of personal conduct; particularly his conduct towards women members of CIM.  
Theological differences 
As I have indicated, Mr Haddon perceived himself as progressive, and questioned some of the received wisdom of the church. At present, it is sufficient to say that the issues of dispute or dissent involved the perception of the literal truth of the doctrine of the virgin birth, of some biblical stories, and the authority of the scriptures.  
Mr Steele was receiving reports from other members of CIM about Mr Haddon's divergent theology. On the afternoon of Thursday, 4 August 2006, Mr Steele and Mr Batten had a meeting with Mr Haddon, at the hotel opposite the church, for the purpose of discussing these matters. Mr Steele told Mr Haddon that the issues concerning his theology were serious. He told Mr Haddon "I'm worried for your soul before God". He asked Mr Haddon to leave the bible study group to which he had belonged, and join another, led by himself and his wife. Most importantly, he told Mr Haddon that he regarded these issues as so serious that he wished Mr Haddon "to step back from any ministry roles" until the theological differences could be resolved and "we are on the same page theologically". In an email dated 8 August (Ex GG) he set out his recollection of the meeting and elaborated on the points he had made, confirming that one of these was that he (Mr Steele) was worried for Mr Haddon's soul.  
Mr Haddon responded angrily. He perceived the request to "step back from any ministry roles" as "a ministry ban", to operate until the theological issues could be resolved as a ban on his participation in CIM unless and until he surrendered his own views to those of Mr Steele - that is, until he "toed the party line". He wrote a rather bitter letter (Ex EE) to Scott and Nikki Powell, the leaders of the bible study group he was by then attending, giving his account of the Thursday meeting.  
A second meeting took place at the same venue on the following Sunday. Present were Mr Steele, Mr Haddon and Scott and Nikki Powell. At this meeting Mr Powell told Mr Haddon that he (Mr Powell) and his wife were unable to cope with having Mr Haddon in their group, and that they had offered to resign; they nevertheless wished Mr Haddon well.  
On 30 August Mr Haddon emailed Evan and Nikki Batten, Scott Powell and Mr Steele (Ex KK). He intended this as a request for reinstatement to ministry duties.  
Mr Steele replied, equally emphatically, declining the request (Ex LL).  
On 26 October, Mr Haddon again emailed Mr Steele (Ex MM). The intent of the email is (to me) obscure, but Mr Haddon appears (T 109) to have intended it as a request for readmission to the ministry. It failed to achieve that purpose.  
In late November, the women's minister (CS) asked Mr Haddon to assist in hanging paintings for an art exhibition that was being organised. Recognising that this might come within the "ministry ban", Mr Haddon advised her to seek clearance from Mr Steele. Mr Steele declined to give his approval, referring to the "theological differences" as "serious and firmly held" (Ex BBB). He told Mr Haddon:  "... I would like us to resolve our theological differences before we start working together in Ministry." (Ex NN)
In March 2007 Mr Haddon produced a lengthy (40 pp) document that he entitled "Confessions of a Heretic" (Ex OO). He circulated it (at some time later) to some members of CIM, and eventually it came to the attention of Mr Steele. Inter alia , he said that the Old Testament did not paint an accurate picture of God as later revealed in the life and teachings of Jesus, but represented:  "a warlike, racist, murderous tribal people telling us as much as they knew of
God. Which, by New Testament standards, was not a lot."
In the middle of 2007, in conjunction with staff members and the council, Mr Steele circulated a document of doctrinal belief, sometimes called "the AFES (Australian Fellowship of Evangelical Students) Confession" or "the AFES doctrinal statement". Those involved in "ministry" (see para [63] above) were required to acknowledge adherence to it. Essentially, the statement reiterated the traditional beliefs as held by Mr Steele, contrary to those held by Mr Haddon. An accompanying document, addressed to Mr Steele, provided for signature of those who offered themselves to serve in "ministry". It made clear that any members of CIM who did not attest to those beliefs would not be permitted to engage in actual "ministry" (Ex HH). The doctrinal statement included, inter alia , affirmation of belief in the infallibility of the Scriptures, belief in the conception of Jesus Christ by the Holy Spirit and his birth by the Virgin Mary, and literal belief in the bodily resurrection of Christ. These were three issues on which it was known that Mr Haddon did not share the fundamental beliefs of Mr Steele.  
On 28 May, Mr Haddon wrote another letter to Mr Steele, suggesting a means by which he could enjoy "full membership" of CIM. This prompted a meeting, attended by Mr Steele, Mr Andrew Barry, an assistant minister, and Mr Haddon. Mr Haddon handed them copies of his "Confessions of a Heretic" and asked them to consider it.  
On 2 September Mr Steele wrote to Mr Haddon to tell him that a church policy had been formalised, after discussion with members of staff, the church council, bible study leaders and Bishop Forsyth. The effect of the policy was that only adherents to the AFES Confession would be permitted to take part in ministry, and that as Mr Haddon's stated position was contrary to the AFES Confession, he could not be invited to take part (Ex RR).  
Shortly after, another meeting took place at the hotel between Mr Haddon, Mr Steele and Mr Barry. Mr Steele reiterated that Mr Haddon would be reinstated to his former role on "door duty" and be permitted to attend the bible study group of his choice and to counsel fellow congregants from the bible - if he were able to sign the AFES Confession. Mr Haddon understood that his exclusion from "ministry" duties extended to such mundane activities as stacking chairs, and passing out pens.  
On 9 September Mr Haddon wrote, by email, to Mr Steele (Ex SS). He expressed his surprise and disappointment at the outcome of the last meeting, having believed that he was to be invited back into "ministry". Of significance (as will become apparent) he asked Mr Steele to clarify with the congregation that the issues that resulted in his exclusion from ministry duties were "doctrinal" and not "a matter of conduct".  
The AFES Confession was circulated to church councillors, staff, community group leaders from "children's ministry workers/volunteers" and anybody who was involved in formal ministry activities.  
On 20 September 2009 Mr Haddon returned the document, with his signature appended. However, the document he returned also contained annotations which heavily qualified his purported acceptance of each of those statements of belief (Ex UU). This was unacceptable to Mr Steele. As a result, Mr Steele declined to appoint Mr Haddon to any ministry role.  
On 25 September Mr Haddon was formally advised that he would not be needed in any ministry role in CIM.  
Personal conduct 
The second cause for concern was Mr Haddon's behaviour towards female (especially young female) members of the congregation. These concerns began to emerge early in 2005, shortly after he joined CIM.  
Mr Haddon was in the habit of greeting female members with what he called "an air kiss" (but others considered to be more personal and intrusive) and a handshake (which others referred to as a "hug"). Concern was expressed that Mr Haddon had a propensity to direct conversations with women towards matters with sexual overtones, and (intrusively) to subjects of a personal nature (also often with sexual overtones). For example, complaint was made that he advocated, contrary to the beliefs of Mr Steele and at least some of the members of CIM, that sex outside of marriage was permissible for Christians. I will defer the detail of these complaints to the consideration of the defence of substantial truth.  
In the immediately following account, and later, it will be necessary to refer in some detail to a number of members of the congregation of CIM, in the main, but not exclusively, young women. Some of what has to be recounted is a matter of some embarrassment to them and sometimes to others. They have in fact often been referred to as "complainants". Essentially, they have complained about Mr Haddon's conduct towards them, almost invariably there being a sexual overtone in the nature of the complaint. Mr Haddon's conduct, in general, is said to have had sexual connotations. I have therefore been asked to refer to these individuals only by initials. No opposition to that course having been advanced, I propose to do so.  
In March 2005, one of the female members of CIM (to whom I will refer as EM), then aged 29, told Mr Steele that she was uncomfortable with the way Mr Haddon, to her observation, approached and greeted women at the church. She asked Mr Steele to "keep an eye on him".  
In May of the same year, another young woman (PE) informed Mr Steele of an event she said had taken place at church. She told Mr Steele that Mr Haddon had blocked her entrance to the church and had "harassed" her about why she had not spoken to him the previous week at a party. She said that she felt Mr Haddon wanted her attention, she did not want to give it to him and he was making her feel uncomfortable. At the time she told Mr Steele of this, she was "upset, teary".  
Shortly after, another woman (JC) then aged 25, put her (similar) concerns in writing. She wrote:  "... [PE] spoke to me yesterday about her conversation to you about [Mr
Haddon] and said that he was feeling uncomfortable with him at church because of his behaviour toward her. My opinion is that he is quite friendly with the girls, particularly young and pretty ones, and will approach them quite readily. He does give quite a lot of compliments in relation to the attractiveness of the person.

I think he is friendly but would benefit from a chat about appropriate behaviour toward the young women ..." (Ex 30) 
This letter is undated.
At a staff meeting in June 2005, following a celebration of a significant birthday of Mr Steele, Mr Steele was told that one of the women had "felt really awkward" at the event because Mr Haddon was:  "going around telling all the girls how nice it was seeing them in dresses, how nice it was he could see their legs and how he hated how Christian women wore pants now all the time and it was just great to see dresses." 
That, to Mr Steele's observation, represented the consensus of the women staff members present at the meeting. Mr Haddon's comments on the personal appearance and attire of young women was a recurring theme in the evidence.
These were not the only complaints about sexual matters in 2005. They led Mr Steele to speak directly to Mr Haddon in about July or August. They met at the hotel. Mr Steele told Mr Haddon that there were some "girls" who were uncomfortable about Mr Haddon's interactions with them, and his comments on their appearance. He made specific mention of the incident recounted to him by PE, who said that Mr Haddon had blocked her entrance to the church building. Mr Steele counselled Mr Haddon not to talk to women about their appearance or their clothing, which, he told Mr Haddon, were "a no go area" (T 488).  
Mr Haddon responded by saying that it was "a generational thing", that in his day comments of that kind had been considered totally appropriate, that women enjoyed flattery from men, but that he would modify his behaviour.  
On 4 October 2005, another woman (RD, then aged about 33) sent Mr Haddon an email, complaining directly to him about his conduct. The complete content of the email is set out below (para [158]). Mr Haddon forwarded the email, together with his own comments, to the women's minister (then known as CS, later CP). He denied any inappropriate touching, and suggested that the problem lay with RD's unstable personality (Ex V).  
CS forwarded both emails to Mr Steele. After church on 16 October Mr Steele took the opportunity of having a short private discussion with Mr Haddon. Mr Haddon described RD as "neurotic" and "crazy". Mr Steele pointed out the age differences, and suggested that older men needed to be particularly careful in their interactions with younger women. He told Mr Haddon that his comments and behaviour were making some people uncomfortable and that his comments about women's appearance were inappropriate. Mr Haddon undertook to try to change the way he complimented women.  
The following day Mr Haddon wrote, by email, to Mr Steele. He identified the subject of the email as "Fried brains - a meal or a pandemic?" (Ex U). He referred to the conversation the previous evening and undertook to "change my protocol re giving compliments on appearances", but added that this had, in his youth, been regarded as a "courtesy". He questioned "extreme levels of sensitivity/stress/neuroticism/depression" in the community generally, but observed that that was greater in young females in the Christian community. He then queried whether this did not come about because of the later average age of marriage, the failure rate of marriage, and "the strict Christian proscription of sex outside marriage". He made an observation about his previous church, St Thomas', and the female members of that congregation. He described the email from RD as containing "trumped up charges".  
Early in 2008 a staff conference was held in Wollongong, over five days. During the course of one of the discussions a new member of staff remarked that Mr Haddon's name had been mentioned on a number of occasions and asserted that Mr Steele had "squashed discussion" on each occasion. He asked who Mr Haddon was. Another member of staff (Samuel Russell) said:  "He's an older guy who goes around hitting on all the new girls. Our Bible
Study group a year ago worked out an arrangement where, since we've got three pretty girls in our group, where the guys would go and intervene and rescue each of the girls if they saw Bruce talking to one of the girls." (T 502)
Others contributed to the discussion; one referred to an occasion when, it was said, Mr Haddon had commented to a number of females about how nice it was to see their legs, see them in dresses, not wearing pants; another commented that yet another woman had reported having difficulties, feeling uncomfortable, and finding Mr Haddon "a problem". Another woman present (JL) said that, at a recent wedding, Mr Haddon:  "was going around telling all the girls how nice it was to see their legs, see them in dresses, not wearing pants."
All of this caused some alarm to Mr Steele. He spoke to EM, asking if she was aware of these issues. She told him that when she was pregnant Mr Haddon had recommended that she give birth by caesarean section (this conversation is dealt with in more detail below). Mr Steele considered this was an inappropriate topic of discussion between a man of Mr Haddon's age and a young woman in the church.  
In January 2008 another woman, MB, approached Mr Steele, and reported a problem in the church; she said there were three men "going around hitting on the women". Mr Haddon was one of the three she identified.  
MB also complained to him that, on one occasion, she had expressly requested Mr Haddon not to invite a friend of hers (CW) who MB was introducing to the church, out for dinner. In defiance of that request, Mr Haddon did invite CW for dinner. MB's husband (or, perhaps, then fianc) told him that, at a church event at a Blue Mountains hotel, Mr Haddon had suggested that it would be a great place to bring MB for "a dirty weekend".  
Mr Steele considered it necessary to take some action because he thought that the women "welcoming team" would perceive that he had not created a safe environment and would leave the church. He was embarrassed at not having taken action earlier.  
Mr Steele received other information concerning Mr Haddon's behaviour. For example, in January 2008, in response to an inquiry from him, another woman (CA) told him of a conversation at which she and another woman (CW) were present in the car being driven by Mr Haddon when an arrangement for him to have dinner with another woman (not of the church) had been cancelled. She told Mr Steele that Mr Haddon said:  "... anyway, the sex would have been no good because her vagina wall would be too thin and because that is what happens to women after menopause ..." (T )

CW's version of this event and conversation is given below. Mr Steele was "absolutely horrified" that a man in his 50s would be having a conversation about vaginas with two girls in their 20s. He confirmed the conversation with
CW.
 * * * 
The two issues - theology and personal interaction with women - were, for quite some time, running parallel.  
Mr Steele discussed the personal conduct matters with Mr Batten. At the end of January, Mr Steele contacted Bishop Forsyth, who was already aware of the theological issues, and apprised him of the issues here outlined. He told Bishop Forsyth that he proposed initiating a discussion with Mr Haddon.  
Mr Steele also spoke to Ms Jenni Woodhouse, who worked in the Professional Standards Division of the Church of England, and to Russell Powell, who was a senior adviser of the Archbishop. Mr Steele and Mr Batten resolved to meet with Mr Haddon for the purpose of discussing the issues. That meeting took place at the church at 5pm (just before the CIM service) on 10 February. Present were Mr Steele, Mr Batten, Nathan Scouler and Mr Haddon. Nathan Scouler was a member of the church who accompanied Mr Haddon to the meeting at Mr Haddon's invitation.  
Mr Steele opened by telling Mr Haddon that he wished to discuss two issues: theology and conduct. There is a significant factual issue, with which I will deal when I come to the question of malice, about the content of this meeting. Mr Steele specified the theological issues and then mentioned a number of matters concerning Mr Haddon's conduct that have been outlined above. Mr Batten told Mr Haddon that some of his comments had been construed as "sleazy".  
Mr Steele suggested that Mr Haddon join the morning service, which was attended by more people closer to his age, but Mr Haddon rejected that. Mr Steele then asked Mr Haddon not to talk to women who were newcomers at the church, and not to talk about "body, sex, legs, tan, hair" to women, but to spend time with men of long standing membership of the church (T 514-515). Mr Haddon agreed to that request.  
The meeting concluded shortly before the commencement of the 6pm service.  
At the conclusion of the service, Mr Steele and Mr Batten observed Mr Haddon, at a refreshments table in the church hall, standing next to and talking to a young Asian woman who was unknown to Mr Steele. The conversation continued for a protracted period of time. Mr Haddon and the woman then joined CW, another regular member of the group, and talked for some time. Thereafter, Mr Haddon joined another young woman, who was also relatively new to the church, but who was known to Mr Steele.  
Both Mr Steele and Mr Batten considered this to be directly contrary to what Mr Haddon had earlier been asked, and had agreed, to do.  
After refreshments in the church hall, the party went to the hotel across the road. There Mr Steele saw Mr Haddon sitting at a table with four young women and one male. Mr Steele joined the group, but remained only for a very short time. During the short time that he was there, he heard Mr Haddon talking on the subject of "caring for your body" (T 518).  
On Monday, 11 February Mr Steele spoke to a number of people about the issue. These included Mr Batten, Ms Woodhouse (T 524), Bishop Forsyth and Russell Powell. He received advice from these individuals. The same day he telephoned CW to inquire about her conversation with Mr Haddon the previous evening. CW told Mr Steele that Mr Haddon had invited her, and her friend, out for dinner. An exchange of emails took place. At about 10am Mr Batten emailed Mr Haddon, acknowledging that the meeting must have been challenging for him, requesting "feedback, thoughts, impression", and, significantly, asking:  "was the issue of conduct we raised clear, how are you feeling about it today." (Ex G) 
A few days later Mr Steele made a written record (Ex 31) of his recollection of the meeting of 10 February. He sent this to Mr Batten, after which the two had a telephone conversation. That evening, Mr Batten made a note of his own recollection of what had taken place at the meeting. These notes were relied on by Mr Haddon with respect to credibility issues, and malice (Ex 32).
Mr Haddon replied, saying, inter alia :  "My family tells me I'm a bit slow to pick up unspoken social clues. Best evidence for that was that I had no idea what Sunday's meeting was going to be about.

I'll do everything I've been asked this round, same as I obeyed all instructions last time this happened. Note some of the more precise restrictions just aren't going to work - I broke three last night and they so precisely contradicted my new regime, that it felt like God comforting me saying 'I think you have a role here Bruce' 
Here they are - Right under Dominic's nose I could not help greet a new member, in the category he has declared 'at risk from Bruce' i.e. female, very young, good looking I think ... It was unavoidable as she spoke to me and I answered at a safe distance ...
 - Ed ASKED me about the new speaker location ... I spent about 15 minutes showing him. This is categorically in defiance of the ban ...
 - Lucy sat next to me at the pub ... Right on cue, she asked about skin care!! !! ...

It's amazing each unavoidable situation was an exact breech (sic) of the guidelines of our discussion , right down to 'skin' ..." (Ex H, underlining in original)
Mr Batten replied, saying that he thought Mr Haddon had missed the point of the meeting and asking whether Mr Haddon had a perspective as to why "we" are receiving so many complaints about the way Mr Haddon spoke to women in particular.  
Mr Batten, in another email, asked:  "Do you accept that we are consistently receiving complaints about how you are speaking with women - this is not something that is being manufactured, but real concerns being expressed consistently by a wide group of women at church - do you accept this, do you see how this happening, does it surprise you (it's not about unspoken social clues - but specific comments and contact that tread into peoples personal space and cross into their comfort zone) ...

It's critical that you feedback to me your understanding of what we have raised, I do not feel that you have done that in the two previous emails." (Ex
L)
Mr Haddon replied, saying that he intended to change, but adding:  "If standing too close is what you mean I'll stand father (sic) away.

If it's air kisses, I didn't invent this silly ceremony, but it's universal and I will continue to greet women I know well this way everywhere except CIM 
If it's commenting on an item of dress or someone's skin (I admit to the first, don't recall the second) that will stop. It's a sad society that can't tell women they look beautiful, but if that's how it is I get it 
If it's hugs, sorry not guilty . I don't hug females unless they initiate it, but they sometimes do at our church and frequently do in some churches.

If it's talking to women more than men, there are more women than men at church. The ones I mix with outside church are 90% men. I've never selected who to talk to based on sex, but I'll be more watchful ...

The complaints still leave me stunned, but I intend to change." (Ex M, underlining in original)
In this email, Mr Haddon also hinted that the real motivation for the meeting was his unacceptable theological position, which had led to "the ministry ban".  
On 12 February Mr Steele sent an email to a large number of recipients (Ex R). He expressly asked them to let him know of any comments (of what kind he did not specify) about Mr Haddon. He asked what the recipients or their staff noticed about Mr Haddon's behaviour in the congregation; and asked whether they had any concerns. On the same day, Mr Steele emailed the pastor at St Thomas', asking a series of questions about Mr Haddon during his involvement at that church including:  "Did young women comment on Bruce's behaviour to you or your staff and what was the nature of the comments?" and, "What did you and your staff notice about Bruce's behaviour in the congregation? Did you have any concerns?" (Ex Q)
Mr Francis was one of the recipients of Mr Steele's request for information. He passed it on to his then fianc, in his own terms. He wrote:  "Dominic is in the process of kicking Bruce Haddon out of Church. To have ammo to tell Bruce about why he needs to leave, Dominic is compiling a litany of the inappropriate things Bruce has said and done to particularly young women at Church.

Do you remember specific things he said or did that I can forward to Dominic? ..." (part of Ex S)
Mr Steele began to receive responses to his request for information. One woman wrote:  "Not really specifics I'm afraid. Just more generally, eg very affectionate when greeting, particularly as he doesn't know me very well. This would be rather off-putting to females. Inspecting what they are wearing very closely, commenting on what they are wearing, their hairstyle, just generally getting too 'close' (not physically, but too personal) ... I find it weird being kissed on the cheek everytime he greets me." (Ex S)
Another (JL) responded, in a lengthy email, which included the following:  "Bruce has commented several times (usually at peoples weddings) about how he loves women who wear dresses because its feminine - or you'll hear him comment specific women as they enter the church 'I love women wearing dresses. It is just so feminine' (or words to that effect).

It's a weird comment to make. Probably because other men dont comment like that ... Maybe i have thick skin, so even if it is a bit creepy, i just brush it off and move away ... Interacting with Bruce is just awkward.

The kisses upon greeting are a bit over-familiar ... [JL compared Mr Haddon with another man who she said hugged and kissed her but she treated like her grandfather, as an approachable wise old(er) man] It's just different with
Bruce - his vibe is not grandfatherly. His vibe is old man trying to spade young woman and make friends with young males. Trying to hang on to his youth.
Trying too hard basically ..." (Ex 34) 
JL went on to refer to the MB/CW event (when Mr Haddon had, contrary to the express request of MB, invited CW out for dinner), and to make other, unrelated, criticisms of Mr Haddon.
SB wrote:  "...
He made several remarks about my voice and my looks when I first arrived.
I didn't worry about it and probably just thought he was being flattering.
Then he became increasingly more physical, hugging me or pecking me on the cheek. Which I thought was a bit much since I hardly knew the guy ...
I have heard from single girls ... that Bruce makes her feel uncomfortable and unattractive at every wedding because of the nature of the remarks he makes in reference to the women around him." (Ex 35) 
SB also made mention of theological views expressed by Mr Haddon.
On Friday 15 February a series of emails was exchanged between Mr Steele and Mr Batten. This was in order to prepare a communication to be sent to Mr Haddon. It was in these circumstances that the two emails the subject of the present proceedings eventuated. Various drafts of a proposed email were circulated, initially between Mr Steele and Mr Batten. From the beginning, the subject was identified as:  "I need to ask you not to join us this Sunday night".

The drafts mentioned a "code of conduct" to which Mr Haddon had agreed, and a breach of the agreement; each draft incorporated a request to Mr Haddon not to attend the service that evening, or a church weekend away scheduled for later that month.
Bishop Forsyth advised Mr Steele that the email to Mr Haddon ought to be sent over the names of Mr Steele and the wardens of St Aidan's.  
Acting on Bishop Forsyth's advice, Mr Steele sought the agreement of the wardens (Messrs Taylor, Woodall and Chua) to being signatories. Agreement was forthcoming from each. At 2.12pm Mr Steele sent to the wardens and Mr Batten the draft email to Mr Haddon, with the following message:  "After talks this morning with Rob Forsyth, Rob Taylor I have reworked my first draft to this. Rob Forsyth thinks best if it comes from me + wardens. So you would need to be happy with it before I send it.

I think we should have a meeting at 5pm Sunday to work out a plan." (part of
Ex OOO) 
It is this email that constitutes the first matter the subject of the proceedings, Schedule A to the Amended Statement of Claim. While there are some variations from that which was ultimately sent to Mr Haddon, they are insignificant, and it is not worth prolonging this judgment to incorporate the full text of what was then the draft.
After receiving the agreement of the wardens, and Mr Batten, and with some minor variations, at 4.47pm, Mr Steele sent to Mr Haddon the email set out at para [5] above. It named as signatories Mr Steele, Mr Woodall, Mr Taylor, Mr Chua (identified as wardens) and Mr Batten (identified as church councillor).  
The email to Mr Haddon was, as I have indicated, circulated to those people named as signatories. The address line shows that the email addresses to which it was sent include not only those of Mr Batten, and Mr Woodall, but also of "Robert & Fiona Taylor", and "Pinghan & Aimee Chua". I mention this now because the potential receipt of the email by Fiona Taylor and Aimee Chua has given rise to a discrete argument, with which I will deal in due course. The email was blind copied to Robert and Margaret Forsyth, Russell and Robyn Powell and Jenni Woodhouse.  (Due to the flurry of emails circulated, there was some confusion in the proceedings concerning what was actually sent to whom, and which document was properly the subject of the claim. I have taken the above from Ex A.)
Just before 5.30pm, Mr Steele forwarded the email to a number of others. They were Paul Semple (who was to become a church warden two weeks hence, replacing Mr Chua), Edward Frances (a ministry trainee on staff), Samuel Russell (who appears also to have been a ministry trainee), Steve and Jane Lister (Mr Lister was a new student minister), Mr Batten, Matthew and Belinda Whitfield (Mr Whitfield was an assistant minister in the church), Nathan McQueen (a "key lay leader" and the Sunday music director), Daniel Sieveking (chairman of the Parish Council). It is the circulation of the email to these recipients that constitutes the second matter the subject of the proceedings.  
The copy email sent to each of these recipients was accompanied by a covering message in the following terms:  "Could you please meet me and the church wardens at 5pm on Sunday at the church hall and we will discuss a way forward.

Please keep this confidential.

Yours in Christ, 
Dominic" (Ex A)
The foregoing history is an outline of some of the elements that led to the two communications the subject of the proceedings. It does not cover the entirety of the evidence it is necessary to understand in order to consider the various defences raised.  
Defences substantial truth 
For the purpose of the defence of substantial truth, each imputation has two component parts. In each case, one component involves conduct attributed to Mr Haddon. In imputations 1 and 2, that conduct is identified with some specificity - respectively, introducing inappropriate sexual topics into conversations with female members of the CIM congregation, and inappropriately touching and kissing female members of the CIM congregation. In each of these cases, the second component (although the first pleaded) is the characterisation of that conduct as constituting sexual harassment.  
In order to prove the substantial truth of either of these imputations, the defendants must first prove as substantially true that Mr Haddon engaged in conduct of the kind asserted. That is a relatively simple question of fact. The second component is rather more elusive. It is necessary for the defendants to establish that the nature and quality of the (or any) conduct proved may properly be characterised as sexual harassment. That is more than a mere question of fact, and involves an assessment of the potential impact of the conduct on those to whom it is directed.  
Imputation 3 is of a different structure. It does not specify the conduct attributed to Mr Haddon, merely referring to it in general terms, and asserting that it was such as to warrant complaint of unwanted sexual advances. As the case was conducted, the defendants rely on the conduct specified in support of imputations 1 and 2 to justify the further conclusion that Mr Haddon's conduct was of that kind.  
If there is any doubt about the meaning of a pleaded imputation, it is necessary, as a preliminary matter, to identify that meaning: Singleton versus Ffrench [(1986) 5 NSWLR 425.] Here, a real question arises as to the meaning of the term "sexual harassment". I will deal with that after dealing with the facts.  
A vast amount of evidence, oral and documentary, was directed to establishing the substantial truth of the imputations pleaded. A succession of witnesses gave oral evidence in support of the defence. Of these, 12 were female members of the CIM congregation, most of them (if not all) relatively young (30 thirty years of age or younger). Some of what follows has been mentioned above, in the historical matters I have recounted. I mention here, also, that a good deal of evidence, much of it concerning what was reported to Mr Steele, was admitted as relevant only to the defence of qualified privilege. In what follows, I confine myself to what was given directly, and exclude that which establishes Mr Steele's motivation for acting as he ultimately did. That accounts for a certain amount of apparent repetition.  
In considering the evidence, it is necessary to bear in mind that the imputations are of sexual harassment (in two specified respects) and of conduct warranting complaints of unwanted sexual advances. Not all of the evidence tendered could be said to have any real bearing on those imputations. There were some aspects of the evidence that seemed to do no more than establish a general incompatibility between Mr Haddon and members of CIM.  
Essentially, subject to some matters of detail, the evidence was tendered in relation to all five (and is applicable to all three surviving) imputations. I will review the evidence; I do not propose to dissect it in detail. A remarkable level of consistency is to be observed in the evidence concerning Mr Haddon's behaviour and conduct in and around St Aidan's. The theme was constant: Mr Haddon directed his attentions primarily to women, predominantly to those who were young and considered to be physically attractive; he greeted them with a hug and/or a kiss in what many of them considered to be an intrusive and inappropriate manner. He offered comments about their personal appearance and, on occasions, volunteered advice as to how they should dress. Again, this was done in a manner that many considered to be intrusive and inappropriate. A few examples will suffice to illustrate the tenor of the evidence.  
One woman (SR) said that, after a wedding that both she and Mr Haddon had attended, Mr Haddon approached her and said:  "I was looking at you during the ceremony of the wedding and observing your back and I just wanted to let you know that you have a lovely silhouette and lovely shaped back." 
SR said that she: "felt a bit uncomfortable and I was taken aback". (T 305)
NB had been a member of CIM since early in 2002. She had been a bible study leader, part of "the music ministry" and, with her husband, ran "the marriage ministry". She helped to organise a course called "To Love and to Cherish" and was, at one time, looking for ideas for a seminar for that course. Unasked, Mr Haddon offered some ideas (Ex 7). These included, for a women only session, "Keigle exercises and why they matter" (which, Mr Haddon explained, encouraged vaginal tightening); and, for a men only session, topics including "What women want" and "Why isn't my wife sexy anymore?". NB was shocked at these suggestions.  
NB gave evidence of another occasion when, in a bible study class, Mr Haddon had used the word "vagina", possibly in the context of childbirth. She was "disgusted" and told him that that was not appropriate.  
She said that Mr Haddon had a nickname for her ("MDB" - "my dear B...") and would greet her with his arms out and kiss her on the cheek. She said she "felt like I had nowhere to go". She saw him greet other women in the same way.  
In cross-examination it was put to NB that, on a social weekend away with members of the bible study class, when she was suffering from a sore neck, she had requested that Mr Haddon give her a rub on the neck, a request with which he complied. She agreed that he had in fact massaged her neck, but did not recall making the request.  
Another witness, PE, said that she had observed Mr Haddon approach young women (including herself) "a lot", and that he frequently sought her out. She described Mr Haddon as being significantly older than many of the CIM members, and said that he made a "beeline" for certain young women, something she found "odd"; she observed that he seemed to approach young women a lot. On one occasion in 2005, two new young women attended the church. PE overheard Mr Haddon ask another person "Who are they? Why haven't I met them yet?".  
PE, who worked in television, said that Mr Haddon made remarks to her "along the lines of":  "You shouldn't be behind the camera, you should be in front of it" and: "You have a great smile. You should be in front of the camera." (T 312) 
He also advised her that she needed "to work on [her] voice" and could have voice lessons.
PE also gave evidence of an occasion when Mr Haddon confronted her. As she recounted the event, she had tired of Mr Haddon's attentions and had begun to avoid him. On the occasion in question, in May 2005, she was to attend a party at the home of a friend of hers, to which Mr Haddon had also been invited. Outside the premises, in the street, she saw Mr Haddon, but did not acknowledge him because she did not wish to engage with him in any way. Inside, at the party, Mr Haddon confronted her, demanding to know why she had ignored him outside. He seemed "angry and agitated and accusatory".  
On another occasion in 2005 he blocked her entrance to the church from the vestibule, and would not allow her to pass until she had shaken his hand. She felt threatened and intimidated. (This is the event referred to in para [86] above.)  
PE gave evidence of being "disgusted" by a remark made by Mr Haddon that:  "the only reason a husband should be unhappy is if his wife's ugly."
EM said that Mr Haddon had paid her compliments about her appearance; she recalled a specific occasion on which he said to her:  "You look lovely in that dress but you should have worn high heels with it." (T 347) 
She said that these remarks made her feel a little uncomfortable because she thought it strange that somebody almost the age of her father would say such things about women her age and younger.
She said that Mr Haddon greeted her with a friendly hello and a kiss on the cheek.  
CS (CP) was one of a number of witnesses who said that Mr Haddon had expressed the view that "a bit of sex before marriage is fine". She also gave evidence that he had invited her out to dinner four times, and that he frequently commented favourably on her clothes.  
CL was another witness who said that Mr Haddon advocated sex before marriage, because, there being more women in the church than men, some would never marry, and they should not bother waiting or they would never have sexual experience.  
Mr Haddon was in the habit of greeting her with a hug and a kiss. He commented on her clothing, particularly on one occasion when she wore a skirt.  
EM was the wife of another member of the congregation and was, in May 2007, pregnant. She said that she had a conversation with Mr Haddon, in the presence of a group of CIM members, along the following lines:  "He asked me if I was going to have a caesarean and when I told him no, I had hoped to have a natural birth unless a caesarean was needed, he said that it would be a really good idea to have a caesarean and that I should do that because the scars were really small and that they were below the pubic line and that he had seen - he could say he knew that because he had seen one or some, I can't remember whether he said one or some, and said that it would be better for my intimate relationship with my husband after the birth of the child if I were to have a caesarean." (T 349) 
EM said that she was "just a bit flabbergasted" at the conversation and felt uncomfortable.
CW recalled that Mr Haddon had been very complimentary about her posture, her feminine dress and her general beauty (T 365).  
JC also said that Mr Haddon greeted her (and other women) with hugs and kisses and commented:  "Women look so lovely when they wear dresses, it is just so feminine." 
She found Mr Haddon's behaviour to be intimidatory and intrusive into her personal space.
RD gave evidence of conduct of more significant dimensions. She was the woman who, at a very early stage, wrote by email directly to Mr Haddon complaining of his behaviour. RD was a music teacher and played the piano for the CIM services. She said that Mr Haddon paid her compliments about her appearance, but also commented, not favourably, about her clothes, which he described as "a bit funny", and "a bit out there".  
She said that he:  "come very close physically and kiss me on the cheek and for hello and goodbye and come very close." 
She then said: "... I used to play piano at church and when I finished playing the piano he used to come and touch my bottom. It happened quite often." (T 757) 
She said that this happened five or six or even more times.
She said that he hugged her at church although she did not hug him, and that he did this on about 10 occasions. She said that she did not feel "nice" about this and that she was "quite uncomfortable". He also advised her to stop eating sweets in the afternoon, because it would make her put on weight.  
She said that Mr Haddon invited her to dinner and to play the piano at his home, and to meet his sister, but that she did not accept these invitations because she was not interested in meeting him "one on one".  
RD's evidence was marked out from that of the other witnesses in another respect. It is supported by contemporaneous documentary evidence. On 4 October 2005 RD communicated with Mr Haddon by email. (I have briefly referred to this above, in the historical section.) The email reads (I have retained the original spelling and punctuation - English is plainly not RD's first language):  "Dear Bruce, 
How are you? I hope you are having a good day.

I am writing to you about the conversation we had on the weekend.

I would like to make a comment on your thoughts concerning my body. Can I tell you something? Could you please dont mention to me how fat and skiny I am never again please? Thank you. Also, girls in general dont want to listen about this? They get dissapointed and I think its very ungenerouse and unkind somebody to tlak about things like that. We have to be liked and appreciated on who we are not how we look!!!! I hope you understand. Also, the same for my clothes. I dont feel it is the right for you to have such an opinion on my clothes. First, you are not aware of the fashion. Second, I thinks it rude of you to say it any way.

And the last thing I would like to write about is the way you touch me on my backside. How harsh was that...I pretend was nothing, as they were so many people around and I kept smilling and kept talking. I don't think you have right to do so to me!!! 
I am very disappointed with your behaviour.

I would like to let you know that I wont like to be around with people like you and will try to avoid any further contacts in the future.

Blessings. R..." (Ex V)
Many of the witnesses said that Mr Haddon had invited them, or others, out for dinner. Some said that he made remarks that they obviously found offensive; as, for example, comments that an overweight woman would not be able to find a husband (T 326, 365). There were also a number of criticisms that he advocated, within the church group, extra-marital sex, arguing that, as there were more single women in the congregation than men, some would not be likely or able to marry, and would be denied sexual experience. This was abhorrent to, at least, some members of the congregation.  
One event (in early December 2007, to which I have already briefly referred) particularly offended CW. She and another woman, CA, were in Mr Haddon's car with him. She recounted the event as follows:  "Bruce was supposed to go out with my friend, a colleague from work, Kim. She had cancelled last minute on the way home. He was dropping us off into the city. On the way to the city she cancelled and she was put on speaker phone so we heard the conversation and we felt really bad for Bruce. He immediately got quite agitated and I would say quite annoyed at this situation because it was very last minute, within the last - they were supposed to meet up in an hour and a half to two hours ... He said, 'Well, it doesn't matter anyway, because women of that age have dry vaginas and it lacks sponginess', and my friend
C... said ... 'I feel uncomfortable about you talking like this.' I said, 'You really shouldn't be speaking to us like this about this', and he said a few comments after that which I don't recall." (T 363)
She did, however, recall that those comments were:  "... about women and their bodies when they were a bit older, because Kim was at the time. So it was about women of that age, but I can't remember the specific quotes." (T 363) 
CW said that she was embarrassed and uncomfortable, and felt "quite burdened" by what he had said for some time afterwards.
CS (who gave evidence as CP) recalled that, at a party Mr Haddon talked about his views on sexuality, criticising the Bible's attitude to sex as "fuddy duddy and outmoded".  
LT spoke of a conversation with Mr Haddon in which they discussed a friend of hers who suffered from bipolar disorder. Mr Haddon expressed the view that;  "She needed to have an orgasm, that would help her with her depression." 
When LT protested that that would be inappropriate for a single Christian woman, Mr Haddon said that it "would help her with her chemical imbalance" (T ). LT was shocked at this exchange.
LT also said that Mr Haddon was given to making comments about her appearance and her clothing (T 624). She agreed with other witnesses that Mr Haddon would greet her by putting his hand on her arm, maybe hug her, and sometimes kiss her on the cheek.  
He also invited her out to dinner. Initially she declined, but eventually accepted, thinking that it was the only way to stop the invitations.  
In cross-examination, LT agreed that she had accepted the dinner invitation by an email in which she said:  "I would love to meet on the 1st for dinner or theatre - i haven't done either for ages. Hope this finds you well." (Ex Y) 
She said that she did this so as not to seem impolite. She rejected the suggestion that she had "welcomed" the invitations, saying that this was simply so she would not have to be asked again.
She agreed that she had invited Mr Haddon to her wedding, including the reception, but volunteered:  " But I also ensured that at the reception he was well away from any single women." (T 626)
This cross-examination was designed to cast doubt on her evidence about Mr Haddon. It was put, explicitly, to her that the conversation about the bipolar disorder friend and the orgasm did not occur (she rejected that) and that, if it had, it would have affected her relationship with Mr Haddon. She said that it had, and that she did not trust him as much.  
Almost invariably, when these witnesses gave their evidence of specific events, or general conduct, they added that they felt "uncomfortable" about the behaviour, or that it was "inappropriate".  
SB agreed that Mr Haddon made comments about her personal appearance and clothing, and also greeted her with a hug. She considered this "a little inappropriate". In about 2007 Mr Haddon invited her out to dinner, apparently to discuss theological issues. She told him that she considered it inappropriate, and that she should take it (the issue) up with one of the men in the congregation.  
After this she began to avoid him.  
MB, for example, gave evidence that Mr Haddon paid her compliments about her physical attributes; she also gave evidence that Mr Haddon said, of another woman, that it would be difficult for her to find a husband because she was overweight. (Women's prospects of marriage does appear to have been a subject that exercised Mr Haddon's mind. It also arose in the context of the discussions attributed to him concerning extra-marital sex.)  
MB described Mr Haddon's greeting manner as:  "Quite often with a sort of a - with a sort of Eastern Suburbs/North Shore kiss on the cheek, maybe two, in a sort of maybe European type fashion." (T )
MB had been a member of CIM since 2001, and met Mr Haddon on his arrival. CW joined in about 2006, aged 26. For some reason, MB took it upon herself to tell Mr Haddon that she did not think it right for him to invite single girls out to dinner "one on one", and expressly asked him not to invite CW out for dinner. Mr Haddon disagreed with MB's views about "one on one" dinners, and did invite CW out. MB considered CW to be nave, very vulnerable, and not able to withstand pressure that she (MB) thought Mr Haddon would apply to CW. She felt some responsibility for CW, who was her friend.  
MB gave evidence that, early in 2008, she approached Mr Steele after church one day. Her evidence is as follows:  " I said to Mr Steele, 'Dominic, I feel like I'm spending my whole night after church running around policing Bruce to make sure he is not asking the young attractive women out at church and I don't feel that that's a job that I should have to do. I feel that something needs to be done about it because I don't feel that he can be trusted to have conversations with the young women because they are feeling uncomfortable and I really need you to do something and get the wardens involved if need be to sort this situation out'." (T 330)
Not all complaints about Mr Haddon's conduct were sex-related. Criticism was also made about his conduct in other respects. There was other evidence, lacking a sexual harassment connotation, that showed that Mr Haddon did not easily fit into the St Aidan's culture.  
Both Mr Steele and Mr Batten gave evidence of an event at a "men's convention" held in the Blue Mountains held in early 2007. About 15 or 20 male congregants attended. The following is taken from Mr Steele's account, which does not differ in any significant way from that of Mr Batten.  
After the day's proceedings, at about 10pm, Mr Haddon said:  "Right, fellers, I have arranged for two 16-year-old Swedish masseuses to arrive in about 20 minutes." (T 495) 
Mr Steele said that this was met by silence by the other men present and that he himself considered it "completely inappropriate". Mr Batten, on the other hand, was relatively unconcerned, thinking that it was just a "harmless" (but tasteless) joke (T 783).
The other incident also took place at that or at another similar convention. After the convention proceedings had closed, the men were relaxing after dinner. Mr Haddon, who had earlier left, re-emerged, wearing only boxer shorts. Mr Batten found this behaviour, given that all other men were fully dressed, "odd".  
In similar vein, NB gave evidence of an occasion on which Mr Haddon entered the church with his shirt not fully on, which she considered inappropriate, and another on which Mr Haddon lifted his shirt to show his stomach, which made her feel awkward.  
Mr Batten also gave evidence (T 785) of a bible study meeting at which a pregnant member was present, at which Mr Haddon made a comment about the value of having a caesarean section, something he said that all women should consider in the light of "the benefit of that for their sex life afterwards". This, I infer, was the conversation recounted by EM, recorded in para [151] above.  
On 14 February 2006 Mr Haddon emailed Mr Steele. He gave the email the subject heading "Attention span".  
His message began:  "Dominic, 
As one experienced speaker to another, I think you might have overestimated the attention span of the Sunday evening crowd." (Ex BB) 
He went on, at some length, to give Mr Steele advice about the length and content of his sermons.
This was fairly representative of Mr Haddon's approach. I have mentioned above that he volunteered advice to women about their clothing. He was also in the habit (which he freely admitted and even claimed) of volunteering advice on matters of diet, health and fitness.  
The uniformity of the evidence given on behalf of the defendants is a compelling reason, alone, to accept it. However, it was largely denied by Mr Haddon.  
The defence case was fully particularised prior to the commencement of the trial. The consequence of that was that, although these were issues on which the defendants bore the onus of proof, Mr Haddon gave his evidence in response in anticipation of evidence expected to be led. In fact, the evidence given on behalf of the defendants substantially followed the particularisation, and Mr Haddon's evidence in chief went directly to the various assertions made. Much of the same territory was covered again in cross-examination.  
In respect of the kissing and hugging allegations, Mr Haddon gave a very different account to those above. At an early stage in his evidence in chief he described how he greeted female members of the congregation. He said:  "... most of the female members of the congregation I did not greet with any ceremony at all but those I knew well perhaps 10, 11, 12 and my pastor's wife and the assistant pastor's wife I would greet with a handshake and draw them in and if there appeared to be no reluctance would kiss the air to the side of the cheek in a ceremony known as an air kiss. The only contact was with their hand ... Very occasionally a woman would greet me with a Christian hug, it's a brief hug. It's a sign of trust and affection. In those circumstances I would return the hug ... I've never made it my policy to initiate a hug. You just don't [know] whether it's welcome or not. That's the woman's prerogative." (T -17)
Later he described what he meant by "air kiss". He said:  "... it's a ceremony whereby you kiss the air to the side of the woman's cheek if she produces it and make the noise of the kiss. It is symbolic of the kiss but in point of fact it isn't one. It is done while shaking hands." (T 34)
He said that on the occasions when he did physically touch any female member of the congregation he did so by touching her elbow to attract her attention, or perhaps putting his hand on her shoulder, but his physical contact was more likely to be a handshake on greeting. However, he said, some women would, of their own volition, greet him with a brief hug; if this happened, he responded "in proportion".  
He denied ever having advocated that Christian women be free to engage in extra-marital sex (T 43) and said that what had been attributed to him was "profoundly inconsistent" with his doctrinal beliefs in contradiction of the way he lived his life, and offensive to him.  
He denied the comment attributed to him by PE, advising her to be in front of the camera rather than behind it. His account of that conversation was:  "Mr Steele had told me that he had selected [PE] to be an on camera presenter for church sermons to be broadcast on Australian Christian channel. I congratulated [PE] on her selection and suggested to her that she had the right look for it but her voice would not broadcast well. I was respectful but
I told her her voice was nasal." (T 45) 
He said that he offered her a "voice lesson" which she accepted, and for which she thanked him.
He denied having blocked her entrance to the church, but acknowledged that he had noticed that PE left a group if he joined it, and conspicuously avoided him, and that he had, at the entrance to the church, asked her why she was avoiding him.  
He denied having touched RD on the bottom, but agreed that he had made a comment about the manner in which she dressed, in terms that suggested he was giving her advice about her sartorial choices. He said that, as he felt sufficiently at ease with RD, he began to greet her with the same air kiss with which he greeted the pastor's wife. However, he then suggested that RD had made romantic overtures towards him and that as he was not interested in a relationship with her he thought it was no longer appropriate to greet her that way lest she gain the wrong impression. He denied having invited her out for dinner. His claim that RD had made advances to him was his immediate response to her email, which he forwarded, with his own exculpatory explanation, to CS who occupied the position of women's minister, and repeated in his evidence, and was put, through his counsel, to RD in cross-examination.  
Cross-examination of RD pursued Mr Haddon's claims that she had made sexual advances to him, and reinforced the suggestion that her email was written out of disappointment or anger at his rejection of her. He said that the email was never mentioned again and that in April 2008 RD had invited him to her birthday party, an invitation he had accepted. He said that at the party she was "very friendly" but hastened to explain that he meant that she was "truly cordial and genuinely convivial" but that he did not mean to imply any "renewed romantic ambitions".  
Mr Haddon also put a different complexion upon the conversation recounted by EM concerning her pregnancy and the means by which she would give birth. He said:  "Recalling my wife's experience I said to [EM] if your gynaecologist recommends a caesarean don't feel bad about doing it, it doesn't leave a scar, it's about that long (indicated) and it's below the pubic line ... My wife endured a 42-hour labour believing that caesareans somehow un-Christian and unbiblical. I didn't want [EM] to make the same mistake and since many women don't like caesareans because they feel it will spoil their appearance I was quick to reassure [EM] that the scar would be invisible." (T 58)
He added that, as he had been on the Board of Relationships Australia for five years, he had considerable knowledge about the incidence of caesareans performed both for cosmetic and medical reasons and felt that he could speak with a modicum of authority on the subject.  
He denied some of the details of what EM had attributed to him. He denied having made the remark to SR about her "lovely silhouette".  
His account of the conversation in the car with CW and CA also diverged widely from that given by CW. He acknowledged that he had an arrangement to have dinner with a friend of CW called Kim, who, at a late stage, cancelled the arrangement. He said that he thought that CW was hurt that he had been inconvenienced and put her hand on his shoulder to console him. He said:  "It's no big deal ... I don't think Kim and I would have got married ... And she said, 'Why not?' And I said, Look, at 56 she is probably postmenopausal and after a lifetime of waiting, if you don't mind, I would like someone who is not going to have problems having sex." (T 65-66)
He said that he then referred to the five years he had spent on the Board of Relationships Australia and believed that the postmenopausal years could be quite a difficult time for women to have sex. This was because:  "As a woman gets older the sex organs change and the spongy areas in the vagina alter." (T 66) 
He said that there was a silence, he apologised, saying he had put that "a bit bluntly" and rephrased his remark as: "Changes in the woman's physiology can make normal marital relations difficult." (T 66)
He said the discussion on the subject continued, with CW saying that Christian women who are chaste and keep themselves sexually pure are at a competitive disadvantage in the competition for the most desirable Christian young men.  
Also called in Mr Haddon's case was a female member of the congregation, to whom, for consistency, I will also refer by initials, TL. TL attended St Aidan's between January 2005 and May 2007, when she moved out of the district. She said that she observed Mr Haddon's means of interacting both with new members of the congregation, and with existing members. She said that his practice was to offer his hand and shake the hand of the other person. Where that person was an existing member, known to Mr Haddon, he would lean in with his cheek and make "like an air sort of kiss" (T 291). When asked if he placed his lips on the cheek of the person he was greeting, she replied:  "He was more like offering his cheek, yes." (T 291) 
She said that in greeting her, after she had come to know him, he would shake her hand and offer his cheek: "and we would have like an air cheek sort of thing and I would hug him." (T )

She initiated the hug.
She said that Mr Haddon occasionally offered compliments concerning her appearance, which she welcomed as "encouraging and supportive from a friend". They did not make her feel uncomfortable.  
TL was then asked about the allegations made by some of the other witnesses as particularised. She said that she knew EM, who she had seen in the company of Mr Haddon, not alone, but in a group situation, and that EM looked as though she was having a good time; TL recalled her laughing at Mr Haddon's jokes and looking "fairly comfortable".  
She said the same of a number of other women who subsequently gave evidence, not all of whose evidence I have referred to in these reasons. She again described Mr Haddon offering his cheek for an air kiss, and that the other women appeared to be comfortable in his company, and laughed at his jokes. She made the same observations of some other women whose names have not otherwise significantly featured.  
She described JL as an energetic person:  "Full of energy, full of life, very busy, buzzing around, hand in everything that was going on" (T 298) who: "... would greet everyone with a big hug and a kiss, so I recall that she would hug Bruce like she hugged everybody else." (T 298) 
This evidence, given in advance of oral evidence by JL, may have been intended to undermine the claim made in anticipation, that JL found Mr Haddon's conduct awkward, and that it was unwelcome and made her uncomfortable.
Also called on behalf of Mr Haddon was Nicholas Chiew. He was a member of St Aidan's from 2005 to early 2007 and was involved in one of the bible study groups. He came to know Mr Haddon relatively well.  
He gave particular evidence about the occasion on which Mr Haddon administered a neck and shoulder massage to NB. His evidence was that NB asked Mr Haddon to do so, a request with which Mr Haddon proceeded to comply. He observed NB relaxing and enjoying the massage, and making no protest at all to Mr Haddon's conduct. When asked if she appeared to be uncomfortable in Mr Haddon's presence he said " No, quite the opposite" (T 343).  
Mr Haddon also relied upon a considerable body of documentary evidence (predominantly email) to counter the suggestion that his behaviour was a cause of concern among the congregation at St Aidan's.  
In March 2006, after he had performed "door duty" one of the women (SL) emailed him, thanking him for his help and asking him to perform the same duty for the rest of the month (Ex B). In July SL emailed again, to thank him for having performed that role again, and told him:  "You did a great job." (Ex C)
In October 2007 CW emailed him to thank him for a recommendation he had given for some kind of treatment she needed. She wrote:  "Thank you, Bruce. You are a gem! You care about people so much and offer such truth and sincerity which is so much appreciated. Have a wonderful week ..." (Ex D) 
In December CW emailed again, in friendly terms, in relation to some frivolity in which the two had engaged (Ex F).
In November, Mr Haddon emailed CW. He wrote:  "Seriously VS [his nickname for CW] - that wonderful voicemail message today is so C...! 
You have so much goodness in you that it flows out with your beautiful flood of well meaning and encouraging words. Never ever change friend, just grow in exactly the direction you are growing now (and we know the Holy Spirit has something so do with that) ..." (Ex CCC) 
He went on to refer to the proposed arrangement with Kim. The following day CW replied in the following terms: "Awww you say the sweetest things...really.. you overflow with goodness and sincere words. I appreciate what you say and above all, your faithful friendship Thanks for the song link... i read the words ... you have great insight and a heart for God ..." (Ex CCC)
As late as 7 February Mr Haddon forwarded to CW an email that he thought would be of interest to her. She replied:  "That truly is so sweet... awww thanks for the hearty email. I hope all is well, Bruce. We will catch up soon!!! : )" (Ex DDD)
During the time he attended CIM, Mr Haddon engaged socially with a number of members of the congregation. He attended a number of weddings and parties. Ex JJ is a chronology of CIM associated social events in which he participated during 2007.  
The purpose of that evidence was to cast doubt upon the contention, on behalf of the defendants, that Mr Haddon's behaviour was unacceptable, particularly to women members of the congregation.  
In relation to the invitations to young women to dinner, Mr Haddon said:  "Given the way I framed the invitation I feel it was perfectly clear that they were fatherly, platonic or mentoring in nature. Therefore I had no reason to suspect that it would be off-putting." (T 193) * * * 
Credit issues 
Before moving to findings of fact, it is appropriate to say something about credit issues. In general, I accept the evidence of the witnesses called on behalf of the defendants in preference to that of Mr Haddon. I doubt that Mr Haddon deliberately set out to deceive - his Christian principles, for one thing, are far too strong to allow that. However, I do believe that he has a considerable capacity for self-deception, and that he lacks insight into the way in which he conducts himself, and its impact on others.  
I observed Mr Haddon in the witness box over a lengthy period. He has (quite unintentionally, I am sure) an extraordinarily ebullient, even overbearing, manner, arising out of his healthy self-regard. His own evidence disclosed that he believed that he could give advice on a variety of subjects to a variety of individuals (including Mr Steele, on the content of his sermons) and that, in doing so, he was doing a favour to the recipient. I do not accept his denials of certain remarks and comments attributed to him, but I do not believe (with two qualifications) that this was out of deliberate untruthfulness. One qualification concerns his denial that he made any comments that could reasonably construed as advocating extra-marital sex for Christian women. I find his outright denial of this puzzling. In the "Fried brains" email of October 2005 to Mr Steele (Ex U), he wrote:  "I wonder if how late we're marrying (women, average age 29) how often it fails (almost half) and how often we're not (I think 30% of women will remain single) combined with the strict Christian proscription of sex outside marriage is affecting women more than we think 
It amplifies in their 30s where there's a marked difference in the confidence and composure of happily married Christian women compared to their celebate sisters - this was the reason I left St Thomas and I'm not the only one.
The men in the 30s congregation (5.00pm) could do nothing right in the eyes of the women, including trumped up charges like [RD] or just exaggerating an incident like the other women you mentioned who was sobbing hours later from something you found not out of order ..."
In another email, dated 23 March 2006, to Mr Steele, with the subject heading "Christian women and marriage", Mr Haddon commented upon a sermon which, he said, introduced one small aspect of sexuality. His comment was:  "1 - we tell Christians, correctly, to save sex for marriage - of the unmarried women you minister to Sunday nights, about 50% will never marry (Fewer Australians are marrying but the situation is amplified for Christian women because Christianity is increasingly a religion for females. Looking around any church confirms this) - we don't know who that 50% are who will never marry, but God does.
Therefore God doesn't say 'save sex for marriage' to those 50% because he knows there isn't going to be a marriage 
What therefore does God say to them? 
We know the stock answer: a lifetime of celibacy. But look at the disgusting distortions and perversions this stance creates for the Roman Catholic priesthood. There are more unmarried Christian women than there are Catholic priests. So with what we now know about human sexuality, we need a better answer. What is it please?" (Ex ZZ) 
This email was signed by Mr Haddon (obviously, sardonically) as the "Honorary
President of the Christian Society for the Prevention of Glib Answers to
Serious Questions".
The evidence of the witnesses called on behalf of the defendants in respect of this matter was consistent and supported by Mr Haddon's own documentation. I am satisfied that Mr Haddon made the comments attributed to him. But that carries the consequence that I am satisfied that his evidence denying that was not truthful. It is difficult to escape the further conclusion that it was known to him to be untruthful. The second illustration concerns Mr Haddon's evidence about the length of time he served as a member of the Board of the organisation called "Relationships Australia". Other than as a matter of credit, this is of little, if any, significance. However, it was put to Mr Haddon in cross-examination that, in the time that he was at St Aidan's, he had on a number of occasions told people that he had been on that Board for five years. He disputed this, saying that the period he claimed was four years. When pressed, he said:  "The figure I have in my mind is four." 
In answer to a subsequent question, he said: "I have always quoted four and I may be mistaken. It may be three." (TT 172-3)
In fact, in his evidence in chief he said:  "I was on the Board of Relationships Australia for five years ..." (T 59) 
He was later asked if that had been a correct statement of fact. He said: "It is correct." (T 66)
In cross-examination he said:  "I was elected to the Board of Relationships Australia for five years" (T 156) and gave the years as between 1984 and 1989. It was put to him that he had served only two full years between 1984 and 1986. His answer was: " No, my recollection is it was longer than that. It might have just seemed so much longer." (T 156)
In a letter to two members of the congregation (CL and her husband AL) dated 10 October 2005, Mr Haddon wrote:  "Later I was on the Board of Relationships Australia for five years." (Ex XX) 
In the proposal with respect to the "To Love and to Hold" seminar (which so offended NB), Mr Haddon concluded by saying: "Thanks mate - happy to help with more info as this evolves. I was on the
Board of the Marriage Guidance Counsel for five years." (Ex 7)
Finally, in answer to an interrogatory (about the CA/CW conversation) Mr Haddon attributed to himself the following:  "Some post menopausal women have great difficulty having sex with their husbands. I am aware of this from studies I have seen during my five years on the Board of Relationships Australia." (Ex 47.7)
How long Mr Haddon served on the Board of Relationships Australia is of itself of not the slightest moment. But that he exaggerated, repeatedly, the length of his service, is telling, as is his refusal to acknowledge that he had done so.  
These circumstances, among others, persuade me that, where there is a conflict between the evidence of the defendants' witnesses, and that of Mr Haddon, I should treat his evidence with caution. I have no such reservation about the evidence of any of the witnesses called on behalf of the defendants. In the end, however, little turned on conflicts of evidence, and credit is determinative of not a great deal.  
Each of the witnesses called on behalf of the defendants was cross-examined. Often, the tenor of the cross-examination was to cast a different complexion on evidence that the witness had given - for example, the cross-examination of EM concerning the caesarean conversation. Only occasionally was it directly put that a conversation, or an event, of which the witness had given evidence had simply not happened. Two examples of when that was suggested were in the cross-examination of EM concerning the second part of the caesarean conversation (the reference to the potential impact on EM's sexual relations with her husband) and the cross-examination of SR, concerning the evidence about Mr Haddon's comments about her silhouette.  
On each occasion the witness was entirely unshaken and stood, convincingly, behind her original testimony.  
Other witnesses were cross-examined to suggest that their evidence of discomfort at Mr Haddon's conduct was, at least, exaggerated, and inconsistent with their behaviour otherwise, such as invitations to weddings and other social functions, sending friendly emails, and the like. Invariably, their answers satisfied me that their evidence ought to be accepted.  
I have no hesitation in concluding that Mr Haddon was quite incompatible with the general congregation of CIM. That was for a variety of reasons - personality, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviour. Only some of these are relevant to the issue of the substantial truth of the imputations, in particular, whether the conduct of which complaint is made ought to be characterised as sexual harassment. It is necessary, but not easy, to disentangle evidence of Mr Haddon's conduct that may have engendered hostility for other reasons from that which points to conduct that amounts to sexual harassment or that might be construed as making sexual advances.  
From the evidence to which I have referred above, general facts of which I am satisfied and that are relevant to the substantial truth of the imputations are:  * (i) that, as a matter of practice or habit, Mr Haddon approached young, attractive women, and physically imposed himself upon them by kissing and/or hugging them, with no regard to whether his attentions were welcome or unwelcome;  * (ii) that Mr Haddon had a tendency to behave in an intrusive fashion towards young women, in particular by making personal comments about their appearance, clothing, weight, and other matters;  * (iii) that Mr Haddon had a tendency to introduce into conversations topics of a sexual nature, that were, in the community to which they were directed, unwelcome and offensive.  
The first and second of these were firmly established by the evidence. No less than 10 of the 12 female CIM members who gave evidence attested to Mr Haddon's physical intrusiveness; 9 gave evidence of personal comments about appearance or clothing.  
The evidence is not so clear when attention is turned to the third, the introduction of topics of a sexual nature into conversations with women. However, I have concluded there is sufficient evidence to support that finding. Relevant evidence is:  * EM's evidence of Mr Haddon's intrusive comments about whether she should or should not have her child delivered by caesarean section; and his even more intrusive comment about the benefit to her sexual relations with her husband; * CW's evidence about Mr Haddon's response to the cancellation of a dinner arrangement, in terms that gratuitously introduced sexual matters; * CP's (formerly CS) (T 399) evidence that, at a housewarming party, Mr Haddon gave his views on sexuality; * LT's (T 624) evidence of Mr Haddon's advice concerning a friend who suffered from bipolar disorder - to have an orgasm; * the repeated evidence of Mr Haddon's expressed views concerning sex outside of marriage for Christians.  
On this evidence, I am satisfied that Mr Haddon did introduce sexual topics into his conversations with women.
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the factual underpinning of each imputation has been established. The next question is whether that conduct amounts to sexual harassment, or was such as to warrant complaints of unwanted sexual advances.  "Sexual harassment" 
Before I can determine whether Mr Haddon's conduct, either in respect of his conversations, or his behaviour (kissing and hugging) amounted to sexual harassment, it is necessary to ascribe a meaning to the term "sexual harassment".  
As a collocation of words, the term did not appear in the 1 st edition (1981) of the Macquarie Dictionary. It first appeared in the 2 nd edition (1991), where it is defined as follows:  "... persistent unwelcome sexual advances, especially when made by superiors in the workplace and when employment status is dependent upon compliance."
Similarly, the term did not appear in the 2 nd edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (1989), which was the last print version. Since then, it has appeared in The New Shorter Oxford Dictionary, at least since 1993, and in the online version of the Oxford Dictionary, where it is defined as:  "Harassment (typically of a woman by a man) in a workplace or other professional or social situation, involving the making of unwanted sexual advances, obscene remarks, etc"
For completeness, I note "harass" is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary as:  "1. to trouble by repeated attacks, incursions, etc., as in war or hostilities; harry; raid. 2. to disturb persistently; torment, as with troubles, cares etc ..."; and in the Oxford English Dictionary as: "1. to wear out, tire out, or exhaust with fatigue, care, trouble, etc; 2. to harry, lay waste, devastate, plunder; 3. to trouble or vex by repeated attacks; 4. to trouble, worry, distress with annoying labour, care, perplexity, importunity, misfortune, etc."
I doubt that these dictionary definitions fully encompass the common understanding of sexual harassment. Certainly, to the extent that both emphasise the relationship with an employment situation, they relegate to relative obscurity other important manifestations. The focus on employment is, perhaps, understandable, given that, in defined circumstances, sexual harassment has been declared by statute unlawful (see, for example, [Sex Discrimination Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/) (Cth), [Pt II](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/index.html#p2) Div 3; [Anti-Discrimination Act 1977](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/) , [Pt 2A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/index.html#p2a), and corresponding legislation in other States and Territories), and workplace claims have constituted the vast bulk of claims made under that legislation.  
On behalf of Mr Haddon it was urged that the definition in the [Sex Discrimination Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/) represents the common understanding of the term as used in ordinary language.  "Sexual harassment" is defined in the [Sex Discrimination Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/) as follows:  
A Meaning of sexual harassment 
For the purposes of this Division, a person sexually harasses another person (the person harassed ) if: the person makes an unwelcome sexual advance, or an unwelcome request for sexual favours, to the person harassed; or engages in other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in relation to the person harassed; in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the circumstances, would have anticipated that the person harassed would be offended, humiliated or intimidated.

In this section: conduct of a sexual nature includes making a statement of a sexual nature to a person, or in the presence of a person, whether the statement is made orally or in writing." [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s22a.html) of the [Anti-Discrimination
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/) is in substantially similar terms, but omits the sub-s (2) definition of "conduct of a sexual nature".
I do not regard the statutory definitions of sexual harassment as determinative or conclusive of the meaning I should attach to the words as they are used in imputations 1 and 2. I do consider, however, that they provide a useful starting point and guide. In my opinion, the definitions are a close approximation, and bear a close resemblance, to the term as it is used in the imputations. I add, however, this caveat. The suffixes to the definition:  "... in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the circumstances, would have anticipated that the other person would be offended, humiliated or intimidated" are significant. They have been included, in my opinion, because the purpose of the Parts of the legislation in which they appear is to render conduct that comes within that definition (in the defined circumstances subsequently identified) unlawful, and, further, to render perpetrators potentially liable in damages. That is a consideration not relevant to the common understanding of the term, and has little, if any, application in considering whether, as a matter of ordinary language, conduct amounts to sexual harassment.
The phrase "conduct of a sexual nature" in sub-para (b) has been the subject of a good deal of judicial consideration: see, for example, Cooke versus Plauen Holdings Pty Ltd  <case> at <case>- <case>; Hall versus A & A Sheiban Pty Ltd <case>; <case>. That concept is also of importance in determining the proper characterisation of Mr Haddon's conduct.  
In Te Papa , the Civil and Administrative Tribunal (Victoria) held that, in some cases, whether certain conduct or a statement is "sexual" will depend upon the circumstances, including such things as where and when and how the conduct occurred, as well as the understanding of the participants at the time. In Fricke , the Administrative Decisions Tribunal Equal Opportunities Division rejected the notion that conduct is of a sexual nature where it merely offends another person's "unusual, idiosyncratic or socially or culturally different understanding" of appropriate conduct; but also held that that conduct could nevertheless be "conduct of a sexual nature" if the perpetrator is aware of the other person's unusual perception.  
In Cooke , the Federal Magistrates Court (applying [s 28A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/s28a.html) of the [Sex Discrimination Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/) ) held that the test was objective and it was immaterial whether the perpetrator intended to act in a sexual way or was aware that he or she was doing so.  
As I have said, I am conscious that I am not construing an Act of Parliament, as were the authors of these decisions; and I am conscious that the definitions have been forged for the specific statutory purpose to which I have referred. I regard the legislation and the decisions as affording some guidance in the approach I should take to the term as it appears in the imputations.  
I have concluded, for the purpose of that exercise, and borrowing from the statutory definitions and the judicial constructions of them, that it is appropriate to approach "sexual harassment" on the basis that it includes unwelcome sexual conduct in relation to another person. I have wavered as to whether I should include the reasonable person test set out in the suffix of each definition. I have concluded that I should not.  
Conduct that may be sexual harassment to one recipient may be perfectly acceptable to another. The concept includes elements of value judgments: sexual harassment is undoubtedly a pejorative term, but, like all concepts involving value judgments, there is no universal agreement that identifies a boundary beyond which conduct falls within that description.  
Moreover, conduct of a particular kind, that, if performed once only, or on a limited number of occasions, may not qualify as sexual harassment, may well do so if persisted in and repeated. An excellent example would be repeated (declined) invitations to social events, including dinner. It could rarely be said that a single invitation to dinner amounted to sexual harassment; persistent invitations in the face of rejection (assuming the necessary sexual connotation is also proved) might. It may also depend upon the manner in which the invitations are rejected: if the recipient repeatedly makes excuses and feigns regret, it may be difficult to conclude that the invitations amount to harassment.  
The context in which the conduct is engaged in may have significance, as may the identity or status of the participants: for example, conduct by an employer towards an employee, or otherwise by a person in a position of power, may amount to sexual harassment, where similar conduct towards to an equal may not. Conduct which of itself contains no obvious sexual element may take on a different complexion when regard is had to other conduct on the part of the perpetrator - that is, an associated sexual connotation may cast light on the motivation for the conduct.  
There is also a question concerning the intention or knowledge of the person said to engage in sexual harassment. On the one hand, a perpetrator who is wholly unconscious that his/her behaviour is unwelcome or even offensive, may well feel aggrieved that the behaviour is held to amount to sexual harassment; on the other hand, it is immaterial to the recipient of such conduct that the perpetrator is insensitive to its impact. In my opinion, intention is irrelevant. It is frequently a hallmark of sexual harassment that the perpetrator is quite unconscious of the adverse impact the conduct has.  
But, in circumstances where the perpetrator has been made aware of the unwelcome nature of the conduct, the inferences that the conduct has sexual overtones, and that it amounts to harassment, may be more readily drawn.  
I mention here that, in respect to imputation 3, while the conduct is not specified, the nature of the complaints said to be warranted is - it is of "sexual advances". "Making sexual advances" does not necessarily equate to, and is not co-extensive with, sexual harassment. As I said in the first section of these reasons, dealing with whether the imputations were conveyed, making "unwanted sexual advances" involves conduct of a greater dimension than mere sexual harassment, and requires some element of invitation to sexual activity.  
The assessment of the issues is complicated by the existence of a good deal of evidence concerning Mr Haddon's conduct that has the most marginal, if any, relevance to conduct of the kind the subject of the imputations, but which was, nevertheless, offensive (in varying degrees) to members of St Aidan's. Two illustrations will suffice: the events at the men's retreat, when Mr Haddon made an ill received reference to two Swedish masseuses; and the two events described by NB when Mr Haddon is said to have had his shirt only partially on, and lifted it to show his stomach.  
I accept that Mr Haddon:  * commented, regularly, in an intrusive and personal fashion, to female members of CIM about their clothing and appearance;  * told SR that she had a "nice silhouette";  * intrusively advised EM about giving birth by caesarean section, with particular and gratuitous reference to the impact of that upon her future sexual relations with her husband;  * commented (offensively) on the capacity of post-menopausal women to engage in sexual relations;  * repeatedly (to both men and women) expressed his views on extra-marital sex;  * recommended orgasm as an antidote to bi-polar disorder.  
I am satisfied that this conduct had the necessary sexual component or overtone. Moreover, the conduct cannot be seen in isolation from other aspects of Mr Haddon's conduct. The whole of the circumstances are relevant. When seen in the context of his other conduct said to constitute sexual harassment, inappropriate kissing and hugging, the inference, that the comments were sex related, is clear.  
I am also satisfied that the conduct was plainly unwelcome, and amounted to harassment.  
Accordingly, I am satisfied that imputation 1 was substantially true.  
I am also satisfied that Mr Haddon regularly and frequently imposed himself physically upon women members of the congregation, by kissing them and hugging them, and that this unwelcome. I am satisfied, in all of the circumstances, that this conduct had the necessary sexual element, and amounted to harassment.  
I am therefore satisfied that imputation 2 was substantially true.  
I add that, if it were necessary, I would also be satisfied that, having regard to all of the circumstances, a reasonable person would have anticipated that the recipients of the conduct would have been, at the least, offended, and in some or all cases humiliated or intimidated.  
In this respect, Mr Haddon's actual knowledge is material. It cannot be overlooked that he was cautioned on more than one occasion, and at an early stage of his engagement with CIM, that his conduct was offensive and unwelcome, and, indeed, that he promised to change.  
I turn, then, to imputation 3. A common theme of complaint was that Mr Haddon persistently, and in an unwelcome fashion, invited women to dinner - even, on one occasion, when he had been expressly asked not to do so by a woman (MB) other than the recipient of his invitation (CW).  
What was uniformly absent from these complaints was any suggestion, either in the account of the invitations or in the dinners that followed, of any request, or even any desire or intention, that the event would lead to a physical sexual encounter, any sexual advance, or any sexual proposition. There was also incidental evidence that Mr Haddon was enthusiastic in making social arrangements, including dinner, with male members of the congregation.  
In the voluminous evidence of complaints made to Mr Steele, there was no suggestion that Mr Haddon proposed sexual liaisons with any of the women.  
In my consideration of whether this imputation was conveyed, I concluded that the emails did incorporate the notion of sexual advances. But that was in the context of evaluating the construction that an ordinary reasonable reader might or would place upon them. Consideration of whether that imputation is true or not involves a very different, and more disciplined, exercise. Again, it is to be borne in mind that the imputation pleaded is not of conduct that constitutes unwanted sexual advances; it is of conduct that warrants complaints of unwanted sexual advances. That leaves open the possibility that the conduct was misconstrued by those who complained.  
On balance, I am satisfied that the evidence does establish that. The dividing line, however, is very fine. I should make my position very clear. If the imputation had been pleaded as conduct that did in fact amount to making unwanted sexual advances, I would hold that the evidence falls short of establishing its substantial truth. But I am equally satisfied that the evidence does establish that Mr Haddon so conducted himself as to give rise to a belief that he was making sexual advances, that those advances were (whether he appreciated it or not) unwanted, and that that belief justified the making of complaints.  
The result is that I conclude that this imputation also is substantially true.  
I do add this. I doubt that Mr Haddon's conduct was for the purpose of sexual gratification, and the evidence certainly does not establish that his motive was seduction. Indeed, notwithstanding consistent evidence of his invitations to young women to join him for dinner, there was not a word of evidence that the dinners that did ensue were followed by any inappropriate sexual advance or approach. I am persuaded that Mr Haddon's motivation was not physical sexual gratification, but to establish himself as a mentor, or a guide, in a variety of ways, to young women.  
I am also satisfied that, in a different environment, much of Mr Haddon's conduct would have excited far less comment and caused far less offence - and may well have encountered a far more robust resistance or rejection. But the fact that this was a rather closed and heterogeneous, and, undoubtedly, conservative, community, is one of the circumstances relevant to the categorisation of his behaviour.  contextual truth 
The defence of contextual truth is provided by [s 26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/s26.html) of the Act, which provides:  "It is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant proves that: (a) the matter carried, in addition to the defamatory imputations of which the plaintiff complains, one or more other imputations ( contextual imputations ) that are substantially true, and (b) the defamatory imputations do not further harm the reputation of the plaintiff because of the substantial truth of the contextual imputations."
This defence is pleaded conditionally: the defendants reserve their primary position that none of the imputations pleaded by Mr Haddon was conveyed; the defence of contextual truth is pleaded only against the prospect of failure of that position. As has been seen, in respect of three imputations that defence has failed and the conditionally pleaded defence of contextual truth arises. The defence can only have relevance where a plaintiff has established that one or more imputations have been conveyed, and the defendant has failed to prove the substantial truth of one or more of them. That is not here the case, and the defence of contextual truth is unnecessary.  
Against the possibility that a different view might be taken elsewhere, I will briefly state my conclusions on the contextual truth defence.  
The defendants plead three contextual imputations. They are:  * (i) "the plaintiff harassed women in the Church in that he discussed sexual matters with them";  * (ii) "the plaintiff made female members of the Church uncomfortable in that he made comments about their appearance when speaking to them"; and  * (iii) "the plaintiff had broken the agreement he had made with the Minister and Church Councillor".  
The defendants also (necessarily) plead that by reason of the substantial truth of each or any of the contextual imputations pleaded, the publication of each or any of the imputations pleaded by Mr Haddon did not further harm Mr
Haddon's reputation.
Additionally, and more controversially, the defendants plead that, by reason of the substantial truth of each and any of the imputations of which Mr Haddon complains and found to have been conveyed and to be defamatory, the remaining imputations pleaded on his behalf did not further harm his reputation.  
This last form of pleading is the form of pleading known, under the [1974 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/), as "pleading back the plaintiff's imputations". In Kermode versus Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd  <case>, I held that, having regard to the manner in which the defence is formulated in the Act, that form of pleading is no longer available. I adhere to that view. I understand that that decision is subject to appeal, but the appeal has not been determined.  
I accordingly disregard the form of defence that invokes the "pleading back" practice.  
I am satisfied that each contextual imputation was conveyed. The first and second are conveyed by a combination of the reference to "a number of complaints from women", and identification of the nature of those complaints in paragraph (a). The third is conveyed by the opening sentence, which carries a clear accusation that Mr Haddon broke an agreement made with "Dominic" and "Evan", who are subsequently identified in the signature line, as "Minister" and "Church Councillor".  
Having regard to the matters I have already discussed, I am satisfied that the first and second are substantially true. Having regard to the matters outlined above, I am also satisfied that the third is substantially true.  
To be sustained, the defence also requires a conclusion that, because of the substantial truth of the contextual imputations, the defamatory imputations do not further harm the reputation of the plaintiff. This involves balancing the impact of each of the imputations pleaded by the plaintiff against the combined weight of the contextual imputations, and a conclusion that the defamatory effect of the latter equals or outweighs the former. I am unable to be satisfied of this. Each of the imputations pleaded on behalf of Mr Haddon is significantly more serious than any of the contextual imputations or all of them in combination. Even bearing in mind the truth of each of the contextual imputations, I would be satisfied that the imputations of sexual harassment and conduct warranting complaints of sexual advances (if not proved substantially true) did further harm Mr Haddon's reputation.  
Accordingly, if it were relevant, I would reject the defence of contextual truth.  and (iv) comment 
Although the defendants have, in their Amended Defence, retained the pleading of a defence of fair comment at common law, no submissions, written or oral, were directed to that subject matter. I take it that the relevant defence upon which they rely is that of honest opinion, as provided by [s 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s31.html) of the Act. [Section 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s31.html) is relevantly in the following terms:  "(1) It is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant proves that: the matter was an expression of opinion of the defendant rather than a statement of fact, and the opinion related to a matter of public interest, and (c) the opinion is based on proper material.
 ...
 ...

A defence established under this section is defeated if, and only if, the plaintiff proves that: in the case of a defence under subsection (1) - the opinion was not honestly held by the defendant at the time the defamatory matter was published, or ...
 ...

For the purposes of this section, an opinion is based on proper material if it is based on material that: is substantially true, or was published on an occasion of absolute or qualified privilege (whether under this Act or at general law), or was published on an occasion that attracted the protection of a defence under this section or [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s28.html) or [29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s29.html).

An opinion does not cease to be based on proper material only because some of the material on which it is based is not proper material if the opinion might reasonably be based on such of the material as is proper material."
Thus, in order to succeed in a [s 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s31.html) defence, a defendant must prove three separate matters:  * (i) that what was published is, properly construed, not a statement of fact, but as an expression of opinion; * (ii) that the opinion so expressed related to a matter of public interest; * (iii) that that opinion is based upon "proper material" (as defined in sub-s (5)).  
Each of these has itself been the subject of judicial exegesis. However, it is unnecessary to explore those issues in great depth. I am satisfied that the defence fails at the first hurdle. The emails could not reasonably be construed as the expression of an opinion. They are, in my opinion, a clear statement of a number of facts.  
It is clear from the way in which [s 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s31.html) is worded that what is required to be demonstrated to be the expression of opinion is the publication by which the imputations are conveyed, as distinct from the imputations themselves, as was the case under the [1974 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/): Lloyd versus David Syme and Co Ltd [(1985) 3 NSWLR 728] at 735; Parker , at 467-8.  
The facts stated in the emails, whether by implication or expressly, are:  * that, on Sunday 10 February, Mr Haddon had made an agreement with Mr Steele and Mr Batten as to his future conduct while at CIM functions; * that Mr Haddon had, on that evening, broken that agreement a number of times; * that the agreement included specific conduct identified as turning conversations with women to sexual topics, touching and kissing women, and the nature of Mr Haddon's social interactions at the church; * that, prior to 10 February, Mr Haddon had had a practice of leading conversations with women towards sexual matters, including making comments about their appearance and clothing; * that Mr Haddon had had a practice of kissing and hugging women at church; * that Mr Haddon had focused his social interactions on women.  
The emails concluded by asking Mr Haddon not to attend church on the following
Sunday, and not to attend a subsequent church weekend away.
The nearest the emails come to expressing an opinion is in the sentence in which the authors stated that they "think" it would be best if Mr Haddon absented himself from the weekend away. For present purposes, that apparent expression of an opinion is immaterial: it is remote from the defamatory content of the email, and, properly construed, is not the expression of any opinion, but a statement of fact concerning their attitude towards Mr Haddon, that he would be unwelcome at that event, and a clearly implied request that he not attend.  
That is enough to dispose of the [s 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s31.html) defence. However, there is a further reason leading to the same result.  
The defendants must prove that the opinion expressed related to a matter of public interest. What constitutes a matter of public interest has also been the subject of judicial exposition. In Bellino versus Australian Broadcasting Corporation  <case>; [185 CLR 183] at 215, the majority in the High Court (Dawson, McHugh and Gummow JJ) said that, for the purposes of the Queensland law of defamation:  "... a subject of public interest meant the actions or omissions of a person or institution engaged in activities that either inherently, expressly or inferentially invited public criticism or discussion." (p 215)
In London Artists Ltd versus Littler [[1968] EWCACiv 3], Lord Denning MR held that what comes within the definition of a matter of public interest should not be confined within narrow limits. He said:  "Whenever a matter is such as to affect people at large, so that they may be legitimately interested in, or concerned at, what is going on; or what may happen to them or to others; then it is a matter of public interest on which everyone is entitled to make fair comment."
I am unable to conclude that Mr Haddon's conduct in the closed community of St Aidan's was such as to invite, whether expressly or inferentially, public criticism; or such as to affect people at large.  
Accordingly, even if I were satisfied that the emails contained expressions of opinion, I would reject the defence on the public interest test. The defence also fails at the second hurdle.  
The third requirement is that the opinion is based on "proper material". Proper material is defined in sub-s (5).  
In my opinion, the defendants have discharged the onus of proving that the material upon which the email was based was proper material. The factual matters contained in the emails were, as I have found above, substantially true; further, as will appear below, they were published on an occasion of qualified privilege at common law.  
However, the defendants have failed to establish either that the emails represented the expression of opinion, or that any such opinion related to a matter of public interest, and, accordingly, the [s 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s31.html) defence fails.  qualified privilege - common law 
In Megna versus Marshall  <case> I analysed in some detail this defence. I adhere to the views I there expressed. I concluded that three strands of inquiry are called for where a defence of qualified privilege at common law is raised. They are:  * the identification of an occasion of qualified privilege; * whether the content of the publication is relevant (germane, or sufficiently connected with) to that occasion; * if both the above are established - whether the publisher was actuated by malice.  
I do not propose to re-state my reasoning process.
The classic statement of principle is contained in Toogood versus Spyring <case>; [(1834) 1 Cr M & R 181] as follows:  "In general, an action lies for the malicious publication of statements which are false in fact, and injurious to the character of another (within the well- known limits as to verbal slander), and the law considers such publication as malicious, unless it is fairly made by a person in the discharge of some public or private duty, whether legal or moral, or in the conduct of his own affairs, in matters where his interest is concerned. In such cases, the occasion prevents the inference of malice, which the law draws from unauthorized communications, and affords a qualified defence depending upon the absence of actual malice. If fairly warranted by any reasonable occasion or exigency, and honestly made, such communications are protected for the common convenience and welfare of society; and the law has not restricted the right to make them within any narrow limits."
In Adam versus Ward [[1917] AC 309], Lord Atkinson said:  "It was not disputed ... that a privileged occasion is, in reference to qualified privilege, an occasion where the person who makes a communication has an interest or a duty, legal, social, or moral, to make it to the person to whom it is made, and the person to whom it is so made has a corresponding interest or duty to receive it. This reciprocity is essential."
The centrepoint of the defence of qualified privilege at common law is the existence of a duty or interest in the person publishing the defamatory matter, and a corresponding interest in the recipient(s) in receiving it. As was pointed out in Adam versus Ward , the reciprocity is essential.  
Identification of the occasion of qualified privilege involves examination of all of the circumstances in which the publication is made, with special reference to its subject matter. It is in the identification of the occasion that the requisite reciprocity of interest, or of duty and interest, must be established.  
I turn to apply those principles to the facts of the present case. I am satisfied that the occasion of publication of each email was one of qualified privilege. Here, it will be necessary to deal with each email separately.  
The parties were at issue on the proper identification of the subject matter of the emails. (Except for the covering note in each, which is immaterial for this purpose, the subject matter of the two emails is identical.) The defendants particularised the subject matter as:  "(a) the management of St Aidan's Church; the conduct of parishioners at St Aidan's; the conduct of the Anglican Church in Sydney; the wellbeing of members of the Anglican Church in Sydney."
On behalf of Mr Haddon however, the subject matter was said to be:  "a a request that the wardens be signatories to a draft email to a plaintiff which contained the subject matter below; b confirmation of the issues allegedly discussed at a meeting between the plaintiff and the defendants on 10 February 2008; c confirmation that the plaintiff had agreed at that meeting not to do certain things in future; d observation by the defendants that the plaintiff had subsequently engaged in conduct which he had earlier agreed not to; e a request for the plaintiff not to attend a church service on Sunday 17
February 2008; f a request for the plaintiff not to attend a church weekend away sometime later in February 2008; g a notification that the writers would subsequently decide what action to take (and presumably contact the plaintiff further)."
Neither, in my opinion, accurately captures the subject matter, which was no more and no less than Mr Haddon's conduct at St Aidan's, and steps already taken, and steps to be taken, in order to deal with that conduct (which was deemed to be unsatisfactory and unacceptable).  
The real attack on the defence made on behalf of Mr Haddon was directed at the issue of reciprocity. It is, therefore, necessary to examine the interest of each of the recipients in that subject matter. (No attack was made upon the duty or interest of Mr Steele in communicating on the issue or subject matter; the issue appears to be the breadth of the circle of recipients.)  
The first email, sent at 2.12pm by Mr Steele, was on its face, addressed to:  "Evan Batten [email address], Robert & Fiona Taylor [email address], Frag
Woodall [email address], Pinghan & Aimee Chua [email address]"
Mr Steele had, in my view, a duty to communicate with the inner circle of the church. The relevant circumstances include that complaints had been made concerning Mr Haddon's conduct towards female members of the congregation. Whether or not those complaints were justified, or whether or not they correctly stated facts and described Mr Haddon's conduct, are not to the present point. In receipt of that information, it was Mr Steele's duty to consult with senior members of the church in order to determine how to deal with the situation. Messrs Batten, Taylor, Woodhall and Chua were all involved in the administration of the church. On behalf of Mr Haddon, it was argued that the evidence established that the wardens' role in the administration of the church was limited to matters of finance and property, and that their interest did not extend to knowing the reasons that motivated Mr Steele to exclude Mr Haddon. Mr Steele gave evidence that he did not know how Mr Haddon would respond to the request that he not attend the church, and that it may have become necessary to call upon the wardens (Messrs Taylor, Woodall and Chua) to exercise their powers to exclude, or remove, him. The response made on behalf of Mr Haddon to that was that, even if it were necessary to advise the wardens that they might be called on to exercise those powers, it was nevertheless unnecessary to spell out to them the reasons for the proposed exclusion.  
I cannot accept this narrow approach. The wardens were not police officers, detached from the church, and acting on instructions. They were active, participating members of the church. That, no doubt, is why they were appointed or elected as wardens. Those who were appointed by Mr Steele were appointed because they had his trust and confidence. Moreover, if it is the case that they had the ultimate decision making role in whether or not to exclude Mr Haddon, it was not sufficient for them simply to be told that that was Mr Steele's wish; they had to be given adequate reasons to take the fairly drastic step that they would be asked to take, and to exercise their own independent judgment in that respect. I expressly reject the contention made on behalf of Mr Haddon that all that was necessary for them to know was that Mr Steele had requested Mr Haddon not to attend.  
It does not appear to be suggested that Mr Batten lacked the necessary interest to establish reciprocity.  
In any event given the history I have recounted, it is highly unlikely that any recipient was not substantially aware of the issues raised. I doubt that, in this email, Mr Steele communicated to them anything which they did not already know.  
I am satisfied that all recipients had the necessary interest in receiving the communication from Mr Steele. The occasion was one of qualified privilege.  
The first question must therefore be answered in favour of the defendants. So must the second. I have not the slightest doubt that what was contained in the email was relevant to that occasion. No submission to the contrary was advanced.  
A further submission made on behalf of Mr Haddon concerned the inclusion of Fiona Taylor and Aimee Chua in the list of recipients. It was submitted that the email addresses did not amount to evidence that Mr Taylor and Mr Chua did not have any other email addresses, that did not include their wives. Equally, there is no evidence that either of those gentlemen did have an alternative email address to which a confidential communication could be sent.  
The evidence did not establish whether either Ms Taylor or Ms Chua did (or did not) in fact read the email. In any event, I consider the point to be somewhat artificial. Both of these "incidental recipients" were the wives of legitimate recipients, and, I infer, members of the church themselves. Their interest, while not as direct as the interest of their husbands, was real.  
The law of qualified privilege recognises that, on occasions an "incidental publication" may be protected. A discussion of this can be found in Gatley on Libel and Slander, Sweet & Maxwell, 11 th ed, at 14.66.  
In respect of the first email (and subject to the question of malice, with which I will deal below) the defence of qualified privilege succeeds.  
The second email was, as was pointed out on behalf of Mr Haddon, a "private and personal communication" to Mr Haddon from Mr Steele, sent at 4.57pm on the same day. It was authorised to be sent in the names of Messrs Woodall, Taylor, Chua and Batten. There thus arises the curious situation that the names of those gentlemen appear both as publishers and recipients. That is a consequence of the peculiarities of electronic communication. I am satisfied that, properly analysed, each of those gentlemen was a publisher of the second email, and not merely a recipient.  
In this case, also, there was incidental publication to Fiona Taylor and Aimee Chua. In addition, it was copied to Paul Semple, Edward Francis, Samuel Russell, Steve and Jane Lister, Matthew and Belinda Whitfield, Nathan McQueen and Daniel Sieveking.  
A copy of the document in evidence shows that it was also "blind copied" to:  "Robert & Margaret Forsyth [email address], Russell and Robyn Powell [email address], Jenni Woodhouse [email address]"
On behalf of the plaintiff it was submitted that in respect of all or some of these recipients, no legitimate reciprocity of interest was established. It is, regrettably, necessary to deal with each individually.  
Mr Francis has already been identified as a ministry trainee. He was involved in the Sunday evening "pastoral ministry". Mr Steele included him in the circulation because he thought, if Mr Haddon defied the request to not attend, Mr Francis may be able to assist in persuading him to leave. It was argued that there was no evidence to suggest that Mr Haddon would defy the request and attend the church.  
I am satisfied that it was reasonable for Mr Steele to consider, and prepare for, that eventuality, and that therefore Mr Francis had the necessary interest.  
Mr Russell is in the same position as Mr Francis, as is Mr Lister and Mr Whitfield.  
Mr Sieveking was the Chair of the Parish Council, which had the conduct of the financial and property affairs of each church in the parish (Ex 27). The role of the Parish Council includes:  "conferring with the minister in the initiation, conduct and development of church work and making recommendations on ministry within the parish." 
I am satisfied that Mr Sieveking had the necessary interest.
Nathan McQueen was identified by Mr Steele as "a key lay leader" and music director. I am satisfied that he had the necessary interest.  
Aimee Chua and Fiona Taylor have already been identified as "incidental recipients" in respect of the first email. They are in the same position in respect of the second. Jane Lister is in the same position.  
Russell Powell was an adviser to the Archbishop and Chairman of the CIM Network Ministry. He had a clear interest in being informed of what was happening at St Aidan's. Jenni Woodhouse was, as I have mentioned, an officer in the Archbishop's Professional Standards Unit. She had the necessary interest.  
It was not contested that Bishop Forsyth had the necessary interest. His wife Jane was an incidental recipient.  
I am equally satisfied that Mr Steele and Mr Batten (as the other signatories are not sued it is unnecessary to consider their position in this respect) each had an interest, and indeed a duty, to communicate on the subject matter.  
A further argument advanced on behalf of Mr Haddon against the defence of qualified privilege was that there was no "pressing necessity" to publish the material. That proposition is drawn from the (vigorously) dissenting judgment of McHugh J in Bashford versus Information Australia (Newsletters) Pty Ltd  <case>; [218 CLR 366] For reasons I gave in Megna versus Marshall , I do not accept that a voluntary publication, other than one published under "pressing necessity", is deprived of the defence of qualified privilege.  
Subject to the question of malice, the defence of qualified privilege at common law succeeds in respect of the second email.  qualified privilege - [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s30.html) of the Act [Section 30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s30.html) of the Act provides, relevantly, as follows:  "(1) There is a defence of qualified privilege for the publication of defamatory matter to a person (the recipient ) if the defendant proves that: the recipient has an interest or apparent interest in having information on some subject, and (b) the matter is published to the recipient in the course of giving to the recipient information on that subject, and (c) the conduct of the defendant in publishing that matter is reasonable in the circumstances. (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a recipient has an apparent interest in having information on some subject if, and only if, at the time of the publication in question, the defendant believes on reasonable grounds that the recipient has that interest. (3) In determining for the purposes of subsection (1) whether the conduct of the defendant in publishing matter about a person is reasonable in the circumstances, a court may take into account: (a) the extent to which the matter published is of public interest, and (b) the extent to which the matter published relates to the performance of the public functions or activities of the person, and (c) the seriousness of any defamatory imputation carried by the matter published, and the extent to which the matter published distinguishes between suspicions, allegations and proven facts, and (e) whether it was in the public interest in the circumstances for the matter published to be published expeditiously, and the nature of the business environment in which the defendant operates, and (g) the sources of the information in the matter published and the integrity of those sources, and (h) whether the matter published contained the substance of the person's side of the story and, if not, whether a reasonable attempt was made by the defendant to obtain and publish a response from the person, and (i) any other steps taken to verify the information in the matter published, and (j) any other circumstances that the court considers relevant.
For the avoidance of doubt, a defence of qualified privilege under subsection (1) is defeated if the plaintiff proves that the publication of the defamatory matter was actuated by malice. (5) ..."
In respect of this defence also, a defendant, to succeed, must establish three matters:  * (i) that the recipient has an interest or apparent interest in receiving information on some subject;  * (ii) that the matter of which complaint is made is published to that recipient in the course of giving to him or her information on that subject; and  * (iii) that the conduct of the defendant (publisher) in publishing the matter is reasonable in the circumstances.  
Similar issues arise as have been discussed in relation to the previous defences. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that each of the recipients did have the necessary interest in the subject matter of the emails. I am satisfied that the matter was published to each recipient in the course of giving him information on the subject.  
It remains to be determined whether the conduct of Mr Steele in publishing this email was reasonable in the circumstances. Reasonableness was the crux of the attack made on behalf of Mr Haddon to this defence. Essentially, however, the attack replicated the attack on qualified privilege at common law - it was argued that publication to an unduly wide circle of recipients rendered the publication not reasonable. That argument must fail for the same reason that it failed in relation to qualified privilege at common law.  
Sub-section (3) attempts to cast some light upon the determination of whether the conduct of a defendant is reasonable in the circumstances.  
In concluding that Mr Steele's conduct was reasonable, I also have regard to the steps he took prior to publication and the limited number of individuals to whom he circulated it. I also take into account that, in including wardens as recipients, he was acting on the advice of the Bishop of South Sydney. Moreover, as I have earlier outlined, the wardens were integrally involved in the implementation of any decision to exclude Mr Haddon from the church service.  
Accordingly, I am satisfied that, subject to the question of malice, the defence under [s 30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s30.html) succeeds.  
Malice 
In Megna versus Marshall (at [171], [600]-[602]), I outlined the law, as I perceived it, as to malice. I see no need to repeat what I there said.  
In the Reply filed on behalf of Mr Haddon, it was pleaded that the publication of each email was actuated by an improper motive or improper motives constituting malice on the part of Mr Steele and Mr Batten. The improper motives were identified as:  "(a) Knowledge of falsity or reckless indifference to truth or falsity of the defamatory imputations ... on the part of [Mr Steele and Mr Batten]; (b) A desire on the part of [Mr Steele and Mr Batten] to injure or discredit [Mr
Haddon]; (c) A desire to exclude [Mr Haddon] from St Aidan's because [Mr
Haddon]'s theology differed materially to that of [Mr Steele and Mr Batten]." 
The allegations were extensively particularised.
The submissions advanced in support of the plea of malice were entirely focused on the last of these three identified motives.  
At the commencement of the second day of hearing, senior counsel for Mr Haddon explained his case on malice. He said:  "It is alleged by [Mr Haddon] tha t the primary purpose for the publication was to manufacture a reason for [Mr Haddon] to be expelled from the church based on conduct grounds or to justify [Mr Haddon's] expulsion from the church on conduct grounds when the actual reason for expelling him was theological in that [Mr Steele and Mr Batten] believed that [Mr Haddon] was not suitable to be a member of the church or congregation because he was not a pure Christian and held corrupt theological beliefs." (T 68) 
In answer to a question from me, he said that the entire allegation (concerning conduct other than theological) was "exaggerated", and that the primary purpose for Mr Haddon's exclusion was theological.
Mr Haddon's case on malice is based upon a premise that I find puzzling. It is that a decision to exclude Mr Haddon from the church based on (sexual) conduct grounds is more sustainable, or supportable, or respectable, than one based upon a ground of hostile theological views. Just why that should be so is not apparent from the evidence. I find it impossible to see why Messrs Steele and Batten would fabricate (or exaggerate) a sexual harassment reason for asking Mr Haddon to absent himself while concealing a theological reason for the same request. So far as the evidence went, there was no impediment to Mr Steele and the wardens making the same request of Mr Haddon, for the expressed reason that he was perceived as a dangerous intellectual force in CIM.  
However, that was the premise underlying the plea of malice.  
There is ample evidence that Mr Haddon's theological position differed radically from that of Mr Steele. I am satisfied that Mr Steele held considerable control over the theological direction of the congregation of CIM, and that he wished to keep it that way. A good example of his determination to do so is, in my opinion, to be found in his circulation of the AFES Confession, requiring adherence to his stated doctrinal position by any who would be involved in "ministry" functions. It is probably no coincidence that he only did so after Mr Haddon joined the congregation, and began disseminating his dissenting and, to Mr Steele, unacceptable, theology. In my opinion, Mr Steele did not want Mr Haddon to disrupt the even tenor of the congregation. The evidence suggests that this was a cohesive and united congregation who joined in church and social activities together and accepted (perhaps unquestioningly) the leadership of Mr Steele. There was not a word of evidence that any other member of the congregation questioned the orthodoxy of the doctrines of the Church of England as taught by him.  
I have no doubt that Mr Steele found Mr Haddon a "troublesome" congregant, of whom he would have liked to be rid, if he could not be brought into line. That he found Mr Haddon "troublesome" is best illustrated by the following. On 15 September 2007 Mr Steele was referred, by Greg Clarke, to an article in a US journal entitled "Church Antagonists: Can't live with them, Can live without them" (Ex FFF). The article is lengthy, and does not bear reproducing.  
It is worth, however, quoting from its conclusion:  "The time may come when all efforts to control the activity of an antagonist are to no avail. The antagonist's attack continues, and the church is being split by his efforts. In this situation, there are two more options: the pastor may resign or the antagonist may be removed.
 ...

Sometimes an antagonist's attack reaches the point where a decision has to be made between excluding that person from the church or having very little church left. The antagonist's behavior has to be such that the church bylaws mandate removal. The extreme measure of removing the antagonist is a last resort, a step that must be approached with fear and trembling - and much prayer. This is a hard step to take, but it is sometimes necessary to ensure the stability of the congregation."
The following day Mr Steele passed this on to Andrew Barry, with the comment:  "I think Greg may have given us the clue to handling Bruce ..." (Ex FFF) 
He also passed it on to CS, who, it seems, disseminated it more widely.
Mr Batten was also unhappy about Mr Haddon's theology and the effect it was having on CIM. On 11 September 2007, he sent an email to Mr Steele, identifying as the subject "bh" (Ex HHH). It is obvious from the content of this email that Mr Batten and Mr Steele had been having discussions about Mr Haddon. In this email Mr Batten said:  "but i also think scripture would also advise you to actively fight lies and untruth while holding a cool head ... the haddon issue is spreading like yeast through the dough of our community, judging by the number of people he is meeting with and talking about the ban"
Senior counsel for Mr Haddon also pointed to exchanges post-dating 15 February that placed more emphasis on the theological differences than the conduct issue. It is obvious from these documents that the negotiations did not cease on the sending of the email to Mr Haddon on that date.  
On 19 February Mr Steele sent Mr Haddon an email inviting him to a meeting with himself and the church wardens to discuss:  "... your breach of our conduct-agreement in regards to relationship with women and negative theological impact in our church family." (Ex T)
There were then active communications between Mr Steele, Mr Batten and Mr Haddon. On 7 March Mr Batten sent Mr Steele an email which purported to represent the views of the wardens. It read:  "We the church wardens of acc and citm hereby inform bruce haddon that he is no longer welcome to be part of this community nor to consider himself a member of the community.

This is effective as of monday 10 march 2008.

This decision is a result of considered delibeerations (sic) by the wardens who are of one mind, united in this decision.

At the centre of the concern: bruce haddon's theological perspective which is deeply entrenched and varies greatly from that of this community, and which has resulted in behavior we consider unacceptable and believe is out of place in any christian community.
 ...

This follows a concerted effort to ask bruce to embrace this communities understanding of scripture and change his behavior.

These attempts were unsuccessful on both counts.
 ..." (Ex LLL) 
Mr Batten had no recollection of how this document came into existence. A reasonable inference is that it is a draft of a communication Mr Batten proposed to be sent to Mr Haddon, by the wardens. It represented, very likely, one of a number of possible scenarios being contemplated. I think it very likely that it does encapsulate Mr Batten's views about Mr Haddon.
On 10 March the wardens and Mr Steele sent a further email to Mr Haddon, cancelling the meeting that had been mooted (Ex T), and advising him that they thought it best if he did not continue as a member of CIM (part Ex MMM).  
On 18 March Mr Batten sent an email to the wardens and Mr Steele saying:  "Our actions so far are adequate. We only stand to lose ground from here. We do not need to explain anything further or get caught up in a debate about any complaints. The church has decided to ask him to leave. We have not explained why and do not have to. Theology is the key reason, conduct is another ." (Ex MMM, bold added)
Senior counsel for Mr Haddon pointed to other evidence suggesting that theology was the, or the predominant, motivation for the meeting of 10 February. For example in Mr Batten's note of the meeting of 10 February, made later that night, Mr Batten wrote:  "DS said there are two reasons for the meeting - Bruce Haddon's theology and conduct.

DS recapped the ongoing tensions caused by BH's promotion of his radically different theology, his failure to accept the bible as the infallible word of
God and his sustained efforts to influence others in church, undermining the teaching of the leadership.
 ...

DS said this has been dealt with in the past and was not the focus of today ...

DS raised the matter of BH conduct.

There have been repeated complaints about the way BH treat women, making inappropriate comments about their appearance, their bodies, their tans and skin colour ..." (Ex 32) 
Mr Haddon accepts this record as substantially accurate.
Mr Steele also made a file note of the meeting, either the following day, or during that week (Ex 31). He was extensively cross-examined about discrepancies between this and Mr Batten's note, and also about discrepancies between the content of the file note and the first draft of the email to Mr Haddon. (For example, the first draft of the email (Ex 33) contained no reference to leading conversations towards sexual matters, or to kissing or touching women, all of which appear in the file note. The purpose of the cross-examination was to question the authenticity, and accuracy of the file note, and to strengthen the suggestion that the sexual harassment allegations were a pretext, or decoy, to "manufacture" an apparent (but not real) basis for the exclusion of Mr Haddon from the church.)  
The attempt failed. I was satisfied with the explanation given by Mr Steele. I am also satisfied that, as at 10 February, Mr Steele's purpose was, as stated in the email, to find a way of dealing with the problems of Mr Haddon's conduct.  
That does not mean that the theological issues were of no importance; they were. But they were separate from, parallel to, and independent of, the conduct issues. They were not the motivation for the email.  
Other issues going to malice were identified in the written submissions made on behalf of Mr Haddon. For example, reliance was placed upon Mr Steele's email of 12 February 2008, to a number of recipients, seeking information about Mr Haddon's conduct (Ex R), and the email to the pastor of St Thomas', for the same purpose. It was perfectly proper for Mr Steele to inform himself fully before taking the rather serious step he was contemplating.  
Senior counsel also relied on Ex G, which he described as "a benign email" from Mr Batten, sent early in the morning, following the meeting of 10 February. In my opinion "benign" is not a proper characterisation of that email, which has to be seen in the light of those that succeeded it. True it is, in Ex G, sent just before 10am on 11 February, Mr Batten asked, innocuously, if Mr Haddon could give him some feedback, with his thoughts and impressions of the previous day's meeting. He also asked if the issue of conduct that had been raised was clear, and how Mr Haddon was feeling about it on that day.  
Mr Haddon responded with a lengthy email (Ex H), to which Mr Batten replied:  "i fear that you have missed the message of the meeting last night ...
 do you have a perspective as to why we are receiving so many complaints about the way you speak to women in particular." (Ex J)
As I have said more than once, I am quite satisfied that Mr Haddon's theological perspective was a major issue in the CIM community, and particularly so to Mr Steele and Mr Batten.  
I am equally satisfied, however, that his conduct towards women was similarly a major issue for them. This emerged early in Mr Haddon's membership of CIM, and continued throughout, raising its head in a staff meeting in June 2005, and at the Wollongong meeting in 2008, in a way that disturbed Mr Steele.  
I do not accept that Mr Steele and Mr Batten misused the occasion for which privilege is permitted. It follows that the plea of malice fails.  
The inevitable consequence is that the plaintiff's claim fails and there must be a verdict for the defendants.  
Damages 
I have considered whether, notwithstanding these conclusions, I should deal with the question of damages. I will do so briefly.  
For the purpose of the assessment of any damages to which Mr Haddon might be entitled, it is important to bear in mind that this is not an inquiry into the administration of St Aidan's, nor of the rights or wrongs of the decision to exclude Mr Haddon, not of the process by which that decision was reached. It is an inquiry confined to the impact of the publication of the two emails.  
There was considerable evidence, from Mr Haddon, and from his brother and sister, of the hurt and distress that he suffered as a result of the publication. Evidence of damage to reputation is virtually non-existent. The publication was to the most limited circle, all, or almost all, individuals who already knew Mr Haddon and, I infer, knew of the issues circulating in CIM. I conclude that no additional damage was done to his reputation by the publication of the emails to that limited circle. It is virtually impossible to separate the hurt and distress that Mr Haddon experienced as a result of receiving the email, and what it conveyed to him, from his hurt and distress at knowing that it had been published to others.  
I have not overlooked that the first publication, by Mr Steele to the wardens, precipitated them to participate in the further circulation of the email. However, there is no evidence from which I could draw the conclusion that the email influenced their opinion of Mr Haddon in a way that could be said to have damaged his reputation.  
If I were to make an award of damages, it would be in the amount of no more than $5000, exclusively related to the injury to Mr Haddon's feelings resulting from the publication of the emails.  
The order I make is that there will be a verdict for the defendants. The plaintiff must pay the defendants' costs.  * * * 
