

Big River Timbers Pty Ltd versus Stewart and Anor Matter No 2243/98 [1998]
NSWSC 237 (22 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 `BIG RIVER TIMBERS PTY LTD versus IAN MALCOLM STEWART & ANOR` `2243/98` `22 May 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings under [s 74K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74k.html) of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) to extend a caveat. 
The plaintiff is a supplier of timber and timber products. The plaintiff was approached by Multiform Pty Ltd to provide credit to that company. The plaintiff's standard form of credit application included a personal guarantee by those in charge of the company. This was duly given. A photocopy of the application appears in the appendix to the judgment.

It can be seen from the appendix that the gentlemen, whose first names are respectively Douglas and Ian, guaranteed jointly and severally Multiform's account and that cl 3 of the document created a charge. The charge is in what has become a common form by suppliers of goods. I considered a similar sort of clause in Bridge Wholesale Acceptance Corporation (Australia) Limited v
Burnard (unreported) in which I expressed considerable doubt as to the validity of such a document, but my decision was overruled by the Court of
Appeal in the same case [(1992) 27 NSWLR 415.] Although
I continue to have considerable doubts I will keep them to myself in view of the Court of Appeal's decision.

One thing, however, I would say before leaving the matter is that both sets of submissions in this case have remarked on what the parties must have intended by the words they used in this document. I was little impressed by this approach because I could not really see how a credit clerk, on one side, and two builders who were just after credit, on the other side, would have understood any one of the concatenation of words which was used in this particular document.

Clause 3 in the appendix contains both "me/us" and "I/we" expressions. The generic document can be amended to delete either the singular or plural reference depending on the circumstances of the guarantor. In this case none of the text was amended or struck through in the credit application and accordingly it remained as "me/us" and "I/we" throughout. It would seem relatively clear that despite the inelegance of these expressions one must look at the plural alternative, remembering that both under the words appearing before cl 1 and also by cl 6 the guarantee is enforceable against
Douglas and Ian jointly and severally. However, simplifying cl 3 it reads as follows: "And to further secure all monies hereby guaranteed to be paid by us to you, all the right, title, estate and interest which we now have or may hereafter during the currency of this Guarantee acquire in any freehold or leasehold property shall by the force of the execution of this Guarantee stand charged by us (as beneficial owners of the said property) with payment of all monies hereby guaranteed." 
What is meant by "us or "we"? The answer to that clearly must be Douglas and
Ian. So then Douglas and Ian are charging, assuming the clause has validity, freehold land which they may have during the currency of the guarantee.

There was no land the subject of these proceedings which was owned by both
Douglas and Ian. There was, however, land owned by Ian and his wife, Kathleen.
The plaintiff says that Ian's aliquot share as joint tenant in this land was an estate or interest in land which "we" had during the currency of the guarantee.

The problem with that is that it involves reading the words "or either of us" after the word "we" in the first line of cl 3. I do not think that this is a valid method of approach. The reasons for this are that the profferor of the guarantee has on two separate occasions made it clear that the agreement is joint and several, that is in the opening words and cl 6. It is obviously a matter that has come to the profferor's attention and the profferor has apparently dealt with it. He or she has made the guarantee joint or several so far as the covenants are concerned, but has said absolutely nothing about the charge over property which one of the guarantors might severally hold with a third person.

The contra proferentem rule of construction applies to guarantees. In case of doubt, the guarantee is construed against the creditor: Eastern Counties
Building Society versus Russell [[1947] 1 All ER 500], 503 affirmed [[1947] 2 All ER 734], 736 .

When one adds this rule to the equation, it seems to me that the proper construction is that land in which one of the guarantors held a joint interest with a third person is not covered by the charge.

Mr Lever for the plaintiff, in his vigorous written submissions, put the alternative situation, that is, that so long as "we" has an interest in land then the charge applied and that to take the approach mentioned above does not give semantic significance to the words "jointly and severally" where twice occurring in the document. Further, he put that to take the view that the property in which one of the guarantors had only an aliquot share was not a commonsense way of reading the particular provision.

Moreover, he says that to take the approach that I have indicated above would really be to read other words into the guarantee. Again he says that if there was one guarantor then that guarantor would be charging his interest in the property in which he might have an aliquot share. Why, he asks rhetorically, should things be any different if there are two guarantors? 
I appreciate these matters and they have weight, but the document is a very loosely drawn document. No-one has bothered to make matters clear when there is more than one guarantor. No-one has taken the trouble to cross out either the "I" or "we" and if a company proffers a loosely drafted guarantee then it must take the risk that some property will fall out through a loophole.

Accordingly, in my view the charge does not cover the guarantor's aliquot share in property which he owns with a third party.

That decision is enough to show that the caveat should not be extended.

However, there are other ways of approaching the case and should the matter go further I should briefly deal with them. To do this it is necessary to set out the facts which I have assumed when deciding the next issues. These are as follows:
On 11 April 1994 Douglas and Ian applied for credit from the plaintiff in the form set out in the appendix.
The application was granted on 15 April, 1994.
The plaintiff supplied goods to Multiform in reliance on the application and almost $260,000 is claimed to be owing by Multiform (now under administration) and is alleged to be the subject of guarantee.
The plaintiff has sued Douglas and Ian in the District Court. Those proceedings have been defended on the basis that the guarantee was limited to $5,000 per month and an application for summary judgment has not yet been heard.
On 18 August 1996 by consent the Family Court of Australia at Newcastle ordered that Ian transfer his interest in the subject property (which would appear to be his and his wife's matrimonial home at 193 Ungala Road,
Blacksmiths) to his wife Kathleen.
Ian and Kathleen are still married. The application before the Family
Court was purely one for property settlement.
Ian duly signed and delivered to Kathleen a transfer to carry out the
Family Court order.
The transfer has not been registered.
Kathleen agreed to sell the subject property.
The subject property has now been sold by consent and the proceeds are currently held in a trust account pending decision in this matter.
On 30 January 1998 the plaintiff lodged the present caveat.
The plaintiff only became aware of the order of the Family Court and the transfer about 27 February 1998.

Although this is really an interlocutory application the parties, with my encouragement, agreed that certain issues of construction or law could be determined on the basis of the above assumed facts. The matter was then adjourned from 6 May 1998 until today with written submissions in the meantime.

I am indebted to both Mr Lever for the plaintiff and Mr Wales for Kathleen for further written submissions which have helped me reach a conclusion on both of the matters I have just considered and the other matter which I now need to consider.

Mr Lever's written submissions say, amongst other things, that the Family
Court proceedings in Newcastle were just a sham or, alternatively, were in fraud of creditors.

So far as the first of those allegations is concerned, a sufficient answer is that the application to revoke the order must be made under <case> of the
Family Law Act to the Family Court, unless the matter is cross-vested to this
Court. So far as the second submission is concerned, there is just no evidence at the moment to support this allegation, though one can see why the suspicion is there.

However, one might be able to get the same result by operation of the rule that where equities are equal the first in time prevails, were it not for a peculiar quirk in the law.

The present situation is that so far as the plaintiff is concerned, on the assumptions I have made, it had an equitable charge as from 1994. I am not actually told when the Blacksmiths property was purchased, but it was obviously purchased before the Family Court made its order, so the matter is really academic. That equitable interest subsisted before Kathleen obtained an equitable interest under either the Family Court order or the transfer.

Kathleen is not a bona fide purchaser for value. If she were, that would have defeated the plaintiff's equity, but as it seems she gave no consideration, and it was a consent order, she is not a purchaser. It may be that this assumption can be challenged by Kathleen saying that she gave consideration in the sense of relinquishing claims she validly had, but there is no material on that at the present day.

Accordingly, as she paid no purchase moneys [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s43a.html) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) does not advance her equitable estate to a quasi legal estate, and if she has notice before obtaining the legal estate then, subject, of course, to the doctrine of tabula in naufragio, her interest would rank behind a prior equity.

However, subject to the exception which was worked out by the Stuart lawyers in Lord Abergavenny's case <case>; [(1607) 6 Co Rep 78] (b); <case>; [77
ER 373], Kathleen already had before the transaction a full fee simple. Before the reforms of Ian and Kathleen both would have sworn fealty to their feudal lord and so would not have needed any further assurance by way of livery. As Butt says in his Land Law 3rd ed (LBC 1996) at p 218, each joint tenant is said to be seised per my et per tout (for nothing and for the whole) meaning that each has a right shared with the other for the whole property, but no individual right to any share in it. Thus a joint tenant who wishes to convey his or her "interest" to another of the joint tenants has, strictly speaking, nothing to convey as the other is already seised of the whole.

However, in the instant case Ian has used a form of [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) transfer and purported to convey his aliquot share to Kathleen. This is not the traditional way of transfer because as Kathleen already had a full fee simple all that was necessary was for there to be a release of the right of survivorship. I analysed this concept in Penny Nominees Pty Ltd versus Fountain (No 3) (1991) 5 BPR 11284. Release was the proper way of conveying; see
Caraher versus Lloyd <case>; [(1905) 2 CLR 480] at 501. If, however, a conveyancer used a grant or a conveyance instead of a release, the grant was interpreted as being a release:
Eustace versus Scawen (1624) Croke Jac 696; [79 ER 604] and Chester versus Willan William Saunders 96; <case>; <case>; [(1949) 78 CLR 313] at 324).

There is some confusion in Blackstone as to whether the word "my" comes from the French "mi" or "mie". Although it has taken quite a while to be appreciated through the legal system, it was actually made clear by the editor of Manning and Granger's reports in 1845 in Daniel versus Camplin <case>; [(1845) 7 Man & G 167], ; <case>; [135 ER 73], 75 where the learned editor said that some modern writers, by a singular infelicity of translation, have rendered "my" as "half" coming from "mi" the word from which we derive "moiety", rather than "ne ... mie" the old negative in French now replaced by "ne ... pas". He then cites the French poem: "Biaux chires (beaux sires) loups n'ecoutez mie 
Femme qui tance son enfant qui crie." 
It is clear, then, that the expression "per my et per tout" means "for nothing and yet for everything", so that when one rids oneself of an interest as joint tenant to the other joint tenant there is not a conveyance (merely an abandonment of the right of survivorship). There being no conveyance there was no equitable interest in Kathleen which competed with the equitable interest of the plaintiff.

Accordingly, it would not seem that even if the plaintiff did succeed on the question of construction, it would have succeeded on any other question on the evidence available at this stage.

Had it not been for the fact that the property has now been sold I would have had to make a decision under [s
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74k.html) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) as to whether the caveat should be maintained because the plaintiff's claim might have validity and would have been defeated had Kathleen obtained registration of Ian's transfer. However, as things have happened the decision on this awkward discretionary question has been removed from me.

Mr Lever also relied on the doctrine of the polluted fee simple; see Penny
Nominees (supra). Mr Wales said that that decision could no longer stand in view of utterances of the members of the Court of Appeal in Guthrie v
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd [(1991) 23 NSWLR 672] at 676-7 per Priestley JA and 681 per Meagher JA. Certainly Meagher JA does seem to take that view. On the other hand, Priestley JA merely seems to say that the reasoning in Lord Abergavenny was a little artificial, but eminently sensible, and that the courts of the 20th century should apply the reasoning as in the 17th century by saying that although co-owners hold per my et per tout the court will in certain circumstances recognise reality.

In view of the other decision I have made, I think the question as to whether the doctrine of polluted fee simple is applicable in New South Wales can await another day.

Accordingly, I decline to extend the caveat further than today and order the plaintiff to pay the defendant Kathleen Anne Stewart's costs of the summons.
 * * * 
