

Regina versus T J Foster [1996] NSWSC 522 (30 October 1996) 
REGINA versus TIMOTHY JAMES FOSTER /96 
Wednesday 30 October 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: This is an application for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Gibson of Queen's Counsel for an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act. 
The applicant was found guilty by a jury on a charge of breaking and entering a dwelling house and in the dwelling house maliciously wounding an occupant. The sentence imposed was in total one of four years, consisting of a minimum term of three years and an additional term of one year.

Having regard to the issues raised on the appeal, it is not necessary to go into the facts in great detail. Suffice it to say that in the early hours of 1
November 1992 the applicant and a co-accused broke into a dwelling house disturbing a household which comprised a husband and wife and their children.
One of the occupants, Mrs Marshall, fled from the house but was pursued by the applicant and she ran back into the house where, exhorted so to do by the co- accused, the applicant inflicted physical injury on this unfortunate victim using a mattock handle.

I do not refer more closely to the facts because of the limited nature of the prisoner's application.

I observe that the minimum term which the learned judge set will expire on 14
December this year. The applicant has asked this Court to entertain his application notwithstanding the delay in making it. The application for an extension of time for appealing was not filed until 18 March 1996. The explanation for this delay is set out by the applicant in an affidavit on 9
October 1996. Earlier the applicant had launched an appeal against his conviction and that appeal was launched promptly enough but abandoned when the applicant was refused Legal Aid.

I am satisfied, having considered the relevant affidavit of the applicant, that the Court should entertain his application for leave to appeal and, indeed, the matter has proceeded with the Crown offering no opposition to that course being adopted notwithstanding the delay for which the applicant has given an adequate explanation.

This applicant has a formidable criminal record and the problem with which this application is concerned arises by reason of the entry most recently on that record at the time that his Honour Judge Gibson passed the subject sentence. On 11 June 1993 the applicant was sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment of twelve months dating from 18 December 1992. Before passing the subject sentence, his Honour was informed by the Crown that the applicant was arrested for the subject offence on 1 November 1992 and that he remained in custody continually from that time until the sentence commencing on 18
December 1992 was imposed. The Crown erroneously informed his Honour that the applicant had served a period of seventeen days custody exclusively for the subject offence before he was sentenced on 18 December. This is clearly incorrect and the period actually served was one of forty-seven days.

The Crown misled his Honour and unfortunately that mistake in calculation found its way into the sentence which was imposed by the learned judge. He said (at p 4 of his sentencing remarks): "At the present time he is serving a sentence which was imposed on 11 June and backdated to 17 December 1992, in fact that sentence has now expired. The minimum term of that sentence has expired and counsel has suggested that this sentence should be backdated to the date in November in which he first went into custody. I do not agree. He should be given the credit for the time that he spent in custody specifically in relation to this offence only, which was some seventeen days, as I understand it, but the other period of time, in my view, in which he was serving a sentence is not the time with which this sentence should run." 
Having so misdirected himself as to the length of the period to be credited, his Honour did not backdate the sentence when fixing the minimum term of three years and indeed it is not clear that he did give the applicant credit for the seventeen days which were served.

It is timely to refer to the decision of this court in Regina versus Deeble (unreported, 19 December 1991.) In that case the desirability of a sentencing judge backdating a sentence to take into account pre-sentence custody was emphasised. Mr Justice Badgery-Parker, with whose judgment the other members of the court agreed, said: "There may be occasions when it is not desirable to backdate the sentence, for example if the effect of doing so will be to create a total sentence in excess of three years depriving the prisoner of the automatic release to parole which on a shorter term would be available to him. If for some such reason a sentencing judge chooses not to backdate a sentence then it is desirable that he should expressly state that he is not doing so and should clearly state his reasons for not doing so." (Emphasis added) 
In my opinion it is necessary for this Court to intervene to ensure that the applicant is credited with the pre-sentence period that the applicant spent in custody before he was sentenced to the twelve months minimum term. In the events which have occurred I consider that the applicant's minimum term should be reduced by forty-seven days, reducing the minimum term to one of two years three hundred and eighteen days. On my calculations, such a minimum term, commencing as it was expressed to commence on 15 December 1993, would have expired on 28 October 1996.

Counsel for the applicant raised a second ground of appeal that the learned judge should have found special circumstances having regard to the fact that the sentence he was fixing followed on the expiration of the minimum term of twelve months previously referred to. The difficulty which that submission faces at the outset is that the minimum term has now expired and what this
Court would be asked to do is to restructure the sentence passed to extend the additional term and to reduce the minimum term which has already expired. That would be an exercise in futility and I do not consider it is one that the
Court should entertain, even if the Court was satisfied there was merit in the submission that special circumstances were established.

In these circumstances it seems to me that leave to appeal should be granted and that the appeal should be allowed for the limited purpose I have indicated. The formal orders which I propose are these:
Leave to appeal be granted; the appeal be allowed; the sentence imposed be quashed; in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced to a minimum term of two years three hundred and eighteen days commencing 15 December 1993 and expiring 28
October 1996. I would fix an additional term of twelve months to commence on October 1996. It would follow that the applicant became eligible for release on parole on 29 October 1996.

HIDDEN J: I agree.

STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
