

Regina versus Javier Lara-Gomez [1996] NSWSC 77 (24 April 1996) 
REGINA versus Javier LARA-GOMEZ /93 April 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Gleeson CJ, Allen J, James J 
CATCHWORDS: SENTENCING - Sentence of 18 years with minimum term of 13 years upheld for two offences of having possession of cocaine reasonably suspected of having been imported. Total quantity was approximately 100 kg realising 77 kg of pure cocaine having a potential street value in excess of $44,000,000. Offender was a 39 year old man who travelled to Australia to set up facilities to receive and warehouse the cocaine. His role was to act as warehouseman and to make supplies of the cocaine as directed.

EX TEMPORE: Ex Tempore.

ALLOWED/ 
DISMISSED: Dismissed.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Allen J to give the first judgment. 
ALLEN J: The applicant pleaded guilty before Studdert J to two charges of offences under Section 233B(1) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/), those offences being having in his possession cocaine reasonably suspected of having been imported into Australia contrary to the provisions of that Act and being not less than the commercial quantity.

The first charge arose from the seizure on 27 August 1992 in a flat rented by the applicant in Bourke Street Surry Hills of approximately 75 kgs of impure cocaine found in three carry bags in a wardrobe and also three individual blocks of impure cocaine located under a divan.

The second charge related to the seizure, four days later, of a further 23 kgs of impure cocaine found in the garage of a different flat in Bourke Street used by his alleged co-offender, one Coletti, by arrangement with the tenant and for which the applicant had a key. The total weight of the cocaine seized was 98.453 kgs. This realised 77.275 kgs of pure cocaine. It was at the time the largest ever seizure of cocaine or heroin made in Australia. Its potential street value was estimated conservatively as being in excess of $44,000,000.

On 23 September 1993 Studdert J sentenced the applicant on each charge to imprisonment for 18 years, the sentences to be served concurrently and commencing on 27 August 1992. That was the date of the applicant's arrest. His
Honour specified a non-parole period of 13 years and six months. The applicant seeks leave to appeal against the severity of those sentences.

The Crown case against the applicant was of overwhelming strength in respect of the cocaine found in his flat. The telephone conversations of the applicant when he was in his flat were recorded under warrant since early in July 1992 and they were damning. Although various euphemisms were used for the cocaine, the applicant clearly was party to an arrangement to store cocaine and distribute it as directed. There was even conversation recorded between him and Coletti in which there was reference to the quantity being "fucking huge" and the number 100 was spoken of. This clearly was a reference to the total quantity originally under the control of the applicant, being approximately kgs. Other references in the telephone conversations reinforced that inference. Further, the applicant and Coletti had been placed under surveillance and they were seen physically to remove the bags, later found to contain most of the cocaine, between the garage and the flat. The Crown case in respect of the cocaine found in the garage was circumstantial and, although it was not overwhelming, it was a very strong Crown case.

His conviction on the first charge, had he chosen to plead not guilty, virtually was inevitable. Further, he would have been fortunate indeed to have escaped conviction on the second charge and an acquittal in respect of that charge would have been of little practical utility if he was convicted on the first charge which related to the bulk of the cocaine seized. The applicant did not at any time co-operate with the police; he declined to be interviewed; he furnished no information.

On 15 July 1993 his solicitor wrote to the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions advising that his client had instructed him that "he has great concern for the welfare and safety of his wife, parents, child, brothers and sisters, who are resident in Colombia and, of course, himself". The letter continued, "my client is unable to provide any information or assistance at this time because the AFP cannot guarantee the safety of his family and, in particular, that of his defacto wife and young child".

In the sentencing proceedings a signed statement by the applicant was received in evidence. The applicant himself declined to give oral evidence. The Crown indicated that its attitude to the signed statement of the applicant was that, although it did not oppose it being placed before his Honour, it did not concede the accuracy of anything said in it.

In that statement the applicant said, amongst other things: "Obviously I am very sorry to have been involved in this. I hope the Court will accept my regret. I realise I will be punished for what has happened but
I want the Court to understand that it is very difficult to say not to people in Colombia. Now I cannot say anything to help myself as I have great fear for myself and my family. I have said nothing to the police because there can be no guarantees for the safety of my wife and my child, as well as my parents and my brothers and sisters and their families. ... I cannot say more than I have about Jimmy or the people I spoke to on the phone except to say I was to obey instructions and to eventually pass on all the cocaine. I was not to receive any money for the cocaine just for my involvement." 
The reference to Jimmy was a reference by that name to the person in Australia from whom he stated he received his instructions from time to time. He gave no information which would have enabled that person to be identified.

In his careful Remarks on Sentence Studdert J set out the antecedents and factors which could be considered favourable to the applicant. He said: "The prisoner was born in Colombia on 14 January 1954 and he migrated to
Australia in June 1974. He was granted Australian citizenship on 30 January
Several months later he went back to Colombia with his then de facto wife and his child but there was a separation in July 1986 and the de facto wife and child came back to Australia. The prisoner did not return here until May 1992, some four months prior to his arrest. In the meantime he married in Colombia and there is apparently a child of that marriage born in 1992. His present wife and child are apparently in Colombia.

The prisoner has no previous criminal record.

Surveillance in the period of two months prior to his arrest did not disclose that the prisoner had any form of lawful employment in Australia." 
In that passage his Honour refers to the applicant's present marriage. That is a de facto relationship, not a lawful marriage.

In his statement the applicant described how he came to be involved in this cocaine transaction. He said: "In January 1992 I met a person I knew from Australia by the name of Guillermo
Betancourt who used to live in Australia ... He approached me about taking care of some cocaine in Australia. He told me that I would have to take delivery of it and store it until someone got in contact with me. I have been told by my family in Colombia that in December 1992 he was shot dead in
Medelin for reasons I suspect arising from my arrest. I was promised that once the cocaine had been taken from me I would get about $US18,000. It was never clearly established whether I would be paid in Colombia or in Australia although I presumed I would be paid in Australia. I decided to come to
Australia and to do this and I borrowed $4,000 from Mr Betancourt for my airfare and travelling expenses. I also bought some emeralds with me which I brought into Australia and sold for approximately $9,000. I arrived in
Australia on 2 May 1992 ..." 
His statement then continued to relate how he acquired the flat and performed various other matters incidental to warehousing the cocaine when it arrived.

It is clear from his statement that he came to Australia for the express purpose of establishing the facilities necessary to warehouse the cocaine when it arrived. It is also clear from his statement that he was well aware that his role was going to be not merely to warehouse the cocaine but also to distribute it by fulfilling orders from time to time passed on to him. It is clear that he knew his role was to be not merely that of the warehousing of this enormous quantity of cocaine but also, in a real sense, to be a supplier of it.

His Honour dealt, in his remarks on sentence, with the unverified statement which had been furnished by the appellant. He pointed out that the Crown did not accept the content of the statement to be fact and he stated: "In those circumstances I find it difficult to attach any weight to the statement tendered where it contains assertions not established by other evidence." 
There is doubtless the implied exception, in what his Honour said, that he would be entitled to have regard to it and did so in relation to matters of admission contained in it as distinct from matters of assertion by the applicant in his own interests.

His Honour continued: "I can accept that the prisoner returned to Australia in 1992 intending to become involved in the handling of cocaine imported into this country but I cannot accept that he was only to receive $18,000. The evidence does not establish to my satisfaction what the prisoner was to receive, but I do conclude that he acted for financial reward and that this was his sole motivation in committing these offences." 
His Honour further stated: "The prisoner has not told the court of his fears" - that is reference to his fears of reprisal if he made information known to police - "and I am unable to make a finding one way or the other as to whether the prisoner's lack of co-operation stems from fear of reprisals as asserted".

It is clear that his Honour was fully entitled to attach to this unverified written statement by the applicant the little weight which he did attach to it (Moratti and Whyte Court of Criminal Appeal, 31 July 1995).

The only additional materials of any substance in the case for the applicant in the sentencing proceedings were a letter furnished by the Catholic chaplain at Parramatta and a psychological report furnished by a clinical psychologist,
Mr Taylor.

In his letter the chaplain analysed the documentary material with which he had been supplied, the statement of facts, information as to antecedents, the statement made by the applicant himself, and Mr Taylor's report. He also had the information of the plea of guilty. On that material he expressed the "sincere hope that the Court will accept this evidence of remorse from Javier
Lara-Gomez". It was, with respect, for the sentencing judge, to analyse the documentary material. The chaplain did, however, indicate that the applicant had regularly been attending services at the gaol and had spoken at length with the chaplain and the chaplain stated: "As his spiritual adviser I am aware of his remorse from our personal conversations." That could mean, as I understand it, no more than that penitence had been expressed by the applicant for the criminal conduct of which he has been found guilty and that the chaplain believed that these expressions of remorse were genuine. That was material which his Honour was entitled to take into account but, ultimately, the person whose opinion mattered as to whether contrition has been shown was that of the sentencing judge and that role could not be taken over by anybody else.

There was also the psychological report, to which I have referred by Mr
Taylor, a clinical psychologist. In the body of his lengthy report Mr Taylor said: "He is very remorseful now with regard to his part in the offences and feels very confused." Again, I make the observations that that is of value only as indicating that the applicant expressed also to Mr Taylor regret for what he had done and claimed to be remorseful for it. It remained a matter for the sentencing judge, not for either of these gentlemen, albeit that his
Honour was fully entitled to take into account what they said.

What his Honour said about contrition is this: "In the statement the prisoner expresses contrition but I cannot regard that assertion as evidence upon which I can act and this is not a case in which the prisoner has rendered assistance to the authorities." 
He then referred to the letter from the chaplain and the report of Mr Taylor and said: "However, I am not persuaded by those expressions of regret conveyed to others in the absence of a concession by the Crown and in the absence of any sworn evidence before me by the prisoner." 
He continued later in his remarks on sentence: "The prisoner's punishment is not to be increased because he has failed to satisfy the Court that he is contrite about the commission of these offences nor is his punishment to be increased because he has not assisted the prosecution by providing information that might lead to the arrest of others.
I would only observe that the case is not one in which contrition and/or assistance to the authorities is to be brought into account in the prisoner's favour." 
His Honour did find that the prisoner had pleaded guilty at the first opportunity but he pointed to the strength of the Crown case and he said: "Notwithstanding the strength of the Crown case the prisoner is still entitled to have the Court take into account in his favour his early pleas and it must be borne in mind that by entering them the prisoner has saved much court time and public expense. This factor warrants leniency: see Winchester [(1992) 58
A Crim R 345] at 350. As I have already indicated I feel unable in this case to find that the pleas reflect contrition by the prisoner for what he has done." 
His Honour found in the applicant's favour that the offences were committed as part of a single enterprise. As to his role, his Honour described it in these words: "The evidence does not establish that the prisoner acted as a principal in the importation of the cocaine but objectively the evidence establishes that he was in possession of the drug and that he was in a position to play an important role in storing the drug and in its distribution, at least in a warehouse way." 
That finding is fully in accordance with the acknowledgment to that affect made by the applicant in his unverified statement.

Before passing sentence his Honour specifically indicated that he took into account the applicant's prior good character.

A number of grounds have been urged in support of the application for leave to appeal. One relates to his Honour's approach to the evidence of contrition. It is put that the pleas of guilty themselves establish at least this much - a desire to prevent further harm to the community. I do not accept that. This applicant was caught in circumstances where it was patently obvious he was gone and his conduct in pleading guilty at the earliest opportunity is fully referrable to a desire to minimise further harm to himself. It is not a necessary inference that it reflected a desire to minimise further harm to the community: and his Honour did not so find. His Honour did give credit for the pragmatic utility of the plea of guilty in saving public time and money. He expressly said so.

All that is left then, in respect of contrition, is that the applicant in an unsworn statement said he was sorry; that he said sorry to the chaplain; that he said sorry to his psychologist and, at least, the chaplain believed him. In as far as the psychologist is concerned, I am prepared to accept that it may be inferred that the psychologist accepted it, there being no contrary statement by him. But the onus of establishing contrition lay upon the applicant. It did not lie upon the Crown to negate contrition. All that his
Honour said was that he was not satisfied that that onus had been satisfied.
He did not say he ignored the chaplain's report or that he ignored the psychologist's report. He said that there was not enough to persuade him that contrition had been established. I see no merit in the argument for the appellant.

The next argument to which I turn is that the sentence which his Honour imposed had to be imposed in accordance with the process required by the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) and that it is apparent, having regard to his Honour's observations as to the application of Section 16G of that Act, that his Honour must have started with an extremely high sentence before the various discounts were applied as required by that sentencing process. I accept the argument that his starting point, in the light of his Honour's detailed reasoning, must have been a sentence of 27 years, a sentence not reflecting that, as is the position in New South Wales, there will be no remission. It is urged that a sentence so high as the starting point must be excessive - particularly as the applicant would be 65 years of age, on that basis, before the sentence expired (albeit, on the sentence actually imposed, he would be 56 when the sentence expired and only 52 when he would be eligible to release on parole).

I do not accept that that starting point is excessive. It is salutary to look at what the appropriate starting point would be in the absence of the various mitigating matters relied upon by Mr Byrne in his able argument. The matters relied upon are contrition, at least in relation to the pleas of guilty, that he had a prior good record with no criminal offences of any sort and that his role in the criminal conduct involved in this cocaine importation was not that of a principal but something less.

Bearing in mind that a huge quantity of cocaine was involved, the largest at that time ever seized in Australia, and bearing in mind its conservative street value of over $44,000,000, for my [part
I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/index.html#p1) would have no hesitation in regarding a sentence for life as appropriate in the absence of those mitigating circumstances. That is the maximum penalty: and this would have been a case which called for it. There is no point in having maximum penalties if judges would never impose them. However, there are these mitigating circumstances and in the light of them it was appropriate to his Honour to take a starting point of 27 years.

It is true that he was not a principal. The word "principal" is a word of uncertain meaning. It is used too often as if there is some magical line of one being either a principal or something else. Putting aside semantics, the role played by this man was a very major role. He travelled expressly from
Colombia for the purpose, he acquired the facilities where the cocaine was to be stored and he had everything set up. He received the cocaine. He stored it.
He moved it from place to place as required for further safety. Without him, or someone else filling his role, the importation would not have succeeded or at least would not have gone on to supply. His role was not that only of the warehousing: it was also the role of the supply. So albeit it may be right to say that he was not a principal, his role was a most material one.

True it is that he had a prior good character. That is commonplace, I regret, amongst major offenders in respect to the importation of drugs. Those involved in a league of that size cannot afford to have criminal records and thereby be persons who are kept in mind. They tend, accordingly, to be record free, as was this man. The law has been firmly declared by this Court and by other courts that in drug importation offences prior good character has less weight than it has in relation to offences of a different character. That applies particularly in respect of couriers: but it applies also, albeit to a lesser degree, to those in a role such as that played by the applicant in this case.

As to his pleas of guilty, his Honour fully took into account the only basis upon which they were persuasive in sentencing. That is, the pragmatic value of them to the community be reflected by a pragmatic degree of leniency in the court's sentencing. That pragmatic degree of leniency was accorded by the sentencing judge in this case.

It has been urged, finally, that looked at overall, these sentences were excessive in relation to the range of sentences passed in other cases. I am wholly unpersuaded that such is the case. Most of the authorities are conveniently collected in the judgment of Ireland J when sitting as a member of this court in R versus Aubney CCA, 6 October 1994. To those authorities there should be added R versus Tamayo CCA, 23 November 1993, R v
Wah CCA, 13 April 1995 and R versus Che Yook and Sae Sung CCA, 29 November 1995.

One can always find cases of sentences higher and sentences lower. But no two cases are the same and looking at the cases overall, I am far from persuaded that this sentence was outside the permissible range of a sound exercise of judicial discretion.

I would propose that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal be dismissed, that each of the sentences be confirmed but that it be ordered that the time served is to count.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

JAMES J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Allen J.
 * * * 
