

Natwest Markets Australia Ltd versus William Scott Dalrymple and Anor [1996]
NSWSC 485 (14 October 1996) 
NATWEST MARKETS AUSTRALIA LTD -v- WILLIAM SCOTT DALRYMPLE & ANOR 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION /96 
Thursday, 3 October 1996 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff seeks judgment against the defendants, William Scott Dalrymple (Dalrymple) and John Beresford Godfrey (Godfrey) under a deed of guarantee dated 21 May 1990 (the guarantee) in a sum which was calculated as at 4 September 1996 as being $9,937,597.13. The guarantee is in respect of the indebtedness of Woolcott Court Pty Ltd (Woolcott) under a facility deed dated 24 May 1990 as varied on 6 June 1991 (the facility). 
On 21 June 1996, when Godfrey had not been served with process, Dalrymple was directed by Bainton J to file and serve his defence together with an affidavit of facts and circumstances on which he relied by 5 July 1996. On that date there was filed an affidavit by Godfrey, sworn 5 July 1996, expressed to be filed also for Dalrymple. On the same date there was filed a defence also expressed to be filed on behalf of both defendants. The defence alleged that it was a "condition precedent to the liability" of the defendants under the guarantee that Woolcott be "indebted to the plaintiff for the amounts claimed". It was alleged that the condition precedent had not been "satisfied". In par 2 of the defence the defendants purported to rely upon "paragraphs 1 to 15 of the Summary of Cross Claimant's Contentions contained in the Cross Claim". No such cross-claim had been filed. However, having regard to the approach I have adopted to this matter, that is of no consequence. The defence went on to make certain admissions, namely, that
Woolcott had agreed to borrow "certain monies from the plaintiff"; that the defendants had guaranteed Woolcott's indebtedness; that Woolcott had not repaid any monies to the plaintiff and that the demands for payment had been given by the plaintiff. Par 9 was in the following terms: "Further or alternatively Woolcott Court Pty Ltd is entitled to set off in limitation or extinction of the plaintiff's claim the whole of the amount owing to it under the cross claim and in consequence the liability of the first defendant and the second defendant is extinguished or reduced accordingly." 
When the matter came before Giles CJ Comm D for further directions on 12 July , a form of cross-claim was produced to the Court, but not filed. That cross-claim was expressed to be on behalf of the defendants and Woolcott. On that directions hearing, it is not surprising that, as matters then stood, an application to strike out the defence was foreshadowed and the Chief Judge adverted to the difficulties of filing a cross-claim in which Woolcott as the principal debtor was a cross-claimant though not a party to the proceedings.
These problems were addressed by the Chief Judge as follows: " While strictly independent, the questions of striking out the defence and filing cross-claims are in practice linked, in particular because the meaning and effect of the same provision of the guarantee was said to arise in relation to each. It being clear that resolution of these matters would have a significant effect on the rights and obligations of the parties, it seems to me that they should be resolved only upon appropriate notices of motion.
Accordingly, having discussed with counsel the course to be followed, the directions which I will shortly give were arrived at. They involve this degree of informality, that one of the matters to be debated will be whether the principal debtor should have leave to cross-claim against the plaintiff and it will be debated at a time when the principal debtor is not a party to the proceedings. Realistically that can be done if counsel for the defendants is also instructed, as I understand is anticipated, on behalf of the principal debtor, and I would expect that to be done for the purposes of the applications.

The directions then are:
Direct that the defendants file and serve a notice of motion seeking leave to file their cross-claim against the principal debtor within 14 days from today, which notice of motion may be made returnable on 16 August 1996 and should be accompanied by all affidavit evidence on which the defendants wish to rely in chief.
Direct that the defendants file and serve on the plaintiff within 14 days a draft of the cross-claim desired to be filed by the principal debtor against the plaintiff and any affidavit evidence additional to that previously directed which they expect will be relied on for an application for leave to file that cross-claim.
Direct that the plaintiff file and serve within 21 days - any application to strike out the defence which may be made returnable on August 1996; and, affidavits on which it purposes to rely in answer to the affidavits previously mentioned.
Direct that the plaintiff serve on the defendants within 21 days a written outline of submissions in opposition to the grant of leave to file both cross- claims earlier mentioned and in support of its application to strike out the defence, and that the defendants serve on the plaintiff within a further 7 days a written outline of their submissions in response to those of the plaintiff; copies of all outlines to be sent to my associate.
Stand the proceedings over for hearing of the motions and directions on 16
August 1996." 
When the matter came before me for further directions on 16 August, the defendants' former solicitor attended as a matter of courtesy to inform the
Court that she had ceased to act. Thereafter the defendants appeared in person. Following the directions hearing of 12 July 1996 the plaintiff had filed a notice of motion returnable 2 August 1996 to strike out the defence and seeking summary judgment. It appears that service of that notice of motion was irregular in that the copy served upon the then defendants' solicitor was an unsealed copy. On the return day there had been no appearance for the defendants, probably as a result of the fact that the instructions of the defendants' solicitor had been withdrawn although she had yet to file a notice of ceasing to act.

In what appears to have been an attempt to overcome the irregularity of service of the notice of motion, a further copy, this time in sealed form, was served on the defendants' solicitor on 15 August 1996 with an accompanying letter which confirmed that it was now returnable for the following day, 16
August 1996. On their appearance before me that day the defendants submitted that they had been prejudiced by the late service of the notice of motion.
They contended that it had only come to their attention the previous afternoon. I noted that the defendants had not complied with the directions of the Court of 12 July in that no notice of motion had been filed nor had a draft of the proposed cross-claim by Woolcott with supporting affidavit evidence been served in accordance with directions 1 and 2 of that date. It was reasonably clear on 16 August that the defendants required some time to pursue a commercial resolution of their dispute with the plaintiff and that this was a strong factor in their reliance upon the irregularity of service and late service of a sealed copy of the plaintiff's notice of motion. In any event, I gave directions on that date with the object of curing any irregularity in the plaintiff's notice of motion and giving the defendants a further opportunity to comply with the directions of 12 July 1996 by extending the time for compliance, in a slightly amended form, to 27 August 1996. The matter was stood over to 29 August 1996.

On the lastmentioned date, as a result of some ongoing discussions amongst the parties, by consent, the matter was stood over to 3 September 1996.

On 3 September 1996 the defendants, who appeared in person, produced to the
Court two documents entitled, respectively, "FIRST CROSS-CLAIM" (MFI 1) and "SECOND CROSS-CLAIM" (MFI 2) together with points of defence in the form of the defence filed on 5 July 1996 with the addition of a defence based upon the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) (MFI 3) (the undated defence). The first cross-claim was in the form of a claim against Woolcott seeking an indemnity in respect of any liability the defendants may have to the plaintiff under the guarantee. The second cross- claim was signed "FOR AND ON BEHALF OF WOOLCOTT COURT PTY LTD" and was signed by Dalrymple as director and Godfrey as secretary. The second cross-claim was essentially in the form of the cross-claim which had been produced to the
Court on 5 July 1996, the principal difference being that the defendants purported to bring the proposed cross-claims into line with the procedure outlined as the appropriate procedure in such cases by Isaacs J in Cellulose
Products Pty. Ltd. -v- Truda & Ors [(1970) 92 WN 561] (see also National Australia Bank Ltd -v- St Leon & Anor (Supreme Court of New South Wales, Bainton J, 12 April 1996, unreported). Although the defendants had not complied with the directions of Giles CJ Comm D of 12 July, nor fully with my later directions, I heard the plaintiff's motion on 3
September 1996 on the basis that, if given leave the defendants would file the first cross-claim and the second cross-claim and amend the defence filed on 5
July 1996 in the form of the undated defence.

In support of the motion the plaintiff relied upon the affidavit of Glenys
Margaret Calvert (Calvert) sworn 31 July 1996. The affidavit described Calvert as having the carriage of the matter on behalf of the plaintiff and evidenced compliance by the plaintiff with formal requirements of the facility and the guarantee and (b) the default of the defendants. It was stated that the indebtedness of the defendants as at 31 July 1996 was $9,841,903.31. She gave evidence of belief that the defendants did not have a defence to the plaintiff's claim. There was nothing in the affidavit to identify Calvert as an officer of the plaintiff within the meeting of cl 13 of the facility entitling her to provide prima facie evidence of the indebtedness to the plaintiff of Woolcott, or, of the defendants under cl 12 of the guarantee.
Although no objection had been taken to the Calvert evidence on this basis, nor any application made to have her attend for cross-examination, I did not proceed to a final determination of the plaintiff's motion on 3 September 1996 but adjourned it to 6 September 1996 to enable a current certificate of indebtedness to be evidenced by the plaintiff.

On 6 September 1996 the plaintiff tendered the certificates of Andrew Henry
Smyth (Smyth) and Calvert, each dated 4 September 1996, certifying, respectively, to the indebtedness of Woolcott under the facility and of the defendants under the guarantee as at the date of the certificates. The certificate of Calvert described her as an "Account Manager" of the plaintiff while Smyth was identified as its Company Secretary. The defendants, still appearing in person, objected to the certificates and in the face of the absence of the certifiers and of any evidence to formally prove the certificates, I further adjourned the motion to 10 September 1996. In doing so, I indicated to the defendants that I was not averse to reserving judgment for 28 days to enable them to pursue further their commercial discussions with the plaintiff. On 10 September 1996 Smyth and Calvert were called by the plaintiff to evidence their certificates. Each was subject to cross- examination by the defendants. This cross-examination established that Smyth's certification was based solely upon the assurances of its accuracy by the plaintiff's Account Manager, Calvert. In the case of Calvert's certificate, she gave evidence that this certification was the result of a close cross check of the plaintiff's transaction computer record of Woolcott's account.

In the proceedings before me on 3 September 1996, Godfrey, in response to my question whether the defendants intended to tender any evidence in opposition to the application, stated: "Yes, your Honour. First of all we admit that Woolcott Court owes some money to Natwest. Yes, it borrowed the money. We do not think Mr Dalrymple and myself are liable because we feel that Woolcott Court has a very strong cross- claim against Natwest." 
As noted earlier in these reasons, the defendants made similar admissions in their points of defence filed 5 July 1996. In the undated defence the defendants repeated those admissions. I do not think there is any real issue as to the principal indebtedness, subject to a claim of set off in the form of the second cross-claim; similarly in the case of the indebtedness of the defendants under the guarantee, leaving aside the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) defence foreshadowed in the undated defence. In those circumstances I do not think there has been any injustice visited upon the defendants by the admission of the evidence of indebtedness in the form of the Calvert affidavit, her certificate of indebtedness and that of Smyth with their evidence identifying the source of that hearsay material. In my opinion that is sufficient to satisfy the exception to the hearsay rule to be found in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s75.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

On 10 September I adjourned the application to 3 October 1996 for the purpose of giving judgment. This was not a reflection of any uncertainty as to the proper resolution of the application. The adjournment was granted in response to the defendants' submission that the granting of further time would permit them to continue commercial discussions with the plaintiff aimed at the settlement of the proceedings. Apparently this has not eventuated.

I have treated the defendants' reliance in the defence filed 5 July 1996 and the undated defence upon a set off "under the cross-claim" as referring to the second cross-claim which alleges a breach by the plaintiff of the duty "to exercise the degree of care and diligence required by s. 232(4) and/or s.
A(1) of the Corporations Law....." together with breach of the duty of care of a mortgagee exercising power of sale.

The undated defence repeats the defence filed 5 July 1996 and adds the following defence: "Each of the guarantees between the plaintiff and the first defendant and the second defendant is unjust within the meaning of [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s4.html) of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) to the extent that: 
It provides that the plaintiff may give to the defendants a certificate setting out the amount which the defendants owe to the plaintiff and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence in that regard; 
It provides that the defendants may be liable to the plaintiff for the whole of amount of the plaintiff's claim against them in circumstances where the plaintiff's claim against Woolcott Court Pty Ltd is extinguished or reduced.

In each case such provision being unjust by reason of it being beyond what is reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of the plaintiff.' (Par 10) 
Reading the second cross-claim in the context of the affidavit of Godfrey of 5
July 1996, it appears that the defendants were instrumental in the development of property at Wahroonga for the establishment of an aged persons hostel which was completed in early 1992. The development was effected by Woolcott which held a long term lease of that property. In April 1992 or thereabouts, the plaintiff entered into possession of the property for the purpose of enforcing the charge held by the plaintiff over the lease. The general complaint of the defendants is that the plaintiff put persons inexperienced and unskilled in the art of marketing the hostel units and excluded the defendants from that exercise with the result that there have only been seven sales of hostel units. There are thirty units in the development. It is alleged that this sales result is a reflection of the incompetence of those charged with the disposition of the subject units and that, in some way, this has resulted in loss to Woolcott. It is this loss which the defendants claim Woolcott is entitled to set off against any indebtedness to the plaintiff under the facility and the defendants contend that they are entitled to the benefit of that set off in extinction or diminution of the indebtedness that they otherwise would have to the plaintiff under the guarantee.

In my opinion, as a matter of construction of the guarantee and as a matter of law, the defendants may not rely upon the claimed right of set off of
Woolcott. As a matter of law, this follows from the decision of Cellulose as approved in Covino & Anor -v- Bandag Manufacturing Pty Ltd [(1983) 1
NSWLR 237] and more recently followed in National Australia Bank Ltd -v- St Leon (supra).

Even if the position at law was otherwise, it is my view that cl 5.1 of the guarantee precludes the defendants from relying on the claimed right of set off. Cl 5.1 is in the following terms: "5.1 Until the Bank has received the whole of the moneys hereby secured the
Guarantor may not on any grounds whatsoever either directly or indirectly:- claim any right or set-off or any other right or relief at law or in equity which would or may have the result of reducing the liability of the
Guarantor under this Guarantee or which would (but for this provision) entitle the Guarantor to deduct from the moneys payable by the Guarantor hereunder any moneys claimed by the Guarantor to be due from the Bank to the Guarantor on any account whatsoever; bring any proceedings to restrain or prevent the Bank from exercising any of its rights powers or remedies or raise or make any defence, crossclaim or counterclaim on the footing that any right of set-off or any other right or relief referred to in paragraph (a) hereof is vested in or available to the
Guarantor, the Debtor, any co-surety or any other person against the Bank;" 
I have been referred by counsel for the plaintiff to a number of other provisions of the guarantee and of the facility which, it is submitted, support the construction that the defendants are precluded from relying upon the claimed set off. I think it is unnecessary to recapitulate those arguments. The plaintiff maintains that upon its proper construction the guarantee precludes the defendants from relying upon any form of set off, including an equitable set off. It is unnecessary to consider that construction. The set off relied upon by the defendants is not an equitable set off.

In my opinion the defendants' defence based upon a claimed right of set off of
Woolcott should be struck out. The question then arises whether the defendants should have leave to amend their defence to include a defence in the form of par 10 of the undated defence.

As to par 10(a), the guarantee does not so provide. It merely makes provision for reliance upon a certificate of indebtedness as prima facie evidence. It is completely unexceptional in a security document of this kind, in this case entered into by mature business men whose execution of the guarantee, I note, was witnessed by a solicitor. The defendants have offered no basis for suggesting that such a provision is in any way unjust, other than the bare assertion that it is beyond what is reasonably necessary for the protection of the plaintiff's legitimate interests. Par 10(b) presumably refers to the restriction against set off in the guarantee to which earlier reference has been made in these reasons. Once again, the provision is unexceptional, and nothing has been put by the defendants to give any credence to the suggestion that it is an excessive protection of the plaintiff's interests. It may be otherwise if the construction of cl 5 of the guarantee extended to exclude reliance upon an equitable set-off. That is not the case here. In my opinion, nothing would be served by granting leave to the defendants to file an amended defence in the form of the undated defence and summary judgment should be given in favour of the plaintiff. In doing so, I have had regard to the "exceptional caution" which must be exercised in granting summary relief. See
Webster & Anor -v- Lampard <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 598] at 602.

Accordingly, I order that the defence filed by the defendants dated 5 July be struck out. I direct the plaintiff to file by 5:00 pm on 11 October an affidavit by a qualified account manager of the plaintiff evidencing the plaintiff's variable base rate and the calculation of interest on the sum of $9,937,597.13 from 5 September 1996 to 14 October 1996 at that rate plus .25 percent per annum with the interest compounded monthly on 30 September .

I further direct the plaintiff to bring in short minutes at 9:30 am on 14
October 1996 in accordance with these reasons and providing for judgment in the sum of $9,937,597.13 plus the interest so calculated.

The defendants are to pay the plaintiff's costs of the summons and of this application.

On 2 October 1996 the defendants forwarded to me the judgment in National
Australia Bank -v- Sampson (Supreme Court of New South Wales, Young J, 9
September 1996, unreported) with a covering letter in the following terms: "Please find attached documents relevant to our case which we inadvertently omitted to hand up to you in our previous hearing." 
I have given consideration to the observations of Young J in that case concerning the operation of a security document certification of indebtedness clause in terms which differ from cl 13 of the facility or cl 12 of the guarantee and in relation to a certificate of indebtedness which issued in circumstances different from the circumstances of this case. I am not persuaded to depart from these reasons and, in particular, to change my views on the admissibility and reliability of the evidence of the defendants' indebtedness tendered by the plaintiff in these proceedings.
 * * * 
