

Dugald Mitchell Insurance Agencies P/L versus Bottom and Anor; The Prudential
Assurance Company Ltd versus Bottom [1996] NSWSC 462 (3 October 1996) 
DUGALD MITCHELL INSURANCE AGENCIES P/L V BOTTOM & ANOR 
THE PRUDENTIAL ASSURANCE COMPANY LTD V BOTTOM  /92 40516/93 COMM D 50649/91 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA CLARKE JA WADDELL AJA 
CATCHWORDS: INSURANCE - INSURED TAKES OWN LIFE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: BOTH APPEALS DISMISSED 
INSURANCE - life insured takes own life - no indemnity if that happened within thirteen months of commencement of policy - payment of premiums suspended and renewed in course of policy - question whether arrangement between insured and insurer's agent meant policy recommenced upon resumption of premium payments or had only been suspended - date from which thirteen month period began depended on answer - held by Cole J at trial that arrangement merely suspended payment but not cover - insurer liable, being bound by agent's arrangement - agent and insurer both appeal - appeals abandoned when called on for hearing except for one new ground raised by agent - Held: in view of pleadings and conduct of trial, the new ground should not be allowed to be taken on appeal - appeals dismissed with indemnity costs.

ORDERS 
The agent's appeals against both the plaintiff and Prudential dismissed with costs on an indemnity basis.
Prudential's appeal against the plaintiff dismissed with costs on an indemnity basis.

JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: When these two appeals came on for hearing the court was told that one of them was to be withdrawn and in the other only one point was to be argued. Questions of costs also remained to be argued.

We will state only the facts necessary for an understanding of the matters sought to be argued within the area to which the appeals were thus reduced.

By a policy which commenced on 1 January 1989 Mr P. A. Bottom, through the agency of Dugald Mitchell Insurance Agencies Pty Limited (the agent) insured his life with the Prudential Assurance Company Limited (Prudential). No benefit was payable under the policy if the insured took his life within thirteen months of the commencement of the policy.

In July 1989 Mr and Mrs Bottom made an arrangement with the agent pursuant to which monthly instalments of the policy premium were not paid until November
From November premium instalments were paid.

In June 1990 Mr Bottom took his own life.

Mrs Bottom became the executrix of her late husband's estate. She claimed payment from Prudential under the policy. A dispute then arose about what had been agreed with the agent in July 1989.

Mrs Bottom contended that what had been agreed was that there would be suspension of payment of premium instalments for a period, the policy remaining on foot at all times.

The agent contended that the arrangement was that the policy would lapse during the period of non-payment of premium instalments, but would be reinstated when payment of instalments resumed.

If Mrs Bottom's claim were correct, then her husband's death fell outside the thirteen month period already mentioned, and his estate was entitled to payment by Prudential; if the agent's contention were correct, then the death occurred within the thirteen month period and Prudential were right in rejecting the claim.

Mrs Bottom (the plaintiff) brought proceedings as executrix against Prudential claiming the sum assured. Prudential defended on the basis already mentioned.
Prudential also cross-claimed against the agent claiming that if the arrangement of July 1989 had been as Mrs Bottom claimed then the agent had been in breach of its agency contract with Prudential in not obtaining
Prudential's consent to the arrangement before making it.

The proceedings were heard by Cole J. He found that the arrangement was as claimed by the plaintiff. Prudential conceded that it was bound by such arrangement made by its agent. Cole J therefore entered judgment against
Prudential for the amount claimed.

Cole J found in favour of Prudential in its cross-claim against the agent. He held that the agent was in breach of its contract with Prudential and that that breach caused loss to Prudential being the amount of the judgment entered against it.

The agent appealed against Cole J's judgment on Prudential's cross-claim.
Prudential appealed against Cole J's judgment on the plaintiff's claim.

Prudential's appeal, prima facie at least, appeared to have very little chance of success. This was because it seemed plain on the face of Cole J's reasons for judgment that the only live issue in the case before him between the plaintiff and Prudential was whether the effect of the arrangement undoubtedly made in July 1989 was as claimed by the plaintiff or by the agent. Cole J's finding in favour of the plaintiff was based upon substantial acceptance of oral evidence by the plaintiff and rejection of oral evidence given on behalf of the agent. Contemporary documentation, in Cole J's view, also tended to support the account given by the plaintiff. His decision directly involved his assessment of the credibility and reliability of the oral evidence of the witnesses considered together with what appeared in a number of documents.
Acceptance of the plaintiff's version of the arrangement and a finding that the arrangement was binding on Prudential were all she needed to succeed in her claim.

As became clear when the hearing of the appeals began, Prudential's own view had always been that its chances of success in its appeal were slim.
Nevertheless, because the agent had appealed against the judgment in favour of
Prudential against the agent, to guard against the possibility that that appeal might succeed, Prudential, as a matter of precaution, and as what was described as its fall-back position, had appealed against the plaintiff's judgment against it, in order at least to keep that matter on foot pending the resolution of the agent's appeal.

The agent's notice of appeal stated a number of grounds none of which need be mentioned, because when the appeals were called on for hearing, all grounds of appeal were abandoned. Counsel for the agent sought leave to file an amended notice of appeal containing one ground only. Counsel for Prudential consented to this amendment being made. The court therefore granted leave to the agent to proceed upon the amended notice of appeal.

At this stage therefore the court dismissed Prudential's appeal against the plaintiff with costs, leaving until the conclusion of the contested matter the hearing of an application by the plaintiff for an order that the costs be on an indemnity basis. At that point the court ordered that the costs be on an indemnity basis. Prudential's motive in putting on a purely precautionary appeal was not improper, but as the event proved, it was without merit, and we did not think the plaintiff should be left to bear any part of the costs unnecessarily caused by Prudential's ultra-prudent approach.

The agent's appeal which was brought against both Prudential and the plaintiff was then dismissed as against the plaintiff, the position about costs being left for later decision in the same way as in the other appeal. Again, at the conclusion of the argument the court ordered the costs should be on an indemnity basis, primarily because the appeal was doomed to failure from the beginning, and the plaintiff should not be out of pocket because of it.

The court then proceeded to hear the one matter sought to be argued by the agent against Cole J's judgment against it.

The ground of appeal relied on was that Cole J erred in finding that any loss was caused to Prudential by reason of any breach of the Agency Agreement between Prudential and the agent.

This point had been dealt with by Cole J in his reasons, although, as the court was told, that it had not been the subject of submissions to him.
Counsel for Prudential told this court that it was because the matter had been dealt with by Cole J as an issue necessary to be decided that Prudential felt it should consent to the point being dealt with on appeal. He was asked whether Prudential would have conducted its case differently had it known that the judge intended to deal with the issue in his reasons. Although counsel's answer appeared to indicate Prudential did not wish to advance such a contention, counsel nevertheless made it clear that Prudential would argue that, because of the way the trial below had been conducted, the agent should not be allowed to argue the point in the appeal.

Cole J, in what he said on the point, had referred to evidence of Mr Mitchell, the agent's principal executive. He found that Mr Mitchell's evidence showed clearly that agreement by Prudential to the arrangement which the plaintiff contended it had made through the agent could have been obtained. In his view it was implicit in Mr Mitchell's evidence that while such an arrangement required Prudential's assent, that assent could be obtained as a matter of possibility. Indeed he expressed the view that Mr Mitchell's evidence suggested agreement would normally be forthcoming. He continued: "There is no specific evidence as to what would have occurred had Mr Mitchell rung and requested agreement to deferment to the premiums for four months. If
Prudential would have acceded to the request, then the act of Mr Mitchell in agreeing to the deferment without obtaining that approval has caused
Prudential no loss. If Prudential had declined to agree to the postponement, there is no evidence as to what the insured would have done. He may have cancelled the policy. He may have commenced repaying the premiums in July or in October so that the policy would not have been avoided. Other commercial arrangements may have been made related to bonuses earned on other policies.
No doubt there are many other possibilities.
 
The breach of authority by Mr Mitchell was not in agreeing to the deferment of premium payment - it was agreeing to deferment of premium payment without the authority of Prudential. It is clear from his evidence that one of his tasks was to deal with such applications by an insured.
 ... ...
 
One has a strong suspicion both from the evidence of Mr Mitchell regarding the way he 'always did it' and 'that's how it's done', that Prudential would have agreed to the deferment had it been asked. It would seem to make commercial sense for Prudential to do so rather than to have the possibility of a policy only six months old lapsing. It suffers loss from the failure of
Mr Mitchell to seek its consent only if it is found that had such consent been sought it would have been declined with resulting termination of the policy so as to eliminate its possible exposure to a claim, or it would have so acted as to exercise a right to declare the policy void (as it purported to do on 2
October 1989), and either not reinstate the policy, or permit it to be reinstated with the advantage of the thirteen months clause operating from the date of reinstatement (clause 9)." 
However, he went on to find further that in agreeing to the arrangement with the plaintiff the agent was acting beyond the power conferred by the Agency
Agreement. He then continued: "Except for that breach of contract the policy would have lapsed, and it was not, in fact, reinstated. Even it if had been reinstated during November,
Prudential would not have been liable under the policy in the events which occurred because of the operation of the thirteen month provision in clause 9.
The loss Prudential thus suffered flowed directly from the breach of contract.
As I have said, one has a strong suspicion if Mr Mitchell had requested
Prudential's approval to suspension of the payments for four months, that approval would have been forthcoming. However the matter was not addressed directly by evidence. If the cross-defendant wished to argue that the failure to seek Prudential's approval resulted in Prudential suffering no loss because, if such approval had been sought it would have been granted and thus the policy would have remained current with the attendant liability upon
Prudential to make payment under the policy as I have found, the onus was on the cross-defendant to seek to establish those circumstances. It did not do so. In my view once Prudential established the breach of the contract with the consequence that the policy remained on foot rather than lapsing, the onus was on the cross-defendant to establish that that breach resulted in no loss if it were the case that had approval been sought to suspension of the four monthly payments, it would have been given by Prudential." 
On this basis he found Prudential entitled to succeed in its cross-claim against the agent.

It was the correctness of this reasoning that the agent wished to dispute in the appeal. The central point, as appears from the passages above set out was that, on the evidence, Prudential's loss "flowed directly from the breach of contract" and the onus was on the insurance agency to establish that the breach resulted in no loss.

As already mentioned, the question of what would have happened if Mr Mitchell had referred the request to defer payment of the premiums to Prudential was not the subject of any evidence or submissions at the trial. Nor, in our opinion, was the issue fairly raised by the pleadings. Prudential's cross- claim against the insurance agency by pars. 6 and 7 alleges the breach by the agency of its contract with Prudential and then goes on to state that
Prudential claims the value of the death benefit alleged to be payable under the policy following the death of the deceased. The only provision of the cross-claim which the appellant relies upon to establish the issue raised by amended par 4(a) of the Notice of Appeal is par 3 of its defence which - "says as to the whole of the cross-claim that:- ... if the death benefit is payable by the defendant to the plaintiff that result is in no way attributable to any fault of the cross-defendant".

We do not think this rather vague assertion fairly raises the contention advanced by the appellant that, contrary to the view of the trial judge, the onus was on Prudential to establish by evidence that if the application to defer payment of the premiums had been referred to it, it would have refused.

The situation thus was (1), the issue raised by the appeal was not raised by the pleadings and was not addressed by evidence or submissions at the trial, but (2) the issue was one which the trial judge had in mind.

In these circumstances, it seems to us that the first question for this Court is whether the appellant should be permitted to argue the point relied upon.

The argument to the contrary is that even in the absence of appropriate issues being raised and evidence led and submissions made, the trial judge fell into error in not applying, of his own motion, the general rule that a plaintiff has the burden of proving the amount of damage before he can recover substantial damages: Mayne & McGregor, On Damages, 12th Ed., par 986.
Perhaps, more precisely, his Honour should have applied the rule as stated by
Clarke, B. in Robinson versus Harman <case>; [(1848) 1 Ex. 850] at 855 that the plaintiff is entitled to be placed, so far as money can do it, in the same position as he would have been in had the contract been performed. Compliance with this rule would have required
Prudential to establish what would have been its position had Mr. Mitchell referred the deceased's application for variation of the payment requirements of the policy to it.

The appellant seeks to submit that in the absence of evidence establishing the amount of Prudential's loss, the trial judge should have awarded only nominal damages. However, in our opinion, the issue which the trial judge had to decide was what was the amount of damage having regard to the issues raised by the pleadings and submissions and the evidence before the Court. It seems to us that in the light of these considerations his Honour reached a conclusion which is not open to attack in this Court. Although we think, with respect to
Cole J, that it would have been more accurate to say, not that Prudential's loss "flowed directly from the breach of contract", but rather that having regard to the way the case had been conducted, that was the appropriate conclusion, we do not think that it was correct to say that the onus was on the cross-defendant to establish that if the application had been referred to
Prudential, it would or was likely to have granted it. In our opinion, if the issue had been raised by the agent, the onus would have been on Prudential to comply with the rule in Robinson versus Harman above. All that can be said, we think, is that as the agent did not raise the issue in its defence nor raise the issue for decision at the trial it should not be said that his Honour's decision as to the amount of damage was wrong.

For the foregoing reasons, the agent's appeal should be dismissed with costs.
We think this costs order should also be on an indemnity basis. The appeal as filed was abandoned at the last moment, a recognition of what its prospects had been from its inception, and reliance then placed only on a new ground which has failed.

The court's orders therefore are:
The agent's appeals against both the plaintiff and Prudential dismissed with costs on an indemnity basis.
Prudential's appeal against the plaintiff dismissed with costs on an indemnity basis.
 * * * 
