

Estate of J M Cross, deceased [1996] NSWSC 132 (16 May 1996) 
Estate of JOYCE MARY CROSS, deceased /95 
Thursday, 9 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES PROBATE DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Joyce Mary Cross (the deceased) died on 13 October 1994 aged 70. She had been married twice, and was a widow at the time of her death, her second husband, John Lewis Cross, having died on 28 October 1992. The deceased was survived by six children whose names and ages at the time of her death are as follows: by her first marriage: Betty Papasian, 53 by her second marriage: Christine Griffin, 42 
Patricia Griffin, 40 
Peter Cross, 37 
Julie Cross, 35 
John Cross, 32 
For convenience I will identify the children by their first names.

On 30 April 1992 the deceased made a will (incorrectly dated 30 April 1991) which had been prepared for her by a solicitor, Mr Anthony Ziade (who was known to her as "Tony"). By that will (to which I will refer as the 1992 will) she appointed her son John as executor and trustee, and in the event of her husband failing to survive her for thirty days, gave some jewellery to a grand-daughter Sarah, $3,000.00 to her daughter Betty, and the remainder to her other five children in equal shares.

During the last few years of her life the deceased was in chronic ill-health.
She was a heavy smoker and a heavy drinker, and suffered from bronchitis and emphysema, for alleviation of the symptoms of which she had an oxygen supply and delivery system at home. Her general practitioner was Dr Adam Ziade (Mr
Anthony Ziade's brother) who had been treating her since 1983. Dr Ziade expressed the view that the deceased had short term memory impairment and cerebral degeneration as a result of alcohol abuse and chronic airway limitation, with which was associated from time to time an excess or an insufficiency of oxygen causing some mental confusion. He also said that the drugs she was taking coupled with her cerebral degeneration caused her to experience tremors of her upper limbs which gave her difficulty when signing her name. During the last four months of her life Dr Ziade saw the deceased on some eleven occasions. Notwithstanding her medical problems the deceased lived alone, although she was frequently visited by various of her children.

After the death of the deceased there was located by John among her effects a black briefcase which was found to contain a number of documents in the deceased's writing. These comprised: a document dated "Sat 20th 8-94" signed by the deceased and expressed to be her "last will and testament", in cursive script in black ink (annexed to
John's affidavit of 23 February 1995), enclosed in an envelope addressed "Tony" (PX2); a letter dated "Sat 20-8-94" signed "Mum" addressed to John, in cursive script in black ink (annexure X to John's affidavit of 23 February 1995); a letter dated "Sat 20-8-94" signed "Mum" addressed to Christine, in cursive script in black ink (DX3); a letter dated "Sat 20-8-94" signed "Mum" addressed to Patricia, in cursive script in black ink (DX4); a letter dated "Sat 20-8-94" signed "Mum" addressed to Peter, in cursive script in black ink (DX5); an undated and unsigned document in cursive script in black ink commencing "I Joyce Mary Cross this is my last will and testament" (part of PX3); an undated and unsigned document in printed script in blue ink commencing "This is the last will and testament of me Joyce Mary Cross" (part of PX3); an undated letter signed "Mum" addressed to John in cursive script in blue ink (annexure B to John's affidavit of 30 April 1996); an undated and unsigned document commencing "Dear John I am writing this short note to you" in cursive script in black ink (annexure C to John's affidavit of 30 April (1996).

Document (1) (to which I will refer as the 1994 will instrument), document (2) (to which I will refer as the 1994 letter to John) and document (3) (to which
I will refer as the 1994 letter to Christine) were in the following terms: will instrument: "I Joyce Mary Cross make this my last will and testament of 96 Queen Street
Ashfield 2131.

I appoint my son John Phillip Cross of 58 Moffetts Drive Dundas Valley, and my
Daughter Christine Judith Griffin 219 Naurarra Road Moorebank 2170, both trustie and executor (on trust of my will.) 
I leave everything to my children as follows, 
Christine Judith Griffin 219 Nuwarra Road Moorebank 2170 
Patricia Ann Griffin 3 Topin Place Moorebank 2170 
Peter Lance Cross 18A Phyllis Street Mount Pritchard 2170 
John Phillip Cross 58 Moffetts Drive Dundas Valley 
Julie Kaye Cross 167 Green Valley Road Green Valley 
Better Papasian 1 Mannix Parade Warwick Farm the sum of Three Thousand Dollars only (3,000-00 only) 
If any of my children should not surved me then it will go to there children at the age 18 year's 
Taxi Plate go to John 
TV to John.

Vidio and stand to Peter Bed lamps to Patricia 
Micawave oven to Christine 
Mini oven top Grill Plus 988 also Friday and washing-machine to Julie.

My trustee's shall have the following powers to do as they wish to do with the house and contents to sell and share with each other.

J M Cross Queen Street 
Ashfield 
Sat 20th 8-94" letter to John: "Dear John 
I am writing you this short note to you hoping this will help you to cope with me leaving, it was time for me to be with dad it has been a long time to be without him and I am OK now we are to-geather John I love you very much so please dont grive for me, just know that I am happy where I am and look after
Baby Lewis & Simone & you self hope you don't work to hard too not enjoy life please enjoy you only have one life and pay that house off and dont get into debt Hear I go again I have to have my last say. love you, keep in touch and look after Julie not Steve only Julie & Sarah & Bean John
Pay my Funeral expenses cash not out of the estate around about $2,000-00 that would be better to do it that way make up money from C. Patricia yourself & Julie Peter if he has the money please dont worry if not because you take money out of the estate after ~~you~~ it comes through John I am leaving the taxi plate's to you, pay off house what is left over put to-geter with the rest and share.

John Both you and Christine are are both (Trustee & Executor on trust) you & Christine will be OK you can show this letter to Christine, there is nothing more I can say.

I love you all and look after S Lewis and J 
Love Mum 
PS TV is your's XXXXXX 
Peter Vidio XXXX 
Christine micawave oven XX 
Patricia 2 Bed lamp's X 
Julie Mini oven top Grill Plus 988 and Fridge and washing machine 
Betty $3,000-00 only 
It would be better to sell house 
P.S Thank you for your help with dad & me.

Love Mum 
SAT 20-8-94" letter to Christine: "Dear Christine SAT 20-8-94 
I am writing to you this shorte note, hoping this will help you to cope with me leaving, it is time for me to go to dad, he has been waiting for me and we are happy and OK so there is no need to be sad for us please love, get on and be happy, I know both you and John will help Julie just keep in touch above all look after yourself and go to doctor if need be dont forget.

I love you all, you only have one life so enjoy it while you can and look after yourself.

Christine dont worry about $55,000-00 to pay back to me, keep it for a raining day no body know's about it only John and he will not say anything to any body
I am paying off his house with the taxi plates and what is left put hold untill the probate is through then put all togeather and share with to estate when it come through I am leaving you and John my (trustee and Executor on trust of my will) 
Sell the contents in the house put to more mony take what any body wont aske them what they wont if anything, I am hoping to make it easy for you &
John no arugering about gets who if be dont take any notice to wrongs dont make it right.

Christine I leave you Micawave oven 
John TV 
Peter Vidio 
Patricia 2 Bed Lamps 
Julie Mini oven top Grill Plus 988 & Fridge & Washing Machine 
Betty Three Thousand Dollars only.
 ($3,000-00 only) 
It would be better to sell house as well. Love you or do as you both think fit they would Love Mum be no worry about XXXXX anything if it was XXXX sold and you will XXX know how there will XX be no worry about X looking after the house X 
Love 
Mum 
PS Thank you for looking after me with me food at your place and taking to the document every day.

Love Mum" 
It is unnecessary to set out the terms of the other documents.

In these proceedings John as plaintiff seeks a grant of probate of the 1994 will instrument, or alternatively of the 1992 will. The 1994 will instrument is propounded as the last will of the deceased, notwithstanding that it was not executed in accordance with the formal requirements of the Wills, Probate and Administration Act 1988, pursuant to s.18A of that Act. Christine,
Patricia and Peter as defendants oppose probate being granted of the 1994 will instrument and support a grant of probate of the 1992 will. They allege: that the 1994 will instrument was not intended by the deceased to constitute her will; that as at 20 August 1994 the deceased did not have the requisite testamentary capacity; that any execution of the 1994 will instrument by the deceased was obtained by the undue influence of John upon her.

The high point of the evidence in support of the defendants' case was that of
Dr Ziade who had been given access to the 1994 will instrument and to the letters comprising documents (3), (4) and (5), and said, among other things, that he found it impossible to believe that the deceased either composed them or wrote them. He presented a picture of the mental and physical incapacity of the deceased at that time which he believed to be inconsistent with her having done so.

The most eloquent evidence to the contrary of that view is provided by the documents themselves. They were obviously written by the deceased: indeed the contrary was not suggested by any of the family members who gave evidence, or indeed in the submissions of counsel for the defendants. The five signed and dated documents seem to me to reveal themselves to be result of considerable thought and attention by the deceased, involving an awareness and consideration of each of her six children, as well as the principal assets in her estate, namely her house and a taxi plate which she owned, each of which had a value of the order of $200,000.00. The other four documents appear to be drafts used to compose the five signed and dated documents. The documents reveal mental and physical capacities at the relevant time of a considerably higher order than is suggested by the evidence of Dr Ziade, although they do reveal deficiencies in the deceased's language skills, at least in the form of written expression. Dr Ziade's opinion is also difficult to reconcile with the evidence of family members including the defendants themselves, so far as that evidence bears upon the deceased's relevant cognitive ability and physical state. There is also unchallenged evidence from an independent witness who in
September 1994 had a long telephone conversation with the deceased in relation to the sale of the deceased's car, to whom the deceased appeared to be "totally understanding of all details I was discussing with her" and who found her "very easy to talk to and in control of her faculties". I find that as at August 1994 the deceased did have testamentary capacity. There is no evidence sufficient to support a finding of undue influence. The evidence of oral statements by the deceased to family members said to be inconsistent with her having made a will without the aid of a solicictor on 20 August 1994, does not overcome what I regard as the powerful evidence to the contrary in the documents themselves.

I turn to the requirements of s.18A of the Act. In order that a document not formally executed should constitute a will of a deceased person under that section, it is necessary: that it purports to embody the testamentary intentions of that person; and that the person intended the document to constitute her will.

Subject to two qualifications, both these conditions are fulfilled in relation to the 1994 will instrument.

The qualifications to which I will now turn raise some considerations which were not explored in the submissions made during the hearing. The plaintiff argued for probate of the 1994 will instrument alone. The defendants argued for probate of the 1992 will alone. As at present advised I am not prepared to take either of these courses. I have tentatively reached the conclusion that it would be proper to take a third course, some of the elements of which were not canvassed in argument. For this reason, what follows in this judgment is to be treated as a provisional view, which may be made the subject of such further submissions (if any) as the parties may wish to put, and is subject to confirmation or otherwise in the light of any such submissions.

The first qualification is that it may be inferred from the terms of the 1994 letter to John and of the 1994 letter to Christine, that the 1994 will instrument did not encompass the whole of the testamentary intentions of the deceased, and correspondingly that the deceased did not intend the 1994 will instrument to constitute the whole of her will. By "testamentary intentions" I take s.18A to be connoting intentions of the person concerned as to dispositions of her property to take effect upon or after her death, and by "will" in the phrase "to constitute his or her will" I take the section to be connoting a document containing dispositions of the person's property to take effect upon or after the person's death. I think that all the five documents dated 20 August 1994 should be considered as mutually contemporaneous statements by the deceased intended by her to remain uncommunicated to anyone, and therefore not to be acted upon, until her death, but then to be made available, primarily to those to whom they were respectively addressed, and acted upon. In my opinion the passage in the 1994 letter to John: "John I am leaving the taxi plate's to you, pay off house what is left over put to-geter with the rest and share" was intended by the deceased to make the gift of the taxi plate to John in the 1994 will instrument subject to an obligation binding him to apply the proceeds of realisation of the taxi plate in paying off the mortgage on his house and to add the balance to the residuary estate, in more technical terms to impose on John a testamentary trust to that effect.
This intention appears also in the 1994 letter to Christine. Furthermore, in my opinion, the passage in that letter: "Christine dont worry about $55,000-00 to pay back to me, keep it for a raining day", was intended by the deceased to relieve Christine from the obligation to repay the $55,000.00 to the estate, in more technical terms to effect a testamentary release of that debt.

It would follow in my opinion that the provisions of the two letters which I have identified contain what purport to be testamentary intentions of the deceased additional to those contained in the 1994 will instrument, and that the deceased intended those provisions to take effect upon or after her death, and accordingly, together with the 1994 will instrument, to constitute her will.

In In the matter of the will of Lobato [(1991) 6 WAR 1], Nicholson J of the Supreme Court of Western Australia held that where the Court is satisfied (to the requisite standard), that a deceased person intends part only of an informal document to constitute her will, that part alone may be held to constitute a will for the purpose of the equivalent legislation in
Western Australia. That legislation is so similar to s.18A of the NSW Act that consistency of interpretation is highly desirable, and I should therefore follow that decision, which I do not consider to be plainly wrong. In In the
Estate of Adams (16 April 1992 unreported) Legoe J of the Supreme Court of
South Australia held that an informal document purporting to embody a deceased person's testamentary intentions and containing dispositions intended by him to take effect upon his death and to be explanatory of his (previously and formally executed) will, should be treated as an addendum to that will and, together with that will, admitted to probate pursuant to the equivalent legislation in South Australia. In my opinion, consistently with that decision, an informal document held to constitute a will under s.18A may be admitted to probate together with another document constituting a will of the deceased (whether formally executed or not), provided of course that one such document does not purport to revoke the other.

The second qualification referred to above is that it may be inferred from all the documents dated 20 August 1994, read in the light of the surrounding circumstances, that it was clearly the deceased's intention at the time she prepared and signed the 1994 will instrument that after her death the proceeds of sale of her house and its contents (apart from the items specifically bequeathed) should be distributed equally between the five children of her second marriage. It may be that on the true construction of the 1994 will document, the words "with each other" appearing therein would not be treated as giving that instrument any different effect. But it is possible that by reason of the inclusion of those words, that instrument might be construed as containing a disposition of the house to John and Christine alone in equal shares. Such a construction would in my view be clearly contrary to the deceased's actual intention. The 1989 amending legislation which inserted s.18A into the Act also inserted s.29A which empowers the Court to rectify a will expressed so that it fails to carry out the testator's intentions. That power is particularly significant in the case of informal documents constituting wills, which would typically be prepared without legal advice or assistance. I respectfully agree with the decision of Hodgson J in Spooner v
Estate J T Therry-Ward (Davis) (28 July 1995 unreported) in which his Honour held that the power of rectification provided by s.29A may properly be utilised ex abundanti cautela to remove a situation of doubt as to the true construction of a will. A similar course was taken by Powell J in granting probate under s.18A of an informal document which his Honour rectified under s.29A in The Estate of Nicholas Ernest Bray (25 October 1991 unreported).

That is what I tentatively consider should occur in the present case, by means of an order under s.29A rectifying the 1994 will instrument by omitting the words "with each other".

Subject to any further submissions which may be made, I would propose that there be admitted to probate: the 1994 will instrument omitting the words "with each other"; the 1994 letter to John omitting the passages commencing "I am writing" and concluding "it comes through", and commencing "John both you and
Christine" to the end of the document; and the 1994 letter to Christine omitting the passages commencing "I am writing" and concluding "look after yourself", and commencing "I am leaving" to the end of the document.
 [The proceedings were relisted on 16 May 1996, at which time no party sought to make further submissions and the Court made final orders in accordance with the above reasons for judgment.] * * * 
