

Peter Li versus Joseph Eliezer [1997] NSWSC 167 (1 May 1997) 
Peter LI versus Joseph ELIEZER /96 
Thursday, 1 May 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: Pursuant to <case> of the [Residential Tenancies Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/) the plaintiff appeals from a decision of the Residential Tenancies Tribunal. S 107(2) is in the following somewhat unusual terms: "If, in proceedings before it, the Tribunal decides a question with respect to a matter of law, a party to the proceedings who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision." 
On 18 October 1996 the Tribunal, constituted by the first defendant, ordered the plaintiff to pay to the defendant the sum of $5,000. It is against this order that the plaintiff brings this appeal. The defendant's sole argument is that no "question of law" is raised by the appeal.

On 26 July 1996 the plaintiff (the landlord) and the second defendant (the tenant) entered into a residential tenancy agreement for the occupation of premises at 13/1-3 Lachlan Avenue, North Ryde for a period of twelve months commencing on 29 July 1996.

Clause 18.1 of the agreement provided as follows: "18. The landlord agrees: .1 to provide and maintain locks or other security devices necessary to keep the residential premises reasonably secure;..." 
By [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/s29.html) of the Act such is, in any event, a term of every residential tenancy agreement.

The second defendant and his wife entered into occupation on 29 July 1996. On August they returned to find that the premises had been unlawfully entered and their possessions stolen. In the Tribunal the second defendant sought an order declaring that the plaintiff had "breached the agreement by not providing the premises in a reasonable state of security" and an order for compensation for the goods stolen in the amount of $5,000. He alleged that the front door was not reasonably secure as required both by the Act and the agreement.

The Tribunal made the following findings: "The evidence established that the set of keys handed to Ms Eliezer on 29 July was the only set of keys for the premises that were held by the agent and that that set had been out of the agent's control on a number of occasions between 19 and 29 July 1996 for varying periods of time. Under those circumstances it would have been impossible for the agent to assure the tenant when the keys were handed to Ms Eliezer on 29 July 1996 that there was no possibility that a duplicate set of keys could have come into existence in the meantime.

I was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there had been no forced entry to the residential premises during the time Mr and Ms Eliezer were absent on 1 August 1996. I was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that whoever gained access to the premises and stole Mr Eliezer's possessions did so by using a set of duplicate keys and that the striker plate was removed and thrown onto the floor inside the unit to give the false impression that access had been gained by force. The lack of damage to the striker plates, the original two screws that fixed the striker plate to the door jamb, the door jamb (frame) and the door itself pointed to non forcible access.

The only set of keys to the premises that had been made available to the landlord's agent by the landlord was out of the control of the agent for varying periods of time on several occasions between 19 and 29 July 1996. The agent was not in a position, therefore, to give an assurance to the tenant that there could not be another set of keys in existence that would allow the possessor of such a set of keys to access the premises. That such an assurance was not requested is immaterial. Accordingly, I was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the landlord was in breach of his duty under clause 18.1 of the Residential Tenancy Agreement [(s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/s29.html) of the Act.)" 
Two distinct arguments were raised on behalf of the plaintiff. The first was that the findings of fact concerning the mode of entry and the existence of a duplicate set of keys were, as a matter of law, not open on the evidence. The second was that the Tribunal applied a wrong test on the construction of claim .1 and the landlord's obligation thereunder.
The Findings of Fact.

At the outset, the plaintiff confronted a number of difficulties. The first is that the oral evidence in the Tribunal was not recorded. The plaintiff relied upon brief summaries of the evidence of each witness which appear in the written reasons for the decision of the Tribunal.

From these summaries, the argument ran, it can be seen that the Tribunal drew inferences of fact which were not available to it. To support his contention that a question of law is so raised, counsel for the plaintiff referred to the decisions of the Full Court of this Court in Carr versus Baker <case>; [(1936) 36 SR 301], and of the High Court in Jones versus Dunkel [(1959) 1012 CLR 298.] In the former case Jordan CJ wrote: "In a Court of justice, the question whether a particular fact has been proved must be determined by considering evidence and seeing whether the existence of the fact is probable in the light of that evidence. In a civil matter, it is necessary, in order that a fact may be regarded as established, that the evidence should be such that it is more probable that it exists than that it does not ...

It has been clearly and emphatically laid down by the House of Lords that in no case can a fact be regarded as established unless its existence is at least a reasonable inference from some matter proved in evidence. It is not sufficient that there should be some ground for conjecturing that the fact exists. There must be evidence affording ground for treating it as existing as a matter of inference and not of conjecture ...the existence of a fact may be inferred from other facts when those facts make it reasonably probable that it exists; if they go no further than to show that it is possible that it may exist, then its existence does not go beyond mere conjecture. Conjecture may range from the barely possible to the quite possible. Inferences of probability may range from a faint probability - a mere scintilla of probability such as would not warrant a finding in a civil action ... to such practical certainty as would justify a conviction in a criminal prosecution.
`In discussing whether there is in any case evidence to go to the jury, what the Court has to consider is this, whether, assuming the evidence to be true, and adding to the direct proof all such inferences of fact as in the exercise of a reasonable intelligence the jury would be warranted in drawing from it, there is sufficient to support the issue'... It is well established that if there is no piece of evidence which, taken at its highest, is more than equally consistent with the existence and with the non existence of a fact, it cannot be treated as established ..." (pp306-7) 
From the latter case, counsel relied upon a passage from the judgment of Dixon
CJ in which his Honour quoted a passage from Bradshaw versus McEwans Pty
Limited (High Court of Australia, unreported, 27 April 1951) and said: "But the law which this passage attempts to explain does not authorise a court to choose between guesses, where the possibilities are not unlimited, on the ground that one guess seems more likely than another or the others. The facts proved must form a reasonable basis for a definite conclusion affirmatively drawn of the truth of which the tribunal of fact may reasonably be satisfied." (p 305) 
Counsel referred also to the following passages from the judgment of Kitto J: "One does not pass from the realm of conjecture into the realm of inference until some fact is found which positively suggests, that is to say provides a reason, special to the particular case under consideration, for thinking it likely that in that actual case a specific event happened or a specific state of affairs existed." 
Counsel's argument was that, in making the findings of fact that it did, the
Tribunal had no direct evidence, and inferred those facts from the evidence which was before it. In doing so the Tribunal never passed from the realm of conjecture.

I do not accept this. The Tribunal noted evidence given by the second defendant's wife that, when she left the apartment on the morning of the intrusion, she had secured both of the locks fitted to the front door.
Although it did not specifically say so, it is plain that the Tribunal accepted this evidence. That evidence became significant in the light of evidence given by Mr Jonathan Wright, a locksmith who was called on behalf of the plaintiff. He described the two locks on the door, the higher of which was a deadlock, and the lower of which was a "button in the centre of the handle" style, described as a fairly standard fitting to home units.

He observed damage to the upper lock and to the door jamb but although the door had been forced he saw no sign of damage to the door itself. Nor was there any damage to the lower lock, although he would have expected damage if it had been secured as asserted by Mrs Eliezer. By this, of course, he must have meant that he would have expected damage to that lock if it had been secured and the door had been forced.

The Tribunal did not accept Mr Wright's evidence without reservation, noting that this event was one not out of the ordinary for a person of his occupation and that it would be difficult for him to recall with accuracy the details of any specific incident. But, assuming, as I do, that the Tribunal accepted the evidence of Mrs Eliezer that she had locked the lower lock, and accepted that part of Mr Wright's evidence in which he asserted that, if that were so, and if there had been a forced entry, he would have expected damage to that lock, and that there was no sign of such damage, then it was open to the Tribunal to look elsewhere for an explanation for the intrusion. The Tribunal's acceptance of Mrs Eliezer's evidence in this regard was fatal to the ultimate opinion of
Mr Wright that there had been forced entry. The two facts, on Mr Wright's evidence, could not stand together. The alternative explanation was found in the evidence of Ms Patricia Arndell, who was the agent of the plaintiff.
Cross-examination elicited from Ms Arndell, that prior to the second defendant's entry into occupation, a number of tradespersons had had possession of the only set of keys held by the agency, for the purpose of attending the premises to perform work.

This was not a case in which a large variety of explanations or possible explanations for what occurred were advanced. There appear to have been only two:- a forced entry by an intruder: an unlawful entry by a person with access to a set of keys to the premises.

The forced entry scenario was rejected because of the combined effect of the evidence given by Ms Eliezer and Mr Wright. If the lower lock had been secured, it would have been damaged by a forced entry. It was not damaged.
Therefore, the Tribunal having accepted that it had been locked when Ms
Eliezer left the premises, the forced entry had to be rejected.

No other possibility appears to have been advanced to the Tribunal.

There were two aspects to the inferences drawn by the Tribunal. The first was that entry was gained by the use of keys and not force, and this inference, I think, was open. The second was the finding that damage was done to give a false impression of forced entry. The basis for this inference does not appear from the summaries of evidence provided in the Tribunal's decision, but that is not to say that there was no such basis in the oral evidence given. In any event, it seems to me, that finding is not necessary for the Tribunal's ultimate conclusion.

Although the inferences drawn by the Tribunal were not necessarily those which
I would have drawn had I been hearing the matter at first instance, I am satisfied that the operative finding goes beyond the realm of conjecture and was an inference the Tribunal was entitled to draw.

I reject this basis of the appeal.
Clause 18.1 
The second argument concerns the conclusions of the Tribunal that, in circumstances in which there was a possibility of duplicate keys having been made, the agent was unable to assure the Eliezers that there was no possibility that a duplicate set of keys could have come into existence in the meantime. Counsel for the plaintiff provided copies of dictionary definitions of the words "reasonable/reasonably" and "secure". The word "reasonably" is so familiar to the law that dictionary definitions are unnecessary to advance comprehension of phrases where the word is used, and "secure" is a sufficiently plain English word again as not to require the assistance of dictionaries in its construction in the present instance. Nor do I consider that the use by the Tribunal, on more than one occasion of the word "assure" or its derivatives demonstrates that the Tribunal applied a wrong test. It is clear that the Tribunal was concerned with the admitted fact that the keys to the premises had been in the hands of others who had the opportunity to have duplicates made, and the impact of that circumstance on the security of the premises.

The decision of the Tribunal must be affirmed.
 * * * 
