

Espada versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales Matter No 12476/93 [1997]
NSWSC 401 (15 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Espada versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales /93  September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /93 - Espada versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff was born in Spain on 31 May 1959. He came to Australia in 1972. He completed his schooling (4th Form) in 1973. 
He married in 1978. There are four children of the marriage (born between 1979 and 1989).

The plaintiff first commenced his employment with the defendant in 1978. He recommenced employment with it in 1980. He has worked for it as a labourer, as a fitter's assistant, as a fettler and performing clerical duties. Prior to , the plaintiff had worked for other employers (including in the hospitality industry).

Prior to 23 October 1987, the plaintiff had suffered a number of injuries (either in the course of his employment or whilst playing soccer). The plaintiff says that he recovered from all of these injuries and that, as at 23
October 1987, he was in excellent health.

On 23 October 1987, he was working as a clerk, Acting Division 2, at the defendant's Chullora workshop. He was working in the packing room office. From time to time, he was required to go to the dispatch office. It was in another building. When proceeding to the dispatch office, he had to negotiate down a set of external stairs. The plaintiff says that there were about 8-10 stairs.
There was a brick wall on one side. There was no handrail on the other side.
The stairs consisted of planks of timber which were old and worn out. There were no rubber or metal strips. The wooden surface was uneven. The steps were wet and slippery. It was a wet day.

The plaintiff says that, after negotiating 3 or 4 steps, his right foot went forwards and he went backwards, falling on his back on the stairs.

After this accident, he saw the first aid officer and was sent home to see his own doctor. He was off work until 9 December 1987. The defendant had made changes to the steps (there was a handrail and strips on the planks).

Whilst on leave from his employment with the defendant, on 4 January 1988, he commenced employment with the Hotel Inter-Continental (as a food and wine waiter).

In about 1988, the defendant decided to close down the workshop. The plaintiff was offered a choice of three jobs. He said that he didn't think that he could do any of the three jobs, but he chose the job of a fettler. He says that he was unable to handle that work. He resigned from his employment with the defendant on 23 January 1988.

In March 1989, he resigned from the Hotel Inter-Continental. He had been working full-time. He decided to go to Hobart. This was because of his bankruptcy and embarrassment concerning it. He returned from Hobart in October
During his stay there, he worked both in the hospitality industry and as a taxi driver.

In November 1991, the plaintiff worked for about two weeks in a restaurant.
Save for another short stint in a restaurant at Leura, he was unemployed until
December 1994. He received unemployment and other benefits.

In January 1992, he says that he became aware that he was suffering from a
L5/S1 disc protrusion and that he should be careful about the work he performs. He had been referred to Dr Graham, who prepared a report dated 26
February 1992. The report does not specify any work restrictions. He saw Dr
Smith, who prepared a report dated 27 August 1992. Dr Smith regarded him as being fit for selected duties (but heavy, repetitive or provocative lifting and prolonged or repetitive bending was to be avoided) for an indefinite period.

On 10 December 1994, he commenced employment with Grace Bros at Penrith in a selling capacity. He continues in that employment. He works about 22 to 25 hours per week. He says that he has difficulty working those hours and feels that he cannot do anymore. He does some 8 hour shifts (such as, on weekends which are the busiest times for the store). Exhibit B contains, inter alia, certificates awarded to him during his service with Grace Bros. He said that he had turned down the offer of undertaking a management training program. He has prospects of becoming at least a part-time manager in the near future. He appears to have secure employment and his employer would like him to work longer hours.

He was reviewed by Dr Graham on 26 October 1995, who prepared a report of that date. It seems that he may not have returned to Dr Graham since that time. He was also seen again by Dr Smith in October 1995. There is a report dated 31
October 1995. The view was expressed that the clinical appearance was essentially the same as when he was last seen. At about that time, he was also seen by Dr Evans. He has prepared a report dated 13 October 1995. It expressed the view that the plaintiff was fit only for light work, not requiring bending or twisting of the back, or lifting of weights heavier than 5kg.

These medical visits took place shortly before the plaintiff's claim came to arbitration in December 1995. He saw Dr Bleasel on 7 July 1997. A report dated July 1997 was prepared. It does not express any view as to work restrictions.

The case before me is a rehearing. It would seem that this report was obtained for the purposes of the rehearing.

Save for visits to a general practitioner, he does not appear to have sought medical treatment since 1992. He has continued to have physiotherapy.

Since the accident, he says that he does not perform certain of the household and other tasks that he carried out before the accident. He does not play sport. He was playing competition tennis and soccer. He was playing soccer on a semi-professional basis. His injuries have affected his social life and have caused him to give up various other activities.

During a period of about two months after the accident, and at other times, his wife has provided care and other services (including massages and helping with exercises). The children now help with the performance of household chores.

The possibility of future surgery has been raised by doctors. He says that he will have it if he is advised to undergo it. He wants to go as long as he can without surgery.

He had planned to leave his employment with the defendant after completing ten years of service. This would have come to pass in about 1988. He then intended to work in the hospitality industry. He had hoped to advance to be a captain in the Hotel or a manager. He now enjoys selling. He has said that he may not have stayed in the hospitality industry.

The plaintiff has spent a considerable period in the witness box. He has been cross-examined at some length. A video film was shown during his cross- examination. A strong attack is made on his credibility (including an allegation of exaggeration). In assessing credibility, I have had regard to both demeanour and evidence.

The film is lengthy. It shows the plaintiff at work on two occasions (13 March and 21 June 1997). It demonstrates a presentation of the plaintiff which is inconsistent with evidence that he has given. I should mention one matter.
Prior to the showing of the film, he had said that he could not squat and would not make an attempt to do so when in the box. The film has been seen by
Dr Bodel and he has prepared a report dated 15 August 1997 (see Exhibit 7).
His observations are consistent with my impression of the film.

The plaintiff was not an impressive witness. I do not regard him as being either honest or reliable. I shall mention certain matters. He was evasive.
There are a number of instances in respect of which there have been changes of evidence. There has been non-disclosure of income to the authorities. He has exaggerated his disabilities. He has given other evidence that I do not accept.

I shall briefly refer to certain of the other evidence placed before the
Court. The plaintiff has called Mr Statham. He was a foreman at the time of the accident. The plaintiff has called Ms Yl. She is a business leader at
Grace Bros. The plaintiff has tendered a Statutory Declaration made by his wife together with a medical certificate from Dr Susana Cubas-Borgus (Exhibit
K). Ms Yl appeared to be sympathetic to the plaintiff. I have some reservations as to the weight that can be given to certain of her evidence (including that relating to his physical capacity for work).

There was objection to the tender of the Declaration. The plaintiff's wife was not available for cross-examination (this was said to be for the reasons advanced in the certificate). After some hesitation, it seemed to me that justice was best served if it was admitted. Although it was admitted, I did so with reservations about accepting the reasons advanced for her unavailability.
The Declaration contained material which the defendant (with some justification) wanted to test in cross-examination. As a consequence, the
Court is left to act on untested material. In the circumstances, I am of the view that it has limited probative value.

Both parties have tendered documentation (including bundles of medical reports). Largely, the plaintiff relies on the reports from Drs Graham,
Bleasel, Smith and Evans. The defendant relies on reports from Dr Bodel.

Although liability remained in issue, it was ultimately the subject of the briefest of submissions. The defendant made no submissions in opposition to a finding of negligence. Its submissions were limited to brief argument on the question of contributory negligence. Reference was made to the plaintiff's prior use of the steps and his knowledge that they were wet and slippery. It was suggested that the plaintiff's responsibility should be found in the order of 10-15%.

The defendant bears the onus on this question. I am not satisfied that the onus has been discharged.

I now proceed to the question of quantum. The relevant heads of damage are non-economic loss, past and future loss of earning capacity, past out of pocket expenses, a Fox versus Wood component, past and future care and future expenses. Largely, the parties have adopted extreme positions and there is little common ground.

It is agreed that the plaintiff is entitled to the sum of $5,981.20 for past out of pocket expenses. It is agreed that he is entitled to the sum of $4,331.14 for the Fox versus Wood component. It is agreed that the defendant is entitled to a deduction in the sum of $142,899.05 from the assessed damages by way of defence in respect of workers' compensation payments.

Largely, there is no real dispute as to the nature of the injury suffered by the plaintiff in the accident. The dispute lies in the area of the disability that may be said to flow from the injury.

It seems that, prior to the accident, there was a pre-existing back condition.
He suffered a serious injury in the accident. There was damage to the L5/S1 disc. He has developed right sided sciatica. He continues to suffer pain.
There are restrictions on the exercise of his capacity to work (including restrictions concerning lifting and bending). He needs to be able to change positions at reasonable intervals. His injury is permanent (impairment of function in the back, loss of efficient use of the right leg at or above the knee and loss of the efficient use of the right leg below the knee including the foot). There is a possibility that he may undergo surgery at some unascertained time in the future.

The plaintiff sees the assessment of non-economic loss in the order of two- thirds or 50% of a most extreme case. The defendant sees it in the order of about 20%. There was some contention as to the figure to be used for assessing non-economic loss for this accident. It seems to me that the relevant figure is $180,000.

When regard is had to the relevant circumstances of this case, I consider that non-economic loss should be assessed at 40% of a most extreme case. I allow the sum of $72,000.

I now turn to loss of earning capacity. In this case, like certain of the other heads of damage, the assessment is an extremely difficult task. It is not made any easier by the divergent approaches taken by the parties. There is a problem of finding a reliable measure for his loss.

The parties have prepared schedules. The plaintiff has prepared two schedules for past economic loss. The schedules embody two alternatives. One is based on full-time employment with Grace Bros and claims past loss of earning capacity in the sum of $172,939.74. The other is based on average male weekly earnings and claims past loss of earning capacity in the sum of $152,668.10. There is also a schedule for future economic loss. This claims future economic loss in the sum of $481,346.22. It has been mentioned that the assessment may have to be a matter of judgment. The defendant has prepared a schedule for past loss.
This allows the sum of $2,096 for the past. It is said that a modest cushion in the order of about $30,000 should be allowed for the future.

The evidence throws up a multitude of considerations. I shall briefly refer to some of them. Since the accident, when he has been working, largely the plaintiff has earned more than he did when employed by the defendant at the time of the accident. He was then performing clerical duties. This job was soon to disappear and be replaced by heavier work. He has had full-time employment (Hotel Inter-Continental). A part of his earnings comprised tips (which were not disclosed and have been the subject of somewhat vague evidence). He had planned to leave the employment of the defendant and work in the hospitality industry. He did not necessarily intend to remain working in that field. Full-time employment has a potential for the production of significant earnings. Since joining Grace Bros, he has enjoyed selling and it seems that he intends to continue in that field. He seems to be doing very well in it. He has prospects of promotion and a secure job (even in a part- time capacity). The plaintiff's taxation returns are not always a reliable guide to his actual earnings. He did not always disclose his actual earnings in the returns. His recollection of earnings that are not evidenced in documentation is less than reliable. There is a lack of records. There have been periods of unemployment. I consider that he could have done more to obtain employment during that time. He accepts that he has a capacity for clerical work. I am not satisfied that, in recent years, he has fully exercised his capacity to work. If he does have to undergo surgery, there will be time off from work. Also, I bear in mind that the future is largely imponderable.

In the circumstances of this case, the best that the Court can do is assess loss of earning capacity in a somewhat arbitrary fashion. It cannot be done with any mathematical precision. In my view, it is best done by general assessment. Doing the best that I can in the circumstances, I allow $50,000 for the past and $110,000 for the future.

Past care is claimed in the sum of $83,139.06. Future care is claimed in the sum of $191,715.93. The defendant is prepared to allow about $2,000 for the past and opposes any award for the future.

The relevant evidence (such as it is) is by and large unhelpful. I shall briefly mention certain of the relevant matter. There is no medical evidence to support any need for care. The material provided by the wife has limited probative value. Also, it is significantly directed towards a loss of services suffered by her and other members of the family. Largely, the plaintiff's evidence on matters pertaining to this head of damage lacked plausibility.
There probably was some need for care for a period following the accident.
There may have been some need for assistance from time to time over the years (the plaintiff has given evidence of "flare-ups"). It really cannot be specified or quantified with any precision. There may be some need in the future (inter alia, if he does undergo surgery). The best I can do is arbitrarily assess some general figure which can be allowed for both past and future care. Doing the best I can in the circumstances, I allow a global sum of $15,000.

There is a claim for future treatment expenses in the sum of $110,839.05. This contemplates the making of an allowance for physiotherapy, medication and visits to general practitioners and specialists, in addition to the prospect of the costs of future surgery. The defendant disputes the allowing of any sum for this head of damage.

In certain respects, the evidence pertaining to this question is either lacking or relatively vague. I shall briefly mention certain of the relevant matters. Largely, there is little medical support for the claim. He has a need for medication. He does spend money on medication. He has undergone physiotherapy. However, at best, he only obtains a little bit of benefit from it. He has said that sometimes it does more harm than good. Whilst I take the view that the claim made is not reasonable, it is appropriate to make some allowance as there may be a need for such treatment from time to time in the future. In the past, he has not needed to see a specialist every year. Indeed since 1992, it seems that he has only seen a specialist for the purposes of forthcoming litigation. He probably does need to make some visits. There is the prospect that he may undergo surgery in the future. There are competing views concerning the need for surgery. He is entitled to have the benefit of the value of the chance that he will undergo that surgery.

Again, the Court can best only make some arbitrary assessment. Doing the best that I can in the circumstances, I allow a global sum of $20,000 for future expenses.

The total of the amount allowed is $277,312.34. From this sum is to be deducted the amount of the workers' compensation payments. After the making of that deduction, $134,413.29 remains. There will be judgment in the rounded sum of $134,500.

The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
