

Cat Media Pty Ltd versus Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd [2006] NSWSC 790 (9
August 2006) 
Last Updated: 10 August 2006 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Cat Media Pty Ltd versus Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 50064/04  
HEARING DATE{S): 28 July 2006  
DECISION DATE: 09/08/2006  
PARTIES: 
Cat Media Pty Limited (ACN 077 817 522) (plaintiff) 
Allianz Australia Limited (ACN 000 122 850) (defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Bergin J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr JAC Potts (plaintiff) 
Mr AS Martin SC/ Mr SA Wells (defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Clayton Utz (plaintiff) 
McMahons National Lawyers (defendant)  
CATCHWORDS:  [COSTS] Application for indemnity costs - Calderbank letter - whether genuine offer of compromise - whether rejection of offer unreasonable - whether interest to be awarded.  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Indemnity costs refused - interest awarded.  
JUDGMENT:  - 17 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
COMMERCIAL LIST  
BERGIN J  AUGUST 2006  /04 CAT MEDIA PTY LTD versus ALLIANZ AUSTRALIA INSURANCE LTD  
JUDGMENT  On 24 May 2006 I published my reasons for dismissing the plaintiff's (Cat
Media Pty Ltd) Second Further Amended Summons in which it sought the entry of judgment for $2.5 million against the defendant (Allianz Australia Insurance
Ltd) for interruption to its business allegedly pursuant to its entitlements under the policy of insurance with the defendant (the Policy): Cat Media Pty
Ltd versus Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd <case> (the judgment).  On 14 June 2006 the defendant filed a Notice of Motion seeking an order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs and disbursements of the proceedings on a party and party basis up until 28 February 2006 and on an indemnity basis thereafter. The defendant claims that such costs order should include costs of the defendant's Cross-Claim, the plaintiff's Notice of Motion dated 11 May and the defendant's Notice of Motion seeking costs and other orders.  The defendant also seeks an order pursuant to [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s101.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), that the plaintiff pay interest on the costs and disbursements the subject of any order made against it calculated on the basis of an Allowed Percentage of each amount of costs and disbursements actually paid by the defendant, from the date of payment by the defendant until the payment of those costs and disbursements by the plaintiff. The Allowed Percentage is based on the formula ((y/x) x 100)% where: "x" is the total amount of costs and disbursements that the defendant has paid or is liable to pay to its legal advisors in connection with the proceedings; and "y" is the total amount of costs and disbursements allowed on assessment to the defendant in connection with the proceedings.  The Notice of Motion was heard on 28 July 2006 when Mr JAC Potts, of counsel, appeared for the plaintiff and Mr AS Martin SC, leading Mr SA Wells, of counsel, appeared for the defendant.  
Relevant facts  The plaintiff made a claim on the defendant under the Policy on 10 June
The defendant denied indemnity on 4 July 2003. The plaintiff commenced the proceedings on 19 May 2004. On 16 September 2005 the matter was set down for hearing for 2 weeks commencing on 27 March 2006. On 31 January 2006 the defendant's solicitors, McMahons National Lawyers, wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors, Clayton Utz, in terms that included the following:  
We have reviewed the pleadings and evidence in this matter and have formed the view that Allianz is likely to succeed in its defence of CAT Media's claim and its cross-claim against your client.  
We say that CAT Media did not suffer any loss resulting from any interruption or interference with its business which falls within the terms of the Policy.
Any loss did not arise from the closure of any part of PAN Pharmaceutical's premises ("PAN's premises") by order of a competent public authority consequent upon a defect in sanitary arrangements at those premises.  
There are a number of reasons for this. Firstly, there were no defects in the sanitary arrangements at PAN's premises. Secondly, the letter dated 28 April from the delegate of the Secretary of Department of Health and Ageing to the managing director, PAN, did not constitute an order from a competent public authority nor was it issued consequent upon any defect in the sanitary arrangements at PAN's premises. Thirdly, there was no closure of any part of
PAN's premises by order of a competent public authority. Fourthly, CAT Media did not suffer any loss of Gross Profit or any loss in respect of Payroll.  
Even if CAT Media is successful in its claim against Allianz (contrary to
Allianz's primary position), the amount CAT Media can recover in respect of defective sanitary arrangements is limited to $100,000.00 under the terms of the Policy. The term so limiting the amount to be recovered under the Policy is the subject of Allianz's cross-claim against CAT Media for rectification of the terms of the Policy.  
The sub-limit of $100,000.00 for Allianz's liability to indemnify in respect of the defective sanitary arrangements was inserted in [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s1.html) instead of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s2.html) of the Placing Schedule of the Policy. The insertion of the sub-limit in the wrong place in the Placing Schedule was made by Marsh Commercial Insurance
Agencies Pty Limited, the insurance broker acting on behalf of CAT Media.  
The insertion of the $100,000.00 sub-limit was made as a result of a mistake common to both CAT Media and Allianz or, alternatively, as a result of a mistake by Allianz of which CAT Media was aware. Accordingly, we are of the opinion that Allianz is likely to succeed in its rectification claim against your client.  
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Allianz is aware of the risks of litigation and is willing to settle this matter on a commercial basis. Accordingly, Allianz offers to pay CAT Media the sum of $100,000.00 on the basis that each party pay its own costs in full and final settlement of the claim and cross-claim in these proceedings. This offer remains open for acceptance for 28 days from the date of receipt of this letter.  
This offer is made on a without prejudice basis in accordance with the principles laid down in the Calderbank versus Calderbank [[1975] 3 WLR .]  
In the event that the offer is not accepted and that CAT Media does not obtain a result better than this offer, we give you notice that Allianz intends to apply for indemnity costs against CAT Media and proposes to tender this letter in support of that application.  On 28 February 2006 Clayton Utz responded to McMahons' letter in terms that included the following:  .2 We are instructed to make a counter offer in full and final settlement of this matter of $1.75 million (inclusive of interest and costs). Our client's offer is based upon the analysis below. 
Cat Media's Claim  .1 Cat Media's claim is for business interruption losses under ISR Policy No.
 0001 489 ISC (the "Policy"), underwritten by Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited ("Allianz"), for $2.5 million plus interest and costs.
Cat Media's losses flow directly and indirectly from the closure of one of its suppliers, Pan Pharmaceuticals Limited ("Pan"), on or about 28 April 2003.  ...  .4 The evidence clearly demonstrates that the relevant manufacturing facilities of Pan were closed and that the reasons related to GMP, including issues of contamination and cleanliness. The closure of this part of the operations is sufficient to trigger indemnity under the Policy. It is not necessary for our client to establish that the whole of the Pan's premises were closed or that the closure was without interruption. The Policy requires only that Pan's premises were closed "in part".  ...  .6 Our client's case accords with commonsense. We expect that a Court would find it difficult if not impossible not to find that a key part of Pan's premises (i.e. the production line) was shut down for some time as a result of order by the TGA and that as a result our client suffered financial loss.  ...  .8 In light of the evidence, our client remains surprised that your client remains reluctant to recognise the claim made under the Policy. 
Rectification - Cross Claim  .1 The Cross-claim filed on behalf of Allianz, and its evidence does not demonstrate any reasonable or convincing prospects of success.  .2 At best, your client's evidence only suggests that Allianz may have been mistaken in respect of the $100,000 sub-limit of indemnity for defective sanitary arrangements. As a matter of law, this is insufficient to establish an entitlement to rectification.  .3 In any event, there is no evidence that Cat Media (through its agent
Marsh) was aware and conscious of this mistake and purposely did not draw this mistake to Allianz's attention in order for the insurance contract to be agreed on this incorrect basis.  .4 Accordingly, your client's rectification case must fail.  ... 
Offer of Compromise  .1 Our client is confident that its claim will succeed at hearing. It is similarly evident that your client's cross-claim will fail.  .2 Nevertheless, our client is an experienced litigant. In an attempt to save the time and costs that it will incur, we are instructed to make a without prejudice offer in full and final settlement of our client's claim and the cross-claim for $1.75 million (inclusive of interest and costs).  .3 This represents fifty percent of our client's claim of $3.5 million (being the total of the limit of indemnity of $2.5 million, interest and costs). We are instructed to stress that this offer in no way reflects our client's assessment of its prospects of success. It is calculated to afford our client with costs protection. The discount offered represents the compromise it is prepared to make to avoid further costs being incurred and management time being expended in relation to the litigation.  .4. This offer is made on behalf of the plaintiff only and will remain open for acceptance by the defendant prior to the expiry of 28 days from the date of this letter.  .5 This offer is made in accordance with the principles set out in the decision in Calderbank versus Calderbank [[1975] 3 WLR 586] and, should your client not accept the offer, we reserve our client's right to produce this letter to the Court on the question of costs at which time our client will be seeking an order for full indemnity costs from the date of this letter.  The judgment refers to the following relevant history of the proceedings:  The proceedings (initially on all issues) were heard on 27, 28 and 30 March , and 3 and 4 April 2006. Mr JB Simpkins SC, leading Mr JAC Potts, of counsel, appeared for the plaintiff and Mr AS Martin SC, leading Mr SA Wells, of counsel, appeared for the defendant. On 3 April 2006 problems arose concerning late evidence the plaintiff wished to call in relation to the trend of the plaintiff's business. To accommodate this difficulty I made an order on that day, by consent, that the question of liability be determined separately and in advance of all other issues. I reserved my judgment on 4 April 2006.  On 11 May 2006 the parties were notified that judgment would be delivered on 12 May 2006. On 12 May 2006 the plaintiff made application: (a) to amend its Further Amended Summons to claim that the term "the Premises" in the
Infectious and Contagious Diseases modification or extension clause in the
Policy (the extension clause) includes Pan's Premises: and (b) to vary the order for the separate determination of liability made on 3 April 2006 to accommodate a hearing of the issues in the proposed amendment, in effect, to re-open its case. I deferred the delivery of judgment and heard the plaintiff's application today. I allowed the amendment to the Further Amended
Summons but refused the application to re-open for the reasons given in the separate judgment delivered today.   The plaintiff's application of 12 May 2006 referred to in paragraph 20 of the judgment was a reference to the plaintiff's Notice of Motion dated 11 May and was heard on the morning of 24 May 2006. I delivered the judgment in the afternoon of 24 May 2006.  
Relevant principles  In Leichhardt Municipal Council versus Green <case>,
Santow JA, with whom Bryson JA and Stein AJA concurred, observed that
Calderbank offers are allowed because they facilitate the public policy objective of providing an incentive for parties to end their litigation as soon as possible (at [14]). The principles gleaned from this decision relevant to this application are as follows:  - the cost consequences attendant under the general law upon an offer of compromise made in a Calderbank letter are in the Court's discretion, to be exercised having regard to all of the relevant circumstances of the case [19];  - there is not a prima facie presumption in favour of an award for indemnity costs if the Calderbank offer is not accepted and is not bettered [19];  - a Calderbank offer that has no real element of compromise in it, which is designed merely to trigger costs sanctions, will not be treated as a genuine offer of compromise [23]-[24];  - there is no rule that an optimistic offer is not a genuine offer. Whether or not it was reasonable to reject an offer is a question that may figure in the discretionary balance, but it is not a question which affects the genuineness of the offer [40];  - an applicant for an order for indemnity costs consequent upon an unaccepted
Calderbank offer must show that the rejection of the offer was unreasonable <case>, the Court (Giles, Ipp and Tobias JJA) referred to the onus being upon the applicant for the order for indemnity costs consequent upon an unaccepted
Calderbank offer "to establish to the Court's satisfaction" that in all the circumstances the failure to accept the offer was "unreasonable" [26].  
Was the offer a genuine offer of compromise?  The offer was for the defendant to pay the plaintiff $100,000 with each party to bear their own costs. The plaintiff submitted that the offer was made just under 8 weeks before the hearing commenced by which stage the evidence was complete and the matter was ready to proceed to hearing. It was submitted that the defendant knew at the time it made the offer that the $100,000 would cover only a portion of the plaintiff's costs incurred up to that time. It was submitted that the offer was, in reality, no more than an invitation to capitulate. In this regard the plaintiff relied upon the following passage of
Bryson JA's judgment in Leichhardt at [59]:  
The respondent's case did not succeed but it was not a case which could not reasonably be argued ... The only element of compromise in the offer was as to costs: otherwise it was a call on the respondent to capitulate and give up: the element of compromise was slight and the respondent's ultimate lack of success does not to my mind demonstrate that the reasonable course for the respondent was to capitulate, nor does anything show that the respondent was delinquent with going on with the trial or in resisting the appeal.  The plaintiff submitted that this was an offer with no genuine element of compromise within it and was merely a device designed to trigger costs consequences.  The defendant submitted that the offer to pay $100,000 inclusive of costs was better than an offer to "walk away". In this regard the defendant relied upon what Santow JA said in Leichhardt in respect of whether a "walk away" offer could be a genuine offer of compromise. A walk away offer can, in a particular case, be a genuine offer and in some cases an offer which allows only a small discount from 100% success can be genuine and realistic but it depends on the circumstances: [36]-[37].  It was submitted that this offer was better than a walk away offer in that the plaintiff would be subjected to an adverse costs order if the defendant were successful on its construction of any one of the elements of the sanitary arrangements extension of the Policy. It was submitted that the offer required the defendant to give up its opportunity to recover its costs if it succeeded against the plaintiff at trial and that the offer represented a very significant advantage to the plaintiff, namely, the avoidance of an adverse costs order against it should it not succeed.  An offer to pay only a portion of the plaintiff's costs at such a late stage of the proceedings may well present as equivalent to a requirement that the plaintiff capitulate. I am of the view that it is a borderline case but on balance, the fact that the defendant was willing at that time to give up - or compromise - what it saw as its strong position and pay $100,000 to the plaintiff persuades me that the offer was a genuine offer of compromise.  
Was the rejection of the offer unreasonable?  The defendant submitted that the reasons put forward by the plaintiff for rejection of the offer, set out in Clayton Utz' letter of 28 February 2006, were legally and factually inadequate. The plaintiff rejected the defendant's offer and put its counter-offer of $1.75 million on the basis that the "relevant manufacturing facilities of Pan were closed" and that "closure of this part of the operations" was sufficient to "trigger indemnity" under the policy. The defendant relied upon the following portions of the judgment to submit that the reasoning process upon which the rejection of the offer was based has been demonstrated to be "flawed":  It seems to me that the word "competent" is directed to the authority with jurisdiction over the specific events and with relevant powers to make orders for the closure or evacuation of the Premises. I am of the view that the power provided to the Secretary under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s41.html) of the Act to suspend Pan's License is not a power to close or evacuate the whole or part of the Premises as that expression is to be understood in the extension clause.  I am of the view that it is not appropriate to characterise the suspension of the Licence as an order by a competent public authority closing Pan's
Premises within the meaning of that expression in the extension clause.  ...  The meaning that the plaintiff attributes to the expression "other sanitary arrangements" in this Policy seems to me to be both strained and unrealistic.
The uncertainty that such a meaning could cause to the defendant and the plaintiff would include the prospect of having premises closed and/or evacuated by reason of dusty equipment. It does not seem to me to have been consistent with the commercial intention of the parties that the presence of particle dust on walls and/or machinery could be a basis upon which people should be ordered to evacuate the Premises or be prohibited from entering the
Premises. To my mind that is not a "businesslike interpretation" of this clause.  ...  I am of the view that the defects in the drains in this clause must be faults that are likely to cause risk to the health or wellbeing of the people at the Premises as opposed to faults that are, for instance, merely cosmetic with no consequential danger to the health or wellbeing of the people at the
Premises. This construction is supported by the location of these matters in subparagraph (ii) between the two events, the occurrence of infectious or contagious disease (subpar (i)) and the outbreak of a notifiable infectious or contagious disease (subpar (iii)). Similarly I am of the view that defects in sanitary arrangements other than in drains must be faults that are likely to cause risk to the health or wellbeing of the people at the Premises.  ...  I am of the view that the term "closure" in the extension clause is the closure of the whole, or part of, the building or buildings comprising the
Premises, that is, preventing physical access to the whole or part of the
Premises. The word "closure" does not mean the cessation of manufacture pursuant to the suspension of Pan's Licence.  The purpose of the extension clause is to provide indemnity to the plaintiff for loss occasioned by the interruption to, or interference with, its business by reason of the unavailability of product caused by the closure or evacuation of Pan's Premises by reason of the events referred to in the extension clause. The Premises were not closed when the Licence was suspended.
There was access to the Premises and product was manufactured for the purpose of training the staff and analysing and testing the product to meet the standards in the Manufacturing Principles. There was no "closure" of the
Premises as that expression is to be understood within the extension clause of the Policy. This clause does not indemnify the plaintiff if there is an inability to manufacture product because the Licence permitting such manufacture has been suspended.  The defendant also submitted that the plaintiff's assertion in Clayton Utz' letter that the defendant had not filed any evidence disputing that an order of a competent public authority was made, ignored the fact that it was the plaintiff that bore the onus in respect of those matters. It was submitted that if the plaintiff had properly construed the Policy it should have accepted the defendant's offer and that its rejection based on the failure to accept the correct construction was unreasonable.  Mr Potts submitted that the presence of the Cross-Claim seeking rectification of the Policy complicated the process of consideration of the offer. Emphasis was placed upon the heavy burden of proof on an applicant for rectification. As can be seen from the judgment it was not necessary to decide the Cross-Claim because of the conclusion I reached in respect of the construction of the Policy. The defendant was not liable to indemnify the plaintiff and accordingly the claim for rectification was otiose.  The claim made by the plaintiff in respect of the construction of the
Policy was arguable, notwithstanding the epithets that I applied to aspects of the construction for which the plaintiff contended at trial. The plaintiff was therefore placed in the position of having to consider the offer in circumstances of an arguable case at a time very close to trial. It also had to consider the offer, which as I have said was borderline as to whether it was a genuine offer of compromise, in circumstances where the defendant was seeking rectification of the Policy. It was not a straightforward situation and although I have found that the defendant's offer was a genuine offer of compromise, it would not necessarily have presented as such at the time the offer was made.  I am not satisfied that the plaintiff's conduct was unreasonable and accordingly I am of the view that the usual order should not be disturbed in the circumstances of this case. I refuse to make an order for indemnity costs.  
Cross-Claim  Mr Potts submitted that the plaintiff should not be required to pay the defendant's costs of the Cross-Claim having regard to the fact that I found it unnecessary to decide the claim. In this regard reliance was placed upon the following portion of McHugh J's judgment in Re Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin <case>; [(1987) 186 CLR 622] at 624-625:  
Ordinarily, the power is exercised after a hearing on the merits and as a general rule the successful party is entitled to his or her costs. Success in the action or on particular issues is the fact that usually controls the exercise of the discretion ... When there has been no hearing on the merits, however, a court is necessarily deprived of the factor that usually determines on whether or how it will make a costs order.  
In an appropriate case, a court will make an order for costs even when there has been no hearing on the merits and the moving party no longer wishes to proceed with the action. The court cannot try a hypothetical action between the parties. To do so would burden the parties with the costs ... they had avoided. In some cases, however, the court may be able to conclude that one of the parties had acted so unreasonably that the other party should obtain the costs of the action.  ...  
Moreover, in some cases a judge may feel confident that, although both parties have acted reasonably, one party was almost certain to have succeeded if the matter had been fully tried. ... But such cases are likely to be rare.  
If it appears that both parties have acted reasonably in commencing and defending the proceedings and the conduct of the parties continued to be reasonable ... the proper exercise of the cost discretion will usually mean that the court will make no order as to the cost of the proceedings. This approach has been adopted in a large number of cases.  In this case the parties did litigate the Cross-Claim. The evidence was before the Court and the parties made submissions in relation to the relief sought. It was unnecessary to decide those issues because of the findings made in relation to the construction of the Deed. This case is therefore different to a case that is settled without any evidence being tendered. Mr Potts submitted that I should not be drawn into making a decision on the merits of this case for the purposes of determining a costs order having regard to the fact that I held that it was unnecessary to decide the rectification suit.  I am satisfied that the defendant behaved most reasonably in bringing the
Cross-Claim in response to the plaintiff's claim. On one view it might have taken a robust approach to its construction of the Policy and awaited the outcome of the proceedings before seeking rectification of the Policy.
However, I regard the approach that it adopted as one that was consistent with the overriding principles of the "just, quick and cheap" resolution of proceedings in this List. I do not intend to be drawn into making a finding on the merits, however I am in a position to say, having regard to the evidence that was relied upon at trial, that the defendant had a strong case in respect of its rectification suit. Taking all of the circumstances into account I am satisfied that it is appropriate that the costs order to be made against the plaintiff should include the costs of the defendant's Cross-Claim.  
Motion dated 11 May 2006  It does not appear to me to be really in issue that the costs awarded against the plaintiff should include the costs of the Notice of Motion brought by the plaintiff to re-open its case and to amend its pleading. As can be seen from the extracted portions of my judgment above I allowed the amendment to the pleading but refused to allow the re-opening of the plaintiff's case for the reasons set out in the ex tempore judgment published on 12 May 2006.  Even if it were in issue I am satisfied that the costs order to be made against the plaintiff should include the defendant's costs of the plaintiff's
Notice of Motion dated 11 May 2006 and argued on 24 May 2006.  
Interest on costs  [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s101.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) provides relevantly:  
The court may order that interest is to be paid on any amount payable under an order for the payment of costs.  
Interest under sub-section (4) is to be calculated, at the prescribed rate or at such other rate as the court may order, as from:  the date or dates upon which the costs concerned were paid, or  such later date as the court may order.  The orders sought in these proceedings are substantially in the same terms as the orders made by Campbell J in Lahoud versus Lahoud <case>
In that case Campbell J dealt with costs applications in respect of proceedings that were heard over seven days by Palmer J, who upheld the claim made by the plaintiff and dismissed the cross-claim brought by the defendants.
The defendants in that case accepted that it was appropriate to make an order against them as they had lost the proceedings but they opposed an indemnity costs order and an order for the payment of interest on costs. Campbell J said relevantly:  In my view it is appropriate to make an order for the payment of interest on costs. There is no requirement, before an order for payment of interest on costs is made, for the Court to be satisfied that the circumstances of the case are out of the ordinary: Grogan versus Thiess Contractors Pty Ltd &
Anor  <case> at <case> per
Barr J; Australian Development Corporation Pty Ltd versus White Constructions
Pty Ltd (in liquidation) & Ors  <case> at <case>- <case> per
Einstein J; Puntoriero & Anor versus Water Administration Ministerial
Corporation  <case> at <case> per Grove J; Davies versus Ku-ring-Gai Municipal Council  <case> at <case> per Austin J.  To the extent to which the plaintiffs have been out of pocket as a result of having to pay their lawyers' costs and disbursements, it is appropriate that the compensation which is recognised in the Court's order for costs take into account the fact that the plaintiffs have been out of pocket in that way:
Hughes Bros versus The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church  <case> at <case>;
Grogan versus Thiess Contractors Pty Ltd & Anor  <case> at <case>;
Woods versus Woods  <case> at <case>;
Australian Development Corporation Pty Limited versus White Constructions (ACT)
Pty Ltd (in liquidation) & Ors  <case> at <case>;
Puntoriero & Anor versus Water Administration Ministerial Corporation  <case> at <case>;
Optus Networks Pty Ltd & Ors versus Leighton Contractors Pty Limited &
Ors  <case> at <case>;
Roads and Traffic Authority versus Cremona (No 3)  <case> at <case>.
Given the length of time the proceedings have been on foot and the extensive preparation, the amount by which the plaintiffs have been out of pocket could be large. It is relevant that the plaintiffs, and the defendants, each conduct businesses and so the amounts which the plaintiffs have had to pay to finance the litigation is likely to be money which otherwise could have been put to a productive use. Conversely, the defendants, by not being required to pay costs until some time in the future when the costs are agreed or assessed, are likely to have been able to retain, for their own productive use, the amount of those costs.  The form of the order for interest on costs has occasioned me some concern.
As the plaintiffs have succeeded in obtaining an order for indemnity costs in relation to only one issue in the proceedings, it is possible that there will be some costs and disbursements which the plaintiff has paid from time to time as the litigation progressed, but which are not allowed on assessment. It might sometimes be possible to cast an order in the form of allowing interest only on such costs as the plaintiff has paid as are allowed on assessment - but such an order would require the assessor to conduct what would amount to a separate assessment in relation to each payment that the plaintiffs had made.
While the making of such a series of costs assessments would be within the scope of section 353 [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/), adopting such a procedure has the potential for making the costs assessment itself more complex and expensive. Further, it sometimes happens in the course of litigation - and the evidence does not tell me whether it has happened in the course of this litigation - that a litigant makes payments to his lawyers from time to time of lump sums on account of costs, without purporting to allocate those payments to particular memoranda of fees or items of work performed. If that had happened in the present case, one could not tell whether the whole or any part of such a payment had been allowed on assessment.  There is no doubt that in this case that the defendant has been paying costs to its legal advisors during the period since the proceedings commenced.
The proceedings were commenced two years ago and the defendant has been out of that money from the time it paid those costs. The plaintiff submitted that the circumstances of this case are not such as to warrant the exercise of my discretion in favour of the defendant as the defendant could hardly be described as being in "indigent circumstances". It is not necessary to establish that an applicant for an award of interest on costs is in such circumstances. This is particularly so in commercial causes. Parties to commercial litigation must understand that where large amounts of money are paid for litigating in this List interest on costs may be awarded to a successful party.  The exercise of this discretion is focused upon the fact that the successful party has been out of its money for some time and the consideration of whether the successful party will be appropriately compensated by an award of costs in its favour without an award of interest. It is not apt to suggest that the defendant is a large insurance company, as was suggested by the submission that it was not in indigent circumstances. It will depend upon the circumstances of each case but where the parties to the litigation are commercial parties suing and being sued for millions of dollars, the fact that the successful party has been out of money that could have been used otherwise in the commercial enterprise is a relevant factor to be taken into account in the exercise of the discretion. The matters to which Campbell J referred in
Lahoud at [84] are relevant to this case.  I am satisfied in all the circumstances that the order for interest proposed by the defendant in its Notice of Motion should be made.  
Orders  I make order 1 in the defendant's Notice of Motion filed on 14 June 2006 but limited to party and party costs only. I refuse the defendant's claim for indemnity costs. I make the order in paragraph 2 of the Notice of Motion, with the deletion of paragraph (b). I make the order in paragraph 3.  Although the defendant did not achieve an order for indemnity costs, it was successful in its application for an award of costs for the Cross-Claim and for an award of interest on costs, both of which were resisted. The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs of the Notice of Motion of 14 June 2006.  
LAST UPDATED: 09/08/2006 * * * 
