

Valassis versus Valverde Matter No Ca 40151/98 [1998] NSWSC 555 (9 November )

Last Updated: 2 December 1998 
DENNIS VALASSIS versus AUREA VALVERDE 
CA 40151/98 November 1998 
Mason P, Giles JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: In 1993 the opponent commenced proceedings against the claimant in the District Court. Both proceedings were heard by Judge Wall, who gave judgment on 16 February 1996. A verdict was found for the defendant with costs. 
The defendant had represented himself in those proceedings. There were orders for costs made in the plaintiff's favour arising out of certain interlocutory steps in the proceedings. The two sets of costs came to be assessed under the procedure for assessment pursuant to the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/).

So far as concerned his own costs, the claimant filed a very detailed bill of costs that had been prepared by Driscoll and Matters Pty Limited, legal cost consultants. Although that application claimed a substantial sum for costs and disbursements, there is evidence before us that Driscoll and Matters had advised the claimant prior to receiving his instructions to prepare his application for assessment that in acting for himself he was not entitled to claim profit costs as if he were a solicitor, and that New South Wales case law indicated that the categories of expenses he could recover were very limited and the amounts minimal. However, the letter that is in evidence confirms that nonetheless the claimant instructed Mr Matters thereafter to prepare a bill as if a solicitor had acted for him in the proceedings.

Although advice had been given in that form that the claimant was running a substantial risk, he ran that risk. The outcome, so far as the costs awarded in his favour were concerned, was that a certificate issued in the sum of $1663 - that is, much less than the amount claimed for costs: indeed, less than the amount claimed for disbursements. This sum does not cover the expense incurred in the preparation of the detailed bill of costs.

It does seem to me on the material that has been put before us that that involved the very risk which the claimant was advised could occur coming home.
Nothing that the claimant has put before us in his written submissions, which
I have read, or his oral argument indicates to me any basis for challenging the assessment by any process.

This is an application for leave to appeal from the orders of Master Malpass, in which he dismissed the summons before him in which the claimant challenged the certificate of costs. The Master also dismissed a related notice of motion in which the claimant sought by joining that summons with some other proceedings to challenge the assessment of costs in favour of the plaintiff in the proceedings below, which was an assessment that came out at a sum a little over $4000.

The Master dismissed both applications and gave his reasons on 26 February
I agree with the reasons that the Master gave for dismissing those proceedings. They were essentially of a procedural nature, but he was also convinced on the material before him that there was no substance lying behind the procedural difficulties. Having read the material and heard Mr Valassis, I am of a like view.

The matter was listed today and, according to a note in the court file, Mr
Bradstreet, the solicitor for the opponent, was notified by telephone that it had been so listed. There was no appearance from Mr Bradstreet, or from anyone else on the part of the opponent. The claimant, Mr Valassis, has indicated that he was content with the matter being adjourned. Indeed, he sought an adjournment on the basis that he would wish to issue a subpoena to Mr
Bradstreet to question Mr Bradstreet about certain matters.

I have not overlooked the submissions by the claimant that there was some conspiracy. All I can say is there is no material to support those submissions and I do not see why the court should issue process designed to try and explore that matter. In essence, much of what the complainant seeks to complain about was the prolongation of the District Court proceedings. Those complaints do not seem to me to go to the question of the challenge to the amount of costs that followed under costs orders which are not themselves the subject of any challenge.

We gave the claimant an opportunity to state what the bases of his challenges to those costs orders were and the transcript will record those bases. Nothing that he put, nor anything in his written submissions, indicates to me that this is a matter in which the court should grant leave, nor should we adjourn the matter to prolong the agony over what is after all a very small amount of money, even if the claimant's contentions were accepted.

Ultimately, the real difficulty the claimant faces is that he appeared for himself and the amount of costs recoverable in favour of a party in that situation is by High Court authority much much less than would be recoverable were a person represented by a solicitor or barrister.

In my view, we should decline the application for an adjournment and dismiss the summons for leave with costs.

GILES JA: I agree with the Acting Chief Justice and in particular, from what one can gather as to what Mr Valassis wished to do in calling Mr Bradstreet, I cannot see that it had anything to do with the application to the Master or the application for leave to appeal from the Master. 
I concur in the orders proposed.

MASON P: The orders will be as I have proposed. * * * 
