

Sydney Land Corporation Pty Limited versus Leisure-Lea Retirement Village
Limited Matter No 4629/98 [1998] NSWSC 665 (3 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
SYDNEY LAND CORPORATION PTY LTD versus LEISURE-LEA RETIREMENT VILLAGE LIMITED /98 December 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I am dealing with a summons for winding up filed on 12th November 1998 and returnable on 11th December 1998 at 11.00am. The plaintiff has consented to an order dismissing the summons with no order as to costs. However, the summons has already been advertised and there is a question whether the Court should order the dismissal of the summons before the return date for hearing. There is the possibility that another creditor or other creditors of the company may be alerted to these proceedings by the notice and may attend on the return date and seek to be substituted. 
Mr. Burton for the defendant company has submitted that that is not a possible eventuality in this case, because the summons is based on the service of a statutory notice and the time for compliance with the statutory notice had not expired prior to the filing of the summons.

The statutory notice was served on 15th September 1998. An application was made under s.459G to set it aside on 6th October 1998, that is within 21 days of service. That application was dismissed on 10th November 1998. In those circumstances, the effect of s.459F(2)(a) is that the defendant had until 17th
November 1998 to comply with the statutory demand.

In circumstances where the summons is based solely on a statutory demand, there is, it seems to me, a theoretical possibility that another party could seek to be substituted and then could seek to prove insolvency as at 12th
November 1998 in some other way; but that is, in my opinion, really only a theoretical possibility and may be disregarded. In those circumstances, I think there is substantial force in Mr. Burton's submission that there is no real possibility that this summons could be successfully pursued by some other creditor.

In addition, I have evidence of a very substantial surplus of assets over liabilities. There is an excess on the balance sheet as at 30th June 1998 of the company of current liabilities over current assets. But on evidence I have received from the managing director of the company, current liabilities are presently within trading terms and the company will have the means to continue to pay them within trading terms. I also have evidence that there is no creditor other than the plaintiff in these proceedings who has either served a statutory demand or complained about payment of debts.

There is also evidence that the company is seeking to re-finance its major borrowing, and also wishes to settle a significant sale; and that this is hindered by the pendency of these winding up proceedings.

In all the circumstances, I think it is appropriate to order immediately that the summons be dismissed. However, I will require an undertaking from the defendant's solicitor to contact the plaintiff's solicitor one day before the date appointed for hearing, to enquire if the plaintiff's solicitor has received any notices under Pt.80A r.9, and to contact any person who has given such a notice in order to advise them of what has happened and, if requested, provide a copy of this judgment.

I note that Lisa Peterson, solicitor acting for the defendant in Court today, undertakes to the court that she will contact the plaintiff's solicitors on the morning of 10th December 1998 to enquire whether the plaintiff's solicitor has received any notices under Pt.80A r.9 in relation to this matter, and if so, will forthwith contact the person or persons giving such notice and advise them about this decision and, if requested, provide them with a copy of this judgment.

I order that the summons be dismissed.

I order that the there be no order as to costs.
 * * * 
