

Fobco P/L versus Harvey [1996] NSWSC 601 (5 December 1996) 
FOBCO PTY LTD versus HARVEY /95; CC 19945/94 DECEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY P, PRIESTLEY JA, BEAZLEY JA 
CATCHWORDS: Workers Compensation - Assessment - Disfigurement - Whether judge could make separate award - Right to lump sum compensation for severe bodily disfigurement.

Courts and Judges - Court of Appeal - Whether Court bound by previous decision.
 [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s65.html), [66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html), [73](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s73.html) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
Worker suffers injury to leg and subsequent severe scarring - successful claim in Compensation Court for lump sum compensation in respect of injury and in respect of disfigurement - Appeal by employer against award for disfigurement - Whether judge could make separate award for disfigurement - Right to lump sum compensation for severe bodily disfigurement - Statutory construction of [s 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) and Table to [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s73.html) 
Court of Appeal - Whether bound by previous decision in Australian
Specialised Meat Products Pty Ltd versus Turner [(1995) 11 NSWCCR 614] -
Whether possible to find ratio decidendi in Turner on the construction of the relevant provisions.

Held: appeal dismissed (by majority - Priestley and Beazley JJA; Mahoney P dissenting) - (i) No ratio decidendi on the construction of the relevant provisions concerning severe bodily disfigurement could be extracted from the earlier decision of Turner such as to bind this Court to uphold the appeal; (ii) (per Beazley JA) Although this Court usually follows previous decisions it is not strictly bound by them.

Bennett & Wood Ltd versus Orange City Council [[1967] 1 NSWR 502]; Nguyen v
Nguyen <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 245]; applied.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: This appeal raises for consideration the effect of the disfigurement provisions contained in the Table to [s 73](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s73.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). 
The facts relevant to the appeal may be summarised briefly. The worker suffered injury to his right leg below the knee and that portion of his leg was badly scarred. He brought proceedings for lump sum compensation under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and [s 73](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s73.html), claiming compensation in respect of the leg and separately in respect of the disfigurement which he suffered.

The judge of the Compensation Court, Manser J, made an award in his favour in which he awarded separately lump sums in respect of the injury to the right leg and the disfigurement. The employer has appealed to this Court against the award. The sole question for decision is whether his Honour could make a separate award for disfigurement.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) provides that a relevant worker is entitled to receive by way of compensation for "the loss of a thing mentioned in the Table to this Division ..." an amount calculated as there provided. The Table provides for compensation in respect of "loss of either leg below the knee". The term "loss" in relation to a thing, is defined to mean, inter alia, "the permanent loss of the use, or of the efficient use, of that thing": [s (1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s65.html)
It includes a reference to "severe facial disfigurement or severe bodily disfigurement": [s (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s65.html) 
In this case, the worker's claim was for the loss of the efficient use of the relevant portion of the right leg. The Table provides for compensation in respect of "Disfigurement": "severe bodily disfigurement (being an injury which is not or is not wholly an injury otherwise compensable under this
Table)".

Other provisions are made in the Division but for present purposes it is not necessary to pursue the detail of them.

Were the legislation to be approached by reference only to the immediate terms of it, the problems apt to arise could, I think, be conveniently divided. What is in issue is the various relationships which may exist between the loss of an efficient use of a thing and disfigurement within the Table. There are various possibilities: 
The loss of the efficient use of the thing, eg, the lower leg may be accompanied by the disfigurement of the lower leg but in such a way that the disfigurement does not increase or reduce the loss of efficient use of that thing. In such a case, it might be thought that the effect of the legislation was that separate lump sum compensation could be awarded in respect of each of the losses, the lower leg and the disfigurement. On such a basis, the "percentage" to be adopted for the purposes of calculating the lump sum compensation would be determined in each case according to what was "reasonably proportionate to" the maximum percentage there provided "having regard to the severity of the matter".

The loss of the efficient use of the thing may be related to the disfigurement in the sense that the fact of the disfigurement may itself cause or contribute to the loss or the extent of it. Thus, a scar may be adhesive and so prevent movement of the leg to an extent which, absent the scar, would be possible.

It is perhaps possible to see the disfigurement, contributing to the loss of efficient use, as doing no more than contribute to the loss of efficient use: I mean by this a kind of disfigurement which would not be of such a nature as to cause embarrassment, distress or such other reactions as would warrant compensation being awarded.

Alternatively, the disfigurement may be such that it not merely contributes to the loss of efficient use of the thing, the leg, but also so interferes with the worker's emotional or other amenity as to warrant separate compensation.
 (The conceptual difference between (2)(a) and (2)(b) is perhaps theoretical rather than real and it is not necessary for present purposes to pursue it further).

As I have indicated, the present case is of the first kind: the disfigurement did not contribute to or affect the extent of the loss of the efficient use.
It is necessary to determine how the act is to apply in such a case.

Prima facie it might be thought that the two things, the loss of efficient use of the right lower leg and the disfigurement, should be assessed separately and separate lump sum compensation should be awarded in respect of each. This is what the judge did in the present case. However, it has been submitted by
Mr Wilkins, for the employer, that in doing this his Honour acted in a manner inconsistent with the principle to be derived from the decision of this Court in Australian Specialised Meat Products Pty Ltd versus Turner [(1995) 11 NSWCCR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2011%20NSWCCR%20614 "View LawCiteRecord" ) It is necessary to examine the relevant portions of the judgments in that case.

In the Turner, the facts were relevantly similar to the present. The trial judge had held that there was no evidence before him that the bodily disfigurement "was a factor relevant to the loss of the efficient use of" the relevant body part: see the citation from his Honour's judgment in the judgment of Priestley JA: at 630; and see at 637, per Rolfe AJA. The trial judge awarded separate lump sum amounts for the loss of the efficient use of the thing in question, the left hand of the worker, and for the disfigurement of her hand and/or wrist which was involved. Accordingly, the case cannot, I think, be distinguished from the present case on its facts.

Kirby ACJ approached the construction of the relevant provisions in the light of the decision of the High Court in KB Hutcherson Pty Ltd versus Correia <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 280.] His Honour concluded that the worker was, "pursuant to [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s65.html) of the Act, to have the compensation for the loss of the left arm calculated to include provision for that loss so far as it included severe bodily disfigurement to the arm": see at 622, par (3). His Honour: at 621; said: "Thus the correct approach, where the severe disfigurement affects a part of the body specified in the Table, is to take that aspect of the disfigurement into account in calculating the 'loss' which is to be attributable to that part of the body, for the purposes of the Table. It is only where another part of the body, eg, the face or torso, hair, skin, etc are disfigured, and not otherwise provided for, that compensation may be recovered under the Table for a case of disfigurement." 
His Honour saw the "words in brackets in the Table after 'disfigurement'" as requiring such a result, that result being "consistent with the overall scheme of the Act (endorsed by the decision in Hutcherson) to avoid double payments. It is compatible with the terms of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s65.html) of the Act. It is confirmed by resort to Hansard. It is, correctly, the view which is taken by the majority of judges of the Compensation Court." 
The judgment of Priestley JA was, in my opinion, to the effect that separate lump sum awards could be made in respect of the loss of the efficient use of the thing and of disfigurement notwithstanding that the disfigurement was of the thing the use of which was in question: see at 630 et seq.

Rolfe AJA was concerned, in the main, with whether the proceeding should be returned to the Compensation Court. His Honour agreed with Kirby ACJ that the trial judge was in error "in awarding her compensation for that disfigurement": at 635. There was discussion in argument - at least, the argument suggested that the point required consideration - that if the disfigurement was of the thing for the loss of which compensation was given, no compensation could be given for the disfigurement. In the end, the order favoured by Rolfe AJA, "... allowing the appeal to delete only the order in favour of the worker for the separate assessment of $3843.40 for severe bodily disfigurement": at 623; should be set aside: see at 639. The result was that the appeal was allowed and that award set aside.

Questions arose as to the principle to be drawn from the Turner case. It was suggested that, by reason of the differing viewpoints, no principle could be drawn from the decision and that it should be treated merely as one of fact.
It is not necessary for me to pursue the question of the extent to which a principle of ratio decidendi can be drawn from the Turner case. Of the
Court, at least Kirby ACJ and Priestley JA were of the opinion that compensation should be awarded in respect of the disfigurement notwithstanding that, upon the facts of the case, the disfigurement was of the thing, the wrist or hand, for which compensation was given under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html)
Kirby ACJ was of the opinion that compensation for the disfigurement could be included appropriately - or at least taken into account - in assessing the compensation for the loss of the thing. Rolfe AJA was not, I think, opposed to the taking into account of the disfigurement in determining the compensation for the loss of the efficient use of the lower right leg. His opinion that the appeal should be allowed in this regard derived, I think, from considerations which, in his view, would lead to a disposal of the matter without a retrial.
Priestley JA dealt with the matter differently. Accordingly, it is, I think, consistent with the views of at least the majority of the Court in Turner to conclude that, in the present case, the disfigurement should, in terms or in effect, sound in compensation under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) 
But that does not conclude the matters at issue between the parties. It remains to determine how compensation for the disfigurement should be given.
As emerging from the arguments, the spectrum of possibility extended from taking the disfigurement into account, not as a separate item under the Table, but as a factor in determining what was the percentage to be adopted for the purpose of calculation of the lump sum compensation for the loss of the efficient use of the right leg to assessing separately the compensation for the disfigurement as a separate item under the Table.

I confess that my inclination would be, unrestricted by authority, to deal with the disfigurement as a separate item under the Table. However, in view of
Turner, I am constrained not to do so. That was what was done by the judge from whom the appeal was brought in Turner. Both Kirby ACJ and Rolfe AJA concluded that that was wrong. Turner was based upon a view of the effect of the decision of the High Court in the Hutcherson case. It is a recent decision and as such I do not feel that I should depart from that part of what it decided.

Accordingly, in my opinion the appeal should be upheld, the award in respect of disfigurement should be set aside, and the proceeding should be returned to the Compensation Court to reconsider the award in respect of the loss of use of the right leg, that award to include provision for the disfigurement and the loss caused by it.

The respondent should pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and should, if entitled, have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act, if such certificate be necessary.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: On 28 November 1995 Manser J of the Compensation Court made a number of orders and awards in favour of Mr M.G. Harvey (the worker) against Fobco Pty Limited (the employer). Order 1 required the employer to pay weekly compensation; Order, 2 lump sum compensation under <case>; Order 3, lump sum compensation under <case>; Order 4, interest on the lump sums; Order 5, expenses; and, Order 6, costs.

The employer appealed against one of the orders in Order 2. None of the other orders was challenged.

The full text of Order 2 was as follows: "That the respondent pay the applicant, as lump sum compensation under section 66, $22,522.25 in respect of 25% loss of use of the applicant's right leg below the knee and $5,662.80 in respect of severe bodily disfigurement." 
The employer's appeal is against that part of the order which awarded the lump sum in respect of severe bodily disfigurement. None of the other orders is subject to the appeal.

The employer's grounds of appeal were as follows: "1. His Honour erred in making an award for the Applicant for severe bodily disfigurement when he had already made an award in his favour for the loss of use of the right leg below the knee and the Respondent's disfigurement was on the evidence, wholly confined to the right leg below the knee.
His Honour erred in making an award under <case> for severe bodily disfigurement without making a finding that the injury for which the award was made was not or was not wholly an injury which was not otherwise compensable under the table contained in <case> of the Workers' Compensation Act.
On the evidence his Honour was not at liberty to make an award for severe bodily disfigurement because the injury sustained by the Respondent was an injury which was otherwise compensable under the said table." 
The three grounds of appeal rely essentially on what is the one point, which is based on the terms of the Act which give a right, in certain circumstances, to lump sum compensation for severe bodily disfigurement.

That right is provided for in Division 4 of Pt 3 of the Act. Division 4 contains ss 65 to 73 and a Table following <case>. The Table is headed "COMPENSATION FOR PERMANENT INJURIES". Section 66(1) provides that a worker who has suffered the loss of a thing mentioned in the Table as the result of an injury is entitled to receive by way of compensation for the loss an amount calculated by reference to the Table. Section 65(1) defines "loss" in relation to a thing as meaning either the loss of that thing or the permanent loss of the use or of the efficient use of that thing. This has the curious result that each of the items listed in the Table is for the purposes of
Division 4 to be regarded as a "thing". The language does not seem to be particularly apt for describing what seems to have been intended to be described.

However, the employer's point on appeal is not concerned with any difficulties that may be raised by the need to accommodate the use of the word "thing" to the various items described in the Table by reference to which compensation is to be paid for loss as a result of an injury. The employer's point depends upon the words following the heading "Disfigurement" in the column of the
Table which is headed "Nature of injury". The item is as follows: "Disfigurement: 
Severe facial disfigurement (being an injury which is not or is not wholly an injury otherwise compensable under this Table) 
Severe bodily disfigurement (being an injury which is not or is not wholly an injury otherwise compensable under this Table)" 
The Table also contains another item, as follows: "Leg injuries 
Loss of either leg at or above the knee 
Loss of either leg below the knee" 
The severe bodily disfigurement suffered by the worker was to his right leg below the knee. The employer's point in the appeal is that the fact that the worker received lump sum compensation under the "Leg injuries" item demonstrates that his severe bodily disfigurement was not an injury not or not wholly otherwise compensable under the Table, that is, that the qualification in brackets to the injury "Severe bodily disfigurement" was not fulfilled; and that therefore Manser J was wrong in making an award under that heading and the award that he made should in that respect be set aside.

For the appellant employer it was said that the foregoing result followed from the proper construction of the relevant words in the Table and, additionally, that this court had already decided the point in the appellant employer's favour in Australian Specialised Meat Products Pty Limited versus Turner [(1995) NSWCCR 614.] 
For the respondent worker, it was submitted that (i) the proper construction of the relevant provisions supported the award made by Manser J, and, (ii)
Turner did not stand in the way of this court so holding. No application was made for leave to argue that Turner was wrongly decided. The submission rather was that no ratio decidendi could be extracted Turner which would bind this court to uphold the appeal.

The order which the court made in Turner was that proposed by Rolfe AJA as a result of the opinion he formed in that case. Kirby ACJ for somewhat different reasons proposed different orders, but because all three judges who heard the appeal were proposing different orders, he said, so that a result could be reached: "I therefore withdraw my preferred orders. I agree in the orders proposed by
Rolfe AJA." (at 623) 
He did not withdraw his reasons. Nor did he express agreement with the reasons of Rolfe AJA.

In his reasons Kirby ACJ construed the relevant words as bringing about the result that "where the disfigurement is an aspect of an otherwise compensable loss, that scarring must be assessed as part of that loss" (at 621). What he meant by disfigurement being "an aspect of an otherwise compensable loss" was made clear by what he had said earlier on p 621, that it was when "the severe disfigurement affects a part of the body specified in the Table" that "that aspect of the disfigurement" was to be taken "into account" in calculating the "loss ... to be attributable to that part of the body".
Only where some part of the body was not specifically provided for in any item could compensation be recovered under the Table for disfigurement (also at ).

As I understand Kirby ACJ's reasons, he was of the view that when an item in the Table referred to a particular part of the body, as for instance the arm or the leg, then lump sum compensation under <case> for severe disfigurement to that part of the body was not available under the disfigurement item but must be taken into account in assessing the degree of loss under the item referring to the particular part of the body; further, such allowance should be made for the disfigurement irrespective of whether the disfigurement played a part in the permanent loss of the use or of the efficient use of that part of the body. This seems to me to be shown by his Honour's references to and quotation of <case> at the foot of p 620 and the top of p 621 of his reasons.

On the other hand, I understand Rolfe AJA to have taken the different view that in cases where there was severe disfigurement to a part of the body referred to in an item in the Table, not only was no compensation available under the disfigurement item but also the disfigurement to that part of the body could only be taken into account in assessing the compensation for the injury to the specified part of the body if the disfigurement caused some loss of use or efficient use of that part of the body. That this was Rolfe AJA's opinion appears to me to be shown by his adoption and quotation of what Duck J of the Compensation Court said about this point in an unreported decision,
Steel versus Loftus Pies Pty Limited, 31 August 1993, set out at p 635 of Rolfe
AJA's reasons and also by what Rolfe AJA said at 637, where he, indicated that the only basis on which severe bodily disfigurement could have been taken into account in Turner was that it "may have caused or contributed to the loss of efficient use of her arm".

This difference in the reasoning of Kirby ACJ and Rolfe AJA seems to me to be quite basic. On Kirby ACJ's understanding of the proper construction of the provisions, the worker in the present case would be entitled to some compensation for the disfigurement to his leg whether or not that disfigurement affected its efficient use. (There was no evidence before Manser
J that the disfigurement did affect the efficient use of the worker's leg.
There was some argument about this in the appeal before us, but in the end it became common ground that there was no evidence that the disfigurement affected the function of the leg; see p 10 of the transcript of the argument in this court.) On Rolfe AJA's approach, on the basis that there was no evidence that the severe bodily disfigurement caused or contributed to the loss of efficient use of the leg, then the severe bodily disfigurement should not be taken into account under the Table at all.

I therefore think that it is not possible to find in Turner a ratio decidendi on the construction of the relevant provisions concerning severe bodily disfigurement. The reasons of the two judges who joined in making this court's orders were different on a point which could affect cases such as the present. Neither set of reasons can therefore be regarded as the court's ratio decidendi.

It therefore seems to me that it is open to this court in the present appeal to act upon what it considers to be the proper construction of the relevant provisions. In this respect I refer to the opening two paragraphs of the draft reasons of Beazley JA in the present case, which I have had the benefit of reading. I agree with what she there says on the question of construction. On the basis of the construction she there adopts, the appellant employer's point in the present appeal would fail.

In my opinion therefore the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
BEAZLEY JA: I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of Mahoney P. Leaving aside for the moment the decision in Australian Specialised Meat Products Pty Ltd versus Turner [(1995) 11 NSWCCR 614], I agree with his Honour's preferred construction of <case> and the Table of Compensation for Permanent Injuries which is revealed at page 6 of his Honour's judgment, that: "... my inclination would be, unrestricted by authority, to deal with disfigurement as a separate item under the Table".
 
In my view, such a construction gives proper effect to the words in the brackets following the item in the Table "Severe bodily disfigurement" and also to the meaning of "loss" in <case>(b). As Mahoney P points out, the present case is one where the disfigurement is one which has not contributed to the "loss" in relation to the leg, or to use the language of <case>, has not contributed to the loss of the efficient use of the lower leg. As such, it is not "wholly an injury otherwise compensable under [the] Table".
 
The question arises therefore whether this Court should follow Turner.
Mahoney P considers that is the appropriate course.

This Court, though not strictly bound by its previous decisions, usually does so. In Bennett & Wood Ltd versus Orange City Council [[1967] 1 NSWR ],
Wallace P stated, at 503-504, that the occasions when the Court of Appeal would overturn an earlier decision should not: "...be confined intransigently to decisions which are "manifestly" or "demonstrably" wrong...Giving full credit to the desirability of certainty in the law (which occasionally appears to be rather a pious aspiration) I consider that even an intermediate Court of Appeal may, on special occasions and in the absence of higher authority on the subject in hand, play its part in the development of the law and in ensuring that it keeps pace with modern conditions and modern thought and, accordingly, in an appropriate case I do not think an earlier decision of the Court (including this Court) should be allowed to stand where justice seems to require otherwise." 
In Nguyen versus Nguyen <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 245] at 269 where Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ stated: "Where a Court of Appeal holds itself free to depart from an earlier decision it should do so cautiously and only where compelled to the conclusion that the earlier decision is wrong." 
The learned President has analysed the judgments in Turner. As is apparent from that analysis, it is doubtful whether its ratio decidendi includes the matter at issue here, notwithstanding that there is probably a majority view as to the construction of <case>, <case> and the Table which is different from my preferred construction, and, it appears, that of the President. In the circumstances, I am of the opinion that in this case, the Court should not follow the construction given to these provisions by Kirby ACJ and, it seems, endorsed by Rolfe AJA. In my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
