

Marhaba and Osman versus Chief Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences
Matter No 14941/89 [1998] NSWSC 333 (15 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
SAM MARHABA and RACHID OSMAN versus CHIEF COMMISSIONER FOR BUSINESS FRANCHISE LICENCES (TOBACCO) /89 July 1998 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By motion filed 11 September 1997 the plaintiffs sought orders: "1. The judgment entered in this action on 11 April 1994 be set aside.
The Certificate of Assessment of Costs of 6 November 1995 be set aside.
The Plaintiffs receive a refund of all moneys taken by the Commissioner.
The Defendant accounts for all insurance moneys received by him.
Such further and other orders as the Court thinks fit.
Costs." 
At the hearing only the relief specified in paragraphs 1, 2 and 6 was pursued.

The matter has a lengthy history and some of it should be sketched. I note that appropriate notices have been given pursuant to <case> of the Judiciary
Act and intervention has not been desired by any of the recipients of notice.

In August 1988 a large quantity of tobacco was seized by the defendant pursuant to the Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) Act 1987 ("the 1987
Act") from a truck driven by the plaintiff Sam Marhaba. The plaintiff Rachid
Osman filed a summons (14381/88) in this Court shortly after the seizure seeking return of the tobacco. Sam Marhaba was later joined as a plaintiff. On March 1989 for reasons published, Smart J dismissed that summons.

On 22 December 1989 the present action was commenced by summons seeking relief in these terms: "1. A declaration that upon the Plaintiff paying such licence fees as are due to the Defendant pursuant to the provisions of the Business Franchise Licences
Act 1987, they are entitled to the tobacco seized by the Defendant from them at Tenterfield on the 19th August 1988.
An Order restraining the Defendant from forfeiting the tobacco.
An Order that the Defendant deliver the said tobacco to the Plaintiffs upon payment of the licence fees.
Such further or other Orders as the Court may deem meet.
Costs." 
On 5 April 1991 after hearing a contested motion I ordered that the defendant be empowered pursuant to <case> of the 1987 Act to sell the seized tobacco and that the proceeds be paid into Court. On 16 August 1991 Hunt J varied those orders as to some now irrelevant detail. Some of the tobacco was stolen and ultimately $155,000 as the proceeds of sale was paid into Court and the defendant also received $127,884.07 insurance indemnity in respect of the portion stolen. The money in Court was paid out to the defendant by order entered on 10 May 1995.

In the interim the Crown Solicitor acting for the defendant made repeated requests for particulars relating to the plaintiffs' summons. Such requests were made over a span from June 1991 (the plaintiffs' affidavits had been filed in April 1991) to January 1994. The requested particulars have never been supplied.

In March 1994 the defendant moved that the summons be summarily dismissed. On March 1994 Master Malpass made the following orders: "1. The plaintiffs provide answers to the request for particulars in the letters dated 7 June 1991 and 27 July 1993 on or before 5 April 1994.
In default of compliance with Order 1 above or earlier other order that the proceedings be dismissed and that the plaintiffs pay the defendant's costs.
The plaintiffs pay the defendant's costs on the motion dated 4 March 1994.

The Court directs that:
The defendant serve this order on the solicitors for the plaintiffs by .00 pm on 23 March 1994.
This order be entered forthwith." 
It is apparent from the content of those orders, there had been no appearance for the plaintiffs at the hearing. I accept the explanation for non appearance by the plaintiffs' solicitor which is implicit in his affidavit sworn 9 July
In any event, the default provisions of the order came into effect and on 11 April 1994 orders were entered: "1. The proceedings be dismissed.
The Plaintiffs pay the Defendant's costs." 
Nothing further happened until 6 November 1996 when a certificate as to determination of costs in the sum of $13,166.07 issued in favour of the defendant. The lastmentioned two matters are of course the direct focus of the present motion.

On 5 August 1997 the High Court of Australia in litigation concerning parties other than the plaintiffs held that various provisions in Parts 4 and 5 of the Act relating to offences and licensing were invalid as imposing duties of excise within the meaning of <case> of the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/):
Ha versus State of New South Wales <case>; [1997 189 CLR 465.] 
After the present motion had been filed by the plaintiffs, the New South Wales
Parliament passed the [Business Franchise Licences (Repeal) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/bfla1997308/) ("the Act"). It was assented to on 9 December 1997. In the course of the Second
Reading speech in the Legislative Assembly the Minister observed: "The Business Franchise Licences (Repeal) Bill also repeals the Business
Franchise Licences (Tobacco) Act 1987, which is unenforceable as a result of the High Court's decision." 
In particular the plaintiffs presently point to <case> of the 1997 Act namely: "6 Tobacco in possession of Chief Commissioner 
It is the duty of the Chief Commissioner to deliver to any person appearing to the Chief Commissioner to be entitled to it any tobacco that was seized in purported execution of the provisions of the Tobacco Franchise Act.

No action against the Crown, the State of New South Wales, the Chief
Commissioner or any other person may be commenced or maintained for any trespass occasioned by a seizure of any tobacco in purported execution of the provisions of the Tobacco Franchise Act or for any injury, loss or damage arising from any such seizure.
 .........................................." 
It was candidly stated by Mr Sexton of counsel for the plaintiffs that it was intended to bring an action to recover the money equivalent of the proceeds of sale and the insurance of the unconstitutionally seized tobacco relying (at least in part) on argument that "any tobacco" as referred to in <case> should be construed as encompassing the money proceeds derived from dealing with that tobacco. In this case the amount would be a combination of the sale price and insurance indemnity. At the hearing I expressed reservation about that construction but I consider that I should not make a determination on that issue within the scope of this interlocutory application.

To complete the background I record that the plaintiffs rely upon SCR Pt 40
Rule 9(2)(b) and alternatively SCR Pt 42 Rule 12(1).

Those Rules provide: "40.9 Setting aside or varying judgment or order 
The Court may set aside or vary a judgment - where the judgment has been entered after judgment has been given in the absence of a party, whether or not the absent party had notice of trial or of any motion for the judgment.
 .12 Matters occurring after judgment 
A person bound by a judgment may move the Court for a stay of execution of the judgment, or for some other order, on the ground of matters occurring after the date on which the judgment takes effect and the Court may, on terms, make such order as the nature of the case requires." 
The proposal that the order of 11 April 1994 be set aside will, inter alia, provoke discretionary considerations relating to the futility of so doing.
Restraint of the defendant from selling the tobacco and ordering the delivery of it to the plaintiffs would be empty orders in 1998. The tobacco has been sold and it is not available for delivery. The declaratory order sought is in its terms subject to payment of licence fees which cannot be constitutionally levied by the defendant. Mr Sexton recognized this difficulty and stated that the summons would inevitably need amendment but I find it is not appropriate to deal with the order in fact made on a hypothetical or contingent basis. I shall return to the issue of discretion.

It was argued by the defendant that the judgment dismissing the summons should not be set aside for a first reason because there had been no defect affecting it demonstrated. In substance the plaintiffs did not prosecute their action and the Master has not shown to have erred in dismissing it. Nevertheless the judgment was entered in the absence of the plaintiffs and the power vested by
SCR Pt 40 Rule 9(2)(b) is ultimately to be exercised upon a determination of whether the interests of justice should permit the plaintiffs to contest what they did not appear in order to contest in 1994.

The second argument noted that the seizure and sale of the tobacco were undertaken pursuant to powers vested by Pt 8 of the 1987 Act, now wholly repealed but not held unconstitutional in Ha. Part 8 was not in issue before the High Court. The defendant contended that Pt 8 was a severable part of the Act capable of effective operation when isolated from the provisions specifically struck down as ultra vires the New South Wales Parliament:
Australian National Airways Pty Limited versus The Commonwealth [1945 71 CLR ], particularly per Williams J at 113.

To the contrary the plaintiffs argued that Pt 8 of the 1987 Act was clearly ancillary to the licensing and revenue raising provisions which were struck down and it had no independent purpose. To borrow language used about <case> of the Acts [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/) in Australian
Railway Union versus Victorian Railways Commissioners <case>; [1930 44 CLR 319], provisions may be upheld however interwoven, but one cannot separate the woof from the warp and manufacture a new web. It was contended on behalf of the defendant that purpose was not an appropriate test and reference was made to the inferred purpose of creating an airline monopoly dealt with in
Australian National Airlines, yet various provisions of the legislation then being struck down in part were permitted to survive. There is support for purpose as a relevant guide in the remark of Gaudron J in Kable versus Director of Public Prosecutions <case>; [1996 189 CLR 51] @ 108: "[Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s5.html) of the (Community Protection) Act is invalid. So are the remaining provisions of the
Act which serve no purpose other than to carry <case> into effect".

I would also find some fortification for that approach in the judgment of
McHugh J in that case who also held that the entire Community Protection Act was invalid.

In the final analysis whether a tainted statute must be jettisoned in toto or whether parts are salvageable must be determined on a case by case basis. It suffices for present purposes to hold that I do not find that Pt 8 can be regarded as "saved" from the constitutional flaw specifically dealt with in
Ha.

This brings me to the third contention of the defendant, conveniently referred to in argument as the issue of finality. As at 11 April 1994 the law was understood and accepted to be as legislated by the 1987 Act. The plaintiffs did not raise any challenge to validity and the terms of relief sought as above set out show that acceptance. There is long standing authority showing that "change", whether by revelation of common law doctrine or by impugnment of enacted provision, does not give rise to a right to reopen concluded litigation where the judgment has depended upon later discarded canon. In the context of a case concerning disallowance of a regulation by the senate, Dixon
J observed: "Thus, after a regulation has been disallowed, no one is liable to conviction for an offence committed while it was in force. His liability ceases when the law is revoked that imposed it. But if he has already been convicted, then because his liability has merged in the conviction, it no longer depends upon the law under which it arose, and it does not lapse with the revocation of the law. The conviction has become the source of his liability for his offence, and the conviction continues in force because its operation does not depend upon the law creating the offence, but upon the authority belonging to a judgment or sentence of a competent Court." Victorian Stevedoring and
General Contracting Co Pty Limited & Meakes versus Dignan <case>; [46
CLR 73] @ 106.

The common law situation has been dealt with in cases such as Piening v
Wanless <case>; [1968 CLR 498](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=1968%20117%20CLR%20498 "View LawCiteRecord" ) and Eggins versus Broomshead Bowling & Recreation Club Limited [1986 5
NSWLR 521] and apart from reference does not require further examination for present purposes.

In R versus Unger [1977 2 NSWLR 990] leave was refused to extend time thereby facilitating reopening of challenge to a conviction which had been dependent upon a regulation held in other proceedings subsequent to the conviction to be invalid. Street CJ declared: "There is no difference in principle between a subsequent judicial decision which has the effect of exposing a prior misconception in relation to a principle of law which was wrongly regarded as well founded at the time of the trial, and a subsequent judicial decision exposing the invalidity of regulations that were wrongly treated as valid at the time of the trial. The trial having been concluded and the time for appeal having gone by, the general principle is that the matter is regarded as at an end. It is to be borne in mind that the effect of a conviction in a criminal court, no less than a verdict and judgment in a civil court, is to merge in that conviction or judgment, as the case may be, all of the material upon which it proceeded.
Dixon J., as the Chief Justice then was, said in Victorian Stevedoring and
General Contracting Co Pty Ltd versus Dignan <case>; [1931 46 CLR 73] @ 106: `.......if he has already been convicted, then because his liability has merged in the conviction, it no longer depends upon the law under which it arose, and it does not lapse with the revocation of the law. The conviction has become the source of his liability for his offence, and the conviction continues in force because its operation does not depend upon the law creating the offence, but upon the authority belonging to a judgment or sentence of a competent Court'." @ 995.

Unger has recently been cited with approval by a bench of five judges in the New Zealand Court of Appeal: R versus Knight [1998 1 NZLR 563] @ 40: "Even under the void ab initio doctrine, however, a judgment of a court of record would seem to be binding upon upon private parties until set aside on appeal or judicial review even though the judgment was based on an unconstitutional statute." 
I apprehend that the express provision in SCR Pt 40 Rule 9(2)(b) would be within what his Honour comprehended in using the term "judicial review".

I conclude that there is no insuperable obstacle to granting the plaintiffs the relief now sought but the question arises whether such relief ought be granted. As indicated I turn to the matter of discretion. It was not disputed by the plaintiffs that discretionary considerations were pertinent and a further affidavit of the first plaintiff sworn 9 July 1998 was read in this regard.

As already observed, setting aside the judgment of dismissal of the summons in its present form would not lead to its being pursued. In reality the motion is primarily brought against the contingency that in a foreshadowed action based upon <case> of the 1997 Act the defendant would seek to plead in some fashion, estoppel or res judicata.

In balancing the competing interests of the parties I find the following factors require important weight to be given: that if the judgment were set aside it is not intended to pursue the revived summons as such; whether amendment of the revived summons would be permitted at this juncture is, at least, moot; the plaintiffs have not commenced the foreshadowed action and the remedy sought is essentially a pre-emptive strike against something which may not be pleaded in the action when and if brought and the plaintiffs are remote from the situation of failing in this hypothesized action for the sole reason of some bar emergent from the judgment of 11 April 1994.

I find that the relevant balance favours the defendant and the motion should fail.

I have given consideration to the alternative use of power to stay pursuant to
SCR Pt 42 Rule 12. The effect of the judgment was the refusal of certain relief sought by the plaintiffs and an order for stay would be awkward as well as futile. I see no reason why the plaintiffs should have a stay if they cannot establish that the judgment ought be set aside. Considerations concerning the costs order are not necessarily identical, however that order against the plaintiffs followed litigation which was initiated by them, which they did not pursue appropriately and which was finalized in the absence of their taking the point of invalidity which is now sought to be agitated as a result of what occurred in independent litigation. I would neither set aside nor stay the order.

The notice of motion is dismissed. The plaintiffs are ordered to pay the defendant's costs.
 * * * 
