

Nelson Garrido versus Helmut Lucia Engineering Pty Ltd and Caltex Refining
Company Pty Ltd Matter No 15238/92 [1996] NSWSC 503 (18 October 1996) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 
Nelson Garrido versus Helmut Lucia Engineering Pty Limited and Caltex Refining Company Pty Limited /92 October 1996 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /92 - NELSON GARRIDO versus HELMUT LUCIA ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED and CALTEX REFINING COMPANY PTY LIMITED 
DATES OF HEARING: 23-24 September 1996 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 18 October 1996 
NEGLIGENCE - INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT - EXPLOSIVE EVENT WHILST OXY-ACETYLENE TORCH
BEING USED IN CONFINED SPACE - CERTIFICATION THAT SPACE "CLEAN" BY OCCUPIER -
ALTERNATIVE MEANS OF PERFORMING REQUIRED TASK - LIABILITY OF OCCUPIER AND
EMPLOYER - DAMAGES ASSESSED.

A P P E A R A N C E S 
PLAINTIFF: L Grey 
SOLICITORS: Boyd House & Partners 
DEFENDANTS: P Neil 
SOLICITORS: Rishworth Dodd & Menczel (First Defendant) 
Maxwell Connery & Co (Second Defendant) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 17 February 1987 the plaintiff was employed by the first defendant as a welder to work at the second defendant's refinery at Kurnell. His relevant task on that day was to cut out vertical piping which stood within an oil storage tank. He was using an oxy-acetylene torch. The piping had been within the tank to support a steam coil system. I am satisfied that the operation involved certification by the second defendant that the tank had been cleaned as a prerequisite to the plaintiff entering and exposing the naked flame of his torch. Such certification was delivered by the second defendant to the first defendant and thereupon the plaintiff set about his task. 
He cut a number of pipes and he noticed what he described as "small explosions" but which were probably more accurately "popping" sounds. On the significant occasion the plaintiff introduced oxygen into the gas mixture and he found himself thrown across the floor of the tank a distance which in Court he estimated to be five metres. His eyes had closed and when he opened them he found the tank full of smoke. He made his exit as quickly as he could. His description of the event was, understandably, without great detail and I do not think that it matters greatly whether the occurrence is catalogued as an explosion or, as counsel for the first defendant suggested, a loud noise accompanied by flash and smoke.

In the course of the hearing the defendants settled cross claims between them on terms which included the first defendant indemnifying the second defendant against any judgment found for the plaintiff against the latter. The plaintiff continued his action against both defendants.

The evidence in support of the plaintiff's case on liability is somewhat scant. A report from Mr Levy an engineer postulates that the probable cause was blow back of slag particles into the nozzle of the torch which extinguished the flame and released both gases into the confined atmosphere which must have exploded when the plaintiff relit the torch. However, the plaintiff vigorously disputed the proposition that the flame had ever extinguished or that he had the need to relight it. The relight theory was canvassed at a safety meeting (attended by the plaintiff) on 14 April 1987 as were other theories including the possibility that the cleaning had not removed all flammable "slops" from within the piping and tank. I understand Mr
Levy to have excluded the latter on the basis that the certified cleaning process which included hot water spraying, lancing the coil supports individually and testing for hydrocarbons (with negative results) must have been efficiently done and thus eliminated this risk.

It was expressly submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that the evidence disclosed only these two possible explanations for the occurrence, namely the torch extinguished - gas escape - relight sequence or, a contact of naked flame with ignitable residue. In the light of the plaintiff's testimony I conclude that the probability is that the torch did not become extinguished. I do conclude that something flammable must therefore have remained within the tank, despite the certified cleaning process, in order for the event to occur.
The cleaning was undertaken by staff of the second defendant and I therefore infer from the whole of the evidence that they did not perform their task adequately and more probably than not left flammable residue within the tank.
Insofar as testing revealed no hydrocarbons, I further infer that that testing must have been either tainted by error in conducting the test or in obtaining its results. The purpose of cleaning and its certification was to enable the plaintiff to undertake his task and the second defendant owed a duty of care which was breached by the failure of its staff to bring the tank into the condition which it certified.

There is no evidence that the equipment supplied by the first defendant was faulty in any way. It is true that the first defendant could not delegate to the second defendant its duty to make the work place reasonably safe but I do not contemplate that it was in breach of that duty once it had shown that it required certification of cleanliness before sending the plaintiff into the tank. The only case which I perceive the plaintiff might make against the first defendant is derivable from two suggestions by Mr Levy that alternative processes could have minimized or eliminated the risk. They are: the use of abrasive cutting discs to cut through the coil support pipes, thus removing the need for the use of oxy-acetylene gases; or the removal of the coil support pipes by oxy-acetylene cutting the 3" x 3" doubling plates which were welded to the tank bottom.

The second proposition relates to a coordinate torch flame extinction and is rendered irrelevant by a finding that this probably did not occur. Provocation of the first defendant to use abrasive discs instead of oxy-acetylene would emanate from a scepticism about the validity of the second defendant's certificate, however the evidence of Mr Levy's opinion was simply tendered without objection. There was no explanation of any reasons preferring one method over the other. It seems to me to impose something of a high standard on an employer to require it to foresee the possibility that certified cleaning might be inadequate, to contemplate an alternative means of doing the work and then to assess in those circumstances it to be a reasonable response to some unspecified degree of risk to adopt the alternative. Nevertheless, the parties have chosen to lead and leave unelaborated the evidence which I have outlined and, with considerable reservation I find that the plaintiff has made a case in negligence against the first defendant.

Contributory negligence was only potentially an issue in any practical sense if the plaintiff had involved himself in relighting the torch. As this has been found to be improbable, the issue should be resolved in the plaintiff's favour.

I turn to damages. Some background matters concerning the plaintiff should be mentioned.

The plaintiff was born on 30 August 1942. He was therefore forty four years of age when the accident occurred and will turn fifty in February next. He came to Australia in 1970. With the exception of some supplementary work as a cleaner, he substantially worked as a welder during the next seventeen years.
Exhibit B shows a chronology which includes employment by about eleven different employers in the period between 1970 and 1987. The plaintiff had been married and was the father of two children. In 1984 he and his wife separated although they continued to reside under the same roof. Mrs Garrido was ill with the disease lupus and she died on 2 February 1987 approximately two weeks prior to the subject accident. The plaintiff returned to work about a week after the accident but again ceased in April. At this time he saw a number of doctors but eventually on 15 June consulted Dr Vago with whom he communicated in Spanish. Dr Vago admitted the plaintiff to Famenoth Private
Hospital for physiotherapy between 22 June and 2 July 1987.

The plaintiff's employment with the first defendant was terminated in July and in November that year he commenced to work with Fruehauf Trailers
Australia Pty. Limited by whom he had been employed some years beforehand. He left their employ in December 1987 but in February 1988 he commenced work again as a welder at Melesco Manufacturing. He continued in that employment until 19 December 1989 an unbroken span of employment of approximately twenty two months. On the day following his resignation from Melesco Manufacturing he returned to Chile where he remained for a little over three months. Five days after he returned from Chile he commenced as a welder with Metropolitan
Engineering Fabrications. He stayed there for a few weeks and then obtained employment in May 1990 with CBR Constructors. During that year he had further short periods of employment as a welder with employers whose details are set out in Exhibit B. On 21 December 1990 he returned to Chile again and re- entered Australia in March 1991. He has not undertaken employment since that time. In 1994 and 1995 he had admissions to Westside Hospital arranged by Dr
Vago for traction and physiotherapy.

With the exception of some oral testimony by Dr Vago, the medical issues in the case presented by the tender on each side by a bundle of medical reports.
Dr Vago manifested a sympathetic approach to the plaintiff's claimed ailments and the impression that I formed was that he was not discriminating in relation to them and was prepared to assume that whatever was related by the plaintiff was accurate and dependable. I do not share such an assumption.

I make reference first to the material tendered on behalf of the plaintiff.
The first document appears to be an x-ray report concerning examination on the day of accident. I have a photocopy of the handwritten report. So far as I can read it, the report shows that there was no fracture detected in the right elbow although there were signs of early arthritic change. X-rays of the thoracic and lumbar spines showed no fracture but revealed a slight anterior wedging of the body of T-12 but the result was otherwise normal. Specifically the intervertebral spaces were reported as normal.

Dr Sachdev, an orthopaedic surgeon saw the plaintiff on a number of occasions until July 1987 by which time the plaintiff had consulted Dr Vago. Dr Sachdev thought that the plaintiff had soft tissue injury to what he described as "cervical thoraco-lumbar spine" as well as the left hip. In April 1987 he predicted that the plaintiff would settle down and be able to return to the pre-injury work as a welder. He certified the plaintiff to resume on 27 April .

The patient notes from both Famenoth and Westside Private Hospitals have been copied and included in the bundle.

Next there is a series of material from Dr Vago. The first eight documents are simply copies of standard general practitioner's medical certificates in relation to fitness for work. Dr Vago postulates that the plaintiff suffered multiple injuries and in September 1987 he reported that "the prognosis remains guarded taking into consideration the severe nature of the injuries suffered". At that point and indeed thereafter I am unable to identify what these severe injuries might have been. Dr Vago's reports do no more than recite the plaintiff's increasing complaints of subjective symptom. Dr Vago reported in June 1989 and next in June 1993 although in the latter he mentioned that there had been continuing care on a regular basis. In July 1995 he reported that the plaintiff's nervous condition had deteriorated. During this period it appears that the plaintiff was subjected to the only examination technique (other than x-ray and CT scan) when in December 1993 there was a thermographic assessment performed by a Dr Leonard Rose described as the Director of Melbourne Pain Management Clinic. The report is recited to contain an observation that there was a slightly abnormal thermogram however the concluding remarks are that "there is no evidence on this thermogram of severe neurological disc function or the presence of sympathetically mediated pain or reflex sympathetic dystrophy". Nevertheless Dr Vago proposed that it was becoming increasingly obvious that the plaintiff had suffered permanent residual damage (of some non-specific kind) in both upper and lumbar spines.
He thought that the plaintiff would remain under care on an indefinite basis.

The next reports are from Dr Weisz an orthopaedic surgeon. He saw the plaintiff during his admission to Famenoth Private Hospital (arranged by Dr
Vago) in 1987. Dr Weisz found tenderness in the mid dorsal area and opined that the plaintiff had a soft tissue injury. In 1988 Dr Weisz wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors to the same effect.

The plaintiff was also seen by Dr Richard Deveridge in 1988 and 1993. In 1988
Dr Deveridge thought that the plaintiff had a "rather diffuse" musculo- ligamentous injury to his thoraco lumbar spine. He thought he had a mild to moderate ongoing disability with frequent pain and some restriction of movement. So far as I can gauge he found no objective signs of injury. In 1993 he described the plaintiff as having a chronic mid to low back strain.

Next there is a series of reports from Dr Peter Conrad. In 1988 he described the plaintiff as having a back strain with ongoing symptoms. In 1989 he thought there might have been prolapsed lumbar intervertebral disc. That speculation has never been confirmed by investigation. In 1993 Dr Conrad again referred to a back strain and he repeated that description in March 1996. As can be seen from a reading of the reports the opinions expressed are apparently based entirely upon reporting of symptoms and disability by the plaintiff.

I have noted that Dr Vago made reference to what he called the plaintiff's nervous condition. In 1991 the plaintiff's solicitors arranged for him to see
Dr Peter Morse a psychiatrist. At that time Dr Morse reported that he did not consider that the plaintiff was suffering any major emotional or psychiatric disturbance. He saw him again in August 1993 when he observed that the plaintiff "seems to be convinced that he has suffered some marked physical symptoms and is suffering ongoing distress because of this." Dr Morse went on to confirm that he did not consider that the plaintiff was suffering from any specific emotional or major psychiatric condition which was causing his physical state. In April 1996 and in admitted contrast to his earlier opinions
Dr Morse thought that on the description by the plaintiff of his life he was suffering from a major depressive illness. As I understand Dr Morse's reports he substantially attributes the development of this condition to the plaintiff's misery about his being unable to work. Whether the plaintiff is in fact unable to work or whether he has chosen not to work is an issue with which I will have to deal.

I turn to the material tendered on behalf of the defendants. In September 1987 the plaintiff was examined by Dr Burke a surgeon. He recorded the difficulty which he encountered in attempting to establish rapport with the plaintiff.
His examination did not reveal evidence of any organic abnormality in any area of the spine nor in the upper limbs nor in the hips. Dr Burke opined that there was no residuum of any work related injury or condition. In March 1988 the plaintiff was examined by Dr Noel Burcher. His examination revealed no abnormality. He received complaints of pain and tenderness from the plaintiff but nothing else that appeared significant. Dr Burcher conceded that the plaintiff had likely soft tissue strain and spinal contusion in the accident but he could find no organic basis for continuing complaints. He thought the plaintiff was fit for work and other activities. Dr Burcher re-examined the plaintiff in October 1990 and the result of his examination was to confirm his earlier opinion.

In August 1993 the plaintiff was examined by Dr Scarf. The plaintiff described to him constant pain in the back extending from the sacrum up to the occiput.
He also complained of pain in the left hip. Dr Scarf was unable to detect any objective sign of disability. The plaintiff complained and asked not to be palpated over the whole length of his spine. Dr Scarf could find no objective evidence to qualify any of the ongoing claimed total spinal column disability.

Dr Milder saw the plaintiff in September 1993. He could find no neurological deficit and thought that it was likely that at the time of the incident the plaintiff suffered some minor soft tissue injuries but thought that these ought to have resolved within a matter of weeks.

Dr John Wright saw the plaintiff in June this year. I note that he had available a series of reports from Dr Vago and the other reports now relied on by the plaintiff (as well as a bundle of reports obtained on behalf of the defendant). The examination would seem to have proceeded without the difficulties, as encountered for example by Dr Burke many years ago, and Dr
Wright described the plaintiff as a pleasant man. However, the plaintiff claimed to him that the left half of his body to a midline demarcation was numb. Dr Wright commented that this was neurologically spurious. He did not think the plaintiff had any evidence of physical abnormality and regarded psychiatric matters as within the province of experts. He commented that there was an extensive inconsistency and embellishment and he thought that the plaintiff was capable of resuming whatever employment he planned to do at his time of life.

The defendant arranged for the plaintiff to be seen by Dr J.W. Shand a psychiatrist. Dr Shand found no evidence to suggest that psychological factors were playing any primary part in continuing complaints but he received a similar history which the plaintiff had given to others of continuing physical pain. He told Dr Shand that he took medication in the form of digesic to relieve this pain. Dr Shand obtained a urine specimen. This was tested by pathology and detected no drugs despite the history from the plaintiff that he took digesics on a daily basis. Dr Shand commented that such result adds doubt to the genuineness of complaints. He concluded that the plaintiff was either consciously fabricating disorder or exaggerating whatever minor genuine residual physical complaints he may have. The plaintiff was re-examined in and nothing arose which caused Dr Shand to vary his opinion.

In December 1990 Dr Mark Spigelman examined the plaintiff and was unable to find objective signs of disease or disorder on physical examination. Dr
Spigelman made this comment: "This man is hypochondriacal. He does not have a work related injury. He has what I have recently begun calling a compensation expectation syndrome. He has a bizarre set of symptoms which fluctuate and vary but which are not based on organic lesions but which he hopes are sufficient to somehow get him compensation. In fact physical examination and history confirm that this man does not have any work related symptoms that are likely to prevent his full and normal return to work." 
Finally the defendant tendered a report from Dr David Bornstein yet another orthopaedic surgeon who examined the plaintiff in April 1993. He thought the plaintiff was physically fit at that time for any occupation that he may care to undertake and he thought there was no assessable impairment of function on any part of the plaintiff's back or any other part of his body.

The evidence does not persuade me that the plaintiff suffered any serious injury at the time of accident. At most, he suffered some soft tissue injury.
I do not propose that soft tissue injuries may not in some circumstances be serious but the extent of any deficit caused in the accident in the case of the plaintiff can be gauged against the long period of employment with Melesco during which - post accident - he was apparently able to perform all the tasks required of him. I do not accept the plaintiff's contention that he was working throughout this period under any handicap. So far as the plaintiff's psychiatric condition is concerned I do not accept the hypothesis advanced by
Dr Morse that a depression discerned in 1996 (which was not detected by him in earlier years) is to be attributed to this relatively minor work accident. Of course the plaintiff has had misfortune in his life and I note his complaints of frustration in being unable to establish himself into a lasting relationship but such problem is not tort induced. I do not accept that the plaintiff has an incapacity for work which was caused by the accident and that he therefore has some misery provoked by reason of that hypothesized incapacity. The effects of accident did not continue beyond the return to usual employment as a welder with Melesco Manufacturing.

I am conscious that since that time the plaintiff has incurred substantial medical expenses, prominently for Westside Hospital and Dr Vago but others as well. I expressly find that the expenses incurred after early 1988 were not reasonably so incurred for investigation or treatment of any symptoms referrable to the incident on 17 February 1987.

Exhibit D contains a schedule of out of pocket expenses together with some supporting documents. I am unpersuaded that expenditure incurred after the plaintiff settled into full time employment with Melesco was reasonably required as a result of the tort. In the light of the evidence of Dr Weisz I consider that the cost of treatment in Famenoth Private Hospital in 1987 should be included in the damages and $4,150 will be included on that account.
None of the other items were incurred until much later with the exception of some part of the account of Dr Vago. As at May 1988 his account stood at $360 and that amount will be included in the damages. I decline to award the plaintiff any other sums sought for out of pocket expenses.

Up until February 1988 the plaintiff had after the accident been at work with the first defendant until April and for a couple of weeks at Fruehauf
Trailers. The evidence does not make his comings and goings entirely clear but he should have damages for interference with earning capacity which was in that period productive of economic loss. As a guide I note that in the year to 1988 an asserted comparable employee Mr Mendez earned $390.68 per week (which I assume in the absence of any other information to be a nett figure).
I propose to award the plaintiff damages of $16,500 for interference with earning capacity during that period. The figure is derived by using the wage of Mr Mendez as a guide over a period of approximately 42 weeks.

There should be included in the damages by agreement $1,601 to avoid the detriment identified by the High Court in Fox versus Wood.

I find that the plaintiff had not suffered economic incapacity which has been productive of loss since 1988 and I decline to award damages for economic loss in the period since then or for the future.

Taking into account that even in the early days it is apparent that the plaintiff's reaction to minor injury was extreme and sufficient to cause his general practitioner to place in Famenoth Hospital I have determined that the sum of $10,000 would liberally compensate him for the non economic aspects of damage. That loss had entirely accrued in my view by early 1988 when the plaintiff was restored to the situation in which he was prior to the accident.
I therefore propose to include interest upon the whole of the amount of general damages from that date at 2 percent and $1,400 will be included in the damages on that account.

The ingredients of damage are therefore as follows: 
Famenoth Hospital $4,150.00 
Dr Vago $360.00 
Economic loss $16,500.00 
Fox versus Wood $1,601.00 
General damages $10,000.00 
Interest on general damages $1,400.00 
Total: $34,011.00 
It is agreed that the defence of payment available to the first defendant in respect of worker's compensation payments already made is available to the extent of $14,607.00. That defence is of course not available to the second defendant although in relation to execution of judgment in an ordinary case the refund to the payer of worker's compensation would operate as satisfaction pro tanto of the judgment. I have already noted the agreement between the defendants and the resolution of actual payment no doubt will follow the arrangements that they have consented to between themselves.

So far as the plaintiff is concerned judgments would be entered against each defendant for differing sums having regard to the availability or non availability defence of payment.

I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff against the first defendant for $19,404. I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff against the second defendant for $34,011. I order the defendants to pay the plaintiff's costs of action subject to the operation of Part 52A r 33(4)(d).
 * * * 
