

Dianne Louise Wilson versus Public Trustee (Estate of David Thomas Grindrod)
No. 3561/93 [1995] NSWSC 5 (24 August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
MASTER MACREADY
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 29:6:1995 #ADD 24:8:1995
ORDER 
Orders made
JUDGE1
MASTER MACREADY:  This is an application under the [Family Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) in respect of the Estate of the late David Thomas Grindrod who died on 11
November 1992. The deceased is survived by his only child the plaintiff in these proceedings together with various brothers and sisters. He had been separated from and divorced his wife many years prior to the date of his death.
The last will of the deceased was made on 30 October 1992. Under that will the deceased gave the legacy of $10,000 to his mother, the legacy of $10,000 to the plaintiff and a legacy of $10,000 to the plaintiff's eldest daughter.
The residue of his estate he divided between his two brothers, his two sisters and his sister-in-law.
The assets in the estate consist of cash amounting to $356,163.05. A house the current value of which appears to be $170,000, a car worth $25,000 and furniture of $700,000. This is a total of $551,863.05. There are liabilities for income tax in the sum of $12,948.85 and in addition there will have to be provision for the costs of the parties to these proceedings. Experience would suggest that perhaps those costs would be in the order of some $20,000.
The deceased was married in December of 1963. The plaintiff, his daughter, was born on 29 March 1964. By 1966 the first separation of the deceased and his wife occurred. They got back together shortly and thereafter separated again. In 1969 they were divorced.
The plaintiff lived with her mother after the separation in Wollongong.
The deceased continued to reside n Sydney and had access to the plaintiff from
Sydney. It seems that in her early childhood the deceased saw the plaintiff quite often. It is apparent that he attended important functions in her life such as her High School graduation, engagement party and wedding.
The plaintiff herself was first married on 7 November 1987. That marriage was dissolved in November 1992.
She had one child by that marriage. That child, Carly, was born on 15 October 1988. She re-married on 7 August 1993 and has had two children by her second marriage. The first of these is Emily, a daughter born on 19 March 1994 and the second, a son Matthew, born recently on April 1995.
Recently the High Court in Singer versus Berghouse <case>; [123 ALR 481] reiterated the two-stage approach to be applied by a Court in considering applications such as the present. At page 487 it said the following:- "The first question is, was the provision (if any) made for the applicant 'inadequate for (his/her) proper maintenance, education and advancement in life'? The difference between 'adequate' and 'proper' and the interrelationship which exists between 'adequate provision' and 'proper maintenance' etc were explained in Bosch versus Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd. The determination of the first stage in the two-stage process calls for an assessment of whether the provision (if any) made was inadequate for what, in all the circumstances, was the proper level of maintenance etc appropriate for the applicant having regard, amongst other things, to the applicant's financial position, the size and nature of the deceased's estate, the totality of the relationship between the applicant and the deceased, and the relationship between the deceased and other person who have legitimate claims upon his or her bounty.

The determination of the second stage, should it arise, involves similar considerations.
Indeed, in the first stage of the process, the court may need to arrive at an assessment of what is the proper level of maintenance and what is adequate provision, in which event, if it becomes necessary to embark upon the second stage of the process,, that assessment will largely determine the order which should be made in favour of the applicant. In saying that, we are mindful that there may be some circumstances in which a court could refuse to make an order notwithstanding that the applicant is found to have been left without adequate provision for proper maintenance. Take, for example, a case Ellis versus Leeder, where there were not assets from which an order could reasonably be made and making an order could disturb the testator's arrangements to pay creditors."
One of the matters that has to be considered by the court of course is the plaintiff's present financial situation and if I might call it domestic situation. The plaintiff who is now thirty-one is a trained hairdresser. She did have a business of her own at one stage but had to close it down due to financial pressures and is now presently at home with her children looking after them. She anticipates that in some six to eight months' time she will wish to start hairdressing work again from home which apparently she can do.
In the past when she has done this work she has earned between $50 and $100 a week in that occupation.
Presently she receives Social Service payments totalling $246.85 per fortnight and maintenance payments in respect of the daughter
Carly of $78 per month.
Her husband is a station assistant with the State Rail Authority. He earns $968.75 per fortnight gross.
When one takes out tax, maintenance, superannuation and union dues the amount is reduced to $658.09.
They have house repayments of about $160 per fortnight. They live in a house which is owned by her husband. That is presently a property which has a worth estimated at $88,000. There is a mortgage on it. The amount owing at the moment is some $30,424.52. The other property that they have consists of a
Ford Sedan worth $5000. The plaintiff's husband has some superannuation entitlement and at the moment that amounts to $10,653.60.
I mention for completeness that in addition to being entitled to the legacy under the will the plaintiff did receive as the result of the death of the deceased a sum of some $3000.
It has also been indicated by the High Court in a number of cases including the quotation I have referred to above, that one of the important matters for the Court to consider is the totality of the relationship between the applicant and the deceased.
The plaintiff, I thought, gave her evidence to the Court in a frank and honest manner and I accept her as a reliable and a credible witness. Her mother also gave evidence on this aspect and she was not required for cross-examination and I see no reason not to accept her evidence on this aspect.
The plaintiff frankly accepted that the relationship between herself and the deceased was not a close one and that there were periods when she did not see the deceased or speak to him by telephone. One of these was for a period of some two years after the deceased forgot Carly's first birthday.
It is apparent from the evidence that the deceased had a psychiatric problem. Evidence has been given by a consultant psychiatrist,
Dr James Grady of his attendance on the deceased during the deceased's lifetime. It appears from his report that he treated the deceased from December 1988 through until
October 1989. For a period of a month he was an inpatient at Mount St
Margaret's Hospital, Ryde.
The diagnosis in respect of the deceased was chronic dysthymic depression plus a major depressive episode. The psychiatrist also made a number of comments about the history given to him by the deceased.
These included reference to the fact that his marriage had broken down many years before and that he had a daughter aged twenty from whom he was alienated. It also showed that the earlier retirement which the deceased had taken had left him with feelings of loneliness and isolation and that this contributed to the depression which he was suffering.
That illness was also spoken about by the deceased to his former wife.
Notwithstanding his separation and divorce there was still contact between them and the matters to which I have referred were spoken about by the deceased to his former wife. He talked of the difficulties he had with coping with depression and how he was unable to change himself. The deceased's former wife also talked of the personality problem which the deceased had. He had difficulty mixing in company and was not a person to enjoy happiness, he seemed to resent that aspect in other people, and these problems with his personality seemed to get worse as the years went by.
The plaintiff herself noticed this in her childhood. She would frequently find that she could do nothing right and was criticised by her father and he apparently likened her to her mother and her mother's lack of regard for him.
What this did was produce in the plaintiff a resentment probably quite understandable and this resentment continued as she grew up. In part, it is the reason for the gap in the contacts that occurred between the plaintiff and the deceased. The deceased himself did not hesitate in being critical of other members of the family to various members. For instance, he was critical of his former wife and in the context of the divorce this is probably understandable.
He was also critical of one of his siblings.
One particular incident in the history between the plaintiff and the deceased is probably worth recounting. The plaintiff, when she was seventeen, was lent $2000 by her father to buy a car. She arranged to pay it back on a monthly basis. The car was duly bought and she started to make repayments.
However, she at that stage moved out and had to start supporting herself in a separate lifestyle and found herself unable to continue the repayments to her father. The father resented this and there are references in the evidence to this and matters which I suspect show that he held resentment in respect of this matter. Notwithstanding that, the plaintiff offered to pay it back later in life when she was able to and the deceased refused. It is the sort of incident which although upsetting to parents is a thing which a wise and just testator would put behind himself in considering the future needs of his child.
In my view, the perhaps at times intermittent contact between the plaintiff and the deceased was substantially contributed to by the deceased's illness and there was, in some small [part I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/index.html#p1) think, some contribution to this by the plaintiff, in particular, the period which it seems to have taken for her to get over the forgetting of the daughter's first birthday.
Fortunately, the plaintiff herself in due course got over her difficulties and made contact with the deceased. By that time, shortly prior to the deceased's death, there was even an occasion when the plaintiff, the deceased's former wife and the deceased dined together.
In considering the question of the jurisdiction to make an order and also, if that is found, the making of an order itself, one has to give consideration to the other persons who have a claim upon the testator's bounty. There are of course no other lineal descendants of the deceased and apart from the plaintiff he is survived by his four brothers and sisters. Two of these have advanced their financial circumstances as a matter to be taken into account by the Court.
Robert Grindrod who was a brother of the deceased lives at Orange and by occupation is a courier. He owns his own home and a car worth some $4000. He has some $1200 credit in a savings account and his employment is as a courier for a pathology company. Apparently for the 1992/93 tax year he earned $22,000 and his current fortnightly wage is approximately $809.80. He has outstanding loans of some $4,900. He is married and his wife has employment as a shed hand or casual fruit picker. For the 1992/93 tax year she earned $1380. In addition to that it appears that he has superannuation entitlements which at June 1994 amounted to $49,535.99. When he turns sixty-five he would be entitled to a sum of $86,408.30.
The other person whose financial situation was put before the court was
Valerie Colquhoun a sister of the deceased. She is a divorced woman, owns a villa which is valued at $120,000 situated at Barrack Heights. She has a Ford
Laser worth $2,500 and funds of some $1,500. She is employed as a TAB agent and although her income tax returns show something higher I am prepared to accept that after expenses she has a wage of some $250 per week. She has a debt with the TAB credit union of some $14,000. She has also a superannuation entitlement which she has been contributing to herself and the present value of that is $19,241.08. Clearly, she is not in a good situation and is struggling.
The plaintiff has in the affidavit evidence and oral evidence given advanced particular needs which she says she has in respect of her education, maintenance and advancement. The first of these is in respect of her housing.
The plaintiff is living with her husband, as I have said, in a house which he owns which was purchased six or seven years ago for $45,000 when it had been condemned.
Work has been done to it to make it habitable and it is now valued at $88,000 the amount I have indicated earlier. It is apparent that they wish to upgrade for two separate reasons. The first is that they say that the house is inadequate for their present purposes and the second is that it is in a noisy environment. The wish to move to somewhere in the nearby area so their children's schooling will not be disrupted.
There is evidence given of the cost of new housing at a time of approximately fifteen months ago. This would indicate that the cost of vacant land is in the order of $60,000 and that a suitable project home would cost between $80,000 and $83,000. There would, in addition, be costs of purchase associated with that so one would have a figure for cost of a new home at $150,000.
The other area which is referred to in the affidavit evidence is the cost of educating the plaintiff's three children. She wishes to educate the children in the private Catholic system and the expenses at present in that system in the Wollongong area are for primary school $1,200 per annum and High
School some $1,650 per annum. Her desire is no doubt a very proper one on the plaintiff's part but it is not really the type of need to which the Act is addressed. [Section 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/s7.html) of the Act provides for the Court to make orders in respect of the education, maintenance and advancement in life of the applicant.
It does not extend to making provision for the applicant's children. The Act focuses on the first stage of the relationship between the deceased and the particular applicant.
The other area, of course, where I think need is shown is that the plaintiff is embarking on a life with her three children and something ought to be allowed for the contingencies of life. There is evidence of the income to which I have referred earlier that the plaintiff and her husband receive but not detailed evidence of the actual expenditure which they are incurring on a daily basis. The case is that the eldest child is now attending the local
Catholic School.
It would seem perfectly obvious that the plaintiff and her husband are in a situation where they are struggling and life is not easy so far as their expenses are concerned. They are committed to mortgage repayments and I think, in the circumstances, it is fair to find that there is an appropriate need for some supplement to their income to cover their maintenance in their life.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that there is jurisdiction to make the order and the more difficult question is the quantum of that order.

The needs for housing have been advanced and certainly I think that some desire to upgrade the accommodation would fall within a need. That does not of course extend to providing a child in the ordinary course with a home absolutely. Ordinary experience in the community would suggest that the type of help given by parents largely might extend to the provision of a deposit, guaranteeing of loan and matters of that nature. However, as I say, there ought to be some component to help the plaintiff go some way towards upgrading accommodation. I will not take into account the question of the education of the grandchildren but I will take into account the need of the plaintiff for something for contingencies of life and to supplement the income which they now receive.
Balanced against this is, of course, the relationship of the other persons having a claim on the bounty of the deceased to which I have adverted.
There are five people between whom the residue is shared and on the figures I have quoted they would each on the present will without any alteration receive something in the order of $96,000. The provision which I propose to make would not substantially reduce the amount to a point where it would interfere with the amount that the beneficiary should receive. I think note that the beneficiaries are prepared to share the burden of any additional provision equally.
In my view, taking into account the matters to which
I have referred I think the appropriate order would be that in lieu of the legacy in favour of the plaintiff of $10,000 that the plaintiff receive a legacy in the sum of $80,000.
In the circumstances, I order that the plaintiff's costs on a party/party basis be paid out of the estate and the defendant's costs on an indemnity basis be retained out of the estate.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/5.html  
