

Langston versus Energy Australia; Langston versus McCleary; Langston versus Mingara
Recreation Club Matter Nos 12103/92 [1997] NSWSC 408 (17 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Langston versus Energy Australia /92 
Langston versus McCleary /92 
Langston versus Mingara Recreation Club /95 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /92 - Langston versus Energy Australia /92 - Langston versus McCleary /95 - Langston versus Mingara Recreation Club 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: Mr Langston is the plaintiff in each of the three proceedings (12103/92, 16073/92, 12433/95). The three proceedings have been heard together. The hearing commenced on 24 February 1997. The parties have underestimated the Court time required to dispose of the hearing of all proceedings. On 28 February 1997, the hearing was stood over part heard. Written submissions were made. The Court sought further submissions concerning questions of quantum. These were not forthcoming. The matter was listed for mention on 24 July 1997. Further time was allocated for the completion of the hearing. This took place on 29 August 1997. 
The plaintiff has been involved in four accidents. The first took place on 15
May 1986. He suffered a fall whilst working with a Cant Hook. In respect of the injury arising out of that accident, he sues Energy Australia (EA),the first defendant. The second accident took place on 14 April 1987 when, at work, the plaintiff slipped down an embankment and strained his lower back.
The third accident took place on 19 July 1987. He suffered a fall when sitting on a chair at the Mingara Recreation Club. In respect of the injury arising out of that accident, he sues Mingara Recreation Club (Mingara). The fourth accident took place on 10 July 1989. This was a motor vehicle accident. The plaintiff's stationary vehicle was hit in the rear by another vehicle. In respect of the injury arising from this accident, he sues Neil Andrew McCleary . The plaintiff has contended that the first accident was the major cause for his disability.

The plaintiff was born on 27 July 1960 (now 37 years of age). He left school at about the age of 15 years. It is said that he suffers from dyslexia. It is said that he is of low intelligence. Prior to the first accident, he took pride in his physical fitness (he had the nickname "pitpony"). He pursued both sporting and social activities. He said that, save for a knee injury (in 1979) and a back injury (in 1978), he was in good health. He saw himself as a happy- go-lucky person who enjoyed life and was on a good wicket. He said that he was never violent or depressed. His presentation during evidence in chief gave a false and misleading picture, of his pre-first accident physical and emotional condition.

After leaving school, he had various jobs before obtaining employment with EA in 1981. He was discharged on medical grounds on 26 June 1992. The positions held by the plaintiff during that employment are set forth in Exhibit E. He said that he had regarded it as a lifetime job (working to retirement age).

He claims that three of the accidents have left him with both physical and psychiatric problems. The physical problems relate to, inter alia, his low back. He has had X-rays, a CT scan, a discogram and a MRI scan. Various diagnoses have been made (including that of disc lesion based on the discogram). He has seen a large number of experts and has undergone an extraordinary amount of treatment (including a multi-level fusion operation in ). Largely, he says that his treatment has not proved to be beneficial. He continues to have treatment and take medication. Recently, it is said that things have started to look a little brighter. He has a new neighbour (Debra).
He feels that a relationship is possible. He has new medication. He has become involved in church activities. He claims that he has been left in a condition where he is, in effect, totally unemployable.

The ambit of disputation is enormous. Certain of the experts have strongly held views. Both EA and Mingara contest the question of liability. The questions of quantum are at large. Ultimately, the quantum of the claims made against Mingara and McCleary became extremely modest.

The investigation and treatment of his condition has thrown up a vast bulk of expert material. It would be both unproductive and unnecessarily time consuming to embark on any reference in detail to that material. It is a case in which the history given by the plaintiff was of importance. The plaintiff has given histories containing material which was untrue and/or incomplete.
There is a striking contrast of views amongst the experts including between the plaintiff's own experts and between the views expressed by certain of the plaintiff's experts and the views expressed by the various experts retained by the defendants. There is some commonality in that he seems to be regarded as suffering from a psychiatric problem or personality disorder and that the suffering from problems of that nature preceded the first accident.

The plaintiff married in 1983. He was separated and divorced soon thereafter.
Prior to the marriage, there had been a broken engagement. At about the time of the first accident, the plaintiff started a relationship with Michelle
Green. The relationship experienced serious problems. At about Christmas 1995, the relationship was broken off. The plaintiff says that this followed an incident in which he struck her and police action was taken. He attributes this to personality change brought about by the accidents.

These were events of significant emotional disturbance in the plaintiff's life. They led him to seek further expert help. Prior to these matters, he had experienced emotional problems both at school and in previous employment.

I shall now turn to the plaintiff's version of the first accident. He was engaged with two other workers in changing over a corner pole. One of the other workers was a leading hand (Bruce Wilson). Both he and the plaintiff were engaged in using a Cant Hook in rolling the pole towards the plaintiff.
The plaintiff was pulling on the Cant Hook and Mr Wilson was pushing it. The other worker (Mr Lyford) was at the other end of the pole, about 10 metres away. The plaintiff had at least one of his feet on the pole. He doesn't know whether or not he had the two of them on the pole. He fell backwards and landed on his back (on a gravel or stony surface). Mr Wilson fell over the plaintiff.

I now turn to the plaintiff's version of the third accident. The plaintiff says that he and Ms Green were at the Mingara Club. They went to sit down at a combined table and chair. It was shaped like a `W'. It was supposed to be bolted to the ground. It flipped up in the air and he fell on his back. This version was not challenged in cross-examination.

The plaintiff says that, since the first accident, he has never been free of back pain. He has exhausted the treatment that was available. He said that he went through heaps of doctors and Mr John Grant was the last on the list. Mr
John Grant performed the fusion. He had taken the view that various investigations had demonstrated the presence of degenerative disease in the lumbar discs. The purpose of the surgery was to relieve pain. There is debate as to the need for this surgery. The plaintiff said that, after this operation, his pain changed. His back improved for a while and the pain moved to his legs, testicles and kidneys. Later, the pain returned to his back. His present position is that he has pain in the low back, left leg, hips and testicles. In the few weeks preceding the commencement of the hearing, he developed a new problem (he experiences pins and needles and numbness in his right leg). Since the first accident, he says that he has had sexual problems.

The plaintiff says that, prior to the first accident, he maintained his own home and made improvements to it. He says that, since the accident, he has not been able to do any improvements and he has not been able to perform the work to maintain it. It is in need of repair. A substantial claim is made for the cost of work to be done in relation to the home. He says that he cannot mow the lawns or effect any repairs and that he now pays someone to mow the lawns.
He says that he has been unable to perform certain cleaning tasks. He says that he has had some domestic assistance (including from his former fiance).

I closely observed the demeanour of all witnesses during the giving of evidence. In assessing credibility, I have had regard to both evidence and demeanour.

The plaintiff has been in the witness box for lengthy periods. His evidence in chief took some considerable time. Further, he has been cross-examined by each of the three Counsel acting for the defendants. His father, Michelle Green, Mr
Simpson and Mr Nicholson were called. The plaintiff has called a number of doctors (Drs McCredie, O'Sullivan, Smith and Morse and Mr John Grant). Mr Mark
Grant (a psychologist) was also called. EA has called Messrs Wilson, Deaves and Mr King. The other parties did not call any witnesses.

I shall mention some matters concerning the evidence of the plaintiff.
Throughout his evidence, the plaintiff often professed a lack of recollection.
Despite the professed lack of recollection, on many occasions, he seemed to have a clear recollection of events of the remote past. I formed the view that he had a selective lack of recollection. I have already mentioned the false and misleading impression conveyed by his evidence in chief. There was substantial conflict between that evidence and history given to experts. I do not regard him as a truthful or reliable witness. There are areas of his evidence that I do not accept.

Ms Green was not an impressive witness. It seems to me that, despite the problems she has had with the plaintiff in the past, she came to Court for the purpose of saying whatever she could to increase the quantum of damages recoverable by the plaintiff. There was significant conflict between her evidence and that of the plaintiff. Also, there was conflict in her own testimony. The testimony revealed areas of confusion and exaggeration. I do not regard her as a truthful or reliable witness. There are areas of her evidence that I do not accept.

Mr Wilson impressed me as a truthful and reliable witness. Generally speaking,
I accept his evidence.

As I have mentioned, the plaintiff has sought treatment from many experts. He has placed numerous reports and other documentation relating to treatment before the Court (including Exhibit A). Drs McCredie and O'Sullivan treated the plaintiff at relevant times. Dr O'Sullivan was an impressive witness. He first saw the plaintiff on 5 September 1986. John Grant first saw the plaintiff in 1991. Dr Smith and Mark Grant did not see the plaintiff until late 1993. Dr Morse has seen the plaintiff on only one occasion and that was in 1996. I have already referred to deficiencies in history given to experts.
The deficiencies were material to the weight to be given to the opinions expressed by the experts.

Prior to the first accident, the plaintiff had suffered low back injury and had had a history of psychiatric or personality problems.

On behalf of the plaintiff, it is said that he suffered a serious back injury (without specifying the nature thereof) in the first accident. It is further claimed that permanent pain and discomfort were a consequence thereto.

Diagnosis of that injury is dependent on the subjective complaints made by the plaintiff himself. It has been said that there is no major neurological sign or objective abnormality. On examination, he has been found to have a good range of back movements. His first accident injury was diagnosed at an early stage as low back strain. There was no complaint of sciatic radiation.

I am not satisfied that the plaintiff's contention should be accepted. The balance of probability favours a soft tissue injury which could have been expected to resolve itself within reasonably short duration. I am not satisfied that the first accident caused any permanent disability. I am not satisfied that the problems caused by the injury did not resolve many years ago.

In 1988, a diagnosis of lumbar disc lesions was made. There are conflicting views as to whether or not the plaintiff has suffered disc injury. I am not satisfied that the diagnosis of disc lesions should be accepted. If it was the case that such a diagnosis was correct, I am not satisfied that such an injury was caused by the first accident. The doctors have canvassed other possibilities as being the cause for his problems. It is not necessary to pursue these matters.

I am not satisfied that the picture presented by the plaintiff of himself can be accepted. If a different view was taken, it may be that, inter alia, the second accident (see Exhibit EA2) has played a significant role. There is material to suggest that it may have been of significance in relation to the problems that he has had (inter alia, it has been said to have led to an increase in pain, to have aggravated his back problem and to have been followed by the development of other problems). It is not the subject of this litigation.

Following the first accident, the plaintiff continued to work on and off until (see Exhibit NAM2). There was initially a return to work on light duties.
Later, he returned to full duties. He did not have any time off from work due to back pain between 14 November 1986 and 16 July 1987. Between 16 July 1987 and 23 November 1987, he took about 25 days off (including 22 days between 30
July and 28 August). Following 23 November 1987, there are many lengthy periods of absence (including 96 days from 23 November 1987 to 5 April 1988).
His duties involved the performance of heavy work. He played cricket at 4th grade level up to the 1990-1991 season for the Lisarow-Ourimbah Cricket Club.
He first played during the 1986/1987 season (October 1986 to about February ). He stopped working on 27 March 1991.

As considerable reference has been made to the progress notes of Dr McCredie,
I should make some mention of certain of their contents. The plaintiff continued to seek treatment following the first accident. By 24 September , he was recorded as being "Much better" and "Fit for work". After returning to work, he saw Dr McCredie on 2 October 1986. The notes record "Back has been reasonable". It appears that he had been doing heavy work (such as swinging a sledge hammer) and that this work did not seem to affect his condition. It seems that he went on holidays towards the end of 1986. On 8
December 1986, the notes record "Back O.K.". He did not see Dr McCredie again until 13 April 1987, after his back had been playing up again. This was shortly before the second accident. He saw Dr McCredie on the day following the second accident. He then had tenderness and "some pain on flexion now". He was sent for X-rays of the lumbar spine. The problems in his legs developed after this accident. The notes also mention that the plaintiff was depressed.
By 4 June 1987, he was "now getting pain down to knees".

Ms Green gave this evidence concerning the second accident:- "Q. And you remember him telling you that he had some more pain in his back after that fall? 
A. He had severe pain.

Q. That was a very bad incident? 
A. Well it was, that's what started it all off.

Q. That was your view of it, living with him, is that correct? 
A. Yes that is when I saw what he was going through, yes." 
Largely, the evidence given concerning the matters of the nature and extent of the third and fourth accident injuries is unhelpful.

There is history to suggest that the aggravation caused by the injury sustained in the third accident may have subsided prior to the fourth accident. He did not take time off from work following the third accident.
There was evidence of some improvement in his condition prior to the happening of the fourth accident. The evidence supports the view that, following the fourth accident, the aggravation caused by it settled down after a while, probably to the level it was before the accident. It has not been demonstrated that this injury caused the plaintiff to take any time off from work. Pre- accident regime of treatment continued.

The best that the Court can do is find that both injuries caused short-term aggravation of whatever problems he had.

In addition to the four accidents, there may have been other incidents which had some effect on his condition. In December 1987, he aggravated his back condition when lifting children. In December 1988, he fell down some steps.

The evidence establishes that each of the injuries suffered in the four accidents were productive of pain. The injury suffered in the first accident was more serious than that occasioned by either of the third or fourth accidents. The duration of the problems relating to any of these three accidents cannot be identified with precision.

The plaintiff suffers from a personality disorder. This condition has been with him since childhood. He is vulnerable to emotional problems. There are many causes of his condition. Probably, each of the injuries may have had some affect on him (in varying degrees). I am not satisfied that the role played by the first, third and fourth accidents was any more than a transient one. The causes include the emotional events that have taken place throughout his life.

It has been said that psychological and emotional factors are playing an important part in the experience and expression of the plaintiff's physical symptoms and disability (Dr Morse). He has been regarded as becoming drug dependent. He has been taking narcotics. These matters have been regarded as serving to reinforce his chronic pain behaviour or compounding the problem. He has been said to have become extremely manipulative in endeavouring to ensure that his demands for medication are met. It seems that his non-physical problems are of significance in the assessment of his capacity to work.

I now turn to the question of whether or not EA was guilty of negligence in respect of the first accident. The evidence establishes that it was Mr Wilson who set the Cant Hook before attempting to role the pole. It is his evidence that it was the application of too much pressure and the taking of a chunk of wood out of the pole which caused the detachment of the Cant Hook from the pole. There is other material (Exhibit K) which suggests that the cause of the accident was the failure to securely attach the Cant Hook to the pole.

Mr Wilson was cross-examined at some length. He was a person of skill and experience in relation to the task being performed. I regard him as a truthful and reliable witness. I accept his evidence as to the cause of the detachment of the Cant Hook.

I accept that the plaintiff had both feet on the pole immediately prior to the accident. In my view, this was the cause of him suffering injury. It was certainly reasonably foreseeable that a workman might do what the plaintiff did. What the plaintiff did was regarded as risky and not a good practice. Mr
Wilson had seen it adopted and had done something similar himself. There was no warning or instruction not to engage in this practice. They were having trouble moving the pole and more power was required. Something extra was needed to turn the pole. It seems to me that, in the circumstances of this case, EA was in breach of the duty of care owed to the plaintiff.

In the light of this finding, it becomes necessary to consider EA's allegation of contributory negligence. In the circumstances of this case, I do not accept that the plaintiff has failed to take care for his own safety.

Before leaving this question, I should mention that the Court did have before it the views of two experts (Mr Nicholson and Dr Olsen). There was conflict between their respective views. I consider that this question can be determined without resolving that conflict.

I now turn to the question as to whether or not Mingara has been guilty of negligence. The accident took place during the course of the use of the Club facilities on the Mingara premises. The version given by the plaintiff was not challenged in cross-examination. There was conflict between his evidence and that of Ms Green. I do not regard the evidence of Ms Green as being reliable on this question. To the extent that it is in conflict with the plaintiff's evidence, I do not accept her version. Mingara has not led any evidence on the matter. It has not offered any explanation. I bear in mind that the onus remains with the plaintiff to prove negligence. It seems to me that the inference to be drawn from the proven facts is that such an accident was caused by negligence on the part of Mingara. The ordinary course of human affairs shows that, in such a case, the incident would not have happened without negligence on its part. I am satisfied that the accident was caused by reason of failure on the part of Mingara to properly secure or anchor the table and chair. I find that Mingara has been guilty of negligence in respect of the third accident.

The plaintiff alleges a large number of heads of damage. Initially, these were claimed at large against all defendants. Later, some differentiation amongst defendants was made.

There are general damages and/or non-economic loss, interest on general damages, past out of pocket expenses, future out of pocket expenses, pharmaceutical expenses, future treatment costs (including travelling expenses), the cost of past and future services, past economic loss, Fox v
Wood component, loss of past long service leave, loss of superannuation benefits, future economic loss, past and future Griffith versus Kerkemeyer claims and administration costs.

The findings that I have made lead to the conclusion that the plaintiff fails on claims relating to the future. The claims that remain to be determined are those for general damages and/or non-economic loss, interest, past out of pocket expenses, cost of past services, past economic loss, Fox versus Wood component, loss of past long service leave and past Griffith versus Kerkemeyer.

The assessment of damages in this case is not an easy task. The submissions made on behalf of the plaintiff have both expressly and impliedly highlighted the difficulty of the task. The Court has been referred to a number of relevant authorities (including Dimas versus GIO of NSW (Court of Appeal, unreported, 28 May 1992)). There are aspects of certain of the claims for damages which must be presently left to the parties. If agreement cannot be reached, then further submissions may be necessary.

I now turn to the assessment of damages claimed against EA.

The plaintiff is entitled to an award for general damages. Counsel for the plaintiff has mentioned sums such as $350,000 or $250,000. Counsel for EA sees it in the order of $25,000. In the circumstances of this case, doing the best that I can on the material before me, I assess general damages in the sum of $40,000. He is entitled to interest on general damages. I will leave it to the parties to calculate the amount to be allowed for interest.

The plaintiff is entitled to an award for past out of pocket expenses. The plaintiff claims $163,394.45. For the reasons expressed in written submissions, EA does not oppose the allowing of the sum of $42,082.11 (being the total of the expenses paid by it). It has taken this course even though it is of the view that the paid expenses "exceed the period of time during which treatment can be causally related to" the first accident. As to that part of the claim which relates to unpaid expenses, I am not satisfied that it can be allowed. I allow the sum of $42,082.11 only for past out of pocket expenses.

I turn to the Fox versus Wood component. The plaintiff claims the sum of $24,668.77. EA is prepared to allow the sum of $1,436.19 only. In the light of my findings, if agreement cannot be reached on this head of damage, I will entertain further submissions.

I am not satisfied that his injuries caused him to suffer any loss of either past long service leave or superannuation benefits. I am not satisfied that any past Griffith versus Kerkemeyer component should be allowed.

He is entitled to an award for past economic loss. He had some time off from work a few days after the accident. He returned to light duties and then to full duties. He had no time off work due to back pain after 14 November 1986 until 16 July 1987. By that time, the second accident had taken place. It is not possible to determine with precision when the injury fully resolved.

The plaintiff has made a large claim. EA sees the loss in the sum of $5,861.60 (20 weeks at $293.08 per week). I am not satisfied that the plaintiff's loss can be so limited and/or measured with such mathematical precision. It seems to me that it is best done by allowing a global sum. Because of the difficulty had in identifying the loss suffered which can be attributed to any of the accidents, the process involves an arbitrary component. Doing the best I can in the circumstances, I allow the sum of $10,000 for past economic loss.

In respect of this assessment, EA mounts a defence for the weekly payments that were made. It is entitled to have payments taken into account. If agreement cannot be reached as to the amount, I will entertain further submissions.

I now turn to the assessment of the damages claimed as against Mingara. Two heads of damage are claimed. These are for general damages and out of pocket expenses.

The plaintiff is entitled to an award for general damages. On any view, it has to be assessed in a modest sum. The plaintiff seeks an amount in the order of $10,000-$15,000. Mingara sees the award in the order of about $5,000. Doing the best I can in the circumstances, I allow $8,800 for general damages. There is a small claim for out of pocket expenses (in the order of $250). It is reasonable that some small allowance be made for expenses of a medical nature (such an approach is not really opposed). Necessarily, the assessment is largely arbitrary. For this head of damage, I allow the sum of $200. The plaintiff makes no other claim against Mingara.

I now turn to the assessment of damages claimed against McCleary. Four heads of damage are claimed. These are for non-economic loss, past economic loss, medical expenses and future treatment costs.

The claim for non-economic loss is governed by the provisions of section 79 of the Motor Accidents Act, 1988 (the Act) (in the form that it had prior to the 1995 amendments). There is a statutory threshold that must be satisfied before the Court can award damages for non-economic loss. In my view, the plaintiff has not satisfied that statutory threshold. I should add that an award in the order of $10,000-$15,000 only was sought. I gained the impression that it was not seriously asserted that this threshold could be met.
Accordingly, no damages can be awarded for non-economic loss.

The evidence does not enable the Court to identify any particular point of time as at which the aggravation caused by the fourth accident settled down.
He was on light duties at the time of the accident. After the accident, he, inter alia, drove 30 kilometres back to the depot and continued working for the remainder of the day. Thereafter, he worked for about 6 or 7 days before going off work. Thereafter, he had periods on and off light duties. The pattern was similar to what it had been before the fourth accident. The plaintiff's evidence indicated that his condition had remained much the same since about at least 1987. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has demonstrated any economic loss caused by the fourth accident.

The plaintiff's claim for medical expenses is in the order of $250. This sum is an arbitrary figure. McCleary is prepared to concede the sum of $25 in respect of the medical attendance that took place on the day of the accident.
Once again, necessarily, the assessment is largely arbitrary. It seems to me that it would be reasonable to allow the sum of $200.

The claim for future treatment costs is founded on evidence given by Mr Grant.
It is a claim in the order of $5,000. The evidence is to be found in a report dated 13 January 1997 and what was said in oral evidence (see Transcript at p ). It relates to costs for counselling and medication in the event of the plaintiff decompensating. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has discharged the onus in respect of this head of damage. Accordingly, I do not allow any amount in respect of it.

In the light of these findings, it is not necessary to dwell upon other matters raised by McCleary by way of defence as a bar to the plaintiff recovering damages against him. These matters are founded on sections 43 and (3) of the Act. The relevant version of section 43 required the plaintiff to provide a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in the making of the claim to the insurer. The claim had not been made by the plaintiff until some years after the accident. In a number of past decisions (including
Alexandru versus Predescu (20 December 1991)) I have expressed views concerning this provision. Over the years, the provision has been amended from time to time.

Section 52(3) had been in force until 1 January 1994. It required the plaintiff to provide a full and satisfactory explanation to the Court for the delay in the commencement of proceedings. The provision is no longer in force.
In my view, it cannot be said that the provision conferred any vested right upon a party. What the provision did do was impose on the plaintiff an obligation to make the requisite explanation to the Court. The Court was empowered to exercise such of its processes as it thought fit to ensure compliance with that obligation.

At best, one or other of these provisions may lead the Court to the making of an order in relation to the proceedings in the event of failure to explain delay. For present purposes, it is not necessary to give these matters any further consideration. Presently, the plaintiff and McCleary have reached an arrangement concerning both of them.

A claim is made for administration costs. There is dispute as to the entitlement of such costs. If the plaintiff has an entitlement to such costs, quantum cannot be ascertained until the amount of the judgments have been determined. The parties have asked me to defer dealing with this matter. I shall leave it to be dealt with at a convenient time in the future.

Costs are reserved. The parties may have liberty to apply. Exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
