

Nasser Chahoud versus Chief Commissioner of Business Franchise Licences
No. 30033/92 [1995] NSWSC 138 (6 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
SMART J
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 14:7:1995 #ADD 6:11:1995
JUDGE1
SMART
J By his further amended summons filed in Court on the hearing Nasser
Chahoud seeks a declaration that the purported seizure of his tobacco products on 16 November 1991 was unlawful and an order for the return of his tobacco.
Alternatively, he seeks a declaration that he furnished a correct transportation record and that he is entitled to his tobacco. There is a claim for damages if the cigarettes have reduced in value as a result of being held by the defendant.
On the evening of 15 November 1991 Nasser Chahoud and Ali
El Rozz left the
Sunshine Coast in Queensland in a white Holden shuttle van containing cartons of cigarettes having a value of about $41,500. The cigarettes had been purchased or otherwise obtained from Mr M.Fatrouni. It is not clear whether the cigarettes were loaded at Mr Fatrouni's house or at a depot containing a self storage facility. There was mention of a bag shop at Nambour conducted by
Fatrouni. All three places were on the Sunshine Coast and relatively short distances apart.
About 12.40 am on 16 November Cons. 1/C S.Carlson and Cons.
F.H.Natoli were carrying out Random Breath Testing on the Pacific Highway at
Brunswick Heads.
The van was being driven south. Cons. Natoli signalled the driver Mr El
Rozz to stop to enable a breath test to take place.
It proved negative.
Constable Carlson asked Mr El Rozz if he was carrying cigarettes. He replied "Yes. I buy in Queensland." Constable
Natoli sought instructions from his superiors. He contacted or caused to be contacted the Duty Operation
Inspector. That officer contacted the State Treasury Office. Constable Natoli received a message advising him to seize the cigarettes, convey them to
Brunswick
Heads Police Station, enter them in the miscellaneous property book and issue Mr El Rozz with a receipt.
In answer to Constable
Carlson Mr El Rozz said that they had bought the cigarettes from Nambour bag shop at 5 pm and that they were taking them to his brother,
Raymond El Rozz, who had a tobacco shop at King Street, Newtown. A telephone number was supplied. Mr El Rozz said that they had paid $40,000 for the cigarettes. Mr El Rozz was asked if he had "any documentation, any invoices for the cigarettes". Mr El Rozz produced an exercise book with an old grey/blue cover. The entry, which was written in pencil, was not itemised in the way that subsequent invoices were. The police did not take possession of the exercise book. Constable Natoli said that no documents other than the exercise book were ever produced to the police. Constable Natoli said that he told Mr El Rozz that they (he and Carlson) had been advised to seize the cigarettes and continued: "If you accompany us back to Brunswick Heads Police Station we will enter them in our Miscellaneous Property Book and issue you a receipt."
Constable Natoli said that Mr El Rozz was invited to return to the police station with the police so they could seize the cigarettes and issue him with receipts. The constable said that Mr El
Rozz co-operated completely, that he was never under arrest, that his actions were voluntary and that Mr El Rozz could have continued to drive down the Highway but without the cigarettes.
Constable Natoli said that he seized the cigarettes under the authority of the radio message received.
Mr El Rozz stated that one of the police officers said that he wanted to stop him (El Rozz) and take him to the police station, that it was not legal to have the cigarettes and that the police wanted to keep the cigarettes until someone from Treasury could come. Mr El Rozz said that he told the police that he wanted to go, that there was nothing wrong but if they said he had to go with them he would do so. Mr El Rozz said that one of the police officers drove the van to the police station.
Constable Natoli could not remember whether this happened but thought that it was quite possible as Messrs El Rozz and Chahoud may not have known the way to the police station and been happy for the police to drive.
I would not attach importance to verbal niceties. The police left Messrs
El Rozz and Chahoud in no doubt that they had to go to the police station and that the police were going to seize or take possession of the cigarettes. The police were courteous but firm and insistent.
After the van was taken to the police station the cigarettes were unloaded and the police listed the property seized and issued the original receipts to
Mr El Rozz.
The Police found in the van some 9 pages containing quantities and descriptions of cigarettes and figures (amounts).
The undated lists were handwritten and contained neither the name of the seller nor that of the purchaser.
Later that morning
Messrs Reid and Hendry of the Office of State Revenue attended at the Brunswick Heads Police Station. Messrs El Rozz and Chahoud returned there. The Revenue Officers first interviewed Mr El Rozz. He confirmed that he was the driver of the van but did not own it. He helped to load the van. He agreed that it was carrying cigarettes. He was required by Mr
Reid to produce to him a transportation record containing the particulars required by s.63 of the Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) Act 1987. He said that all he had was the papers he had given to the police. He identified those as the 9 pages earlier mentioned. Mr Reid then informed Mr El Rozz that as he had failed to provide the records required under s.63 of the Act he was taking the tobacco into temporary custody pursuant to s.64 on behalf of the
Chief Commissioner. Mr El Rozz, on being further questioned, said that he had received the records from
Michael Fatrouni of 3 Waterbird Street, Maroochydore and that Mr Nasser Chahoud was the owner of the tobacco.
Messrs Reid and Hendry interviewed Mr Chahoud who confirmed that he was the owner of the tobacco which he had obtained from Michael Fatrouni.
Mr
Chahoud stated that he was going to store the cigarettes at his house. He had asked his wife to give him the money ($41,000) to buy the cigarettes and she had done so. He said that he had not taken any orders. Mr Reid stated that they were seizing the tobacco as the driver had failed to furnish transportation records containing the particulars required by s.63 of the Act.
On 3 December a notice appeared in the Sydney Morning Herald requiring claims for the tobacco to be submitted.
By letter of 4 February Mr Chahoud's solicitor enclosed an Invoice (comprising several people) from Mr Fatrouni in respect of the purchase of the tobacco and a transportation record. In a subsequent letter Mr Chahoud's solicitor advised that the money to purchase the cigarettes had come from Mr
Chahoud's wife. A term deposit receipt for $39,000 was produced. It showed the maturity date of 24 May 1991. A savings bank passbook of Mrs Chahoud showed that between 4 June 1991 and 5 July 1991 there were five withdrawals totalling about $26,000.
She was unable to find the earlier passbook.
By letter of 13 April 1992 the Delegate of the Chief Commissioner rejected the claim. He was not satisfied that the records supplied correctly contained the particulars required by s.63(2)(b), (c) and (d).
By letter of 9 September 1992 Mr Chahoud's solicitor furnished an Amended
Transportation Record, Amended Invoices and a statement by Mr Chahoud that he had received the moneys to purchase the cigarettes from his wife. The letter explained that the Amended Invoices set out the tobacco items which were on the truck and that Mr Fatrouni and Mr Chahoud were to check the items as against the Invoice at the time of arrival in Sydney.
By letter of 16 November 1992 the Delegate stated that he was not satisfied that the Amended
Record complied with s.63 of the Act and, in particular, in these respects: the type and quantity of tobacco being transported the name and address of the person who owns the tobacco the name and address of the person (if any) who has agreed to purchase the tobacco.
The Delegate drew attention to the differences between the tobacco seized on 16 November and the details listed in the documents supplied (the original 9 page lists, the typed lists supplied as an Invoice in February and the Amended Invoices supplied in September 1992). There were conflicting statements as to the source of funds used in the purchase of the tobacco and the owner could not be conclusively established. There were also conflicting statements and information as to whether there were purchasers for the seized tobacco products.
Mr El Rozz insisted that Mr Chahoud paid the money for the cigarettes to
Mr Fatrouni on an earlier trip. Messrs El Rozz and Fatrouni were friends. Mr
Fatrouni did not give evidence. The plaintiff's efforts to arrange for Mr
Fatrouni to attend court could not be described as persistent or thorough. On the plaintiff's evidence Mr Fatrouni seemed reluctant to become involved.
Ms S Mansour speaks and writes the English and Arabic languages.
She examined "invoices" numbered 12 to 21 (excluding 20) being the lists taken from the van on 16 November 1991. Arabic handwriting appears on each of the invoices but it had been scribbled over with a blue pen. Invoice 18 was illegible. She translated the Arabic writings into English. Invoices 12, 14, and 16 contained the name "Ghassan", invoices 12 and 13 the name "Lateef
Allah", invoice the word "Returned", invoices 17 and 19 the letter "N" and invoice 21 the word "Wakeem".
She inspected photographs and stated that they showed Arabic writing on each of the boxes containing cigarettes. She translated the Arabic writing. on some boxes the writing was unclear or not applicable. On boxes 3, 4, 6, 7 were the names "ghassan" or "ghass", on boxes 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, , 17, 22 and the word "Nasser", on box 18 the name "Nasse", on boxes 8 and 15 the letter "N" and on boxes 22 and 23 the name "Lateef".
Mr Chahoud said that he did not know any person by the name of "Ghassan" or "Lateef Alla" or "Wakeem". He thought that Fatrouni might have made these markings but he did not have any idea why the various names had been written on the boxes.
Mr Chahoud said while he could recognise Arabic writing he could not read it. The boxes were loaded in the van by others and he did not see any Arabic writing on the boxes. Mr Chahoud said that he had no people in mind to whom he was going to sell the tobacco.
He had no customers arranged or in mind. He intended to sell the cigarettes to anyone who owned a shop. He had envisaged selling them to different shops. He said that he had never done this before, he did not know what prices to charge and that Mr Fatrouni was going to fix the prices.
Mr Chahoud said that he did not realise that the invoices he had been given were the wrong invoices until his solicitor had pointed that out to him.
In his evidence in chief Mr Chahoud agreed that he told Mr Reid that he had got the money to purchase the cigarettes from the Commonwealth Bank at
Punchbowl through a personal loan. He said that he wanted to indicate that the money was not his money and that he wanted assistance. In cross examination he said that he had obtained money from the Commonwealth Bank and perhaps there was a misunderstanding. He did not understand Mr Reid. He also said he was scared and confused. Mr Chahoud said that he did obtain money to purchase the cigarettes from the Commonwealth Bank - it was from the proceeds of the sale of a house which had been placed in the bank.
Mr Chahoud said that the moneys were and had to be withdrawn in small amounts. Such moneys (about $26,000) were stored in his wife's bag. By 5 July the bulk of the $40,000 was stored in his wife's bag in their house. Mr
Chahoud had no credible explanation why he did not go and buy the cigarettes in July 1991.
Mr
Chahoud said that he drove up to Mr Fatrouni's premises with the money in a bag in the car about a week before 16 November 1991.
Mr Fatrouni was to select cigarettes which would sell readily in Sydney. Mr Chahoud did not know what he was to be given.

Mr Chahoud seemed to have greater language difficulties in Court than he had with Messrs Reid and Hendry. He had been in Australia since 1977.
Nevertheless, in evaluating his evidence I make a significant allowance for language problems. He engaged in some "backing and filling" and was ready to shift his ground. There was a lack of frankness. I found it hard to accept that he left everything in Mr Fatrouni's hands or that he had not made arrangements for the sale of the cigarettes. There was no satisfactory explanation for the names on the invoices or the boxes.
Mrs Samar Chahoud, the plaintiff's wife, said that she gave her husband $40,000 to purchase the tobacco. She said that she withdrew money from the
Commonwealth Bank and deposited it with National Mutual. She had to withdraw the money in small portions and give it to her husband. No records from
National Mutual were produced.
Mrs Chahoud said that she received $60,000 from the sale of their house.
She did not want her pension benefits affected. She was told by her sister-in-law, who worked in a bank, that she would "block the amount of money to the limit that you are entitled to. It will not affect your pension". That amount was $39,000. The account with the Bank was in her name in trust for the children.
The plaintiff's account of events including the obtaining of $40,000 for the cigarette purchase is not credible. I am not persuaded that the plaintiff was the owner of the cigarettes. He may have been. On the other hand there may have been a syndicate. Mr Fatrouni may have had an interest. The possible interest of the plaintiff's wife cannot be overlooked.
It is probable that some agreement had been reached with purchasers to buy at least some of the cigarettes. The names on the 9 pages of lists and the cartons point in that direction and to more than expressions of interest. It seems that Mr Fatrouni was going to be involved after the cigarettes reached
Sydney.
I do not regard the differences between the tobacco seized and that finally listed as decisive.
I am of the opinion that the plaintiff failed to furnish the Chief
Commissioner with a correct transportation record. The plaintiff contended that the police officers wrongly seized the tobacco in the early hours of 16
November 1991.
Under s.25(1) of the Act the Chief Commissioner may delegate any of his functions under the Act to any person. S.25(2) requires a delegation to be in, or be evidenced by, writing signed by the Chief Commissioner. Neither of the constables held any delegated authority.
Section 63(1) provides that while any tobacco (exceeding the prescribed quantity) is being transported by road vehicle there shall be carried in the vehicle a record complying with subsection (2). S.63(4) provides that the
Chief Commissioner or an inspector may at any time require the driver of a
road vehicle in which the Chief Commissioner or the inspector reasonably suspects tobacco is being transported to produce the record for inspection. It is an offence to fail to do so.
The police did not in terms formally require the production of a transportation record. Instead they asked Mr El Rozz if he had any documentation, any invoices to accompany the cargo of cigarettes. This was when the exercise book was produced. There were also the 9 pages of lists in the driving section of the van. Mr El Rozz understood he had to produce whatever documents or invoices he had. There was not being carried in the van any correct transportation record and no such record was produced to the police in response to their demand for documentary materials. As the police officers held no delegation in writing from the Chief Commissioner and had not been appointed as Inspectors they had no authority under the Statute to require production of a transportation record. It is doubtful if they made a formal demand for a transportation record. They required, in effect, to see any documents or invoices relating to the cargo being carried. The formal requirement to produce a transportation record is important as s.63(6) provides that the driver of a road vehicle, who on being required by the Chief
Commissioner or an
Inspector to produce a record fails to produce a record or produces a record which the driver knows is false or misleading in a material particular, is guilty of an offence.
Section 64 provides: "(1) If the driver of a road vehicle: does not produce a record referred to in section 63 as required under that section; or in purported compliance with a requirement under that section produces a record which the Chief Commissioner or an inspector reasonably believes to be false or misleading in a material particular; the Chief Commissioner or an inspector may require the driver to drive the vehicle to a police station or other place within a reasonable distance, as determined by the
Chief Commissioner or the inspector, at which the tobacco can be unloaded from the vehicle.
If the driver of a vehicle does not comply with the requirement, the
Chief Commissioner or an inspector may take charge of the road vehicle for the purpose of driving it to the police station or other place referred to in subsection (1).
on arrival at the police station or other place, the tobacco shall be unloaded, as soon as may be practicable, from the vehicle.
When the tobacco has been unloaded from the vehicle: the Chief Commissioner or the inspector shall tender a receipt to the driver of the vehicle from which the tobacco has been unloaded; and the tobacco: may be taken into custody by or on behalf of the Chief
Commissioner; or may be transferred to another vehicle in order to be taken to a place at which the tobacco may be taken in to custody by or on behalf of the Chief Commissioner.
The power of the Chief Commissioner or an Inspector to require the driver of a vehicle to drive to a police station depends on there being either the non-production of a transportation record complying with s.63(2) or the production of a record which the Chief Commissioner or an inspector believes to be false or misleading in a material particular. On arrival at the police station the tobacco must be unloaded as soon as may be practicable. This enables the citizen to leave promptly with his vehicle. It is the Chief
Commissioner or Inspector who issues the receipt.
S.65 provides that tobacco taken into custody under s.64 shall be dealt with in accordance with Division 2 (of Part 8). Division 2 contains a series of provisions which enable the future of the seized tobacco to be determined.
Seized tobacco means tobacco taken into custody under s.64. The Chief
Commissioner advertises for claims. Claimants must lodge a correct transportation record. The Commissioner may require a claimant to produce records and documents relating to the purchase of tobacco and to furnish a statement setting out details of the source of funds or finance. There is provision for Court proceedings to resolve disputes and for forfeiture of the tobacco and its disposal.
The power to require a person who is in apparent lawful possession of goods to submit to the regime is ss.63 and 64 is a special one and involves a major interference with a citizen's rights.
The Act contains extensive provisions regulating the sale of tobacco. A person must not sell tobacco unless the person is the holder of a licence.
Tobacco wholesaling and retailing without a licence are prohibited as is selling tobacco from unlicensed premises. Substantial fees must be paid (s.41).
Part 7 confers extensive powers upon the Chief Commissioner to enable him to enforce the provisions of the Act. These include access to all premises, records and documents for any purposes of the Act or the regulations (s.55).
He can require the production of documents and statements, questions to be answered and take documents reasonably believed to be evidence of an offence.
Search warrants may be issued by an authorised justice (s.56). The
Commissioner may require any person to give particulars of tobacco dealings (s.57).
S.58(1) provides that the Commissioner may take and keep any tobacco (exceeding the prescribed quantity) which he reasonably believes is evidence of an offence by any person. S.58A(1) provides that if the Chief Commissioner reasonably believes that tobacco in custody under Part 8 is or was at the time it was taken into custody evidence of an offence, he may decide to treat that tobacco as having been taken into custody under s.58 and issue a certificate to the effect. It is then so regarded (s.58(2)).
Part 8 deals with transportation of tobacco, the duties of drivers of vehicles and the keeping of records showing full details of the tobacco being sent, the owner, the consignor, the consignee (including addresses) and the purchaser. Being able to check on the movement of tobacco was regarded as important in making the substantive provisions of the Act effective.
If the correct transportation records are not produced the tobacco may be kept in custody until the true position is ascertained. There is a particular statutory regime as to tobacco which is being transported.
It was conceded by the Commissioner in argument that neither he nor his inspectors had ever acted or purported to act under ss.58 and 58A. They are the more general provisions.
The Commissioner contended that the power under s.64(4) was a discrete power and could be exercised whenever tobacco was unloaded from a vehicle at a police station or other place determined by him. It did not matter how or by what means the vehicle arrived at the police station. I do not agree.
S.64(4) refers to "the vehicle". That refers back to "the vehicle" in s.64(1) which is one to which either paragraph (a) or (b) applies.
S.64(4) is part of a series of transportation provisions and enables the tobacco to be held in custody while the position in relation to the tobacco is resolved. Section 64 sets out a series of steps which may subsequently be taken where the driver does not produce a correct record (paras (a) and (b)). The statutory scheme and the particular provisions are against the Commissioner's submissions.
The
Commissioner referred to the provisions of other Acts dealing with different statutory schemes and different subject matter and decisions on them, for example, s.4E of the Motor Traffic Act 1906 and Merchant v. The Queen <case>; [126 CLR ] I did not find these of assistance in the present case.
The Commissioner submitted that the police were entitled to seize the tobacco under s.80 which provides: "80. To the extent to which a member of the police force is not so authorised by any other law, a member of the police force is by this section authorised to provide: the Chief Commissioner or an inspector; or any lawful delegate of the Chief Commissioner, with such assistance as may in any particular case be required for or in connection with the exercise of any of the functions of the Chief Commissioner, inspector or any delegate."
The words "for or in connection with" suggest that this section enables police to assist the Chief Commissioner or inspector or lawful delegate in the exercise of their functions. It does not empower police to exercise the functions of the Chief Commissioner or inspector. The Commissioner's interpretation would be contrary to the ordinary meaning of the words used and would not sit easily with s25 which provides for delegation of the Chief
Commissioner's functions. S.80 provides only that police officers may assist the Chief Commissioner, not that they may otherwise perform the functions of a
Chief Commissioner or inspector.
The police officers acted outside the powers available to them under the
Act in November 1991.
The Commissioner submitted that nothing done by the police officers impacted upon or detracted from the actions of Messrs Reid and Hendry and that the actions of these Revenue
Officers were lawful and effective. The delegations of these two officers are not in dispute.
On 16 November 1991 Mr Reid treated the failure of Mr El Rozz to produce a correct transportation record to him as the critical matter and after orally recording this failure he stated that he took the tobacco into temporary custody under s.64. A little later Mr Reid told the plaintiff that they (he and Hendry) were seizing the tobacco under s.64 as the driver had failed to furnish the particulars required by s.63, that is, the transportation record.
The Commissioner's advertisement records the time of seizure as 11.55 am on 16
November 1991.
 .
There are some difficulties. The tobacco had been seized about 10 hours previously and placed in the police station. It was in the custody and control of the police. They thought they were holding it for the Chief Commissioner.
The tobacco had ceased being transported.
The police could hardly be asked for a transportation record. The statutory procedures under s.64 do not fit readily with the tobacco already being placed in the police station at the insistence and direction of and by the police.
While the power of Messrs
Reid and Hendry to effect seizures under s.64 was not disputed it is difficult to construct a seizure by them in accordance with s.64. There was none.
It is unnecessary for me to define the moment of seizure. It was complete, at the latest, when the tobacco was unloaded and placed in the police station. It was probably complete when the police officer drove the van to the police station it having been earlier announced by a police officer that they had been advised to seize the tobacco: Whim Creek v. Colgan <case>; [(1991) ALR 204] at 216-217. That decision is also helpful on the difficulty of an alleged second seizure, especially when the goods have not been returned to the person having the right to possession and are being held by the police.
The next question is whether at common law the police officers had power to seize tobacco. This point was not pressed by the Crown and was touched upon indirectly and in passing. I will deal with it briefly.
In Ghani v. Jones [1970 1 QB 693] the English Court of Appeal considered the powers of police, without a search warrant and when no one had been arrested (or charged), to take and retain property without the consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property. The Court held that it had to consider the freedom of the individual and that his privacy and possessions were not to be invaded except for compelling reasons. On the other hand there were the interests of society at large in finding out wrongdoers and repressing crime. At 708-709
Lord Denning MR held that to justify the taking of an article when no person has been arrested five conditions had to be satisfied.
The first was that the police officers must have reasonable grounds for believing that a serious offence had been committed. I do not regard failing to produce a correct transportation record or carrying cigarettes in a vehicle without such a record as such an offence. They do not justify seizing and withholding the tobacco when the specified procedure in the Statute has not been followed.
Ghani is no longer the law in England, having been replaced by the Police and Criminal [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) 984 (UK). Ghani has been criticised as an unfortunate departure from settled principles at common law which protected the right to privacy and security of possessions. See Leigh "Recent
Developments in the Law of Search and Seizure" (1970) 33 Mod LR 271 and
J.W.Bridge "Search and Seizure" [(1974) Crim LR 218.]
Ghani has been followed in New South Wales in Marinko v. James (Hope J, August 1971, unreported), Dixon v. Stevens (Street
J, 2 September 1971, unreported), G.H.Photography v. McGarrigle [(1974) 2 NSWLR 635 (Mahoney] is not consistent with Ghani. In McFarlane v. Sharp [(1972) NZLR 64 (White] Ghani was not followed. It is not necessary to do more than note the debate as the first condition in Ghani has not been met.
 .
The powers of the police at common law do not extend to justifying the police seizure and holding of the tobacco in the present case.
In my opinion the initial seizure by the police was wrongful and the subsequent actions of Messrs Reid and Hendry did not validate what had previously occurred. Nor are they a valid independent seizure.
I grant the plaintiff the following relief:
A declaration that the purported seizure on 16 November 1991 by the defendant of the tobacco products in the plaintiff's possession was unlawful;
An order that the defendant return to the plaintiff forthwith the said tobacco products or, if they have been sold, the proceeds of sale be paid to the plaintiff.
I reserve the questions of further relief and costs for further argument.
As to costs my provisional view is that the plaintiff should receive the general costs of the proceedings and the costs of one day of the hearing before me. The hearing took two days. one day was spent on the issue of whether a correct transportation record was produced. The plaintiff lost on that issue.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/138.html  
