

Gigliotti Constructions Pty Ltd versus Jalili and Anor Matter No 55007/98 [1998] NSWSC 182 (8 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
GIGLIOTTI CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus JALILI & ANOR /98 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division Construction List 
Name of Case: GIGLIOTTI CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus JALILI & ANOR 
Proceedings: 55007/1998 
Date of Hearing: 1 May 1998 
Date of Mention: 6 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 8 May 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Ms E M Olsson 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Cara & Company 
Counsel for Defendants: Mr G A Sirtes 
Solicitors for Defendants: Adrian C Williams 
Cross Applications for leave to appeal pursuant to [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/).
Applications dismissed as no manifest error of law on the face of the Interim
Award: Update Constructions Pty Limited versus Rozelle Child Care Centre Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR 251]; Promenade Investments Pty Limited versus State of New South
Wales [(1991) 26 NSWLR 203] and
Natoli versus Walker (Court of Appeal - 26 May 1994 - unreported) followed.

Consideration of quantum meruit where variations are "outside the contract" but there is a requirement for written authorisation to perform them before contractor entitled to payment.

Held that contractor is entitled to payment on a quantum meruit: Liebe versus Molloy <case>; [(1906) 4 CLR 347] followed. 
I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
These Proceedings 3 
The Applicable Principles 4 
A Consideration Of GC's Submissions 7 
The Submissions On Behalf Of Mr and Mrs Jalili 14 
The Evidence Before Me 17 
The Way In Which The Proceedings Before The 
Arbitrator Were Conducted 20 
The Claim Based On A Quantum Meruit 26 
Costs 36 
Orders 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
Gigliotti Constructions Pty Limited, ("GC"), for which Ms E.M. Olsson of
Counsel appeared and of which Mr Guiseppe Gigliotti has been, at all material times, the principal director, carries on business as a formwork, steel fixing and concrete placement contractor. It entered into a written agreement, entitled "Trade Contract for Construction Management", on 24 April 1994 with
Mr and Mrs Jalili, for whom Mr G.A. Sirtes of Counsel appeared, for the carrying out of certain such work on a residential building at 317a McCarrs
Creek Road, Terrey Hills. The agreement named Mr Stephen Clayton of Project
Construction & Development Pty Limited, ("PCD"), as the construction manager and he seems to have delegated his work to a Mr Jordan.

The parties agreed that the resolution of disputes should be by arbitration pursuant to clause 19 of that agreement, sub-clause (a) of which provided:- "Any dispute that may arise hereunder or in any way in connection with the Works and whether before or after the completion or determination hereof shall be submitted at the instance of either party to the arbitration of the President of the Master Builders' Association of the State or Territory in which the Works are carried out or in the event of his unwillingness to act of his nominee." 
Disputes arose and, pursuant to that clause, Mr E.E. Morris was appointed as the Arbitrator. On 27 February 1998 he delivered an Interim Award which is, by definition, an "award" within the meaning of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), ("the
Act"): [s.4(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s4.html)
By that Interim Award he ordered Mr and Mrs Jalili to pay GC $5,823 together with interest thereon from 14 November 1994 to the date that the Interim Award "is given effect in full and final satisfaction and discharge of all claims by either party against the other in this arbitration, at the flat rate of interest prescribed by the Supreme Court of NSW for the corresponding period".
The Arbitrator's reasons were annexed to and incorporated in the Interim
Award.

He found that GC was entitled to $41,365.50, being the difference between the total claim of $301,408.49 to which it was entitled according to his findings, and $260,143.39, which Mr and Mrs Jalili had paid to it. He found that Mr and
Mrs Jalili were entitled to $35,542.50 on their cross-claim, which he deducted from $41,365.50 to provide the figure of $5,823. The amount awarded to Mr and
Mrs Jalili was the sum of rectification costs numbered 6, 10 and 13, $3,112.50 for additional engineer's time, and $12,050 calculated at p.20 of the Interim
Award.

These Proceedings 
By a Summons filed on 13 March 1998 GC sought leave to appeal pursuant to [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) of the Act in respect of various matters, which were characterised as "questions of law". On the hearing the points raised in the Summons were refined to four, viz:- "A. The Arbitrator found for the defendants on the part of their cross-claim which claimed the cost of bringing the standard of concrete finish from Class 3 to Class 2 in circumstances where he had found that there was confusion between the parties as to the terms of the contract and that the parties had not resolved the issue. In doing so, he misconstrued the law of contract.

B. The Arbitrator made a mathematical error in deducting from monies due to the plaintiff an amount which he elsewhere awarded to the plaintiff.

C. The Arbitrator allowed to the defendants the amount of a quoted sum to rectify defective work rather than the actual cost of the works, thereby erring in law as to the appropriate measure of damages.

D. The Arbitrator, in allowing part of the defendants' cross-claim for defective work, did not make any allowance for the retention monies held by them under the contract in circumstances where the unchallenged evidence was that retention was held by the defendants, thereby unjustly enriching the defendants." 
On 7 April 1998 Mr and Mrs Jalili sought leave to appeal pursuant to [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) on the ground that the Arbitrator had erred in law in holding that notwithstanding that clause 5(a) of the contract provided that GC "shall not be entitled to claim payment for any variation not authorised in writing", he was none-the-less able "to over-ride the requirements of 5(a) if I am satisfied that the work in question is a variation to the works and should be paid for". Mr and Mrs Jalili also complained that the Arbitrator had found that the practice on site was that variations to the works, in the majority of cases, were accepted or recommended for acceptance without the issue of a written instruction, which they asserted had not been a matter in issue before him, and that he had also found that having been parties to that practice Mr and Mrs Jalili could no longer rely on clause 5(a). It was submitted that in this way the Arbitrator either committed a manifest error of law on the face of the Interim Award or, alternatively, was guilty of technical misconduct within the meaning of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s42.html) of the Act.

The Applicable Principles 
The Court shall not grant leave pursuant to [s.38(4)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) "on any question of law arising out of an award": sub-s.(2), unless, first, having regard to all the circumstances, the determination of that question could substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties to the arbitration agreement, and, second, there is a manifest error of law on the face of the Award; or, and this requirement was not argued, there is strong evidence that the Arbitrator made an error of law and that its determination may add, or may be likely to add, substantially to the certainty of commercial law. Therefore, for the parties to obtain leave, they must meet the stringent requirements laid down by sub-s.(5)(a) and (b)(i): Update Constructions Pty
Limited versus Rozelle Child Care Centre Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR 251];
Promenade Investments Pty Limited versus State of New South Wales [(1991) 26
NSWLR 203] and Natoli versus Walker (Court of Appeal - 26 May 1994 - unreported). In addition, as Mahoney JA pointed out in Natoli versus Walker, there are further questions as to whether, having regard to a number of discretionary matters including the amount involved, the Court should, in the exercise of its discretion, grant such leave. His Honour was prepared to assume that the statutory requirements of [s.38(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) had been satisfied, but he considered that leave should not have been granted for the reasons to which he referred.

At p.25 in Natoli Kirby P said:- "Obviously, there is difficulty in the word `manifest'. What may be `manifest' to one judicial officer may fail to persuade another. The criterion cannot be the swiftness of mind of the sharpest intellect. Nor can it be the perception of one whose whole career has been devoted to examining and reflecting upon building contracts. An objective, not a subjective, test for what is `manifest' is contemplated. But the word will not go away. Against the background of its history in this context it requires swift and easy persuasion and rapid recognition of the suggested error. Otherwise, Parliament has taken the decision that it is better for the community as a whole that the parties should be held to their arbitral award. The price of lengthy exploration and reconsideration may prove warranted in a particular case. But, in the administration of justice as a whole, it is not. Expressed in economic terms, the marginal utility of the variations which will be achieved in particular cases is outweighed by the marginal cost of the delays, frustrations, uncertainties, inconvenience and legal and other expenses thereby necessitated.

This will seem a harsh decision to those who can show error in an arbitrator's award. It will seem particularly harsh where an error of law can be shown. It may even seem intolerable where an arguable, but not `manifest', error of law is demonstrated. But that is the choice which Parliament has deliberately taken. Judges must be faithful to that choice. They must obey it, even where their inclinations suggest that a detailed and painstaking review of the facts and the law might ultimately persuade them that the arbitrator has erred." 
At p.28 his Honour said:- "Parliament has decided that, viewed as a whole, it will ordinarily be best to hold parties to their arbitral awards. The interventions of the courts must be strictly limited. When they are, parties will be spared the fourfold litigation that has occurred in this case. They will be spared the delays, the uncertainties and the costs of further litigation. The signal must be sent quite clearly." 
Mahoney JA, at p.8, said:- "Third, it will ordinarily follow that leave to appeal will not be appropriate where the dispute involves, not the consideration of a bare question of law, but examination of how, against the contractual structure, the parties acted in the particular case. The present is, I think, a case of this kind. The execution of the work did not proceed strictly in accordance with the contractual terms. The parties, no doubt sensibly, accommodated what they did to the circumstances - and the disputes - which had arisen in the course of the work. But the result of that has been that the court has become involved, in principle, in determining the rights arising from their actions rather than the determination of questions of law arising from the contractual documents referred to in the award." 
These passages make a number of matters clear, not the least of which is that the more one has to examine the factual matters, the less likely it is that the Court will be able to find a relevant error of law.

The final point that Mahoney JA considered was the amount involved. His Honour said, commencing at p.9, that whilst he appreciated that sums in the order of $50,000 and more were not insubstantial, they were to be measured against the costs of arbitration and of Court proceedings. His Honour considered that the results achieved by the arbitration and, subsequently, by the Court proceedings, had not, in money terms, been great and:- "In this context, I am of opinion that the present award should not have been the subject of review on appeal." 
In the instant case the amounts are relatively small, although when compared with the amounts awarded they are relatively large. Mahoney JA did not decide how this requirement should be accommodated to the obligation to consider substantial affectation unless his Honour meant to say that if an amount is relatively small that in itself is sufficient to preclude that.

Meagher JA was satisfied that there were manifest errors of law on the face of the Award and that sub-s.(5)(a) had been satisfied, but he recognised that the judgment in Promenade was "the most authoritative statement of the relevant tests to apply in this type of case".

It is against the background of these decisions, and I have quoted from
Natoli versus Walker because it is not, so far as I am aware, reported in any authorised reports, that the present submissions must be viewed.

A Consideration Of GC's Submissions 
In support of the first ground Ms Olsson submitted that the Arbitrator was in error in finding that the parties had entered into a concluded contract raising the standard of concrete finish from Class 3 to Class 2. The question whether there is a contract and, if there is, its terms, is one of fact or, in some cases, one of mixed fact and law. The Arbitrator found that the contract into which the parties entered was the written agreement of 24 April 1994, to which I have referred, and two letters, which were annexed to and incorporated in it, being those to GC dated 19 and 25 April 1994. The first letter required the supply and erection of formwork to Class 2 standard for external and exposed beams, awnings and slabs and, for all other formwork, to be to Class 3 standard.

After considering how the contract came into existence the Arbitrator said, in relation to the letter of 19 April 1994:- "This document was attached together with Annexure B to the Trade Contract of 24 April, 1994, which was signed by Mr Gigliotti on or around 26 April, 1994.

Mr Gigliotti stated that he did not know if the contract documents handed to him on or about 26 April 1994, contained the two annexures referred to above, but his initials at the bottom of these documents satisfies me that these two documents were attached to the Trade Contract of 24 April, 1994 at the time of signing by Mr Gigliotti." 
The Arbitrator went on to consider Site Instruction 909, which stated that "all exposed concrete columns and beams shall be Class 2 Finish". This, essentially, complied with Annexure "A" to the contract. The Arbitrator recorded some discussion between Mr Gigliotti and Mr Jordan concerning that document, and Mr Gigliotti's complaint about the requirement of a Class 2 finish and the requirement for further payment. He said that in the course of that conversation Mr Jordan told Mr Gigliotti that that was a requirement of the contract. The Arbitrator dealt with certain submissions about the failure to notify Mr Gigliotti that the terms of Annexure "A" to the contract were different from those contained in the invitation to tender and said:- "However, in my opinion, whatever the contents of the contract documents referring to the concrete in question, were overtaken by SI 909 of 13 May, 1994, which is clear in it's (sic) intention.

The alleged conversation referred to in the above, does not in any way absolve GC from producing concrete in accordance with that Site Instruction.

The failure of GC to resolve this problem before proceeding with work, that would produce only a Class 3 finish, instead of a Class 2 finish was not warranted and was not wise.

If GC was of the opinion that it was a variation to the Contract, it should have dealt with the issue by way of the variations Clause 5 of the Trade Contract.

Whilst the onus was on GC to provide concrete of a Class 2 finish, it appears that the employees of PCD on site took no actions to supervise the works of GC to ensure that the required finish was achieved." 
The Arbitrator considered various matters, which could relate to the contract, and found, as a fact, that the written contract, together with the annexures, which Mr Gigliotti signed and initialled, constituted the contract between the parties. Whilst some of the evidence to which he referred indicated there may have been some argument between the parties as to the terms, the Arbitrator was, none-the-less, satisfied that they were in accordance with the documents to which I have referred. His statement that if GC was of the opinion that
Site Instruction 909 was a variation to the contract makes clear that he did not consider that Site Instruction was the contract.

The finding as to the contract, in my opinion, was probably a question solely of fact, but it may have been a question of mixed fact and law. It certainly was not a question of law and, in finding that the executed documents constituted the contract between the parties, the Arbitrator has not been shown to have made an error of law, let alone a manifest error of law on the face of the Interim Award.

The second point was said to involve a mathematical error in deducting from money due to GC an amount elsewhere awarded to it. At p.8 of the Interim Award the Arbitrator noted GC's claim for $7,250 for the construction of a garage slab and stairs. He referred to a further tender by GC of $41,200 for work described as Stage 2 and an acceptance, on 24 August 1994, whereby the two sums of $7,250 and $41,200 "were combined in a contract sum of $44,000". He dealt with the argument that there had been no reduction of the $7,250 and, in relation to that amount, he found that GC was entitled to payment of it. When he came to his figures at p.20 he had regard to a quotation of $42,500 from another contractor, Mr Wren, to remedy defective work. He deducted from GC's quotation of $44,000 two amounts being $7,250 for the garage slab and $6,300, which had been offered by way of payment, which produced a figure of $30,450, which he deducted from $42,500 to produce $12,050. That figure became part of the amount included in the cross-claim.

It does not appear to me that the Arbitrator made any error of law, and, if he did, it was not one which was manifest and on the face of the Interim Award.
He had found at p.11, after dealing, inter alia, with the claim for $7,250 that the total claim "according to findings" was $301,408.89. I assume, and there is nothing on the face of the Interim Award to show that this is not correct, that he included in that amount the sum of $7,250. Accordingly, when he came to consider the quotation of GC of $44,000, which he proposed to off- set against Mr Wren's quotation, it was proper for him to deduct that portion of that quotation, which he had allowed earlier. If he had not done so GC would have been paid twice. In my opinion, no manifest error of law on the face of the Interim Award has been demonstrated by the approach followed by the Arbitrator. Further, the computation and calculation of damages was essentially a matter of fact for him and even if, contrary to the view to which I have come, he was in error in his calculations such error does not, in my opinion, constitute an error of law, nor such an error, which is manifest and on the face of the Interim Award. Questions of damage are, essentially, questions of fact. It would be a rare case, requiring, in my opinion, some obvious error in legal principle, which is both manifest and on the face of the award, before an asserted error in relation to damages will meet the requirements of [s.38(5)(b)(ii).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) 
The third complaint of GC was that in calculating damages the Arbitrator had given effect to a quoted figure, rather than the actual figure for carrying out the work. My attention was directed to evidence, which showed that after
Mr Wren quoted $42,000 he was not required to supply certain material to the value of approximately $11,000. The reference to the evidence made it clear that one could not discern error by reading the Interim Award. In these circumstances it was submitted, firstly, that the Arbitrator was in error in giving effect to a quotation, and, secondly, that if he was correct in giving effect to it he should, none-the-less, have deducted $11,000 from it. Prima facie, it is correct to say that the amount of damages to which Mr and Mrs
Jalili were entitled on their cross-claim was the amount they were actually called upon to pay and, accordingly, if there was a deduction of $11,000 from the quotation, this was an amount to which they were not entitled. This conclusion does not come from a consideration of the Interim Award. It requires recourse to the evidence. Further, the question of fact arose as to the payment of $11,000 to someone other than Mr Wren. There was no suggestion that they received the materials free of charge. Therefore there was no manifest error on the face of the Interim Award. However, the Arbitrator's finding was:- "In my opinion the arrangement between Wren and PCD for PCD to supply the concrete and reinforcement does not affect the veracity of the quote." 
What I understand the Arbitrator to be saying was that notwithstanding that
PCD had agreed to supply certain other material, that did not affect "the veracity" or, perhaps, the validity of the quotation. In saying this I understand the Arbitrator to be saying that there was no affecting of the correctness of the cost of having the work carried out and supplying the materials. That was essentially a question of fact committed to his decision and it does not constitute a manifest error of law on the face of the Interim
Award.

The fourth challenge was the alleged failure of the Arbitrator to make any allowance for the retention moneys held under the contract. It was submitted that he did not pay proper regard to them. But, at p.20, he said:- "I further do not agree that the Respondents are not entitled to deduct from any progress claim, any moneys in addition to the retention amount. It is my view that the Respondents were entitled to deduct further moneys to offset any charges flowing from defective work." (My emphasis.) 
It was submitted that the Arbitrator did not make a finding as to the retention sum, and did not set it off against the damages he awarded Mr and
Mrs Jalili for rectification works. I disagree. In my opinion the passage I have quoted makes it clear that he found that Mr and Mrs Jalili were entitled to deduct not only the retention sum but moneys in addition to it. This, in my opinion, was essentially a question of either fact or mixed fact and law for his decision, and it does not give rise to circumstances justifying the grant of leave to appeal.

For these reasons I do not consider that GC established that it is entitled to a grant of leave to appeal on any of the points raised and, accordingly, its
Summons must be dismissed with costs.

The Submissions On Behalf Of Mr and Mrs Jalili 
In considering the claims made by Mr and Mrs Jalili it is to be noted that Mr
Sirtes conceded that GC pleaded a claim based on a quantum meruit; that it may have been open for the Arbitrator to have found in GC's favour on a quantum meruit; and that the words of clause 19 were sufficiently wide to entitle the Arbitrator to consider a claim based on a quantum meruit. Mr
Sirtes' submissions raised three points. Firstly, whether the Arbitrator had made a finding based on a quantum meruit and, if he had, whether he was entitled to do so as the contract remained on foot and required any variation to be authorised in writing before GC was entitled to payment. Secondly, whether the Arbitrator had made a finding based on waiver or, perhaps, estoppel and, if he had, whether he was entitled to do so as neither was relevantly pleaded, i.e. as neither was pleaded in answer to the point raised by Mr and Mrs Jalili that save for certain express concessions in relation to specific variations, no other concessions were made. Thirdly, if either of his submissions was correct, what the legal consequences were.

The essential complaint of Mr Sirtes was that in the Interim Award the
Arbitrator had said:- "I am of the opinion that the provisions of the Arbitration clause (Clause 19) is wide enough for me to over-ride the requirements of 5(a) if I am satisfied that the work in question is a variation to the works and should be paid for." 
He submitted that this demonstrated a totally inappropriate approach by the
Arbitrator to the terms of the contract and showed, as clearly as may be, an error of law, which was manifest, and on the face of the Interim Award.
Alternatively, he submitted such an approach amounted to technical misconduct.

His next complaint was that the Interim Award made no reference to the
Arbitrator's proceeding on the basis of making a quantum meruit award. The third was that the Arbitrator had had regard to the practice of the parties, such that Mr Mrs Jalili could no longer rely on clause 5(a) of the Trade
Contract, which matter had never been pleaded or fought at the hearing.

I shall deal with certain of the submissions for the purpose of rejecting them. Firstly, on a fair reading of the passage I have quoted I do not consider that the Arbitrator was saying, as Mr Sirtes submitted he was, that he had some general freedom to disregard the terms of the contract. He was saying that clause 19 was wide enough to enable him to determine disputes between the parties and if he was satisfied, on the facts of the particular case, that clause 5(a) was no longer applicable, that there was no impediment to awarding payment for variation work, which he found to have been carried out and in respect of which Mr and Mrs Jalili had obtained the benefit. So understood I do not discern any error in what the Arbitrator said. The real question is whether, in the circumstances of this arbitration, the pre- requisite existed to allow him to ignore the obligations of clause 5(a).

Mr Sirtes submitted that on a literal reading of the Interim Award either the
Arbitrator's comments amounted to technical misconduct or there was technical misconduct for that reason, alone or combined with his failure to refer to the fact that he was basing his decision on a quantum meruit claim. I disagree with these submissions. In my opinion the issues before the Arbitrator entitled him to consider, if it was otherwise appropriate to do so, the matter in the way he did, and his failure to refer to the basis on which he made the finding, in itself, when it was not in issue that quantum meruit had been pleaded and fought at the hearing, did not constitute an error of law, let alone a manifest error of law on the face of the Interim Award. However, it was a condition precedent that the circumstances allowing him to make such a finding existed.

Mr Sirtes also submitted that the Arbitrator was influenced by the practice on the site as precluding Mr and Mrs Jalili from continuing to rely on clause (a). He submitted that no issue of waiver or estoppel was raised on the pleadings nor fought at the hearing, which was not in issue, and that, accordingly, the Arbitrator directed his attention to matters, which the parties had not committed to him for consideration.

The Evidence Before Me 
The parties tendered, without objection, the contractual documents, the
Interim Award, the final pleadings and certain pages of transcript. So far as they sought leave to appeal pursuant to [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) the principally relevant document, in my opinion, is the Interim Award, because it is necessary to show, from a consideration of it, manifest error of law on its face. Once the parties find it necessary to go to other matters a very real question arises as to whether the Court is determining the existence of such an error, or is considering the Award in the wider context to which
Mahoney JA referred in Natoli versus Walker. However, for the purpose of determining whether there has been technical misconduct pursuant to [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s42.html), and for other purposes which are not presently relevant, it is permissible to look beyond the Award.

GC also sought to tender the earlier pleadings, to which Mr Sirtes objected on the ground of relevance and which I admitted subject to relevance. The point of doing so was to seek to show that initially Mr and Mrs Jalili had not raised the failure to obtain written authorisation as required by clause 5(a) as a defence. In none of the pleadings did they do so in terms.

I think it is proper to have regard to the final pleadings, which were before the Arbitrator, and comprised Annexures G, H, I and J to the affidavit of the solicitor for GC, Mr Luigi Pasquale Marasco, sworn 28 April 1998.

By its Further Amended Points of Claim, Annexure G, GC pleaded in paragraphs 5 and 6 that it was an express written term of the contract that works could be varied by the parties and that it was to be paid the price agreed for such extra work and, from time to time, the works were varied by agreement between the parties. In paragraph 7 it was pleaded that in breach of that term Mr and
Mrs Jalili failed or refused to pay for certain variations. This pleading relied on the contract.

However, in paragraphs 13 and 14 it was pleaded, in the alternative, that GC supplied materials and performed work at the site at the specific request and direction of Mr and Mrs Jalili for which it was entitled to reasonable remuneration, which was $310,125.25 of which $260,143.39 had been paid. This pleading led to the concession that a quantum meruit had been pleaded.

By their Defence to this claim, Annexure H, Mr and Mrs Jalili did not admit the allegations in paragraph 5 "and will make reference to the entire written contract at the hearing", and denied the allegations in paragraph 6. They also denied the allegations in paragraphs 13 and 14.

At this stage neither party had raised expressly clause 5(a), although Mr and
Mrs Jalili's pleading that they would refer to the entire written contract gave some hint that this point would be taken.

Mr and Mrs Jalili filed a Further Amended Cross-Claim, Annexure I, and GC filed a Defence thereto, Annexure J. In that it asserted that the contract comprised, inter alia, the Trade Contract general conditions, which was executed on 28 April 1994. Accordingly, there was an admission that clause (a) formed part of the contractual arrangements between the parties, at least for certain purposes. The Defence concluded:- "In further answer to the Cross Claim, the Cross Respondent" (CG) "says in the alternative that: 
By its conduct the Cross Claim (sic) is estopped from claiming damages as alleged. 
The Cross Claimant has, in the course of and arising from the works of the Cross Respondent, obtained accord and satisfaction of its claim.

The Cross Claimant has, by its conduct, waived its rights to claim damages or any other remedy for breach of contract." 
None of these pleadings go to the point as to whether there was an estoppel or waiver in relation to the operation of clause 5(a). As I have said neither that fact, nor the fact that such issues had been raised before the
Arbitrator, were in issue.

It is unfortunate that the parties did not give some greater consideration to the pleading of this issue. Prima facie the correct response to GC's claim in relation to variations would have been that they were not authorised in writing as required by clause 5(a), whereby GC was not entitled to be paid for them, to which GC could have filed a Reply asserting that Mr and Mrs Jalili had either waived their rights to rely upon that clause, or were estopped by their conduct from asserting that it was applicable.

The Way In Which The Proceedings Before The Arbitrator Were Conducted 
At Tp.7, Exhibit 2, Ms Olsson said to the Arbitrator that so far as the
Further Amended Defence was concerned she did not know what the defence was:- ".. because it simply appears to be a list of admissions and denials and it doesn't particularise their defence in any way. Perhaps my friend can indicate what is their defence." 
Mr Sirtes responded:- "Our defence with regard to the variation claims - I deal with that first because they take up a large proportion of the claim - are twofold: one limb of the defence will be that the variations were never properly authorised. That is the first limb. That has to be broken up again into further limbs owing to the nature of the way the variations and, indeed, the contract claim, particularly the variation, has been pleaded.

They have been pleaded in the further amended points of claim, on the one hand, arising out of the contract, and, on the other hand, they have been pleaded as being requests made by the defendant, and should fall under the quantum meruit cause of action, if I can use that expression. 
With regard to the contract claim, the defence will be that the variations have not been raised pursuant to the terms of the contract which was entered into between the parties, particularly the variation provision of the contract. With regard to the variation claims which are made in the alternative, I would imagine as a quantum meruit claim, we again would say those variations have not been properly authorised, have not been requested, and, as an additional defence raised, we say that there has not been proper particularisation of the value of those claims." 
After some further discussion at Tp.8 Ms Olsson said that that particularised "some part of the defence going to variations".

It is clear from what Mr Sirtes said that Mr and Mrs Jalili were relying upon the failure to comply with the contract in order to be entitled to obtain payment for variations and, in so far as variations arose under the quantum meruit claim, that they had not been properly authorised. Thus the failure to comply with clause 5(a) and the quantum meruit claim were clearly in issue.

The position, at least arguably so far as the Arbitrator was concerned, was somewhat confused by the legal representatives seeking a short adjournment to agree upon some variations, notwithstanding that it did not seem to be in issue that none of the variations were authorised in writing. After that adjournment Mr Sirtes advised the Arbitrator that there were a few variations "which have been agreed to and will not be contested": Tp.9. He identified those and, at Tp.10, he concluded:- "They are the total of the concessions that the defendants are prepared to make." 
The matter proceeded and, in the course of Mr Sirtes' cross-examination of Mr
Gigliotti, Tpp.79-80, Ms Olsson objected on the basis that it was "fairly clear from the concessions that have been made that the respondent has acknowledged that, certainly with respect to some items of variation, the contract regime of having a variation in writing was not adhered to". She continued:- "It's the applicant's case that broadly - and I think this is pretty clear from the evidence he has given - it's his case that he received some verbal instructions to do something. For the most part he put his response to that in the letter together with the price, sent it off to the project construction people and, in a lot of cases, got a verbal reply and he went ahead and carried out the work.

Now, it seems that the respondent has accepted that, at least in some part, that was a conduct between the parties that occurred because they have agreed to certain of the variations and where they haven't agreed to quantum, they have certainly agreed to the liability for the variations. That being the case, and perhaps my friend can clarify, I don't see where his cross-examination of the variations not being in writing is taking any of us. It certainly doesn't seem to be a matter that's going to any issue that you'll have to decide. 
MR SIRTES: Mr Arbitrator, it goes to the standard of documentation between the parties. Not simply on the issue of authorisation of these so described variations, but to the standard of documentation with regard to the valuation of these variations. It wasn't simply an absence of written instructions in accordance with the contract; it is the absence of any documentation going to what work was done, the valuation of that work, the labour that was expended, the materials that were purchased - any of that documentation. So it goes to the entire issue.

Obviously, at the end of the case you will have to stand in the shoes the contract stipulates to value these variations. That job obviously, in our submission, will be impossible to do in the absence of anything other than just an invoice." 
The Arbitrator, perhaps perplexed by all that had been said, said:- "There is some admission to certain variations, forget quantum, forget anything. As Miss Olsson says, there's apparently agreement that some variations were made irrespective of site instructions of (sic) not." 
If I may say so with respect one can understand the confusion, which was permeating the matter at this stage and clearly there was an obligation on both Ms Olsson and Mr Sirtes to specify what was being alleged. It is clear from what had appeared at Tp.7 that the pleadings did not do this. However, Ms
Olsson did not raise in her objection either the word "estoppel" or the word "waiver". She acknowledged that in respect of some items the contract regime for variation had not been met, and asserted that even if quantum was in issue
Mr and Mrs Jalili "certainly agreed to the liability for the variations". Mr
Sirtes' response was that not only had the contract requirement not been met but, for some reason, it would still be necessary for the Arbitrator to determine quantum. He may have had in mind that if his submission that the variation was not authorised in writing did not succeed, which in turn may have depended upon what the Arbitrator found to be the contract, an issue of quantum would still be alive.

In my opinion, however, Mr Sirtes had made clear at Tp.7 that there remained a live issue, in the sense that Mr and Mrs Jalili were relying upon the point, that there had not been compliance with clause 5(a). This had to be addressed by GC, because it does not seem to be in issue that there was not compliance with the clause.

In her written submissions to me Ms Olsson referred to the fact that in their first Defence Mr and Mrs Jalili asserted that they had paid some of the variations and did not defend the claim for the balance on the basis that they were not agreed or were not variations within the terms of the contract and, in the Amended Defence filed by them, "no specific defence was raised in respect of the variations". She referred to the fact that on the first day of the hearing a Schedule of Variations was prepared and the defendants admitted some notwithstanding that they were not in writing as required by the contract. She continued:- "4. It is submitted, and was submitted for the Plaintiff in reply to the Defence that the Defendants by their admissions and their conduct, waived its rights to rely on the specific written terms of the contract to defend the claims. In other words, having conceded liability in quantum for some of the variations claimed, and liability but not quantum for some of the others, the Defendants could not defend the balance on the basis that they were oral and not in accordance with the strict letter of the contract.
 . The Arbitrator was entitled to take the conduct of the parties into consideration in determining whether or not they should be bound by the strict letter of the contract. He did not cite authorities for this position, but it is submitted that he did not fall into appealable error.
 . The conduct of the parties is relevant to the determination of whether or not they have waived their rights under the contract - Update .. .
 . The Arbitrator made a factual finding that the parties' practice on site was to accept or recommend variations without the issue of a written instruction. A finding of that kind entitled the Arbitrator as a matter of law to hold that the defence based on the strict letter of the contract did not succeed." 
In the light of this submission I have considered all the pleadings. I am unable to find in the pleadings any assertion that Mr and Mrs Jalili waived their right to rely on the terms of clause 5(a). Ms Olsson conceded that this was so.

In his written submissions Mr Sirtes referred to the fact that the Arbitrator required, at the conclusion of the evidence, the exchange of written submissions and that in its response to GC's claim for variation Mr and Mrs
Jalili "raised clause 5(a)". It was further stated that the submissions on their behalf were that the variations, which were in issue, were not authorised as required by that clause. Ms Olsson tendered her submissions to the Arbitrator, Exhibit A, but conceded they did not raise relevantly an issue of waiver or estoppel.

As I understand it, the Arbitrator had before him claims for various variations. Mr and Mrs Jalili admitted, notwithstanding that the variations had not been authorised in writing, that they were liable to pay the amount claimed in respect of some. In respect of the balance they did not admit that they were liable to pay them at all because of the failure to comply with the variation clause. As I have said it is not difficult to see how the Arbitrator could have been confused by this situation, particularly in the light of the pleadings, and in view of the submissions made by counsel during the hearing.
None-the-less, there was an obligation, in my opinion, on GC to raise in respect of those variations which were not admitted, that at the relevant time, i.e. during the course of the contract, Mr and Mrs Jalili had either waived the right to rely upon the variation clause or, alternatively, were estopped from doing so by their conduct or the conduct of those for whom they were responsible. In the absence of either a pleading or an express and unequivocal statement that that position was being taken during the course of the hearing, such as to put those matters in issue, it is my view, that in relation to the variations which were not admitted, the Arbitrator should have dealt with them on the basis that neither waiver nor estoppel availed GC in seeking to overcome the failure to comply with clause 5(a). It is important to note that the Arbitrator did not say that he was considering estoppel and/or waiver, although what he did say may suggest that he had one or other in mind.

The Claim Based On A Quantum Meruit 
It is now necessary to consider GC's claim based on a quantum meruit, which was clearly before the Arbitrator.

The contract was a lump sum contract for $269,880. Clause 5, beside the side note "Variations", provided:- "5(a) The Contractor shall vary the Works as required by the Construction Manager but shall not be entitled to claim payment for any variation not authorised in writing.

The price of any variation shall be added to or deducted from the Contract Price and should the parties not agree upon a price or a method of arriving at a price then the Construction Manager may require the Contractor to execute the variation and the matter of price may be referred to arbitration in accordance with the provisions hereof or, at his option, the Construction Manager may have the variation carried out by another person, in which case the Contractor will allow free access to such person and his employees as required." 
The letter of 19 April 1994 provided, inter alia:- "1.01 The accepted Contract Sum not subject to Rise and Fall .. $269,880." 
The letter set out what the sum comprised, so far as work was concerned, and, in clause 4.02, the requirement, prior to commencing on site, of the entry into the Trade Contract "which is available at our offices for your signature".

The letter of 25 April 1994 referred to the same contract price and set out certain other work to be done.

GC's Further Amended Points of Claim pleaded in paragraphs 5 and 6 the matters to which I have referred. I have also set out the response of Mr and Mrs
Jalili to those paragraphs. In order to ascertain the true defence it is necessary to have regard to what Mr Sirtes said, which I have quoted. What he said at Tp.7, and repeated at Tp.80, was that the variations were not authorised by the contract. Further, in his written submissions to the
Arbitrator, as recorded in his submissions to me, he relied upon clause 5(a) and submitted that the variations claimed were not authorised in writing as required by the contract:- ".. and therefore, the failure of GCPL to comply with clause 5(a) of the contract disbarred the contractor from any entitlement to be paid for such variations." 
At no stage did Mr Sirtes make the submission that the variations were not "variations" i.e. that they did not amount to a variation of the works as required by the contract.

The contract clearly contemplated that the variations, to which reference was made in clause 5, would require the carrying out of work, which would increase the Contract Price and, accordingly, be work additional to or other than that stipulated in the contract. It is to be noted, of course, that sub-clause (b) provides for the deduction of a price, but this does not, in my opinion, detract from the concept that the work the subject of the variations was work different from that contemplated by the contract. Rather it tends to reinforce it.

In Liebe versus Molloy <case>; [(1906) 4 CLR 347] the High Court was called upon to consider a building contract, which stipulated that no extra works beyond those included in it, should be allowed or paid for "without an order in writing from the employer and architect". The contractor executed a number of works, some of which were done pursuant to written orders signed by the architect and expressed to be at the employer's direction, but not signed by him. A dispute arose and there was a finding before arbitrators that the written orders were not endorsed by the employer, but that the fair inference was that he had knowledge of the extra work. The submission was that the proprietor entered into an implied contract to pay the fair value of the works "as extra works".

Griffith CJ, who delivered the reasons of the Court, (Griffiths CJ, Barton and
Higgins JJ), said at p.353:- "The law on the subject may be very briefly stated. There was a written contract between the parties, and these items cannot be brought within its terms in face of the express stipulation that `no extra shall be paid for unless ordered by an order in writing by the architect endorsed by the employer;' but that stipulation does not exclude altogether the implied doctrine of law that, when one man does work for another at his request, an implied obligation arises to pay the fair value of it. The question therefore is whether, notwithstanding the absence of written orders, the contractor is entitled to recover these sums, or in other words, whether under the circumstances of the case an implied contract to pay for them is to be inferred. That is inference of fact to be drawn by the tribunal which is called upon to determine the matter, that is, the umpire." 
His Honour continued, p.354, that whilst it had been found that the employer had knowledge that the work was being carried out, a further inference needed to be drawn before liability to pay arose, namely, an implied contract to pay.
This, in turn, gave rise to a further factual issue as to whether the employer knew the work was extra work, or whether he did not know or believe that the contractor expected to be paid for it. Those were questions of fact, which were remitted to the umpire for determination.

His Honour continued:- "An implied contract may be proved in various ways. When a man does work for another without any express contract relating to the matter, an implied contract arises to pay for it at its fair value. Such an implication of course arises from the express request to do work made under such circumstances as to exclude the idea that the work was covered by a written contract. So it would arise from the owner standing by and seeing the work done by the other party, knowing that the other party, in this case the contractor, was doing the work in the belief that he would be paid for it as extra work. If the umpire was of opinion that any of this work was done under such circumstances that the owner knew or understood that the contractor was doing the work in the belief that he would be paid for it as extra work, then the umpire might, and probably would, infer that there was an implied promise to pay for it." 
His Honour also referred to the possibility of an architect ordering extra work with the owner's express authorisation and, at p.355, he said that under those circumstances it would not be understood by either party that such work was included in the lump sum specified in the contract. I cannot discern any relevant difference between the issues raised in that case and the present.

The position of a quantum meruit payment was considered in detail by the
High Court in Pavey & Matthews Pty Limited versus Paul <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 221.] The judgments are so well known as not to require lengthy recitation by me. The implied contract theory gave way to the restitution or "unjust enrichment" formulations.

In their joint judgment at p.228 Mason and Wilson JJ said:- "However, when success in a quantum meruit depends, not only on the plaintiff proving that he did the work, but also on the defendant's acceptance of the work without paying the agreed remuneration, it is evident that the Court is enforcing against the defendant an obligation that differs in character from the contractual obligation had it been enforceable." 
At pp.256-7 Deane J said:- "The circumstances in which the common law imposes an enforceable obligation to pay compensation for a benefit accepted under an unenforceable agreement have been explored in the reported cases and in learned writings and are unlikely to be greatly affected by the perception that the basis of such an obligation, when the common law imposes it, is preferably seen as lying in restitution rather than in the implication of a genuine agreement where in fact the unenforceable agreement left no room for one. That is not to deny the importance of the concept of unjust enrichment in the law of this country. It constitutes a unifying legal concept which explains why the law recognises, in a variety of distinct categories of case, an obligation on the part of a defendant to make fair and just restitution for a benefit derived at the expense of a plaintiff and which assists in the determination, by the ordinary processes of legal reasoning, of the question whether the law should, in justice, recognise such an obligation in a new and developing category of case: see Muschinski versus Dodds (26); Goff & Jones, op.cit, p11ff. In a category of case where the law recognises an obligation to pay a reasonable remuneration or compensation for a benefit actually or constructively accepted, the general concept of restitution or unjust enrichment is, as is pointed out subsequently in this judgment, also relevant, in a more direct sense, to the identification of the proper basis upon which the quantum of remuneration or compensation should be ascertained in that particular category of case." 
In Update there was a complicated contractual situation relating to work to be carried out and variations in relation to a lump sum contract. The Court held that upon a proper construction of the contract the work for which a claim was made was work "within the contract", in the sense that it was work required to be done to comply with the express requirements of the contract.
The arbitrator held that it was unnecessary for him to consider quantum meruit because the additional work carried out was within the scope of work encompassed by the contract. He also found that the proprietor had a liability to the builder for additional building work and the Court of Appeal found that this finding was open to him.

Kirby P said, at p.262:- "An attempt was made to suggest that the doctrine in Pavey did not apply to this case because, whereas there the only basis for recovery was quantum meruit, here a proper basis for recovery was established but within the four walls of the written contract. I cannot agree that this is a valid basis for distinguishing the High Court's principle. It rests upon the fundamental nature of a claim for quantum meruit. So long as this was considered to be grounded in contract, the builder was in difficulties by reason of the construction which his Honour favoured concerning the meaning of the contract. But once the conceptual basis of the entitlement to recovery was accepted to be, not the contract which the parties entered (if any), nor even a contract which the law will imply but a notion of fairness or conscience, the basis of the claim can be seen to be quite different. It is not contract at all. It is `the obligation which the law imposes to make restitution': see per Deane J (at 256).

One might have, especially in the context of building disputes, great sympathy for the points made in this Court and in the High Court by Brennan J: cf discussion by Smart J (1989) 5 Building & Constr L 103 at 105 and by D. Goldstein, `Quantum Meruit - Arbitration' (1989) 5 Building & Constr L 83 at 84. But the duty of the Court, as of Rogers CJCommD and the arbitrator, is to apply the law as stated by the High Court. Contrast the law in England stated in Government of Gibraltar versus Kenney [[1956] 2 QB 410.] This means that the appellant was entitled to have determined its claim in the alternative based not on contract but on the obligation of the respondent to make restitution. Such a claim is not liable to be defeated by the terms of the written contract or of the statute. The appellant had never had a determination of that question by the arbitrator, in the course which the arbitration took before him." (My emphasis.) 
Priestley JA, with whom Samuels JA agreed, considered Liebe versus Molloy in detail and, after referring to the facts and findings in that case, his Honour said, at p.272:- "One point which seems to me to be basic to the decision in Liebe is that if the work claimed for had been work required by the contract to be done, then the builder could not recover for it, because he had not complied with the contractual requirements. If however the work was work which the builder was not required to do by the contract (`outside the contract' in the words of the High Court) then, if certain further facts were found, the builder could recover. It may be that the basis of such recovery would these days be referred to ideas of restitution rather than implied contract. The point of substance, for present purposes, seems to me to be that facts of a certain kind result in liability. If all the facts of the necessary kind were present in the instant case then I think the same result should follow as was indicated in Liebe." 
His Honour considered whether the claim was for work "outside the contract" and he noted that clause 8, which had been deleted from the contract, dealt with general variations to it, either by omissions or the performance of extra work. However, in that case clause 8 required agreement, whereas, in the present case, the variations clause imposed an obligation on GC to carry out the work.

At p.274 he said:- "Things done under clause 6 were things which Update had to do. Unlike things raised under clause 8, in the instances where something which had to be done under clause 6 was a variation, Update had no option not to do it." 
That statement meant, as I understand it, that compliance with clause 6 was required to give effect to the stated contractual obligations, whereas compliance with clause 8 required doing work, which was additional to those obligations and subject to further agreement between the parties.

Subsequently he said that clause 16 was like clause 6 and unlike clause 8, in that it gave Update no option but to do any work that fell within it and he continued:- "On looking at these claims, a distinction from Liebe at once appears. The extra work there was not done because of the requirement of any public authority, but, so far as can be seen from the report, solely because the proprietor's architect ordered it. On this basis it was work not in any sense having to be done to complete the contract work; it was in every sense additional to what was necessary to be done to carry out the contract work for the contract price. It was more akin to clause 8 extras in the present than to anything done under clause 6 or clause 16. `Extra' work of the clause 6 kind does not seem to me to be `outside the contract' in the Liebe sense." 
Thus, his Honour explained the passage at p.274, which I have quoted, in the way in which I read it.

Clause 6 imposed a requirement on the builder to comply with various statutory requirements in performing the work. That, in my opinion, is a quite different provision from clause 8 and from clause 5(a) in the present case. As I understand it his Honour would have found, had it been necessary, that extras performed pursuant to clause 8 was work carried out "outside the contract".

Having found that the matter fell within clause 6 his Honour was of the view that no question of either a separate implied contract or of restitution could arise, and that Update would have been defeated on claims brought under that clause because of the lack of written notice "if nothing else appeared on the facts of the case": pp.274-275.

The distinction, which the majority drew, was between work "outside the contract" and work for which the contract provided specifically and originally. It may be argued that work "outside the contract" was, none-the- less, work within the contract in the sense that it was work contemplated by the contract and required to be carried out in conformity with certain procedures. The same line of reasoning applied, in my respectful opinion, in
Liebe versus Molloy. The consequence of giving effect to these decisions is to leave, so it seems to me, no operation for clause 5(a), save, perhaps, for a claim for breach of contract, because once it is accepted that a variation is work "outside the contract" there is no obligation, on the authorities to which I have referred, to comply with at least certain of the contractual requirements relating to that work in order to obtain payment. However, the authorities to which I have referred in which, of course, I include Pavey, are clearly binding on me and I can find no rational or proper basis for distinguishing them from the circumstances which obtained in this case.

In the result I consider that the Arbitrator was entitled to find for GC in relation to variations on a quantum meruit basis. Whilst he makes no reference to quantum meruit, at least in express terms, it was clearly pleaded and fought out before him. In my opinion, his determination in relation to it was correct. Therefore even if there had been any deficiency in his reasoning he came to the correct conclusion with the consequence that there could be no substantial affectation of the rights of Mr and Mrs Jalili: [s.38(5)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) 
I am also of the opinion that the amount involved, which is some $19,000, is neither in absolute nor relative terms sufficient, in the exercise of my discretion, to grant leave even if I was of the view that there was relevant error: Natoli versus Walker.

In the result I consider that Mr and Mrs Jalili's application for leave to appeal must also be dismissed. Further, I do not consider that the Arbitrator was guilty of any technical misconduct in the way he approached and decided this aspect of the matter.

Costs 
I propose to dismiss both the Summons of GC and the application of Mr and Mrs
Jalili. In the circumstances I think the proper order for costs is that there be no order for costs of any party.

Orders
I dismiss the plaintiff's application for leave to appeal against the
Interim Award of Mr E.E. Morris dated 27 February 1998.
I make no order for costs.
I dismiss the defendants' application for leave to appeal against the
Interim Award of Mr E.E. Morris dated 27 February 1998.
I make no order as to costs.
I remit the matter to Mr E.E. Morris to make an award as to costs in relation to the arbitration.
I order that the exhibits be returned.
 * * * 
