

Sing Yuen Auyeng and Anor versus Selina Chan Matter No 40147/98 [1998] NSWSC (22 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
SING YUEN AUYENG & ANOR versus SELINA CHING MAN CHAN 
CA 40147/98 June 1998 
Mason P 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I propose to grant a stay in this matter. 
On 26 February 1998 Judge Dent QC ordered a verdict in favour of the opponent in the sum of $378,499.44. The verdict resulted from a judgment in the opponent's favour in proceedings against her former landlord for damages for breach of the Fair Trading Act and the Trade Practices Act. The essence of the breach was a misrepresentation as to the state of the air conditioning of the premises, being premises for a Chinese restaurant that were to be let.

The judgment turned, in very large part, upon favourable credibility findings.
However, there was a significant dispute as to quantification of damages, which is not entirely caught up in credibility based issues. Were it not for the matter I am about to refer to, I would not have granted a stay.

I do not think that the appellants' prospects of success are very great, although I base that assessment upon my reading of this judgment and nothing more. However, given that the judgment is significantly based on credibility findings, the prospect are, as I have said, not very great in my assessment.
However, the appellants have a right of appeal to this court, given the sum of money involved, and it is relevant, in the exercise of the court's discretion as to the granting of a stay, to have regard to the appellants' entitlement not to have their right of appeal rendered nugatory.

The appellants have offered to secure the payment of the judgment and the order for costs and they argue that by this means the opponent will not ultimately be disadvantaged should the appeal fail.

The opponent resides in Hong Kong. There is no evidence of her having any assets within the jurisdiction. All negotiations relating to the acquisition of the restaurant business which is the subject matter of the proceedings were conducted through an agent.

I think I must conclude that if the judgment debt is paid there is a significant risk that the money would be taken off-shore. In my view, it follows that there is a significant risk in the right of restitution, should the appeal be upheld. In saying that, I am not suggesting any particular difficulties with respect to the exercise of such rights in Hong Kong, but the prospect of chasing money off-shore, no matter how clear a debt exists, is not one that any litigant should feel sanguine about.

One matter which causes me some concern, and which I will hear from Mr
Radojev, if he wishes to say something further about this, is the question of the cost of defending the appeal. I think that the opponent should be allowed to recover at least so much of her judgment as would put her comfortably in funds to be able to defend the appeal. After all, she has the benefit of a judgment in her favour and a judgment which, as I have indicated, she has prospects of sustaining.

What I am minded to do, subject to anything Mr Radojev wishes to say, would be to stay the execution of the judgment debt except for $30,000, being the estimated cost of the appeal for the opponent to that appeal. The stay of the judgment with that exception would be on condition that the appellants provide adequate security to the satisfaction of the respondent's solicitor (in the event of disagreement to the satisfaction of the Registrar), such security is to be provided within 30 days and there will be a stay in the meantime.
 (Mr Radojev addressed on costs) 
Earlier I indicated that the judgment would be stayed as to $30,000 upon condition that the appellants give suitable security. I did not intend to confine myself to security in the form proposed by the appellants. Security is entirely a matter for the appellants. If they can do it by way of bank guarantee, then provided that is acceptable to the respondent's solicitor (or in default to the Registrar) that is acceptable. I want to make it plain they are not confined to the method proposed. As I indicated earlier, I was concerned about a caveat being used to do the work of a mortgage.

As to the $30,000, I do acknowledge that there is a real risk there would be difficulty in recovering this sum if, as is almost certainly to be the case it, or the better part of it, is spent on the appeal and if the appellants are successful. I have not overlooked that and the fact in any event it would be necessary for the money to be pursued in all probability outside of the jurisdiction.

However, I return to the fact that the opponent has the benefit of a judgment and a judgment which, on the limited assessment I have given, is one which will not easily be displaced in an appeal.

The granting of a stay is not automatic and in the exercise of my discretion, for the reasons I have given, I think the stay should be qualified in the way
I have indicated.

I make the following orders:
I stay the execution of the judgment pending determination of the appeal or further order upon condition that within 30 days: 
The appellants pay $30,000 to the respondent's solicitor in partial satisfaction of the judgment debt; 
The appellants provide security for the balance of the judgment debt including the costs of the trial. Such security is to be as agreed by the respondent's solicitor provided that if there is no agreement within 14 days the parties are to submit to the Registrar within a further period of 7 days submissions as to an appropriate form of security, in which event, security is to be as determined by the Registrar.
Liberty to apply.
Costs of the motion to be costs in the appeal.
 * * * 
