

Lindel Constructions P/L versus Bacic Bros Plastering P/L [1996] NSWSC 81 (29
April 1996) 
Lindel Constructions Pty Ltd versus Bacic Bros Plastering Pty Ltd /96 
Monday, 29 April 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application made by summons filed 31 January 1996 under s.459G of the Corporations Law to set aside a statutory demand served on 10 January 1996. The demand was for $10,477.47, representing what is said to be an unpaid balance of a total debt of $95,477.47. The demand arises from a plastering contract which the defendant performed for the plaintiff, which was completed in or about December 1994. The question is whether there is a genuine dispute about the existence or amount of the debt to which the demand relates within the meaning of s.459H of the Corporations Law. In Burton versus Guildford (1 December 1995 unreported) Hill J, with whom Whitlam J agreed, in the Federal Court said in relation to the jurisdiction to set aside statutory demands: "One thing is clear, it was not intended by the legislature that the court would in an application to set aside a statutory demand embark upon any extended inquiry into the merits of the case. All the court need do is determine whether there is a genuine dispute." 
In that case there is reference to many earlier authorities on the meaning and significance of the expression "genuine dispute" where it is used in the legislation. For my part I adhere to the views I expressed in the case of
Eyota versus Hanave [(1994) 12 ACLC 669.] 
Counsel for the defendant has sought to persuade me that the case sought to be raised by the plaintiff is so clearly unbelievable or untenable that although there is obviously a dispute I should not accept that it is a genuine dispute.

In order to come to that conclusion I would have to reject as without plausible foundation the sworn evidence of at least two of the witnesses called for the plaintiff. It is not to the point that I may have a view as to the likelihood or otherwise of the plaintiff's assertions being ultimately accepted if fully litigated. Time and time again the authorities have said that it is not the function of the Court to weigh the merits of a dispute which the Court considers to require investigation. It seems to me that on the evidence before me in this application there is a case requiring investigation and that it would be wrong for me to reject the plaintiff's evidence as not giving rise to a genuine dispute within the meaning of the relevant section.

It is, however, true that on the evidence before me the defendant had every reason to consider at the time of service of the statutory demand that there was not a genuine dispute. The statutory demand was preceded by written communications from the defendant to the plaintiff. There was evidence of four such communications, namely a claim submitted on 17 February 1995, a letter of demand on 25 May 1995, another letter of demand on 10 August 1995, in each of those cases directly from the defendant to the plaintiff, and on 17 October a letter of demand from the defendant's solicitor to the plaintiff, all of which preceded the service of the statutory demand on 10 January 1996. The receipt of the claim of 17 February 1995 is denied by the plaintiff, as also is receipt of the letter of 10 August 1995. It is quite clear, however, that the letter of 25 May 1995 was received, as was the letter of 17 October 1995.

Although there was some evidence of some telephoned response to one or other or perhaps both of those letters of a fairly desultory kind, it seems to me that letters of that kind required, as reasonable conduct on the part of the company to which they were directed, some sort of written response, if the rejection of the demand was to be taken seriously. There was no such written response and, accordingly, it seems to me that the defendant was justified in serving the statutory demand, even though subsequently, in hindsight, a genuine dispute may be said to have arisen.

I mention these matters because it seems to me that they should have an effect on what is to be done about the costs of this application. In the circumstances I have outlined, I would propose, subject to any particular submissions on the point that either party may wish to make, firstly, that although I propose to set aside the statutory demand, nevertheless, the plaintiff should pay to the defendant its costs up to the point of time when it ought to have become clear to the defendant that by reason of the matters raised there was a genuine dispute. So far as I can see that point in time occurred on 28 March 1996 when there were filed in Court the affidavits which were the principal affidavits of the plaintiff, establishing the existence of the dispute, that is the affidavits of Antoine Younan of 21 March 1996, of
Jaul Jamaal of 8 March 1996 and of Wardy Younan of 21 March 1996. My provisional view is that in respect of costs incurred after that date the defendant should pay the plaintiff's costs, and that the costs should be set off one against the other.

Before I make any final orders I will hear what counsel wish to say, if they wish to say anything, in relation to the proposed orders for costs that I outlined.
 [Counsel addressed on costs] 
I make orders as follows: Order that the statutory demand served on the plaintiff by the defendant on or about 10 January 1996 be set aside.
 Order that the plaintiff pay to the defendant its costs of the proceedings incurred up to and including 21 March 1996.
 Order that the defendant pay to the plaintiff its costs of the proceedings incurred after 21 March 1996.
 Order that the costs payable pursuant to these orders be mutually set off.
 * * * 
