

Mittagong Rsl Club Ltd versus Drew [1996] NSWSC 150 (23 May 1996) 
MITTAGONG RSL CLUB LIMITED versus DREW /92; CL 10988/92 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Mahoney P, Priestley JA, Handley JA 
CATCHWORDS: STATUTES - statutory discretion - limited to proper purposes and administration of statute.

LIQUOR LAW - grounds for regulating private clubs - review limited to the purposes and administration of the Act.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
On 9 March 1990 a dance and striptease routine by male dancers was held at the Mittagong RSL Club. The Licensing Court upheld a complaint under s (1) of the [Registered Clubs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/) that the entertainment incorporated indecorous and inappropriate conduct. Section 17(1) enables the Licensing Court to cancel or suspend a Certificate of Registration upon grounds including para (e) "on any other ground that the magistrate issuing the summons is satisfied is not frivolous or vexatious". McInerney J dismissed the Club's appeal rejecting an argument that <case>(e) did not provide the power to regulate entertainment for private functions which was not otherwise unlawful.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: (1) The legislative history with respect to registered clubs supported a broader construction: Randwick-Coogee Legion Ex-Service Club Ltd versus Malouf <case>; [(1954) 90 CLR 187] applied; (4) Indecorous and disorderly conduct was a relevant ground under <case>(e); (5) The principle of strict construction of penal provisions must give way to the plain meaning of the Act.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: The basis of the present appeal is outlined in the judgment of Priestley JA. I shall not repeat what his Honour has said. 
The decision of the Licensing Court which is here in question was given on 17
January 1992. That decision was based upon the terms of the [Registered Clubs
Act 1976](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/) in the form it then took. The power of the Licensing Court is to be determined upon the basis of the legislation as it then was.

The Act provided relevantly for two things: the issue of a summons "calling upon a registered club to show cause why the certificate of its registration should not be cancelled or the club should not be disqualified from holding a certificate of registration for a specified period ...": <case>; and the making of an order by the Licensing Court: <case>.

The section envisaged that such a summons should allege or, at least, be based on a "ground". Section 17(1) provided a number of grounds but did not limit the available grounds to those there specified. It provided that a summons might be issued: "(e) on any other ground that the magistrate issuing the summons is satisfied is not frivolous or vexatious." 
If the magistrate to whom the relevant complaint was made was so satisfied, the summons might be issued.

The power vested in the Licensing Court to make an order involved relevantly two things: the Licensing Court was required to "hear and determine the matter of the complaint" and, accordingly, to determine whether the ground upon which the complaint was made had been made out; and (if it was) it was required to determine whether action should be taken and (if it should) what form that action should take. The fact that the ground relied upon as the basis for the summons "is not frivolous or vexatious" and had been made out did not of course mean that the Licensing Court should make an order. Whether any action was to be taken was a matter to be determined by the Licensing Court having regard to all of the relevant circumstances of the case.

In the present case, the Licensing Court determined that the ground specified in the complaint was made out. That ground was that: "On 9 March 1990 male dancers provided entertainment on the defined premises of the registered club which incorporated indecorous and inappropriate conduct." 
It is important to understand the basis on which the present appeal has been brought. It has not been contended that the evidence did not justify the conclusion of the Licensing Court that what took place was "entertainment ...
which incorporated indecorous or inappropriate conduct". The evidence of what took place is before this Court. The inferences drawn by the magistrate from that evidence are set forth in his judgment. In order to appreciate his findings and his conclusions, it is necessary to examine the evidence in the terms of the judgment. But, as I have said, it has not been contended that his conclusions were not justified or that they did not establish the ground.
Insofar as it may be relevant, I am of opinion that it was open to the
Licensing Court, and proper, to make the findings that it did.

I believe that it has not been contended that, if <case>(e) be construed as the Court has construed it, the conclusions arrived at by the Licensing Court provided a proper basis for the orders which that Court made. If it has and insofar as it may be relevant, I am of the opinion that the evidence and the conclusions warranted the making of the orders that were made.

I believe that the only matter in issue in this appeal has been whether s (1)(e) is, on its proper construction, to be read down in the manner submitted for the appellant. Mr Ashburner, for the appellant, submitted that the grounds comprehended by <case>(e) are limited to grounds involving conduct which is illegal or otherwise a breach of the law.

In my opinion <case> is not to be construed in such a way. The section gave to the Licensing Court a judicial discretion: if the Licensing Court concluded that the ground had been made out, it was empowered to do, or not do, the things referred to in <case>. (I put aside the qualifications and exceptions to what in this regard the Licensing Court could do). A judicial discretion granted in such a fashion is not unlimited in its scope. It is not limited by reference only to, for example, conduct which is illegal or contrary to the law. This does not mean that there are no limits to the considerations which may be taken into account in determining how the discretion may be exercised: some considerations would plainly be outside the discretion. It must be exercised, in the sense to which I shall refer, for the purposes of the legislation.

The purposes or considerations relevant to the exercise of such a discretion may be specified in terms by the Act. If such are not so specified, the power will be confined only by the scope and purposes of the legislation: see
O'Sullivan versus Farrer <case>; <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 829] at 836, Brennan CJ, Gaudron and McHugh JJ said, in relation to the power there in question: "As already indicated, the power conferred by <case> is one that must be exercised judicially. That means, among other things, that it must not be exercised arbitrarily, capriciously or to frustrate the legislative intent.
Rather, it must be exercised in the interests of justice and within the confines of 'the purposes for which it was entrusted': Water Conservation & Irrigation Commission versus Browning <case>; [(1947) 74 CLR 492] at 504; see also O'Sullivan versus Farrer <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 210] at 216." 
In my opinion, when the Licensing Court came to consider whether, and what, orders should be made under <case>, it was relevant for it to consider, inter alia, the kind of conduct which had been allowed or organised upon the Club premises. I do not mean by this that conduct of whatever kind would authorise or warrant the making of an order under <case>. For the conduct to be relevant to the exercise of the Licensing Court's discretion, it would have to be relevant to "the purposes for which it was entrusted" with that discretion; the Licensing Court was required to consider what the legislature sought to achieve by the Act, how it sought to achieve those objectives, and the limitations which, for such purposes, it saw fit to impose upon registered clubs and what they could do.

The history of legislation in this State relating to registered clubs - whether voluntary associations, incorporated bodies, or bodies having a legal identity by virtue of statutory provisions - indicates that the legislature has seen that there is a public interest in the kind of conduct carried on upon the premises of a registered club. It is not necessary for present purposes to pursue the reasons why the legislature has taken such a view. It is sufficient to conclude, as I do, that the history of the legislation and the form it has taken from time to time warrants such a conclusion.

But, as Mr Ashburner has submitted, that leaves for consideration what kinds of conduct can authorise or warrant the making of an order under <case>. As he has submitted, it is not every kind of conduct to which members of the
Licensing Court may from time to time take objection which provides a basis for the exercise of the statutory discretion. It is accordingly necessary to determine whether conduct such as that here in question authorised or warranted the exercise of that discretion.

It is neither necessary nor desirable to attempt, by a formula of words, to mark out the kinds of conduct which could authorise or warrant the exercise of that discretion. But, as I have indicated, the present conduct was such as to entitle the Licensing Court to do what it did.

There is a public interest in the way in which registered clubs are conducted.
It is understandable that this should be so. The Act gives to a registered club and to those concerned with it, powers and privileges which are not given to others. Those powers and privileges may, as experience has shown, allow a registered club to accumulate property, power and influence. There is a public interest in how that property, power and influence is used; at least, there is a public interest in ensuring that they are not used in what I shall describe for want of a better term, an inappropriate way.

That, of course, gives rise to two questions: what, for this purpose, is inappropriate; and how is it to be determined. It was not to be expected that the legislature could enumerate exhaustively those things which, in the relevant sense, should be seen as inappropriate uses of the club. The legislature, in <case>, enumerated a number of things. But it committed to the judgment of the Licensing Court the determination of whether there were other things which a club should not do and what those things were. In that sense, it committed the supervision and control of the activities of registered clubs and their members to the Licensing Court. It did this in the sense that it authorised that Court to do the things referred to in <case>.

In my opinion the section did not commit to the Licensing Court the supervision and control of every aspect of the activities of a registered club or what its members did in it. A registered club, though registered, remains the property of its members and those to whom its constitution commits it. It was not the purpose of the Act, I think, to intrude upon what clubs could do beyond what was necessary in the public interest. In a modern community, the actions of some are, in the opinion of others, indecorous or inappropriate.
The standards of propriety or morals of some are not the standards of others.
And the Licensing Court is not, I think, a court of propriety or of morals.
But there are some kinds of conduct which, viewed in the light of the purposes of the legislation, fall within the ambit of, as I have described it, the supervision and control which, by <case>, has been committed to the Licensing
Court. I do not accept that that conduct is limited to conduct which is illegal or contrary to the law. Instances may be given of conduct which, though not strictly illegal or contrary to the law, is inappropriate to be conducted upon the premises of a registered club. It was, in my opinion, open to the Licensing Court to conclude that the conduct here in question could and did fall within this description.

I am conscious that standards change. What may be capable of being treated as within <case> at one time may, by reason of a change in community standards, not be relevant to the exercise of the Licensing Court's discretion at another time. It may be that some of those who were involved in the conduct here in question would not have so acted in earlier times. Conceivably, such conduct may become so widely acceptable at a later time that it would cease to be a matter by reference to which the Licensing Court could act. These matters have not been argued in the present case. Having regard to the submissions made, it is sufficient to conclude that the considerations to which the Licensing Court could have regard in this case were not limited in the manner suggested by Mr
Ashburner's submissions.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: This is an appeal from the dismissal by McInerney J of a summons by which the plaintiff, Mittagong RSL Club, sought the reversal or quashing of a decision of the Licensing Court of New South Wales given 17
January 1992.

The Licensing Court's decision was made on a complaint lodged on 6 June 1990 under <case>(e) of the [Registered Clubs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/) (the Act) which alleged that the plaintiff was a club for which there was a Certificate of Registration in force pursuant to the Act and that: "On 9 March 1990 male dancers provided entertainment on the defined premises of the registered club which incorporated indecorous and inappropriate conduct." 
The ground on which the plaintiff attacked the Licensing Court's decision was that upon the true construction of the Act the Licensing Court did not have jurisdiction to hear and determine the complaint in circumstances where: no breach of any law or statute was alleged to have taken place; and (b) no person other than members or guests of members of the Club were present at the entertainment.

The conduct which the Licensing Court found indecorous and inappropriate was a dance and strip tease routine by a number of young men before an audience of women on the plaintiff's club premises.

There was no evidence that these women were not club members or guests of club members.

The Licensing Magistrate who heard the complaint was of opinion that the evidence showed the case was one "of the encouragement of contact with the near-naked body of a male person with a large number of females in a series of feeling, rubbing, pawing occurrences." 
He found some specific incidents of the conduct were indecent and that the totality of what happened transgressed the generally accepted bounds of decency and offended the ordinary modesty of the average man or woman.

The argument before McInerney J concerned the interpretation to be given to s (1)(e) in the context of the Act. The whole of <case> is one important part of that context, and was as follows: "(1) Upon the complaint of the licensing inspector, the Principal Registrar or a council or person specified in section 26(2)(a), (b) or (c), made on oath, a licensing or stipendiary magistrate may issue a summons calling upon a registered club to show cause why the certificate of its registration should not be cancelled or the club should not be disqualified from holding a certificate of registration for a specified period - on the ground that - the requirements specified in section 19(1) are not being met in relation to the club; having regard to existing facilities and social amenities available to meet the purposes of the club, the club is not required to meet a genuine and substantial need; undue competition and economic waste will result if the certificate of registration continues in force; 
The quiet and good order of the neighbourhood in which the premises of the club are situated will be disturbed if the certificate of registration continues in force; the supply of liquor to the club or on the premises of the club has not been under the control of the governing body of the club; liquor has been illegally sold, supplied or disposed of on the premises of the club during the period of 2 years that last preceded the making of the complaint; the secretary of the club is not a fit and proper person to act as secretary; the club has habitually been used mainly for the supply of liquor; persons have habitually carried liquor away, or have attempted to carry liquor away, from the premises of the club in contravention of section 46; the club has failed to comply with the provisions of section 37, 39, 40, or [49](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/s49.html), whether or not it has been convicted of an offence in respect of that failure; a rule of the club referred to in [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/s30.html) has been broken or any other rule of the club has been habitually broken; the club has been conducted, or the premises of the club have been habitually used, for an unlawful purpose; intoxicated persons have frequently been on the premises of the club or have been seen to leave those premises; or the club has failed to comply with a condition to which its certificate of registration is subject; on the ground that the club has done anything in respect of which it may make an application under Division 2 without the Licensing Court or Board, as the case may require having granted an application for it to do that thing; on the ground that the club has failed to comply with an order of the
Board under section 20A; on the ground that the club has ceased to exist; or on any other ground that the magistrate issuing the summons is satisfied is not frivolous or vexatious." 
It was contended before McInerney J that <case>(e) gave the Magistrate no power to make findings in respect to entertainment provided in a registered club for members or their guests and from which the general public was excluded. It was submitted for the club that registered clubs are in a significantly different position under the Act from premises holding liquor licences open to the public. It was further submitted that the area where this entertainment took place was not a public place and that it was not contemplated by the legislature that the Licensing Court should have power to entertain complaints relating to private functions.

After considering the history of the law relating to registered clubs and the provisions of the Act in some detail, McInerney J ruled against the club's submissions, saying there was nothing in the Act that would lead him to conclude that <case>(e) should be read down in the way contended for by the club.

In this court much the same argument as failed before McInerney J was again put forward. The club relied on two relevant principles of interpretation: the principle of purposive construction and the principle of strict construction of penal statutes.

In its written submission, the club stated very forcefully its argument under the purposive construction head: "As a matter of immediate impression, there is something quite repellent, in a liberal democracy, in giving a construction to Section 17(1)(e) which gives full effect to its literal meaning, with the result that a club is liable to the imposition of a monetary penalty, or worse, on any ground other than those set out in Section 17(1)(a) to (d), subject only to the sole condition that the Magistrate receiving the complaint is satisfied that it is not frivolous or vexatious. So to construe the legislation is quite inconsistent with the ordinary notions of liberty, which include that one is free to do whatever is not expressly proscribed, in advance, with particularity. The alternative is wholly inconsistent with the ordinary notions of liberty prevalent in liberal democracies. It rather is redolent of that which characterises the most extreme dictatorial, authoritarian societies, where the citizen can do nothing without express permission. It is respectfully submitted that it would require the most extraordinarily intractable language before the Court would construe
Section 17(1)(e) in a literal sense. It simply cannot have been the intention of Parliament to make the liberty of registered clubs in New South Wales dependent upon the opinion of a Magistrate receiving a complaint, expressed after the events in question, that the complaint is not frivolous or vexatious." 
There is some foothold in pre-Act decisions of the High Court for the approach taken by the foregoing submission of the club. However, after considering the remarks made in those decisions about the distinction between clubs and licensed premises in the light of the history of the relationship in New South
Wales between liquor licensing statutes and the operation of private clubs, I do not think the High Court decisions are of any assistance to the club in the present case.

At the end of the 19th century the liquor licensing statutes had little application to the activities of clubs in regard to liquor. The consolidating
Liquor Act, 1898 Pt III <case> made it an offence to sell liquor without a licence. Part III <case> provided that nothing in Pt III was " ... to apply to any person selling or offering for sale - ...
 
Liquors in any club-house, provided that such liquors be so sold only to members of such club, or offered only to such members or their guests, and in premises of which the members are the bona fide owners or lessees." 
The theory at this time was, in any event, that the supply to a club member on club premises of liquor which was club property, was not a sale: Graff v
Evans [(1882) 8 QB 373.] 
Then, in 1905, a quite specific reason produced a marked change. The Liquor
Bill, 1905 was introduced to Parliament by the government in fulfilment of an election campaign promise for the holding of a referendum on the question of local option. In introducing the Bill the Attorney-General, Mr
Wade, said the government had been returned by a large body of people with strong views on the temperance question (New South Wales Parliamentary Debates ((2nd series) Session 1905 ("Hansard") vol 20, 2519). In explaining the Bill,
Mr Wade pointed out that as the law till then stood the only effect of bringing about local option or reduction of licences by compulsory methods would be to encourage a mushroom growth of sly-grog shops and bogus clubs.
Under the present law, he said: "... all clubs or institutions which take the name of clubs have been exempt from the provisions of the Liquor Act, with the result that any association of people can form themselves into a so-called club with a plausible appearance of being a bona fide institution, and although they are really only sly-grog shops they can carry on in defiance of the law." (ibid, 2538) 
The Bill therefore, he continued, struck at that "evil" by bringing about the situation that once it passed if you had no licence for a hotel and were not a registered club you could not sell liquor. The Bill, he said, laid down conditions making it absolutely essential that before an association of persons could be called a club and be registered they must comply with certain strict formalities which, he said, "will deal a death blow to all the bogus clubs", (ibid 2538). In the course of extensive debate Mr Wade made other statements of the intention that the proposed legislation would make clubs, in regard to liquor, subject to controls the same as or very similar to those on licensed premises.

Hansard records the following exchange in Committee, when what became Pt V of the Act was being debated: "MR WADE: ... The object of this part of the bill was to put obstacles in the way of bringing into life all bogus clubs, and to confine the consumption of liquor to the licensees mentioned in the principal act; and to those associations or members of clubs who could comply with those conditions, and who might very well be assumed to be respectable, and who would not abuse their privileges. This was only a scheme to regulate and prevent this mushroom growth of bogus clubs, and at the same time to allow those who obeyed the law, and behaved in a decent respectable way to have the privileges which they had enjoyed in times past so long as they did not break the law of the day.
 
MR McGOWEN: Does the hon member propose to give the people the same power to close a club as they have to close a public-house under this bill? 
MR WADE said all those clubs would come under the operation of the licensing act. There was no distinction. We could not make this provision effective unless we put all these institutions and people who purveyed liquor on the same footing in all respects." (at 3098) 
The Bill became law as the Liquor (Amendment) Act 1905. It was to be read with the 1898 Act. The 1905 Act contained its own Pt V, dealing with "Clubs".
The registration of clubs under the Act was permitted upon certain conditions: ss 44 and 45. Certain sections of the Principal Act were to apply to registered clubs in the same way as if they were licensed premises: Pt V s
Davidson J's observation, in Ex parte Turner; re Hardy (1947) 48 SR , at 136, that the apparent object of the 1905 Act was that of bringing clubs within substantially the same restrictions as those imposed upon hotels concerning the sale or supply of liquors, was soundly based in history.

Part VI of the 1905 Act provided for a referendum on the local option question. It also included, in <case>, that the number of clubs in the State should not exceed the number in being and bona fide on 1 November 1905 and registered under the Act before 1 March 1906.

The 1905 Act repealed <case> of the 1898 Act (s 3, Sch 1), but did not disturb the position established by Graff versus Evans. Part V of the 1905 Act was carried into Pt X of the next consolidating Act, the Liquor Act, 1912.
The provisions did not require that clubs apply for licences, but penalised the unauthorised sale or offering or exposing of liquors for sale. The ceiling on the number of clubs was maintained (Pt IV <case>). This did not change until 1946.

The next significant step in regard to registered clubs was the Liquor
Act 1946. Section 54 made substantial additions to Pt X. One of these was <case> which provided for the granting of a certificate of registration which authorised the club secretary to sell liquor on the club premises, subject to the provisions of Pt X. Section 133A relaxed the ceiling on the maximum number of clubs providing for the issue of fresh certificates of registration on a pro rata basis, approximating one club for four hotels in the metropolitan area and one club for six hotels elsewhere.

This was the statutory position when the High Court cases earlier referred to were decided. In Randwick-Coogee Legion Ex-Service Club Limited versus Malouf <case>; [(1954) 90 CLR 187], the question was whether the premises of a club registered by certificate were "premises licensed for the sale of ... liquor" within the meaning of an Order in Council made under the [Landlord and Tenant
Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lata1948257/). In considering this question the judges discussed the distinction between the registration of a club and the licensing of premises. Dixon CJ said this distinction " ... is not one merely of nomenclature or of common understanding. It is a legislative distinction of substance and moreover of purpose.
 
The licence is to sell to the public at large. It stamps the premises with the character of a particular business and usually adds enormously to their value. The liquor legislation recognises the economic interest of a landlord in the existence of a licence in respect of the premises when his tenant is the licensee and provides means for the protection of that interest especially when the landlord is the owner of the freehold. ... 
The registration of a club enables the club through its secretary to dispose of liquor to the members but not to the public generally. To obtain registration the rules of the club must provide that a visitor shall not be supplied with liquor on the club premises unless on invitation and in the company of a member (s 135(g)). The purpose of the registration of clubs is to secure control of and exercise supervision over the clubs in which liquor is supplied to members. The description of clubs that may be registered is limited and defined (s 134). The rules of the club must fulfil certain requirements relating to its management, the identification of its members, the election of members and the admission of honorary members (s 135). Much of this no doubt is pointed against a recourse to illusory clubs so as to escape the licensing provisions of the Liquor Act. Proprietary clubs are excluded (s (h) and <case>). The responsibility for compliance is placed upon the secretary (s 132A) but when the secretary changes the club is entitled to have the name of the new secretary endorsed on the certificate, whereupon the responsibility passes to him (s 142). The landlord of the club has no economic or other interest in the club's registration in respect of the leased premises. Indeed the rent may not exceed ten per cent of the total sum which comprises the unimproved capital value of the land (excluding any added value attributable to the fact that the club is registered) and the value of the improvements on the land (s 134(h)(i) (2nd par)). The club may remove to other premises if the licensing court gives its authority and the only objections open are that the premises are unsuitable or that the accommodation or the sanitary conveniences are insufficient or inappropriate to meet the purposes for which the club is formed (s 145). There are provisions directed at the prevention of the abuse and misuse of the authority to supply liquor and at other irregular practices. The sanction may be refusal of the renewal of registration or cancellation (ss 139, 140, 148). But this is the concern of the club and not the landlord under the Act. the differences in the treatment of clubs by the legislation and in that of victuallers and other licensees is so markedly different simply because both the purpose and effect are different. In point of history the registration of clubs came long after the licensing of victuallers &c. ...
 
It is not difficult to understand why a landlord of licensed premises should be set free of the obstructions arising from the Landlord and Tenant
Act 1948-1952, to his recovering possession in case of breach of condition or other ground for terminating the tenancy. The licence giving value to his premises might be in imminent peril. But no such reasons apply to the premises of a registered club." (at 192-193) 
Dixon CJ concluded that registered clubs were not within the meaning of the
Order in Council. He did so after a somewhat different survey of their position from that of the following judges, although they came to the same conclusion as he did. I have emphasised a sentence in the third paragraph of the citation which I will refer to later.

Fullagar J, in reaching the same conclusion referred to the decision of the
High Court (Williams ACJ, Webb, Fullagar, Kitto and Taylor JJ) in Bergin v
Stack <case>; [(1953) 88 CLR 248.] That was an appeal from the Supreme Court of Victoria involving a prosecution under the
Victorian Licensing Act in which one question argued was whether the section under which the prosecution was brought applied at all to sales on club premises (see per Fullagar J at 263). In considering this question Fullagar J examined the history of the legislation. When dealing in Randwick-Coogee
Legion Ex Service Club Limited with the distinction between licensed and club premises, Fullagar J in the following passage referred to his reasons in
Bergin: "Such premises as hotels and the shops of licensed grocers are premises on which a commercial activity is carried on, premises on or from which liquor is sold to the public or to the liquor trade itself. Club premises stand in an entirely different position. It may be conceded that the obtaining of liquor for members is the main excuse for the existence of some clubs. But it is not of the essence of a club (as it is, for example, of the essence of a hotel) that liquor should be available on its premises. Whether liquor is available or not, they are essentially private premises. Clubs do not, in any real sense, sell liquor to customers. The very reasons which led Parliament to make special provisions in the Liquor Act for clubs would equally account for an
Order in Council which excluded such premises as hotels from the protection of the [Landlord and Tenant (Amendment)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lata1948257/) while leaving club premises protected, like private premises generally, by the provisions of that Act. I may perhaps repeat what I said (with the concurrence, I think, of Williams, Kitto and Taylor JJ) in Bergin versus Stack ...: 'Parliament may well have regarded, and almost certainly did regard, clubs as standing on a special footing of their own. They are societies, generally speaking, of a private and social nature, and, so far as the essential conception goes, their premises are more closely analogous to private homes than to public trading establishments' (at 270)." (at 198-199) 
Here, the emphasis is on the essentially private nature of clubs, and their greater likeness to private homes than licensed premises.

A little later in the Randwick-Coogee Legion Ex Service Club Limited case
Fullagar J said, (at 199) that at times relevant to that decision there were in force in all the States of the Commonwealth, Acts closely similar to the
Liquor Act of New South Wales; but each Act controlled the sale of liquor according to very much the same scheme; and contained special provisions for clubs closely analogous to the those of the New South Wales Liquor Act (at ). After referring to some differences between the various Acts, he concluded: "But all alike treat clubs and club premises as standing outside the general licensing system." (at 199-200) 
Kitto J also reached the same conclusion as Dixon CJ, but his viewpoint was closer to that of Fullagar J. He said that the function of the certificate of registration of a club was entirely different from that of a licence. He pointed out that the doctrine of Graff versus Evans was that when liquor was supplied to a member of a club from a stock which the members owned in common there was no sale of liquor (and thus no requirement for a licence) but only a release to one member of the proprietary rights of his co-members (at 201). He then added: "Indeed it was precisely because this meant that clubs did not need licences that it was necessary to introduce a system of requiring clubs to be registered, as a means of establishing a degree of control over them in relation to their dealings with liquor." (at 201) 
He then went on to note that there had been a more recently created special prohibition of selling or supplying liquor on the premises of an unregistered club. He said that a certificate of registration still lacked the prime characteristic of a licence since it did not constitute the holder an authorised vendor of liquor to the public, its relevance being not to the prohibition of selling liquor without holding a licence but to the newer prohibition of selling or supplying liquor on the premises of an unregistered club (at 201).

Kitto J in saying, in the sentence cited above, that the system of requiring clubs to be registered was a means of establishing some control over them in relation to their dealings with liquor, was referring to the same consideration as that mentioned by Fullagar J in Bergin when, commenting on the introduction of the [Licensing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/la1906104/) in Victoria, he said, at 267, that the 1906 Act radically altered the whole position of clubs, replacing a system under which there was a very wide exemption of clubs from the licensing legislation with a system "for the legislative regulation, in respect of liquor, of all clubs".

The two High Court cases, and in particular the observations of Fullagar and
Kitto JJ give some support to the idea that when those cases were decided, the only invasion of a private registered club's privacy under the Liquor Act was by provisions directed towards controlling the clubs in relation to their dealings with liquor. Dixon CJ, in the sentence of his that I have emphasised earlier (p 9 above) appeared to take a broader view of the control given, and thus, in my respectful opinion was a sounder generalisation.

The general argument of the club in the present case was that the Act, and s (1)(e), should be construed consistently with what had been said by Fullagar and Kitto JJ.

However, those two judges had not considered in detail (as Dixon CJ had) the degree to which the licensing legislation had imposed controls upon clubs of the same kind as those upon licensees and licensed premises. I will give some particulars of what was done.

Section 43 of the 1905 Act made ss 46, 47, 51 and 52 and Pt VI of the 1898 Act applicable to registered clubs as well as ss 8 to 19 of the 1905 Act itself.

Section 46 of the 1898 Act prohibited gaming in licensed premises. Section 47 made it an offence to use licensed premises for prostitution. Section 51 made it an offence for the holder of a licence to supply liquor to an intoxicated person. Section 52 empowered any licensing court to forbid licensed publicans to sell or supply liquor to any person who had by the excessive drinking of liquor wasted his means or seriously impaired his health.

Part VI gave inspectors extensive powers of entry upon licensed premises. Part
VI <case> empowered licensing inspectors and police officers who had reasonable cause for suspecting unlawful or disorderly proceedings to be carried on in any licensed premises at any time during the day or night to demand entrance to the premises and if admittance were refused or unreasonably delayed to break into the premises.

Section 8 of the 1905 Act made it an offence for a licensee to supply certain persons with liquor. Section 9 made it an offence for any person to send a person under the age of fourteen to licensed premises to get liquor. Section made it an offence to fail to remove any person under the age of seventeen years from the bar of licensed premises. Section 11 made it an offence for a prohibited person to be on licensed premises. Section 12 made it an offence for a licensee to permit drunkenness or any indecent, violent, quarrelsome or riotous conduct to take place on his licensed premises. Section 13 made it an offence for a licensee to allow any female under the age of twenty-one years other than his wife or daughter to serve liquor in any bar in licensed premises. Section 14 imposed a penalty upon a licensee for permitting his licensed premises to be used for purposes of prostitution. Section 15 required licensees to comply with various sanitary standards. Section 16 stipulated times when premises might not be open for the sale of liquor. Sections 17 and dealt with the offence of persons being found drinking liquor on licensed premises during prohibited times. Section 19 gave members of the Police Force powers to obtain the names and addresses of persons on licensed premises at prohibited times.

The latter part of <case>, which made all the foregoing provisions applicable to registered clubs, specified that in applying the provisions, "club premises" should be read for "licensed premises" and "secretary of the club" for "licensee".

Section 60 of the 1905 Act gave further powers of search of clubs by police in certain circumstances.

For practical purposes the provisions I have enumerated either accomplished or went close to accomplishing Mr Wade's stated object of putting the control of registered clubs on the same footing as that of hotels.

In the 1912 Act, the section corresponding to <case> of the 1905 Act was <case>.
It reproduced quite closely the same controls, offences and restrictions as had been introduced by the 1905 Act.

A study of the provisions shows, in my opinion, that although, as Fullagar and
Kitto JJ both said, (as have many other judges), the nature and theory of clubs are quite distinct from those of licensed premises, it is quite clear that the practical ways of controlling them were, from 1905, very much the same, and deliberately so.

When the bill which became the 1976 Act was before Parliament, Mr Maddison, the Attorney-General, recalled that the pro rata restriction on the number of registered clubs introduced in 1946 had been removed in 1954 and that poker machines had been legalised in 1956 (Hansard Vol 21, 3619). Another member mentioned that the number of clubs had increased from 85 in 1946 to 1500 in (at 3714). This is only part of the background to the Act, but it is enough to show that the need for the same kind of control to be maintained over club premises as over licensed premises was as much in the minds of the legislators as it had been in 1905.

The Act in Pt IV (ss 43-57) reproduced a list of offences much the same as in ss 8 to 19 of the 1905 Act, with some additional ones related to the use of poker machines and to drugs. The act did not directly make applicable sections of the Liquor Act in the same way as had been done in 1905 and 1912, but achieved much the same effect in <case> (see pp 2-4 above) by listing numerous grounds of complaint, and in <case> where there is an analogous list of grounds on which objections to applications for registration can be based.

Particularly important for present purposes, is the retention in the Act of the equivalent to the powers of entry given to the police in 1905 and 1912.
Section 59 of the Act provided that if specified members of the police Force suspected on reasonable grounds that any unlawful or disorderly conduct was being carried on, or any offence arising under the Act was being committed, on the premises of a registered club at any time, then such officers might demand entry to the premises and, if not admitted, or unreasonably delayed, might break into the premises.

This section seems to me plainly to contemplate as had its predecessors, that disorderly conduct, explicitly distinguished from unlawful conduct, on club premises, was to be subject to external control.

This provision when taken with all the others leads me to the clear opinion that the club's argument on its purposive construction approach does not require that the words of <case>(e) be limited in the way contended for by the club.

The respondent on the other hand contended that the words should not be read down in any way at all. I do not think this can be right. It seems to me that any ground relied on must be one qualified by words to the effect of "relevant to the purposes and administration of the Act". I do not think it would be reasonable or right to construe the intention of parliament, in conferring the vague catch-all power of <case>(e) upon the magistrate, as being that it should be used for purposes not to be found by reference to the Act itself.

The club's approach to the question of construction would seek to confine "any other ground" more narrowly, to purposes relevant to "controlling the use of liquor in club premises" or alternatively, "connected in some way to unlawful behaviour".

Section 59 contemplated that disorderly conduct, explicitly distinguished from unlawful conduct, on club premises, was to be subject to external control.
Taking this into account with all the provisions of the Act, and in light of the history earlier mentioned, the control of indecorous and inappropriate conduct in registered clubs by external authority was, in my opinion, within the contemplation of the Act.

A further argument relied on in support of the purposive construction contended for by the club, was that the 1976 Act gave no indication of seeking to control entertainment in clubs, and that such control was deliberately left to Local Government and Theatres and Public Halls legislation, and to the
Licensing Court, under the Act, only in regard to matters of safety.

Even if that be so, it does not answer the argument of the respondent. The respondent was not seeking to regulate entertainment as entertainment, but conduct which it was claimed was indecorous and inappropriate, which happened to be called entertainment by the club. Control of that kind of behaviour, notwithstanding it might incidentally be classed as entertainment was in my opinion given to the Licensing Court by means of <case> and the Act generally.

I would wish to make it clear here that it is not for this court in the present proceedings to agree or disagree with the Magistrate's opinion that the evidence before him showed indecorous and inappropriate conduct. The question specifically raised by the club in this appeal is the different question whether the Act empowered the Magistrate to rule that conduct which was in his opinion indecorous and inappropriate constituted a ground of complaint within the meaning of <case>(e). On the purposive construction approach it seems to me that the Magistrate did have that power. On the evidence before him it was in my opinion open to him, depending on his view of the evidence, to find the complaint proved. It was also, I think, open to him to have found the other way. The only question this court is asked to decide is whether or not he had the power to make such a decision. In my opinion he did.

The other principle of interpretation upon which the club relied was that of strict construction of penal provisions. I think the club was probably right in submitting that the possible consequences to the club of the complaint being proved against it were such that the principle of construction relating to penal provisions is applicable in the present case. Assuming that to be so, nevertheless it seems to me that the language of the Act is quite clear and, when read as a whole, carries the meaning of the broader construction I have mentioned above on the relevant point. That being so, the principle of strict construction of penal provisions must give way to the plain meaning of the
Act.

In my opinion the club's grounds of appeal fail and the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
HANDLEY JA: In this appeal I have had the benefit of reading the reasons for judgment of Priestley JA in draft form. I agree with his Honour's reasons but will add some brief additional reasons of my own.

Section 17 (1) of the [Registered Clubs
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/) contains the grounds on which disciplinary action may be taken against such a club.
There are 18 such grounds, the last being ground (e) which provides: "On any other ground that the magistrate issuing the summons is satisfied is not frivolous or vexatious".

McInerney J held that the 17 grounds which preceded the ground in para (e) did not constitute a recognisable class or genus, and that it was therefore not possible to construe para (e) as merely authorising disciplinary action in other circumstances of the same kind as that specified in the preceding specific grounds. This conclusion was accepted by both counsel and is clearly correct.

Section 17 (1) (e) is not a legislative aberration because <case> (1), which contains the 14 grounds on which objection can be taken to an application for registration of a club, concludes with para (m) which provides: "The Certificate of Registration should not be granted on any other ground".

Mr Ashburner in his thoughtful argument submitted that ground (e) must be limited to conduct which was unlawful. In my opinion this construction is excluded by the context, because Parliament has dealt specifically with unlawful conduct in other paragraphs (see <case> (1) (a) (vi), (ix), (x)) and in particular in para (a) (xii) which provides: "The club has been conducted, or the premises of the club have been habitually used, for an unlawful purpose".

Moreover, in Seagulls Rugby League Football Club Limited versus Superintendent of
Licences [(1992) 29 NSWLR 357] at 369-70
Kirby P, referring to <case> (1) (e), said: "It is clear that it is not enough that the matter of complaint should not be frivolous or vexatious. It must be an `other ground' for the purpose of <case>.
In that sense it must be a ground which is relevant to the potentially drastic consequences which <case> (2) permits where the `matter of complaint' is determined adversely to the club. It must also be a `ground' which fulfils the purposes of the [Registered Clubs
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/), read as a whole. It must be relevant to the discipline of the Club which the Act is designed to ensure and which <case> (2) enforces. It should not be a `ground' which duplicates or contradicts one of the `grounds' already stated in pars to (d) of <case> (1). That would involve contradiction or inconsistency within the grounds upon which the matter of complaint might be determined and this should not be imputed to Parliament".

That case was not a decision that <case> (1) (e) can include conduct which is not illegal or unlawful because the point was not taken on behalf of the Club, although it was certainly available to be taken, but the dicta of Kirby P are against Mr Ashburner's argument.

I agree with Kirby P that the ground in <case> (1) (e) is necessarily confined within limits set by the Act as a whole. In my opinion a particular ground sought to be brought within <case> (1) (e) which is not inconsistent with the specific grounds will be within power unless the scope and purpose of the Act as a whole enables the Court to conclude that the particular matter complained of is extraneous to any objects Parliament could have had in view. See The
Queen versus The Australian Broadcasting Tribunal Ex parte 2HD Pty Limited <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR 45] at 49.

The power of entry on club premises conferred by <case> where disorderly conduct is reasonably suspected demonstrates Parliament's concern with such conduct in registered clubs, but there is no specific ground in <case> (1) dealing with this subject. In these circumstances it is not open to this Court to hold that disorderly conduct is extraneous to any objects Parliament had in view when enacting <case> (1) (e).

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
