

Penrith Waste Services Pty Limited versus Penrith City Council Matter Nos Ca /96; Ca 40448/96 [1998] NSWSC 510 (6 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 November 1998 
PENRITH WASTE SERVICES PTY LIMITED versus PENRITH CITY COUNCIL 
CA 40447/96; CA 40448/96 November 1998 
Mason P, Powell JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: LAND AND ENVIRONMENT COURT OF NSW - TALBOT J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40447/96; CA 40448/96; LEC 40156/94; LEC 40157/95 
DELIVERED: 6 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: 23 September 1998 
PARTIES: PENRITH WASTE SERVICES PTY LIMITED versus PENRITH CITY COUNCIL 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, POWELL JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: T S Hale 
Respondent: S B Austin QC/ J Sexton 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Minter Ellison 
Respondent: Gadens Ridgeway 
CATCHWORDS: 
DEVELOPMENT CONSENT - validity - extent development permitted by consents - declaration sought to compel compliance with consents - declaration sought to extend operations - onus of proof - whether trial judge failed to give sufficient reasons in relation to orders made - whether order was authorised by discretion contained in <case> [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 22 
PENRITH WASTE SERVICES PTY LIMITED v PENRITH CITY COUNCIL 
These proceedings concern the use of an area of 46 ha near Penrith for extractive industry and solid waste disposal. The land comprises two lots, Lot and Lot 201, over which a number of development consents had been granted during the 1970's. In late 1990, the appellant acquired the site and began operations.

In 1994, Penrith City Council (respondent) commenced proceedings in the Land and Environment Court seeking compliance with the relevant development consents. In 1995 Penrith Waste Services Pty Ltd (appellant) commenced proceedings seeking a declaration that Lot 22 could be lawfully used and developed under the relevant development consents.

The trial judge noted that, while the appellant was entitled to continue any existing use in accordance with a consent in force [(s
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s109b.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) (the
Act)) it bore the onus of proving the existence of the consent. The Council bore the onus of establishing the relevant conditions and their breach. The judge also noted that, in relation to two of the development consents, no plans had been produced by the Council. He made a number of findings regarding the validity of the consents and the existence of breaches.

The judge held that the Council was entitled to an order requiring Lot 201 to be restored to pre-existing surface levels or in accordance with the relevant plan. He also found that the appellant was entitled, under the relevant consent, to carry out waste disposal on Lot 22 to fill the excavation, but no further. Accordingly, he refused the appellant the relief it sought with regard to Lot 22. He concluded his judgment by requiring the parties to bring in short minutes of order reflecting his findings.

The parties were unable to agree on the form of orders to be made. The various positions of the parties were ventilated at great length. Finally the judge made orders which reflected the Council's position for development on Lot 201.

On appeal, it is submitted that: * the orders of his Honour should be set aside because no reasons were given; * the orders should not have been made because of the uncertainty of construction of consents and the absence of a threat of future breach; * the orders are inconsistent with the reasons for judgment; * his Honour erred in the finding on the ambit of consent 296/73; * the exercise of discretion, with regard to costs, miscarried. 
On the cross-appeal, it is submitted: * his Honour's declaration was in error; * it is entitled to the original declaration sought regarding Lot 22. 
Held: . The judge gave adequate reasons in the judgment to justify the orders made. The orders are generally consistent with those reasons. During the hearing on orders, the judge adequately exposed his reasoning to the parties who had ample opportunity to put their positions. There was no error of law in the failure of the judge to give further or supplementary reasons. 
The judge's findings on onus were correct.
It is not correct to say that at the time the order was made there was no evidence of threatened breach by the appellant. The Council had proved a number of breaches and the appellant had shown an intention to place waste on the land in excess of the permit. The judge was entitled to make the injunction.
Order 1 was made within power and was authorised by the discretion contained in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s124.html) of the Act.
His Honour's order with regard to costs was reasonable in the circumstances and sufficient reasons were given.

Warringah Shire Council versus Sedevcic  <case>; [(1995) 91 CLR 512] 
Jones versus Sutherland Shire Council [[1979] 2 NSWLR 206] 
Sydney Serviced Apartments Pty Ltd versus North Sydney Municipal Council (No 2) [(1993) 78 LGERA 404] applied.

ORDERS 
CA 40447/96 dismissed with costs except for the agreed amendment to Order No 1 made by Talbot J on 11 July 1996 in LEC 40156/94 set aside and the following substituted: 
Unless otherwise authorised by a further consent of the Applicant, the
Respondent carry out future development for the purpose of an extractive industry on land at Mulgoa Road, Mulgoa being Lot 201 in Deposited Plan 804405 ("the land") pursuant to Development Consent 199/77 granted by the Applicant dated 5th January 1978 as amended by letter of 27 June 1978 in accordance with the plans reference 9871/S25 sheets 1 and 2 (Exhibits CC and DD herein) ("the revised plans") and Model reference 9871/M1 (Exhibit EE herein) and take the measures referred to in Conditions 21, 23, 26, 28 and 29 of the Development
Consent on the basis that the expression "the Plan" or "the Plans" in the
Development Consent means the revised plans and the words "the cross sections of" are deleted from Conditions 21 and the words "indicated on the cross sections of the Plans" are deleted from
Condition 24 and replaced by the words "approved by the Environment Protection
Authority".

CA 40448/96 dismissed with costs.

Cross-Appeal CA 40447/96 dismissed with no order as to costs.

Cross-Appeal CA 40448/96 dismissed with no order as to costs.

PENRITH WASTE SERVICES PTY LIMITED v PENRITH CITY COUNCIL 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Stein JA. 
POWELL JA: I agree with Stein JA. 
STEIN JA: 
INTRODUCTION: 
The appeals by Penrith Waste Services Pty Limited concern the use of an area of 46 ha at Mulgoa for the purposes of extractive industry and solid waste disposal. The land comprises two adjoining lots - Lot 22 in DP 537922 and Lot (formerly Lot 21 in that deposited plan). A number of development consents have been granted with respect to the land.

Briefly summarised, these comprise: * 51/70 issued 7 May 1970 in respect of Lot 22 permitting the extraction of clay and shale. * 217/73 issued 17 July 1973 in respect of Lot 21 (now 201) permitting extractive industry. * 296/73 issued 17 June 1977 in respect of Lot 22 authorising the tipping of solid waste `within your excavation'. * The amendment of 296/73 on 11 January 1978 adding Lot 21 (now 201) to that consent. * 199/77 issued 5 January 1978 permitting extraction from a 7.5 ha area of Lot 21 in accordance with Plan 23. * The amendment of 199/77 on 27 June 1978 to amend the plan of extraction in accordance with amended Plan 23. 
In respect of 51/70 and 217/73, no-one was able to produce the plans referred to in the consents, nor the plans relevant to 199/77. However, amended Plan 23 was produced by the Council on the second day of the hearing before Talbot J in the Land and Environment Court.

Prior to 1990 the site had been badly mismanaged by a previous operator to the appellant. Late in 1990, the appellant acquired the site (and the consents) and set about its operations, including site remediation. A dispute then arose between the appellant and the respondent Council about the terms and extent of the consents and remediation. The Council commenced proceedings in the Land and Environment Court in 1994 seeking compliance with the various consents.
The appellant commenced its proceedings in the court in 1995 seeking a declaration that Lot 22 could be lawfully used and developed under consents /70 and 296/73. At the commencement of the hearing, Council made it plain that it no longer sought any relief with regard to Lot 22, although it maintained that the development had been completed and the consents spent.

THE JUDGMENT 
Talbot J commenced his judgment by noting the competing contentions of the parties. In particular, the appellant's submission that because of the absence of the plans referred to in the consents, the court was unable to construe them and could not make the orders requested by Council. If the court found to the contrary it should, in its discretion, allow development to be completed in accordance with its management plan, rather than as required by the
Council.

From 7 October 1987 the Sydney Regional Environmental Plan No 13 (the SREP) came into effect and prohibited extractive industry and waste disposal in the
Rural Conservation Zone wherein the land was situated.

After referring to [s
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s109b.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) (the
Act) his Honour noted that the appellant is entitled to continue any existing use in accordance with a consent that has been granted and is in force.
However, he held that where the user of land relies on a consent to continue an existing use after prohibition, then it bears the onus of proof of the existence of a relevant consent. Talbot J noted that the Council could have simply proved the prohibition. However, since it sought relief on the basis of an existing consent, it had the onus of proving the consents. Since the
Council alleged that the appellant was not carrying out development in accordance with the conditions of consent, it bore the onus of establishing the relevant conditions and their breach. Thereafter, the appellant bore the onus to negative any enlargement, expansion or intensification contrary to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s107.html) of the Act since the prohibition or that it was carrying out the development in accordance with [s
B.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s109b.html) 
In construing the consents, his Honour noted that no plans had been produced with respect to consent 51/70, nor in relation to 217/73. Accordingly, the
Council was unable to prove any breach which required reference to the plans.
Equally, the appellant could not prove that it was carrying out development in accordance with the plans and thus benefit from [s
B.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s109b.html)
Council's primary claim was that consent 217/73 had been abandoned in 1978 following the issue of the new consent 199/77. In the absence of the relevant plans, Talbot J rejected this submission. His Honour found that consent 199/77 was issued to formalise work carried out since 1973, otherwise than in accordance with 217/73.

In relation to consent 199/77, Talbot J held that it was granted by the
Council on 5 January 1978, amended as from 27 June 1978, and the relevant plan was amended Plan 23 dated 10 March 1978.

Turning to the solid waste consent (296/73) Talbot J noted that the development application had sought consent to both Lots 21 and 22. However, approval was granted on 17 June 1977 to Lot 22 only. A notation on the consent related it to the restoration of the site `in accordance with previous development consent conditions'. This must have been a reference to consent /70. By letter dated 11 January 1978 the Council acceded to a request from the applicant and extended the consent to include Lot 21. This decision was taken at a Council meeting on 20 December 1977, the same meeting which granted consent 199/77.

His Honour then dealt with the alleged breaches of the consents regarding Lot
Talbot J found no breach of conditions 10 and 12. He found that extraction had taken place east of the 7.5 ha approved by consent 199/77 contrary to condition 23. The western section of Lot 201 had had the level increased significantly beyond the level in amended Plan 23 contrary to conditions 20 and 23. Condition 21 had also been breached. The finished surface levels did not accord with amended Plan 23, nor the natural surface level referred to in condition 26.

The appellant argued before his Honour that the extraction may have been permitted under the earlier consent, 217/73. Talbot J rejected this proposition because of the clear intention that consent 199/77 was to overcome the breaches of and supersede the conditions in consent 217/73. In my opinion,
Talbot J was entitled to so conclude. Moreover, his conclusion is consistent with condition 20 of consent 199/77.

In addition, Talbot J noted that there was no real dispute that extraction had proceeded below the levels on amended Plan 23 contrary to condition 24. The breaches which were found in relation to consent 199/77 led the judge back to consent 296/73 in order to ascertain whether the excavation and filling carried out in breach of 199/77 was authorised as part of the waste disposal development. His Honour found that consent 296/73 did not authorise excavation. However, while it placed no limit on the height of the fill by its terms, consent 199/77 clearly required the level of restoration to be to existing or actual ground level or otherwise in accordance with Plan 23. Since the amendment of 296/73 to extend it to Lot 21 was contemporaneous with the grant of consent 199/77 authorising extraction from part of Lot 21, one of its purposes was clearly to facilitate restoration of areas to be excavated under that consent. His Honour concluded that consent 296/73 did not authorise the breaches of consent 199/77. Talbot J noted that the level of fill beyond that required to fill the excavation was also in breach of consent 296/73.

With reference to Lot 22, Talbot J held that the Council had not proved that the development had been completed. The appellant had not shown `for the purposes of [s
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s109b.html), that any further extraction will be in accordance with the consent'. However, turning to the disposal of waste, Talbot J found that evidence did not establish whether there had been a breach of consent 296/73 within Lot 22. He continued: 
However, the breaches which have occurred in Lot 201 have effect on the whole of the consent for the purposes of [s
B.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s109b.html)
Although the Court can find that the consent remains in force for the limited purpose of [s (a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s106.html) and [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s107.html), it is not able to go further. The making of a declaration in the form required by PWS in the 1995 proceedings is not justified. It could be misleading. [3147
F - I] 
This part of the judgment is attacked. Talbot J made his difficulties plain when he added: 
It is open for the Court to find on the evidence that consent 296/73 and consent 51/70 have been granted in respect of Lot 22 but to go any further and to determine to what extent they may be relied upon, at present, for the purposes of Div 2 cannot be ascertained from the evidence presently before the
Court. [3147 J - H] 
In responding to the appellant's reliance on [s
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s109b.html) of the Act, Talbot J said: 
The fact that the approved plans have not been proved means that PWS cannot rely on [s
B(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s109b.html) to support future extraction in that Lot. The absence of the plans prevents the Court from finding that extraction development would be, or has been, carried out in accordance with the consent. [3148 G - J] 
Talbot J found that since 11 January 1978 the solid waste disposal consent /73 had included both Lots 21 and 22. Accordingly, the breaches established on Lot 201 (formerly Lot 21) carried through to Lot 22. This finding is also attacked by the appellant.

In so far as the appellant proposed the dumping of fill on Lot 22 significantly higher than the indicative level before excavation, his Honour noted that the integration of the lots could not be achieved without cutting across consent 296/73 issued on 17 June 1977. Having noted that the Council was no longer seeking any relief with regard to Lot 22, Talbot J found that it would be inappropriate to allow development to be carried out other than in accordance with the conditions of consent.

In his conclusion, Talbot J noted the practical difficulties of restoring Lot to pre-existing surface levels by the tipping of waste in conjunction with the restoration of Lot 201. The practicalities had not been sufficiently explored to enable the court to make final orders with any degree of confidence. The Council was entitled to an order requiring Lot 201 to be restored, where rehabilitation had not been completed, `to pre-existing surface levels or in accordance with the levels shown in the amended Plan 23'.
Further, the appellant was entitled, absent the breaches on Lot 201, to carry out waste disposal on Lot 22 under consent 296/73 to fill the excavation, but no more. Any waste disposal beyond consent 296/73 would have to be the subject of a further application to the Council and not by means of the exercise of the court's discretion. Accordingly, his Honour refused the appellant the relief it sought in relation to Lot 22. The deposit of waste could continue within Lot 201 pending the determination of any application by the appellant to regularise the situation.

Talbot J concluded his judgment by requiring the parties to bring in short minutes of order reflecting his findings or present further argument in regard to the appropriate form of orders.

THE ORDERS 
The parties were unable to agree on the form of orders to be made and each presented short minutes to his Honour. Argument and the evidence of surveyors (by way of affidavit) extended over three days, which of itself is remarkable.

In relation to Lot 201 the Council's position was that it sought a mandatory injunction requiring the appellant to restore the land in accordance with the plans Exhibits CC and DD produced by surveyor Warwick. The appellant put a number of options to his Honour. First, to order it to fill no higher than pre-existing ground surface levels at 1956 where that had not already been exceeded. Alternatively, to make orders in accordance with the blended plan of
Mr Ward, its surveyor (Plan C). Or, further in the alternative, to make no order. Both sides asked the court to make an order in relation to their own plan in the exercise of the court's discretion under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s124.html) of the Act.

The essential difference between the two blended plans is at the interface between Lot 201 and Lot 22. The Council's plan moulded Lot 201 at the interface so that it matched Lot 22. The appellant's proposal allowed it to fill to the limit of the consent. This would have the effect of leaving an escarpment or cliff face in the vicinity of the boundary between the lots. The
Council submitted that the appellant's version should be rejected as it was not a good environmental solution to the restoration of the land and that its proposal would yield a better environmental outcome. Moreover, if the appellant did not make a development application regarding Lot 22 or did not proceed to carry out any consent obtained, the restoration programme would be defeated by leaving a cliff between the allotments. The Council also contended that making the order it sought would not have any adverse effect of the appellant's proposal to seek to further develop Lot 22.

The relevant options were extensively debated, Talbot J exposing his thought processes in an open and transparent fashion and reiterating the findings already made in the judgment.

Also canvassed were the terms of any declaration regarding Lot 22 in respect of the appellant's proceeding. The appellant contended for the declaration it had sought in its application, or something very like it. His Honour made it plain in argument that he was not prepared to so declare for the reasons he had already adverted to his judgment, in particular that to do so could be misleading or potentially mischievous. It seems to me that a good deal of the appellant's submissions to his Honour appeared to seek to re-argue aspects of the judgment with which it did not agree.

The three day hearing on orders travelled over and over the various options presented and the respective positions of the parties. One might conclude that everything that could possibly have been said was said. Indeed, repetition was the order of the day. At the end of the hearing on orders, his Honour reserved to consider. In doing so he noted that the matter had been ventilated and any reasons he gave would not be of any great length.

Nine days later Talbot J made orders. Order 1 reflected the Council's desire for development on Lot 201 in accordance with surveyor Warwick's plans CC and
DD, rather than the appellant's surveyor's proposal or the other alternatives canvassed. At the time his Honour gave no reasons why he made the orders although he gave some brief reasons on costs.

THE APPEAL 
The primary submission of the appellant is that the orders of 11 July 1996 should be set aside because no reasons were given. Further, they should not have been made because of the uncertainty of construction of the consents and absence of threat of future breach. The orders are claimed to be inconsistent with the reasons for judgment. Further, his Honour erred in the finding on the ambit of consent 296/73. Lastly, Talbot J's exercise of discretion, in awarding the Council two-thirds of its costs, miscarried. In the second appeal, the appellant maintains that his Honour's declaration was in error and that it was entitled to the declaration regarding Lot 22 which it had sought in its application.

The Council cross-appealed in relation to order 1, contending that the order was unclear. However, the cross-appeal has not been pursued since the parties have agreed to certain amendments to the order and ask the court to make the amendment in the event of the appeal being dismissed. The Council also filed a cross-appeal in the appellant's proceeding to the effect that the judge was wrong to find that consents 51/70 and 296/73 (with regard to Lot 22) had not been spent, as well as certain other matters. This cross-appeal has also been abandoned.

NO REASONS FOR ORDERS 
It is perhaps surprising that his Honour gave no reasons at the time he made the orders. A normal incident of the judicial process requires reasons be given. However, this case was far from normal. The hearing lasted more than 3 weeks. In a reserved judgment of 40 pages his Honour gave extensive reasons which, together with his findings, suggested the orders which should be made.
However, his Honour did not make the orders in his judgment. Rather, for cogent reasons which he exposed, he invited the parties to agree on the orders or make competing submissions. The judgment exposed the practical difficulties of filling Lot 22 to natural ground level in a manner complying with the consents. These considerations had not been sufficiently explored in the evidence to enable the court to make final orders with any degree of confidence that they would be practical.

It is abundantly clear from the judgment and the lengthy argument on the form of orders that the judge did not consider that the litigation contemplated authorising the appellant to place waste on Lot 22 and he was at pains not to make any order or declaration which might be so construed.

In my opinion, his Honour was entitled to prefer the evidence of the Council's surveyor and his plans as a basis for the order. By implication that is what he did. He gave adequate reasons in the principal judgment to justify the orders made and the orders are generally consistent with his reasons. During the hearing on orders, the judge exposed his reasoning process to the parties, who had more than ample opportunity to put their positions on what orders ought be made to give effect to the judgment. The purpose of reasons for judgment is to understand why orders are made. Given the transcript of the argument on orders of 18, 19 June and 2 July 1996, it was not an error of law by his Honour to fail to give any further or supplementary reasons. They were, in the circumstances, simply not required. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Hale of counsel submits that further reasons may have indicated his Honour's source of power for the order. However, if the order was made without power, an appeal is not dependent on reasons being given. I would dismiss this aspect of the appeal.

ORDER 1 IMPERMISSIBLE? 
It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the order made by his Honour was not authorised by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s124.html) of the Act. In particular, Mr Hale submits that there was no breach, or apprehended breach of the Act, to remedy or restrain, hence no power to make the orders. Further, it is maintained that the orders are inconsistent with findings that the relevant consent permitted extraction to pre-existing surface levels.

I do not accept this submission. Talbot J did not find that the appellant was lawfully entitled by the consents to fill Lot 22. On the contrary, his Honour held that the breaches which he had found with regard to Lot 201 extended to the whole of the consent 296/73 - viz. to Lot 22. His Honour held that, for the purposes of ss 106 and 107 of the Act, (not <case> B) the tipping of solid waste within the excavation on Lot 22 was subject to the conditions of consent /73. The trial judge expressly declined to find that the appellant was entitled to fill Lot 22 to natural surface levels. Talbot J qualified his statement of the appellant's entitlement under 296/73 in two respects. First, it was `absent the breaches which have occurred in Lot 201'. Second, the entitlement was `to the extent that it fills the excavation previously made in that land, and no more'. His Honour continued that any waste disposal beyond that authorised by 296/73 should be the subject of a further application to the Council.

THE ONUS ISSUE 
The appellant challenges his Honour's finding that the appellant, as the user of land, bears the onus of proof that a relevant consent exists where it is relying on that consent to continue the existing use after prohibition. The challenge is rejected. The situation is clear. The Council bears the onus of establishing that the development is prohibited. In this case the SREP and the relevant use of the land established the prohibition. As his Honour noted, the
Council did not have to go further. However, since it sought relief on the basis of an existing consent, it retained the onus of proving the consent and the breach. His Honour correctly acknowledged that thereafter the appellant bore the onus to prove the use had not been contrary to ss 106 and 107 of the
Act since the prohibition or that it was carrying out the development in accordance with a consent (s 109B).

Warringah Shire Council versus Sedevcic [(1987) 10 NSWLR 335] at -338 is authority for the proposition that the onus is on the user to prove that its use, for a prohibited purpose, was exempted as being the continuance of an existing lawful use. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision of Cripps
J on this issue, see [(1986) 57 LGRA 335] at 342-343 where his Honour refers to Vines versus Djordevitch <case>; [(1955) 91 CLR 512.] 
The judgments of the Court in Jones versus Sutherland Shire Council [[1979] 2
NSWLR 206] and Sydney Serviced Apartments Pty Ltd versus North Sydney
Municipal Council (No 2) [(1993) 78 LGERA 404] do not stand for any different proposition. See in particular Hutley JA at 213 D in the former and Handley JA at 409.3 in the latter, referring to Sedevcic.

In my opinion, Talbot J's approach to onus was correct. It was for the appellant to prove the consent and compliance with its conditions in order to prove an existing lawful use within ss 106 and 107 of the Act or the carrying out of development in accordance with the consent for the purposes of <case>.
To prove that its actual use complies with the consent, it must prove the terms of the consent. Sedevcic was such a case. In the appellant's proceeding in the Land and Environment Court, it sought a declaration. In so doing it assumed the onus to prove the relevant consents for Lot 22, see
Jones at 212.

SHOULD THE RESTRAINING INJUNCTION HAVE BEEN MADE? 
The appellant submits that at the time the order was made there was no evidence of threatened breach. Once the law was declared there was no reason to suggest that the appellant would do other than comply. Accordingly, a declaration was all that was required.

The submission is rejected. The Council proved a number of breaches of the
Act. The appellant had always intended to emplace waste on the land in excess of what it had permission to do. Until the judgment, the intention was to do so in accordance with its management plan (Ex 9). This was rejected by the judge. At the time of the orders, the intention was to do so in accordance with Mr Ward's Plan C. This was also rejected. The appellant still wishes to extend its waste disposal operation into Lot 22, see its written submissions.
The trial judge was entitled to make the injunction.

WAS ORDER 1 WITHIN POWER? 
Mr Hale submits that Order 1 was made without power and was not authorised by the discretion contained in <case>. Central to his submission is that the Order sought to take away his client's right to work the whole of its consent to the levels it was entitled to fill. There was simply no breach of the Act which enabled the order to be made.

Section 124 of the Act relevantly provides: 
Where the Court is satisfied that a breach of this Act has been committed or that a breach of this Act will, unless restrained by order of the Court, be committed, it may make such order as it thinks fit to remedy or restrain the breach.

Without limiting the powers of the Court under subsection (1), an order made under that subsection may: where the breach of this Act comprises a use of any building, work or land - restrain that use, where the breach of this Act comprises the erection of a building or the carrying out of a work - require the demolition or removal of that building or work, or where the breach of this Act has the effect of altering the condition or state of any building, work or land - require the reinstatement, so far as is practicable, of that building, work or land to the condition or state the building, work or land was in immediately before the breach was committed.

The provision was considered by the court in F Hannan Pty Ltd versus Electricity
Commission of NSW (No 3) [(1985) 66 LGRA 306.] Street CJ said: 
Well established canons of construction require a mandatory significance to be placed upon the phrase in subs (1) "may make such order as it thinks fit to remedy or restrain the breach". Where an actual or threatened breach has been established the Court is obliged to consider what should be done to remedy or restrain the breach. In determining this, the Court is given an extremely wide charter. Falling expressly within that charter are the powers in subs (2) to restrain an infringing use, to require demolition or removal of an infringing building or work and to require reinstatement so as to efface the consequences of the infringement. These are but three ways open to the Court to discharge its duty under <case> to make "such order as it thinks fit". This last- mentioned phrase empowers the court to mould the manner of its intervention in such a way as will best meet the practicalities as well as the justice of the situation before it. [at 311] 
See also McHugh JA at 327.

The discretion inherent in <case> (and <case>) was first examined by Cripps J in
Rowley versus NSW Leather Trading Co Pty Ltd [(1980) 46 LGRA 250] at -261. His Honour said that the discretion is to be exercised having regard to the public interest as well as the rights and interests of the parties.
This is a reflection of the public law duties imposed by the legislation.
Rowley was referred to in Sedevcic with approval. Kirby P noted the undoubted width of the discretion in <case>, as wide as the discretion enjoyed by the Supreme Court in its equitable jurisdiction (Sedevcic at 339C).

The appellant submits that although the court could have exercised its discretion under <case> to order the "blending' order suggested by its surveyor, Mr Ward, it did not have the power to make the order it did at the behest of the Council. This is, so the submission runs, because the effect of
Order 1 is to diminish the `rights' of the appellant under the consent to fill to pre-existing surface levels.

In my opinion, this misunderstands the judgment and the width of the discretion under <case>. The discretion to make orders is extremely wide.
Because of the public law nature of the remedy, the court may make such order as it thinks fit to remedy the breach. Relevant breaches were found by his
Honour. The breaches were such, and the problem which they created, that the trial judge was entitled to mould the relief to fit the circumstances of the case. It is noteworthy that the orders mentioned in ss(2) are prefaced by the words `Without limiting the power of the court under subsection (1)'.
Subsection (2)(c) may also be relevant. It empowers the court in circumstances where a breach has the effect of altering the condition or state of land to require that land to be reinstated `so far as is practicable'. In my opinion, what his Honour provided for in Order 1 was an appropriate and rational response to the exercise the discretionary judgment inherent in the section.
It was an exercise within power which had regard to the particular circumstances revealed by the evidence.

COSTS 
Talbot J ordered the appellant to pay two-thirds of the costs of the Council.
The appellant complains that his Honour's reasons are inadequate. His Honour gave brief reasons. I am not persuaded that they were insufficient. In any event, the order seems to be a perfectly appropriate response to the circumstances of the proceedings.

It follows that, save for the agreed amendment in Order 1, the appeals should be dismissed with costs. The cross-appeals, which are no longer pursued, will be dismissed with no order as to costs.

Order No 1 made by Talbot J on 11 July 1996 in 40156/94 is set aside and the following order substituted: 
Unless otherwise authorised by a further consent of the Applicant, the
Respondent carry out future development for the purpose of an extractive industry on land at Mulgoa Road, Mulgoa being Lot 201 in Deposited Plan 804405 ("the land") pursuant to Development Consent 199/77 granted by the Applicant dated 5th January 1978 as amended by letter of 27 June 1978 in accordance with the plans reference 9871/S25 sheets 1 and 2 (Exhibits CC and DD herein) ("the revised plans") and Model reference 9871/M1 (Exhibit EE herein) and take the measures referred to in Conditions 21, 23, 26, 28 and 29 of the Development
Consent on the basis that the expression "the Plan" or "the Plans" in the
Development Consent means the revised plans and the words "the cross sections of" are deleted from Conditions 21 and the words "indicated on the cross sections of the Plans" are deleted from Condition 24 and replaced by the words "approved by the Environment Protection Authority".
 * * * 
