

St Jude Property Investments Pty Ltd versus Folari Pty Ltd [2011] NSWSC 328 (20
April 2011) 
Last Updated: 1 November 2011 
This decision has been amended. Please see the end of the decision for a list of the amendments.
 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
St Jude Property Investments Pty Ltd versus Folari Pty Ltd  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): November 2010, and 23 and 24 March 2011  
Decision Date: April 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Tamberlin AJ  
Decision:
Declares that the first plaintiff is entitled to be paid by the first defendant an amount equal to 20 per cent of the net profits from the sale of the properties 58-64 John Street, Lidcombe less expenses relating to the development approval up to the date that approval was granted. 
Orders that an account be taken to ascertain the net amount payable to the first plaintiff. 
Orders that the amount so ascertained be paid by the first defendant to the first plaintiff forthwith together with interest. 
Orders that the defendants pay the costs of the plaintiffs on the claim. 
Orders that the cross-claim be dismissed and that the defendants pay the costs of the plaintiffs on the cross-claim.  
Catchwords: 
CONTRACT - formation - parties - terms - whether joint venture - whether plaintiffs entitled to share of profits.  
EVIDENCE - witnesses - credibility.  
Legislation Cited: 
Cases Cited: 
Texts Cited: 
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
St Jude Property Investments Pty Ltd (First Plaintiff/Cross-Defendant) 
Michael Saklaoui (Second Plaintiff) 
Folari Pty Ltd (First Defendant/First Cross-Claimant) 
Kevin Zouki (Second Defendant/Second Cross-Claimant)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
Counsel: 
A Fernon (Plaintiffs) 
S F Hughes (Defendants)  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors: 
Joseph Grassi & Associates (Plaintiffs) 
Legal Recovery Solutions (Defendants)  
File number(s): /279220  
Publication Restriction: 
Judgment 
THE CLAIM 
The plaintiffs seek a declaration that pursuant to an agreement made in about November/December 2001 the first plaintiff and/or the second plaintiff are entitled to 20 per cent of the profits on the purchase and sale of property at 58-64 John Street Lidcombe (the properties) after development approval had been granted and the properties had been sold prior to construction. They seek judgment in an amount of $103,588.83 or such other sum as the Court finds owing or, alternatively, an account in respect of the profits after taking into account the costs of purchase and the expenses in obtaining the development approval for the erection of residential units on the properties. 
The plaintiffs allege that the agreement was partly oral and partly implied arising from conversations between Mr Saklaoui on behalf of St Jude Property Investment Pty Ltd (St Jude), Mr Kevin Zouki on behalf of the first defendant, Folari Pty Ltd (Folari) and Mr Abbi Saab, who originally introduced the properties 58-60 John Street to Mr Zouki as a prospective investment. Both Mr Zouki and Mr Saklaoui had engaged in mutual business dealings prior to this arrangement. Mr Saklaoui introduced Mr Abbi Saab to Mr Zouki. 
The agreement alleged is that Folari would enter into agreements to acquire the properties for the purpose of obtaining development approval and that the purchase of the properties would be funded by Mr Zouki or a company nominated by him, and that the purchaser would do all things necessary to obtain a development approval for development of the properties for construction of approximately 40 residential units. It is alleged the arrangement was that after obtaining the development approval the net profit would be divided between St Jude as to 20 per cent, Mr Abbi Saab as to 30 per cent and Folari as to 50 per cent. The arrangement was to be a joint venture. A term of the agreement was claimed to be that interest would be charged to the joint venture on all moneys spent in respect of the expenses of purchase of the properties and obtaining development approval and this would be taken into account in the calculation of the profits from the properties. Mr Zouki and his company were to take all steps necessary to obtain the development approval and provide a full and accurate accounting report to the parties to the agreement in respect of the profit earned including details of all moneys spent and expenses incurred in purchasing the properties and obtaining the development approval. 
Pursuant to the agreement 58 John Street was acquired on 21 February 2002 for $700,000 and on the same day 60 John Street was acquired for $550,000. Folari arranged an option agreement on 30 January 2002 for the acquisition of 62 John Street for $530,000 and acquired that property in October 2002. At about the same time the property 64 John Street was acquired for $510,000. 
In about December 2002, Mr Zouki bought out the interest of Mr Abbi Saab for $275,000 as a result of discussions with Mr Abbi Saab carried out by Mr Saklaoui and himself. 
On 18 November 2003 development approval was obtained for the construction of 41 strata title residential units on the properties. 
On or about 25 May 2004, Folari paid Mr Saklaoui on behalf of St Jude an amount of $429,000. Mr Saklaoui says this was in payment of his share of profit earned from the properties. On about 8 June 2004, Mr John Zouki on behalf of his father Kevin and the Zouki company, Folari, requested that St Jude repay to it $89,620 which they claimed had been overpaid as a result of a miscalculation by Mr Kevin Zouki. It is alleged by the plaintiffs that at the time of making the request for a refund Folari as a condition of the payment of $89,620 undertook to provide an accounting of the profit calculation relating to the agreement. This is said to have been an oral undertaking by Mr John Zouki made on behalf of Folari. In accordance with this undertaking Mr Saklaoui on behalf of St Jude paid the amount of $89,620. 
CROSS-CLAIM 
On 17 September 2008, Folari filed a cross-claim in which Folari alleges that in about December 2001, St Jude and Folari (not including Mr Abbi Saab) entered into a partly oral partly implied agreement relating to the purchase of properties whereby St Jude, as an acknowledgement of its role in introducing Folari to the opportunity to purchase and develop the properties, would be paid 10 per cent of the profit, net of expenses that Folari made from the selling of the properties with a development approval in place. Folari alleges an oral term that in calculating the net profit it was entitled to charge interest on the money spent by it from the date of each item of expenditure. 
Folari also alleges that the payment of $429,000 paid to Mr Saklaoui was a loan repayable on demand and not a payment on account of any entitlement to a share of profits. It says that on 8 June 2004 Mr Saklaoui agreed to repay $89,620 of that sum which was paid as the result of the miscalculation. Mr Kevin Zouki says that in paying the $429,000 he acted on the basis that there would be an adjustment of the payment when the final profit was worked out from the joint venture. He says that St Jude has been unjustly enriched in an amount of about $234,000 and seeks repayment as calculated on that basis or alternatively on the basis that this amount remains outstanding on the loan. 
ISSUES 
The issues are as follows: 
Was any agreement made between the plaintiffs and the defendants and Mr
Abbi Saab in late November or early December 2001 concerning the purchase of the properties and the obtaining of development approval and the sharing of profits? 
If so what were the terms of that agreement, particularly in relation to the percentage shares that the parties were to have in the profits resulting from the purchase and the obtaining of development approval? 
Was the agreement varied to fix a sale price at $115,000 per unit making a total sale price out of which net profits were derived of $4,715,000 for the purpose of calculating profits? 
Are the plaintiffs entitled to be paid any further amount than the amount in the order of $339,000 received by them and/or is Folari entitled to a refund? 
What was the net profit from the arrangement? This raises questions as to the nature and amount of expenses which could be deducted to determine net profit from which the shares of profit would be paid.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
Mr Saklaoui, the director of St Jude and Mr Kevin Zouki, the director of Folari are brothers-in-law whose relations have deteriorated since the joint venture the subject of this dispute was allegedly entered into. 
Mr Saklaoui was first introduced to the properties by Mr Abbi Saab in November 2001 and there was subsequently a meeting between Mr Abbi Saab, Mr Saklaoui and Mr Zouki when a joint venture was proposed for the development of the property. There is no written record of the agreement in evidence. It is said to be partly oral and partly implied. Mr Saklaoui's evidence is that the following conversation took place in late November/early December 2001: 
I (Mr Saklaoui) said: "Kevin has agreed to come into a joint venture with us to purchase the properties in John Street, Lidcombe. John can you please explain to Kevin the proposal." 
Abi Saab said: "I can secure two properties by options and two properties will need to be purchased outright and if you Kevin acquire these properties you will be able to put between 38 and 40 units on them and there should be enough profit for the 3 of us on the basis of 1/3 rd share each if the properties are then sold with a development consent." 
Kevin said: "I agree." 
I said: "John, this is not fair because if Kevin is funding the project then he should get a greater share." 
Abi Saab said: "No. I have arranged the deal and I will not accept anything less than 30 per cent." 
I said: "O.K. you will get 30 per cent, I will get 20 per cent and Kevin will get 50 per cent. Are you happy with that?" 
Abi Saab said: "Yes, I am happy with that as long as I get 30 per cent." 
I said: "Kevin are you happy with this arrangement." 
Kevin said: "Yes, I am very happy with this arrangement. I will arrange to enter into the options to purchase 62 and 64 John Street. and arrange to purchase 58 and 60 John Street through one of my companies."
Thereafter in late 2002 Mr Zouki negotiated with Mr Abbi Saab as a result of which an amount of $275,000 was paid to him in full satisfaction of his claims in respect of the introduction to the properties. Mr Abbi Saab agreed to accept this payment presumably on the basis that he was getting an early payout and there was at that time before development approval was obtained some doubt as to the amount of any eventual net profit. Mr Abbi Saab then relinquished his right to claim a share in the venture. 
The defendants' position is that there was never any agreement referring to shares in the profits as alleged. Their position is that Mr Abbi Saab was paid $275,000 in settlement of a separate arrangement whereby he would received a consultancy fee comprising 5 per cent commission and an allowance for negotiating the price for acquisition of 62-64 John Street at a price equal to that paid for 58-60 John Street. He did not have any entitlement to a share in the net profits from the joint venture. The defendants deny that Mr Saklaoui had any interest in the net profits but they are nevertheless prepared to pay him 10 per cent of the net profit as calculated by them having regard to the family association. This figure of 10 per cent is not referred to in any of the critical documents in evidence as discussed below. The defendants say that Mr Zouki provided all the finance for the acquisition and assumed all the resulting risk. 
By October 2002, the four properties had been purchased. 
In about November 2003, Mr Saklaoui said that he had a conversation with Mr Zouki in which he made it clear that he did not want to go in to a building syndicate to construct units on the site as then proposed to him by Mr Zouki and he asked that he be paid his 20 per cent share. On 25 May 2004, Mr Saklaoui said that he went to Mr Zouki's home. Mr Saklaoui said that he calculated his share in the net profit as being at least $429,000 and Mr Zouki then gave him a cheque for $429,000 on account of his 20 per cent profit share from one of his companies, Hardy Pty Ltd (Hardy). This cheque was deposited at the St George Bank on 28 May 2004. As noted earlier Mr Kevin Zouki says this was a loan and not a payment in respect of a share of profits and he now seeks repayment of the balance of that loan in the defendants' cross-claim. 
On 8 June 2004, Mr John Zouki, the son of Kevin Zouki, called Mr Saklaoui stating that Mr Saklaoui had been overpaid $89,620 as a result of a miscalculation and asked for a cheque. A cheque was duly signed on that day by Mr Saklaoui and given to Mr John Zouki. 
Thereafter there were numerous requests made by Mr Saklaoui seeking an accounting in relation as to how his share of the profit in the venture had been calculated. There was no response. He has estimated that his 20 per cent share of net profit is $417,000 and in a letter of 16 May 2007 sets out his estimate of the costs. No payment has been made and accordingly these proceedings were instituted seeking an account. 
WITNESSES 
The two principal witnesses in the case were Mr Saklaoui for St Jude and Mr Kevin Zouki for Folari. 
Both these witnesses impressed me as being experienced businessmen with a keen commercial sense in relation to property development and it is clear that they have been engaged in a number of substantial property ventures. 
Mr Saklaoui was at times evasive in his answers concerning the payment of finder's fees. He said he regarded tax invoices and receipts as much the same thing when questioned about a tax invoice. This is difficult to accept from such an experienced businessman. He did not accept that he prepared a document identified as MS1 which is a print out of calculations. In my view the evidence establishes that this was his document which he refuses to acknowledge. I therefore approach his evidence with considerable caution and would accept his assertions only where there is an inherent probability that they are correct, or there is documentary support or some reliable corroboration of them. 
In relation to Mr Zouki, I find his evidence to be generally unacceptable. He asserted that there was a loan and yet made no claim for the unpaid loan for several years. There are no detailed terms as to this loan as one might expect. Nor is there any written record. He alleged that he suffered from a disabling depression but this did not prevent him from acting as a supervisor of the substantial development at Lidcombe and other financial activities in this period. I do not accept this as a sufficient explanation in relation to the cheque for $429,000. The obliteration of the description and the substitution of the word "loan" on the butt of the cheque for $429,000 is very significant in assessing credibility and his evidence to explain this was internally inconsistent. At one point he said that he amended the cheque butt and then later reneged and said he did not change the cheque butt. However, he agrees that he originally wrote the words "share from John Street Lidcombe" on the cheque butt and then wrote the word "loan". 
Having regard to these and numerous other matters pointed to in the course of cross-examination I do not accept any evidence from Mr Kevin Zouki which is not established by records, corroboration, objective facts or the context. 
REASONING 
The issues of central importance in this case concern the agreement made in December 2001 and the so-called loan agreement made in May 2004 and the provision of accounts. 
It is common ground that there was a meeting between Mr Abbi Saab, Mr Zouki and Mr Saklaoui in about early December 2001 regarding the properties. Mr Zouki says that Mr Abbi Saab at that time was only able to arrange the purchase of premises 58 and 60 John Street and that it was agreed with Mr Zouki that if Mr Abbi Saab could negotiate a favourable price for the premises at 62-64 John Street then Mr Abbi Saab could have the difference in addition to a 5 per cent commission. Mr Zouki denies the existence of any joint venture arrangement whereby any shares of profit were assigned. He contends that Mr Abbi Saab and Mr Saklaoui admitted that they had no money and that he was to be responsible for all the finance. Mr Saklaoui is alleged to have said in the presence of Mr Abbi Saab and Mr Zouki that he did not want anything but after Mr Abbi Saab left Mr Zouki says he offered Mr Saklaoui 10 per cent of the net profit because he introduced him to the possibility of purchasing and developing 58 - 60 John Street. He says that the 41 units were approved by the council for development on 18 November 2003 after three major re-designs of the plan. 
In relation to who were the parties to the agreement I am satisfied that having regard to the accounts, cheques and other records in evidence that the negotiations between Mr Saklaoui and Mr Zouki were carried out on behalf of their respective companies, St Jude and Folari, and were not undertaken in their personal capacities. Mr Abbi Saab was involved in negotiations in his personal capacity. 
The Court has not had the benefit of hearing from Mr Abbi Saab as neither party elected to call him to give evidence. Nevertheless his role in the dealings is important in deciding between the contrasting versions of Mr Zouki and Mr Saklaoui as to whether there was any joint venture arrangement between the parties in relation to the purchase and development of the properties. Mr Zouki denies that there was any agreement whereby Mr Saklaoui would receive a 20 per cent share of net profits. Mr Zouki says he was only prepared to give 10 per cent to Mr Saklaoui because they were brothers-in-law. 
When negotiating for payment to be made to buy out Mr Abbi Saab, Mr Saklaoui says that he was given a handwritten document by Mr Zouki which is Exhibit E in these proceedings. It is almost entirely in ink in the handwriting of Mr Zouki. This document sets out a detailed list of costing and estimates as to likely profit from the development as anticipated at that time. It contains a list of items of expenditures, the date of payment, the number of days up until 22 February 2004, and interest accruing on the expenditure. The interest payment calculation amounts to $285,040 and the total expenses are stated to be $3,129,463. The document refers to the estimated sale price of units based on a variation of between 41 units and 38 units and this is compared with the architect's opinion as to the total number of units likely to be approved. There is then an estimate of the net profit from the venture which amounts to $948,135. 
Importantly, the document includes the following notation in the handwriting of Mr Zouki: "also interest on $265,000 + cash or no Shares of 20 per cent Share, on 30 per cent shares or the above to ad [sic] to cost".

There is no reference to a 10 per cent share for anybody.
On the second page the Exhibit contains the following note: "Proffit [sic] $948,135  - J.A.S. Say $300,135  $648,000  less M.S.
 
KZ share ? " 
At the time of this document in December 2002, Mr Zouki was anxious to pay out Mr Abbi Saab and the negotiations culminated in a cash payment to him by Mr Zouki of $275,000. 
It was in the interest of Mr Zouki at that time to negotiate a low price for the pay out to Mr Abbi Saab leaving a greater profit to himself. The negotiations were carried out on the basis that there was at that time before development approval uncertainty as to the final number of units which would be approved together with risk and uncertainty as to the realisation price and ongoing expenses which would have made the offer of a cash payment of $275,000 attractive to Mr Abbi Saab. To this end the document contains a series of calculations designed to show a relatively modest estimate of profit for the purpose of the negotiations with Mr Abbi Saab. 
One important aspect of this document is the reference "to 20 per cent share" and "30 per cent shares". This notation is inconsistent with the position asserted by Mr Zouki that there was no agreement in relation to 20 per cent or 30 per cent shares going to Mr Saklaoui or to Mr Abbi Saab. The reference to "share" also appears on the second page of the document where a profit figure of $948,135 is set out. There is then an estimate of a payment to Mr Abbi Saab of $300,135 but it is apparent that this was a broad estimate. In fact, a 30 per cent share of $948,135 would equate to about $284,400, which is not far removed from the figure of $300,135 used in the calculation in the handwriting of Mr Kevin Zouki. The purpose of this calculation, in my view, is to show that there would not be much profit margin left for Mr Zouki or Mr Saklaoui if Mr Abbi Saab received a figure of about $300,000 and it was intended to use the calculations as a negotiating lever. The fact that Mr Saklaoui's initials appear opposite the word "less" in this note indicates it was contemplated he was entitled to some payment and this is in the context of a reference to "KZ (?) share". 
In my opinion this document provides sufficient objective support for rejecting the version of Mr Zouki as to the arrangement and accepting that there was initially an agreement whereby Mr Saklaoui was to get a 20 per cent share of net profits after calculating the costs of obtaining and relating to the development approval. 
A second important document in ascertaining the terms of the agreement is the document which is Exhibit "MS1" to the affidavit of Mr Saklaoui of 26 November 2009. That is a print out which appears to be made using a calculator as to the alleged expenses of the venture. These expenses are largely identical with those set out in the handwritten document of Mr Zouki, which is Exhibit E. The print out shows the total of the expenses column as being $280,673.17 but does not categorise the individual expenses, as does Exhibit E. Importantly, it contains the following printed notation: "Total sale of land $4,715,000.00  $3,165,713.17  
Profit - $1,549,288.83  %  $1,239,429.464  
Balance owing $309,857  
To Buy Share From Another Person 
It becomes your profit not mine.
 
This is based on 20 per cent not 50 per cent."
In fact the land was sold for $4,715,000 with development approval for 41 units. The figure of $4,715,000 equates to $115,000 per unit. 
Mr Saklaoui says that this document was not prepared by him. 
The document also contains a notation which reads: "SERVICES RENDERED $308,527-00 ---  $30,853-00 
GST  ,380-00 
Loan ,000-00 
Bill $339,380-00 
GST  
Refund to Hardy $89,620"
There is a dispute as to the provenance of this document. I consider that the document originated from Mr Saklaoui because on its face it is designed to increase the amount of profit by disallowing certain expenses that were contained in Exhibit E. It is clearly an adjustment to Exhibit E. 
However, what is significant is the fact that the document refers to buying a "share" and the reference to "your profit not mine". This indicates that there was some form of arrangement as to shares and profit sharing and the figures 20 per cent and 50 per cent are referred to in this connection. This is inconsistent with Mr Zouki's version that there were never any shares agreed upon as to 20 per cent or 50 per cent. The reference to a share based on 20 per cent "which becomes your profit not mine" indicates that the profit being spoken of is that of some person other than the author. The document contemplates a buyout of a share and provides substantial support to the assertion of Mr Saklaoui that there was an arrangement whereby profit would be shared in proportions including 20 per cent to him. The reference in this document to "share" and to "20 per cent not 50 per cent" and the amount of profit was not raised, commented upon or denied by Mr John Zouki when he later wrote on it in relation to the claimed loan by Mr Kevin Zouki. 
Having regard to [35] - [40] I therefore find that the adjustment of profit between the parties should be made on the basis of a sale price of $115,000 per unit. 
A further important document in evidence is a purported "Tax Invoice" which bears a date 28 May 2004. It is not on any letterhead and is not signed in any way. It is addressed to "Hardy Pty Ltd" and refers to a supply of services rendered to Hardy in an amount of $308,527 with a figure for GST of $30,852.70, making a total including GST of $339,379.70. This figure roughly compares to the amount of $339,380 appearing in MS1. 
Mr Saklaoui says that this document does not originate from St Jude or from himself. He points out that there were no services supplied to Hardy by St Jude or himself but rather the arrangement was with Folari and Mr Zouki. I prefer the evidence of Mr Saklaoui to that of Mr Zouki as to the provenance of this invoice not originating from Mr Saklaoui. 
Mr Zouki claims, that in response to a request from Mr Saklaoui, Mr Zouki made him a loan for $429,000. Mr Zouki said he did not make enquiries as to the purpose of the loan because he had lent money to Mr Saklaoui on previous occasions without considering there was a need to make any enquiry. Mr Zouki says that he said he would draw a cheque for $429,000 and at the same time he marked the cheque butt with the word "LOAN". The terms of the loan and the interest rates are not spelled out anywhere. This cheque butt of 25 May 2004, addressed to St Jude Property Investment is a further significant document. The cheque butt records the date of 25 May 2004 and the payee as being "St Jude Property Investment". There are then four lines of description which have been obliterated and which are very difficult to read. Underneath these four lines of description the word "LOAN" is written and the cheque amount is stated as $429,000. This document was examined by a handwriting expert who was able to recapture most of the obliterated material which, in his view, and this is not seriously contested, originally read: "(Indecipherable) 
Share from 
John St Lidcombe"
This is an important document because it shows that the cheque that was originally given to Mr Saklaoui was intended to record a payment in respect of a "share" in relation to John Street and not a loan. There has been an attempt to conceal this fact by subsequently obliterating the original characterisation of the payment. The probability is, and I so find, that this alteration was made after the cheque butt was initially filled in by Mr Kevin Zouki and not at the time the cheque was written. I also consider that the obliterated material provides cogent support for the conclusion that there was a transaction the true nature of which it was sought to hide and in respect of which St Jude was to have a share. 
I find that the amount of $429,000 was a payment on account of a final settling of the entitlement of St Jude to a 20 per cent share of net profits as opposed to a loan. The obliteration reflects most adversely on the credibility of the evidence of Messrs Kevin and John Zouki and the case advanced by them that there was no share arrangement ever entered into as to the 20 per cent claimed by St Jude. It also negates their contention that there was a loan of $429,000 rather than a payment on account of profits subject to later adjustment in respect of the purposes rendered by Mr Saklaoui and St Jude to Folari. I note that the amount of net profit which Mr Saklaoui claimed in his letter of May 2007 was $417,000 which is relatively close to the figure of $429,000 paid by Mr Zouki. 
In paragraphs [19] to [23] above I have considered the evidence relating to the lack of credibility of both Mr Saklaoui and Mr Zouki. I have decided that this is a case on which reliance should be placed on documents and records rather than the testimony of the witnesses. However, in the principal areas of conflict I consider that the objective facts and the documents support the evidence of Mr Saklaoui. 
I am satisfied that there was a joint venture as claimed by Mr Saklaoui under which St Jude was entitled to a 20 per cent share of the net profits from the sale of 41 units. I am also satisfied that there was no loan of $429,000 from Mr Zouki to the plaintiffs but rather that it was a payment made on account of what was owed to St Jude subject to a final determination after the taking of accounts as to expenses. I am also satisfied that the relevant expenses to take into account are those relating to obtaining development approval for 41 units up to the time of obtaining that approval. 
QUANTUM 
Although there is a deal of material before me as to expenses and accounting as between the parties I am not satisfied that I have sufficient material on which to make a determination as to an amount which should be recovered and I therefore grant the order sought by the plaintiffs that there should be an account taken of the net profit and expenditure relating to the arrangements between the parties. 
I find that the arrangement made in about December 2001 was that the expenses relating to the development approval and interest should be borne up to the date of the development consent and not to the date of sale and that the account of profits should be taken on that basis. 
ORDERS 
The Court: 
Declares that the first plaintiff is entitled to be paid by the first defendant an amount equal to 20 per cent of the net profits from the sale of the properties 58-64 John Street, Lidcombe less expenses relating to the development approval up to the date that approval was granted.
Orders that an account be taken to ascertain the net amount payable to the first plaintiff.
Orders that the amount so ascertained be paid by the first defendant to the first plaintiff forthwith together with interest.
Orders that the defendants pay the costs of the plaintiffs on the claim.
Orders that the cross-claim be dismissed and that the defendants pay the costs of the plaintiffs on the cross-claim.
 
Amendments Apr 2011 Typograhical error in figures quoted. Paragraphs: 38 * * * 
