

Athcad Pty Ltd versus Basto and Anor Matter No 2098/97 [1997] NSWSC 211 (22 May )

Athcad Pty Limited versus Basto & Anor /97 May 1997 
Hodgson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
NO 2098 OF 1997 ATHCAD PTY LIMITED V BASTO & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Athcad Pty Ltd, seeks orders for delivery up by the defendants, Mr Basto and Mr Jago, of documents relating to Athcad.

I will begin with a brief outline of the facts.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
A company called Inteq Custodians Limited has, since November 1993, been the trustee of a trust called the Residential Property Trust. The assets of the
Trust have, since December 1993, included ownership of all the shares in
Athcad. The actual shareholders are two directors of Inteq, Mr Russell and Mr
Jacobs, but it is plain that they hold these shares on behalf of Inteq.

Until September 1996, a company Basto Management Limited was manager of the
Trust, and the defendants, who are in fact directors of Basto Management, were the directors of Athcad.

On 6 August 1996, Inteq resolved that Basto Management retire as manager of the Trust, such resolution being effective from 3 September 1996. On 11
September 1996, Mr Russell and Mr Jacobs met as shareholders of Athcad, and resolved to remove the defendants as directors of Athcad and to appoint themselves as directors in their place.

Clause 8(a) of the trust deed provides as follows: . Both the Managers and the Trustee respectively covenant: that they as the case may be will not exercise the right to vote in respect of any Shares relating to investments under this Deed held by the Managers the Trustee or its nominee at any election for directors of a Corporation whose Shares are so held without the consent of the majority of the Registered Holders present in person and voting given at a meeting of those Holders summoned in the manner provided for in Clause 34 for the purpose of authorizing the exercise of the right at the next election.

A clause in those terms is required to be included in trust deeds of this kind by s.1069(1)(k) of the Corporations Law.

It is common ground that there was no meeting of unit holders of the kind contemplated by cl.8(a), in which consent was given to the measures taken at the meeting of 11 September 1996.

The defendants apparently took the view that their purported removal as directors of Athcad was in breach of cl.8(a) and of s.1069(1)k of the
Corporations Law, and was therefore ineffectual. Basto Management sent notice to unit holders of the Trust of a meeting to be held on 27 September 1996.
Representatives of Inteq attended that meeting, claimed it was invalid, and undertook to call a further meeting at which the issues raised by the Basto
Management notice would be considered.

A further meeting was called, and it took place on 28 November 1996; and there was an adjourned or further meeting on 18 February 1997. At none of these meetings did the unit holders consider a resolution to ratify what was done on September 1996, or any resolution to similar effect.

ISSUES 
The issue that has been argued in the case arises from the defendants' claim that they have duties as directors of Athcad and responsibility for its books and records, which they continue to have to the present, because of the invalidity of the resolutions of 11 September 1996.

It seems to me that there are two issues that I need to consider: were the resolutions of 11 September 1996 effectual; and if they were, is there any discretionary defence which the defendants have to the claim that the books be handed over? 
SUBMISSIONS 
Mr Basto was present unrepresented, and made the following submissions. He referred to cls.20(3) and 3(i) of the trust deed, and contended that the effect of these provisions was that what was done by Mr Russell and Mr Jacobs was a breach of the deed, just as a similar action by the trustee itself would have been. He submitted that the resolutions of 11 September 1996 were breaches of cl.8(a) and of the Corporations Law, and were therefore invalid.
He also relied on the circumstance that, although eight months have passed, and there have been at least two meetings at which resolutions could have been passed to ratify what was done, the opportunity was not taken to obtain such ratification.

DECISION 
The argument has proceeded on both sides, that is by Mr Basto on behalf of the defendants and Mr Archer for the plaintiffs, on the assumption that there was a breach of cl.8(a). However, it is arguable that cl.8(a) is directed only towards the situation which arises in the regular election of directors, and has no application where directors are removed pursuant to provisions in the
Memorandum and Articles of Association giving the company in general meetings power by ordinary resolution to remove directors. I note that there is such a provision in article 91(d) of the Articles of Association of Athcad. However,
I will look at the matter on the other assumption, that is on the assumption that what was done was, in fact, in breach of cl.8(a).

On that assumption, the actions of Mr Russell and Mr Jacobs would amount to a breach of cl.8(a) by Inteq and would be a breach of trust. In my opinion, that of itself would not invalidate what was done. This view is supported by the consideration that breaches of trust can be excused and indeed can be authorised in advance (see [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/) NSW [ss.81](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/s81.html) and ).

It was put that these actions were also a breach of the Corporations Law. Mr
Basto referred to s.1069(1)(k). However, that section does no more than require certain covenants to be included in approved deeds, so a breach of covenant is not as such a breach of that particular section of the
Corporations Law. It is necessary however to consider another provision of the
Corporations Law, s.1073. Subsections (1A) and (1B) of s.1073 are in the following terms: 
A person must not contravene: a covenant contained, or taken to be contained, in a deed that is, or has at any time been, an approved deed; or a covenant deemed or taken, because of subsection 1069(7) or (9A), to be contained in a deed; or a covenant deemed, because of subsection 1069(8), to be given by a deed.

A person who contravenes subsection (1A) is not guilty of an offence.

Pursuant to s.1073(1A), a breach of a covenant in an approved deed is made a breach of the Corporations Law. However, s.1073(1B) makes it clear that that breach does not amount to an offence. The question arises, what then is the effect of such a breach of the Corporations Law? It could be suggested that, because it is not made an offence, the intention must be to visit the breach with invalidity. However, I think that when one reads the remainder of s.1073, and has regard to the law as it stood when that provision was introduced, that contention cannot be upheld.

The remaining subsections of s.1073 makes it clear that a contravention of the
Corporations Law, in relation to offers of prescribed interests, does not give rise to illegality and the avoidance of the transactions involved. Prior to the introduction of s.1073, the case of Hurst versus Vestcorp [(1988) 12 NSWLR ]
had held that illegality and avoidance of transactions was involved when there was breach of the previous provisions concerning offers of prescribed interests. As I have said, it seems to me that s.1073 makes it clear that those consequences are no longer to follow. I think it can be concluded from that, that it was not the object of s.1073(1A) to visit invalidity on all contraventions of the Corporations Law.

The various commentaries on the Corporations Law suggest that one general effect of s.1073(1A) is to enable the Australian Securities Commission to take action in the courts in relation to breaches of covenant and other matters caught by s.1073(1A), under provisions such as s.1324 of the Law.

For those reasons, I do not think the fact that, on the assumption I am considering, there would have been a breach of s.1073(1A) would invalidate the resolutions made on 11 September 1996.

Moving to the second issue which I have identified, namely whether there could be any discretionary defence to the plaintiff's claim, it seems to me that if there had been positive evidence that what was done was contrary to the wishes of unit holders, or that if there had been evidence that unit holders had, at a subsequent meeting, passed a resolution which was entirely contrary to the action which has been taken, there may have been the possibility of a discretionary defence. However, the material which has been submitted falls far short of that and, in my opinion, no discretionary defence is made out.

For those reasons, in my opinion the plaintiff is entitled to the relief that it seeks.

Mr Archer, on behalf of the plaintiff, seeks an order for costs. Mr Basto submitted that he and the other director have taken the stance which they did because they believed that they still had the duties and responsibilities of directors of the plaintiff, and that accordingly they should not hand over the books and records. He submitted that this was not done out of any interest which he or the other director had in receiving fees or advantages from their position, but purely because they believed the stance which they took was correct legally.

I think there would have been some force in those submissions if the defendants had, in substance, merely submitted to the jurisdiction of the
Court. I think it is a fair assessment of the attitude taken that it was not a submission to the jurisdiction of the Court, but an adversary position seeking positively to uphold the view that the plaintiff was not entitled to the orders which it sought. Orders for costs are not intended to be punitive, but rather to have the effect that a party that has been forced to come to court to vindicate rights should not be too greatly disadvantaged because it has been forced to do this.

On the whole, I think the ordinary result as to costs should follow, and that the defendants should be ordered to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.

I make order 1 in the summons.

I order that the defendants deliver at or before 5pm on Friday, 23 May 1997 to the plaintiff at level 3, 9 Barrack Street, Sydney all reports, files, documents, registers and other books and records, whether they be in hard copy or computer readable form, relating to Athcad Pty Ltd.

I order that the defendants pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.

The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
