

Regina V Raymond John Dumbrell [1997] NSWSC 188 (9 May 1997) 
REGINA V RAYMOND JOHN DUMBRELL /96 
FRIDAY 9 MAY 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, GROVE J, SPERLING J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Sperling J to give the first judgment.

SPERLING J: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentence.

The applicant pleaded guilty to a charge of conspiracy to import into
Australia a quantity of cannabis resin contrary to <case>(cb) of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/)
Commonwealth.

On 21 March 1996, Blanch CJ of DC sentenced the applicant to imprisonment for a period of thirteen years and fixed a non-parole term of nine years.

The maximum penalty for the offence is life imprisonment.

A statement of facts by an agent of the Australian Federal Police dated 21
March 1996 was tendered without objection by the Crown. It was to the following effect. There were three separate syndicates involved in an operation to import a large quantity of cannabis resin into Australia. Of the planned importation, some five tonnes being the first instalment and having a street value of about $75 million, was landed on Australian soil in August
One Victor Spink and the present applicant were members of what was called the organising syndicate. That syndicate made arrangements with an overseas syndicate for the supply of cannabis resin. The third syndicate was initially engaged by the organising syndicate to off-load the cannabis resin at sea. The applicant was one of three persons who headed the organising syndicate. The applicant and Mr Spink were arrested together on 5 August 1994.
Mr Spink's role was described as follows: "Victor Spink was one of the principals of the organising syndicate. He was directly and intimately involved with the negotiation of the importation and oversaw all the importation arrangements. Along with Dumbrell, he met with principals of both the other syndicates to discuss details relating to the method and timing of the importation. He also deputised Dumbrell to look after certain of the day-to-day details of the importation. Although Dumbrell was the most active participant in the conspiracy in terms of the number of phone calls and meetings to which he was a party, Victor Spink was the controlling mind of the importation." 
The applicant's role was described as follows: "Dumbrell was also one of the principals of the organising syndicate. He too was directly and intimately involved with all levels of the importation negotiations and arrangements. Not only did he meet, accompanied by Victor
Spink, with principals of both the other syndicates to discuss details relating to the method and timing of the importation, he also attended some meetings with (variously) Spread, Radavan and Sabados alone on some occasions, as deputised by Victor Spink. Overall, of all the conspirators, he was the most active participant so far as police monitoring of the number of phone calls and meetings to which he was a party." 
The applicant's activities included corrupting a serving member of the
Australian Federal Police in order to obtain police information, overseas travel for liaison with the overseas syndicate, and further numerous liaison meetings in Australia, personal involvement in sophisticated counter- surveillance activities, liaison with the initial off-load syndicate, the procurement of radios fitted with scrambling devices, the recruitment and supervision of other personnel, and processing the payment of large sums of money for expenses. In telephone conversations with other operatives the applicant was in Mr Spink's company on more than one occasion and appeared to defer to him and to take instructions from him.

The applicant and Mr Spink were charged with the same offence.

On 11 March 1996, Mr Spink having pleaded guilty to the charge, was sentenced to imprisonment by Blanch CJ of DC for nine years with a non-parole period of six and a half years. Since this application for leave to appeal involves a comparison with that sentence, I will summarise his Honour's remarks on sentence in relation to Mr Spink.

In a shorter statement of facts by the same agent dated 16 August 1994, tendered by the applicant's counsel without objection, the applicant was described as first lieutenant to Mr Spink and it was said he organised and controlled men and equipment on behalf of Mr Spink. It was also said that the applicant controlled every facet of arrangements for the off loading of the cannabis resin after consultation with Mr Spink, and that the corruption of the serving Australian Federal Police officer to which I have referred was at the direction of Mr Spink.

The applicant and Mr Spink were charged with the same offence.

Remarks on sentence in relation to Mr Spink 
On 11 March 1996, Mr Spink having pleaded guilty to that charge, Blanch CJ sentenced him to imprisonment for nine years with a non-parole period of six and a half years. Since this application for leave to appeal involves a comparison with that sentence, I will summarise his Honour's remarks on sentence in relation to Mr Spink.

Before doing so I should mention that <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cth) provides that if a Federal sentence is to be served in a prison of a State or
Territory where State or Territory sentences are not subject to remission or reduction, the Court imposing the sentence must take that fact into account in determining the length of sentence and must adjust the sentence accordingly.
The section applies to New South Wales. It is customary to reduce the sentence otherwise thought to be appropriate by one-third on this account.

In sentencing Mr Spink Blanch CJ of DC reviewed the facts of the case involving, as they did, activities by both Mr Spink and the present applicant.
As to Mr Spink's role the Crown had conceded that, although it believed Mr
Spink was the leader of the conspiracy, that was not established to the requisite standard of proof. On the other hand, the evidence did establish that Mr Spink was one of the leading figures in the conspiracy, together with others including the present applicant.

Subjective considerations taken into account by Blanch CJ of DC in relation to
Mr Spink include the following. Mr Spink was 53 years of age. He had a prior criminal history, although there was nothing relevant in recent years. There was favourable character evidence. Mr Spink had suffered a significant financial loss in terms of wasted outlay in relation to the criminal venture and his assets were subject to a restraining order under Commonwealth legislation. There was then reference to what was called "other material" having been tendered which his Honour regarded as being of major significance.
This apparently related to assistance provided and promised. For obvious reasons, the nature and extent of such existence was not revealed in his
Honour's reasons for judgment. His Honour said that the material tendered indicated a matter of major significance, and that it had to have a major result so far as concerned the sentence to be imposed on Mr Spink.

His Honour went on to refer to Mr Spink having pleaded guilty at an early stage, and stated that this had led to a number of other persons following his lead so that legal proceedings, which could have lasted a very long time before the courts, had been considerably shortened.

His Honour regarded Mr Spink's offence as being an extremely serious one, to be classified as falling in its criminality at the top end of the scale. His
Honour noted the maximum penalty for the offence was life imprisonment. He said that the appropriate sentence to be taken as a starting point was 24 years having regard to the objective considerations. This was to be reduced by one-third pursuant to <case>, to which I have made reference. On that account a sentence of 24 years was to be reduced to one of 16 years, and a non-parole period of 12 years would, his Honour said, ordinarily have been appropriate.
His Honour said that a further discount of at least one-third was appropriate because of the other material relating to assistance to the authorities.

Having regard to the totality of objective and subjective considerations, his
Honour determined that the appropriate sentence was nine years imprisonment with a non-parole period of six and a half years.

With further reference to the other material, his Honour noted that some related to the future and, accordingly, he had, in coming to the ultimate result, reduced the non-parole period by twelve months and the head sentence by one year and four months for that future component.

I make the following observations concerning the sentence imposed on Mr Spink.
First, his Honour had a wide discretion as to what discount to allow for assistance to the authorities given and/or promised. In Cartwright [(1989) NSWLR 243] the trial judge allowed a discount of about 30 per cent for assistance to the authorities; on appeal, this court increased the discount to per cent; cases were cited on the appeal in which the discount for assistance varied from 43 per cent to 67 per cent, depending on the nature and extent of the assistance provided. There is no fixed formula for such a discount: Salameh [(1991) 5 A Crim R 384] per
Smart J at 386.

This court has no knowledge of the nature and extent of the assistance involved. Nor, presumably, does the present applicant. There has been no Crown appeal against Mr Spink's sentence. I must assume that the discount allowed by his Honour was not inappropriate, and the present applicant cannot reasonably assume otherwise.

The second observation I would make is to note his Honour's view that the sentence otherwise appropriate was to be reduced by at least one-third on account of this consideration. A one-third discount on a sentence of 16 years would have resulted in a head sentence of ten years and 8 months. The head sentence imposed was 9 years. That took into account not only the assistance provided, but also the plea of guilty (and its relevance to contrition and the saving of expense), the financial penalty suffered by Mr Spink and other subjective considerations. It is apparent that the effect of Mr Spink's plea on others, and the financial penalty suffered by him, did not play a major role in the result. That is understandable, in view of the evidence which would suggest was that there was a very strong case to be made against other participants and that a plea of guilty by them was accordingly likely in any event.

I mention the first of these matters because it features in the present applicant's argument for a reduction in his sentence. I mention the second because I would not wish to endorse, without further consideration, the validity of taking into account on sentence the kind of financial penalty suffered by Mr Spink in this case.

Remarks on sentence in the present case 
I will now summarise his Honour's remarks on sentence in relation to the present applicant. 
His Honour gave a brief summary of the facts of the conspiracy and of the applicant's role in it. His Honour then referred to the sentence imposed on Mr
Spink. He noted that he had sentenced Mr Spink on the basis that he was one of the key organisers but that, in relation to the present applicant, it was conceded by the Crown that many of the acts carried out by the applicant were done at the direction or request of Mr Spink. His Honour went on to observe that even though the applicant acted as a lieutenant, he was acting as a very able and active lieutenant and, in his Honour's view, it became a matter for fine judgment as to what was the difference in the criminality involved. His
Honour said he did not regard the difference as great. Making an allowance for that difference, his Honour took as the starting point a head sentence of -1/2 years for the applicant compared with the 24 years taken as the starting point in relation to Mr Spink.

That, his Honour said, was to be reduced by one-third to 15 years pursuant to s 16G.

His Honour recognised the early plea of guilty and its usual implications. He also recognised that it was the present applicant's plea of guilty which had been seen as a factor influencing the decision of a number of others to plead guilty. That was, by implication, a correction of his Honour's understanding at the time when Mr Spink was sentenced, namely, that it had been Mr Spink's plea which had that initial effect.

The present applicant has now been given credit for that, although his Honour said that the usual considerations relating to contrition and the utilitarian saving of court time in relation to the applicant's own trial were the most significant considerations to be brought to account in relation to the applicant's plea of guilty. His Honour noted that the present applicant's assets were, like those of Mr Spink, now the subject of a restraining order, a consideration which his Honour took into account. (Again, I would not wish to endorse that as a legitimate approach without further consideration.) 
Amongst the subjective considerations taken into account by his Honour, reference was made to support, guidance and assistance which had been provided by the applicant to other prisoners. His Honour was of the opinion that there were good prospects of rehabilitation.

In fixing a sentence of 13 years with a non-parole of 9 years his Honour recognised that this was longer than the sentence imposed upon Mr Spink. His
Honour observed, by way of explanation, that special matters were taken into account in respect of that sentence which were acknowledged as not being relevant to the case of the present applicant. That was a reference to assistance by Mr Spink to the authorities.

Grounds of appeal 
There are in effect three grounds of appeal advanced in relation to the sentence imposed by his Honour on the present applicant. The first is that the sentence is excessive by comparison with the sentence imposed on Mr Spink; secondly, that his Honour did not make sufficient allowance for the plea of guilty and its effect in the case of the present applicant; and, thirdly, that the sentences were excessive having regard to other cases.

First ground of appeal 
As to the disparity with the sentence imposed on Mr Spink, there are three subsidiary grounds: first, that the sentence imposed on the applicant did not sufficiently distinguish his role relative to that of Mr Spink; secondly, that the sentencing Judge had erroneously given Mr Spink credit and deprived the applicant of credit for inducing others to plead guilty; and, thirdly, that the difference between the two sentence could not be satisfactorily explained merely by reason of the assistance provided by Mr Spink.

Consistency of punishment is of fundamental importance in the administration of justice: Lowe <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 606] per Mason J at 610). A sentence, not manifestly excessive, may be varied in order to avoid a marked disparity with a sentence imposed on a co-offender, but the disparity must be such as to give rise to a justifiable sense of grievance or, in other words, to give the appearance that justice has not been done (Ibid, per Gibbs CJ at 610). The principle applies only if all things are equal: Doan (CCA , 27 September 1996, unreported).
Subjective factors concerning co-offenders may justify disparity in their sentences: Antoun (CCA , 16 April 1987, unreported) per Street CJ at 5.

The first subsidiary ground relating to asserted disparity with the sentence imposed on Mr Spink is that the sentence imposed on the applicant did not sufficiently distinguish his role relative to that of Mr Spink. His Honour noted the point and took it into account. The question is whether he did so insufficiently.

On behalf of the applicant it is observed that the difference in roles is recognised only by a 6 per cent difference in the respective starting points of 24 years in the case of Mr Spink, and 22-1/2 years in the case of the applicant. That, it is argued, was patently insufficient to reflect the fact that Mr Spink was the controlling mind.

The significance of a consideration such as this must vary greatly, depending on the circumstances of the case. Let me illustrate. Assume that A engages B to beat up C. Assume further that A plans the operation and directs B as to precisely what he is to do and how he is to go about it. B then beats up C in strict accordance with his instructions. Should B receive a lesser sentence than A because A was the controlling mine. I would not have thought so.

I have also to say that the argument does not accurately reflect his Honour's approach. Mr Spink was sentenced on the basis that he and the present applicant were leading participants of equal rank. The true difference to be recognised between the two cases was therefore between leading participants of equal rank and the applicant being subject to direction by another.

In the present case, the applicant was a very active participant in the higher echelons of the organisation. His role was at the core of the conspiracy and its implementation. There was nothing to suggest that Mr Spink had some kind of hold over the applicant. The applicant was a free agent.

In those circumstances, I see no error in the extent to which his Honour made allowance for the difference in roles as between Mr Spink and the applicant.

The second subsidiary ground relating to asserted disparity with the sentence imposed on Mr Spink is that the sentencing judge had erroneously given Mr
Spink credit and deprived the applicant of credit for inducing others to plead guilty.

The first point to be made is that it is erroneous to argue that the present applicant was deprived of the benefit of this consideration. As appears from my summary of his Honour's remarks on sentence, his Honour did in fact take account of that consideration in favour of the applicant.

The gist of the applicant's submission is that he has a justifiable sense of grievance in that one of the reasons for Mr Spink's sentence being so much less than the applicant's appears to be that Mr Spink has erroneously been given credit for a consideration which should have operated in favour of the applicant and only the applicant. However, as I have shown by reference to his
Honour's remarks on sentence in relation to Mr Spink, the allowance for that consideration must have been very slight. I do not think it has been demonstrated in these circumstances that the difference between the two sentences is materially attributable to credit having been given to Mr Spink for something he did not deserve. If Mr Spink's sentence were substantially lower than the applicant's because of a mistake in relation to Mr Spink's sentence that might provide the applicant with a basis for the argument, but I do not think that is so.

The third subsidiary ground as to disparity with the sentence imposed on Mr
Spink is that the difference between the two sentences could not be satisfactorily explained merely by reason of the assistance provided by Mr
Spink.

In the present case his Honour was obviously impressed by the nature and/or extent of assistance and made a very substantial discount for that consideration in sentencing Mr Spink. As I have said, the allowance is not shown to have been inappropriate and must reasonably be accepted as having been appropriate.

In my view, that consideration does satisfactorily account for the substantial difference between the two sentences.

For these reasons, it has not been established to my satisfaction that the applicant is entitled to have a legitimate sense of grievance arising from the difference between the two sentences. The first ground on which the sentence is impugned fails.

Second ground of appeal 
The second ground of appeal is that his Honour did not make sufficient allowance for the plea of guilty and its effect in the case of the present applicant. The applicant relies on the decision of this court in Winchester [(1992) 58 A Crim R 345] where it was said (at 350) that in cases where admissions are made immediately, and a plea of guilty is entered in the Local Court, the reduction made in the sentence imposed should be substantial and it should be seen to be such.

The applicant complains that in the present case a discount of only slightly more than 13 per cent - 15 years reduced to 13 years - was given for subjective considerations, including the plea of guilty in the applicant's own case and the effect of that plea in influencing others to plead guilty.

On behalf of the Crown, it is argued that the evidence did not establish that others were not influenced to plead guilty by the applicant's plea. It seems to me, however, that his Honour found that this was so and took that consideration into account. I do not see why he would otherwise have recognised, in his remarks on sentence, what was put on behalf of the applicant in this regard. If this court were re-sentencing the applicant, the
Crown's point would have to be resolved but, for the purposes of an enqury as to error, it should be accepted that his Honour found the facts in the applicant's favour on this point.

It should then be noted, however, that his Honour did not regard this factor as the most significant in relation to the plea of guilty, as contrasted with its relevance as evidence of contrition and as having led to a saving in costs relative to the applicant himself. (As I have mentioned, the same observation was made by his Honour when sentencing Mr Spink.) 
A sentencing judge has a wide discretion as to what weight to give to subjective considerations, including a plea of guilty. Where there is a strong case against the accused and where the accused has had to be apprehended, the allowance will not be so large. This was such a case. There is also an overriding consideration that inadequate weight must not be given to the gravity of the crime viewed objectively: Dodd [(1991) A Crim R ).] 
This was a very serious offence, viewed objectively. It does not seem to me, in those circumstances, that an error in the exercise of discretion is demonstrated by reference to the allowance made for subjective considerations, including the plea of guilty.
 
Third ground of appeal 
The third ground on which the sentence is impugned is that the sentence is excessive having regard to the sentences imposed in other cases. 
Considerations of consistency as between sentences are not the same where co- offenders are not involved. The test is then whether the sentence under review is within the range of sentences appropriate to the objective gravity of the offence and the subjective circumstances of the offender: Ellis [(1993) A Crim R 449], per Hunt CJ at CL at 461; Morgan [(1993) 70 A Crim R ] per Hunt CJ at CL at 371.

Reference has been made to a number of reported and unreported decisions by way of sentences said to be relevant in this regard. I think it unnecessary to review them. They vary considerably in relation to the nature of the drug involved, the quantity of drug, the role of the prisoner in each case, the activities engaged in, the time over which the activities have been engaged in, whether there has been a plea of guilty, whether the drug has been distributed or not. Some of those considerations have operated in favour of the prisoner, some against. A large variety of combinations of circumstances has understandably led to different results.

It is not a question of whether the sentence in this case is in some way an average sentence having regard to such other cases. It is a question of assessing whether the sentence in this case is outside the range of sentences appropriate to the objective gravity of the offence and the subjective circumstances of the offender in this case.

It does not seem to me that it has been established that the sentence imposed by his Honour was in this case outside the range of sentences reflected in the cases to which reference has been made. Accordingly that ground of appeal should also fail.

Proposed orders 
For those reasons I would grant leave to appeal against sentence in the present matter and would dismiss the appeal. Time spent by the applicant in custody pending the hearing of the application should count.

GLEESON CJ: I agree with the orders proposed by Sperling J and with his reasons.
 
GROVE J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Sperling J.
 * * * 
