

Solomon Pacific Resources Nl versus Acacia Resources Ltd No. 1608/96
Corporations [1996] NSWSC 226 (24 June 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
McLELLAND CJ IN EQUITY
HRNG
SYDNEY, 18 March 1996 #DATE 20:3:1996 #ADD :6:1996 
A Myers QC, D J Hammerschlag and V Kerr appeared for the Plaintiff 
P Jacobson QC and J Simpkins appeared for the
Defendant
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
McLELLAND CJ IN EQUITY On 4 March 1996 the defendant (Acacia) served on the plaintiff (Solpac) a document in the form of a booklet which included a statement (the Statement) purporting to be a Part A Statement relating to offers proposed to be made by Acacia to shareholders in Solpac for the acquisition by Acacia of all their shares in Solpac in consideration of the allotment and issue to them of one share in Acacia for every six shares in
Solpac. On 15 March 1996 Solpac commenced these proceedings in which it seeks declarations challenging the validity or propriety of the Statement on various grounds in reliance on Part A in s.750, s. 1022AA(2), s.704(1)(b) and s.995 of the Corporations Law, and s.52 of the Trade Practices Act, injunctions to restrain Acacia from despatching the Statement or the offers, and other relief.
Presently before the Court is an application by Solpac for interlocutory injunctions to restrain Acacia from despatching the Statement or the offers to shareholders of Solpac.
The matters of complaint relied on Solpac are conveniently set out in a letter dated 12 March 1996 from Solpac's solicitors to Acacia's solicitors, to which Acacia's solicitors replied by letter dated March 1996.
The particular provisions of the Corporations
Law which formed the basis of the argument before me are ss.643, 704(1), clause 17 of Part A in s.750, and s.1022AA(2)(b) (as if the Statement were a prospectus to which that subsection applied). The requirements of s.1022AA(2) (thus modified) are applicable by virtue of a condition specified in an exemption by the
Australian Securities Commission under s.728(1) of Acacia from clause 18 of
Part A in s.750 in respect of the proposed takeover scheme.
Section 643 provides: "643 A Part A statement may contain, in addition to the information referred to in Part A in section 750, such information as the offeror thinks fit, other than information that is false in a material particular or materially misleading."
Section 704(1) provides: "704(1) Where: there is, in a statement that purports to be a Part A statement served under subsection 637(1), in an offer that purports to be a takeover offer, in a statement that purports to be a Part C statement served under paragraph 679(1)(a) or in a notice served or given under section 657 or subsection 701(1) or 703(1) or (4), matter that is false in a material particular or materially misleading; or there is an omission of material matter from such a statement, offer or notice; person to whom this subsection applies contravenes this subsection." 
It is to be noted that subsequent subsections of s.704 provide defences to proceedings in respect of contraventions of subs.(1).
Clause 17 of Part A in s.750 requires a Part A statement to: "set out any ... information material to the making of a decision by an offeree whether or not to accept an offer, being information that is known to the offeror and has not previously been disclosed to the holders of shares in the target company."
The requirement of s. 1022AA(2)(b) (as modified) is that the Statement must: "contain all such information as investors and their professional advisors would reasonably require, and reasonably expect to find in the (statement), for the purpose of making an informed assessment of: the effect of the offer ... on (the offeror); and the rights attaching to the securities (to be offered as consideration for the proposed acquisition)."
Before going to the particular matters of complaint by Solpac, I would make some general observations concerning (a) the application of certain statutory provisions to the circumstances of the present case, and (b) the proper approach of the Court to applications for interlocutory injunctions in cases of this kind.
Each of the provisions of the Corporations Law quoted above relates to matter which is, or is to be, included in, or which is omitted from, a Part A statement or a document that purports to be a Part A statement, as the case may be. The booklet which contains the document purporting to be Acacia's Part
A statement includes much else besides. In particular it includes, apart from the proposed form of offer, the proposed form of acceptance and the preliminary financial statement for Acacia for 1995, some pages of material, the subsections of which are headed: "1 Key Offer Information Letter from the Chairman of Acacia Why you should accept Acacia's Offer Summary Description of Acacia Effect of the Offer on Acacia"
These pages are in fact presented as the primary content of the booklet, to which the form of offer, Part A statement, preliminary financial statement and form of acceptance are appended as "Attachments". Section 5 "Effect of the Offer on Acacia" is however incorporated in the Part A statement by reference in clause 18 thereof. Some of the complaints relied on by Solpac relate to matter in the 18 page section, rather than in the attachment identified as the Part A statement. So far as appears, it is only the latter attachment that was registered by the Australian Securities
Commission as a Part A statement under s.644: it alone appears to be the subject of the endorsement required by s.637(1). The view is open that the provisions of the Corporations Law relating to takeover schemes proceed on the assumption that so far as concerns matters which are required to be included in a Part A statement by Part 1 in s.750, or additional matters which are in fact included in such a statement under the liberty granted by s.643, a Part A statement will be a stand-alone document in the sense that it will be despatched to offerees unaccompanied by any other document (apart from the offer itself and any Part B statement and accompanying report - see ss.639(2) and 640) dealing with those matters. Otherwise, it could be said, the statutory safeguards relating to the contents of a Part A statement are liable to be subverted by the contents of other accompanying documents prepared by the offeror not subject to the same regulatory mechanism. Somewhat analogous considerations can arise in respect of Court-approved explanatory statements relating to schemes of arrangements under s.411(1) and s.412 (1) (see eg Chief
Commissioner of Payroll Tax versus Group Four Industries [1984 1 NSWLR 680] at 686).
I will not pursue this question further here, as it was not the subject of any argument. Of course, while an accompanying document which is not itself a Part
A statement lies outside the operation of ss.643 and 704, the prohibitions in s.995 of the Corporations
Law and in s.52 of the Trade Practices Act of misleading or deceptive conduct make no distinction between a Part A statement and an accompanying document.
It is necessary to say something about the scope of the requirements of s. 1022AA(2)(b)(ii). The expression "the rights attaching to the securities" in my opinion denotes no more than the legal incidents of ownership of the securities.
In particular, it does not include the value of the securities.
This I think is evident from the use of the same expression in s.
(1)(b) in juxtaposition and contrast to the expression "the assets and liabilities, financial position, profits and losses, and prospects of the corporation" in s. 1022(1)(a), requiring a much higher level of disclosure of information than that required in cases to which s. 1022AA applies.
As I have indicated, the present application is for interlocutory injunctions to restrain the despatch to shareholders of Solpac of the offers and Part A statement from Acacia. As Bryson J observed in ICAL versus County
Natwest
Securities Aust [13 ACLR 129] at 131-2, there are limits to the efficacy of endeavouring to secure compliance with statutory provisions relating to takeover offers by granting injunctions in proceedings conducted with great urgency, particularly in matters of any complexity. The application in the present case was heard by me on the next business day following the date of commencement of the proceedings, and the hearing took most of the day. If an interlocutory injunction is granted, the making of the contemplated offer by
Acacia to shareholders of
Solpac may be delayed for some considerable time until a final hearing can take place, in circumstances where the market for shares in both Solpac and Acacia may well be quite volatile. There are of course other sanctions for any contraventions of the law which may ultimately be established. These and other factors relevant to the discretionary considerations governing the grant of interlocutory injunctions in such matters as these are discussed by Ryan J in Associated Dairies versus Central West
Dairy <case>; [11 ACSR 234] at 244-6. The overriding consideration for the Court in deciding whether to grant or refuse an interlocutory injunction is what course is best calculated to achieve justice between the parties, having due regard also to the interests of other affected persons as well as the public interest, in the circumstances of the particular case. In such a case as the present, having regard to (a) the practical consequences of the grant of an interlocutory injunction, (b) the vagueness of the criteria in some of the statutory requirements application to Part A statements including the concept of "materiality", and (c) the availability of other sanctions and remedies, including the ability of the target company in its Part B statement to draw attention to any alleged deficiencies in the Part A statement, that overriding consideration will generally dictate that an interlocutory injunction to restrain the despatch of offers and a Part
A statement on the basis of alleged deficiencies in that statement be granted only where the deficiencies appear to be clear and serious.
I turn now to the particular matters of complaint. Two matters said to be of major significance were placed at the forefront of Solpac's argument. The first was that the Statement provides no information in the nature of earnings forecasts or cash flow projections for Acacia. It was said that information of this kind is necessary in order to enable Solpac shareholders to assess the financial prospects of Acacia, including its prospects for future growth and expansion, and was therefore "information material to the making of a decision by an offeree whether or not to accept the offer" within the meaning of clause of Part A in s.750.
In my view, there is for present purposes a significant distinction to be drawn between facts and predictions. Predictions, whether in the form of forecasts or projections or in any other form, are inherently speculative and subject to contingencies of varying degrees of probability and forseeability. The very inclusion in a Part A statement of such a prediction might well be potentially misleading. There is no evidence as to what earnings forecasts or cash flow projections might exist or how reliable they might be.
I am not persuaded that this alleged deficiency is sufficiently clear or significant to justify the grant of an interlocutory injunction.
The second matter said to be of major significance is that the booklet includes in the section headed 'Effect of the Offer on Acacia' (which, as already stated, is incorporated into the Part A statement by reference) pro forma consolidated balance sheets of Acacia as at 31 December 1995 assuming the acquisition of 32%, 50.1% and 100% respectively of the shares in Solpac, in which, it is claimed, there is no accounting for goodwill in respect of
Solpac which, it is said, in the case of a 100% acquisition should have been brought in at $65.6 million (being the difference between the total consideration of approximately $89.8 million and the value attributed to the identifiable net assets of Solpac of $24.2 million), and would have been required to be written off either in the year of acquisition or over twenty years, on the basis of Accounting Standards AASB 1013 - "Accounting for
Goodwill" and AASB - "Accounting for the Acquisition of Assets". The
Accounting Standards must be read subject to the provisions of s. 191 of the
Corporations Law, as is pointed out in Practice Note 54 issued by the
Australian Securities Commission. The notes to the pro forma consolidated balance sheets include the following passage: "Acquisition Accounting 
In the proforma consolidated balance sheets the identifiable assets and liabilities of Solpac are included at acquisition cost which, in accordance with applicable
Accounting Standards, is determined as their fair value.

For the purpose of preparing the proforma consolidated balance sheets the shares to be issued by Acacia to acquire the shares in
Solpac have been assumed to be issued at (78) cents, being cents par value and (53) cents premium.

The issue price was determined after giving due consideration to the valuation adopted by the directors of Acacia of the assets and liabilities of Solpac which established their estimated fair values at a net $24.2 million. These estimated fair values may vary from the fair values which will be adopted by the directors of Acacia after the acquisition, when additional information is made available. Acacia's corporate policy is to regularly review the carrying value of all its assets.

In accordance with Acacia's stated accounting policy, the fair value of the assets and liabilities has been assess on a commercial basis having regard to the discounted cash flow of the assets based on Solpac's published development plan for Brocks Creek."
I think it is quite clear that the way that the notionally acquired assets have been treated in the pro forma consolidated balance sheets is inconsistent with the Accounting Standards, generally for the reasons advanced in Mr Lonergan's affidavit, and I am not persuaded that s. 129 can account for the inconsistency. The above-quoted note and those aspects of the pro forma consolidated balance sheets which reflect the effect of the acquisition are accordingly, in my view, misleading in that the non-adherence to the
Accounting Standards is not disclosed. The misleading effect of the non-disclosure is exacerbated by the inclusion in the first sentence of the above-quoted passage of the phrase "in accordance with applicable Accounting
Standards", although read literally that phrase does not extend to the whole of the quoted passage.
Quite apart from the misleading aspect of these matters, a question of substance and importance arises directly affecting compliance with the requirements of clause of Part A in s.750 and of s.1022AA(2)(b)(i), namely how, for accounting purposes, including compliance with s.191, should the value of the assets to be acquired be ascertained and taken into the accounts of Acacia. There are various possibilities including one not yet espoused by either party, namely that the value should be ascertained by reference to the fair market value of the shares in Solpac to be acquired. Insofar as there may be a very substantial goodwill factor in the value of the assets to be acquired this is likely to be a very significant matter to offerees having regard to the provisions of Accounting Standard 1013 which includes the following: "Accounting Tmatment for Purchased Goodwill .34 Goodwill which is purchased by the company shall be brought to account as a non-current asset at acquisition.
 .35 Goodwill which is purchased by the company shall be systematically amortised to the profit and loss account over the period of time during which the benefits are expected to arise.
The period over which goodwill is to be amortised shall not exceed twenty years.
 .36 The unamortised balance of goodwill shall be reviewed at each balance date and charged to the profit and loss account to the extent that future benefits are non longer probable.
 .37 Subject to clause .35, the time period over which goodwill is to be amortised and the amortisation method shall be reviewed at each balance date and, if necessary, adjusted to reflect the amount and timing of expect future benefits.
 .38 Notwithstanding the requirement contained in clause .36, purchased goodwill shall not otherwise be revalued."
The importance of this matter is such that it should I think be decided on a final, rather than interlocutory basis, without delay. I therefore propose, subject to any submissions which may be made on behalf of the parties, to deal with this aspect of the matter as a separate question for final determination pursuant to an order to be made under Part 31 of the
Supreme Court Rules, which I would be available to hear next Monday, 25 March .
As to the remaining matters of complaint, with two qualifications none of them is in my opinion of sufficient significance either alone or in combination with others to justify an interlocutory injunction or other order.
The first qualification relates to the annual report of Acacia for 1995.
During the hearing counsel for Acacia informed the Court that that report would be ready for despatch by this Friday, 22 March 1995. I consider that copies of that annual report should accompany the offer documents to be sent to the shareholders of Solpac. Provided Acacia indicates its intention to do this, it win be unnecessary to make any order about it.
The second qualification is that I regard as seriously misleading the first and second graphs on page 5 of Acacia's booklet, as well as the phrase on that page "a history of out-performance over the Gold Index", and also the sentence on page 8 of the booklet "Since listing in November 1994, Acacia's share price has outperformed the ASX Gold Index." If there had been no other reason for enjoining the despatch of the offers and booklet without alteration
I would have regarded Solpac's ability to comment on those matters in its Part
B statement as a sufficient remedy. But if by reason of the matters already referred to concerning the acquisition accounting it is necessary for some alteration to be made to the contents of the booklet, the two graphs and other material to which I have referred should be removed from the booklet before the despatch of offers.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/226.html  
