

Regina versus Elcoate Matter No Lo17/95 [1998] NSWSC 136 (8 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 
REGINA versus ERIC THOMAS ELCOATE 
LO17/95 May 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT (Application for Redetermination of Life Sentence) 
HIS HONOUR: 
In May 1988 the applicant, Eric Thomas Elcoate, was tried before Mathews J and a jury at Coffs Harbour for the murder of Terry Lee Ehlers and for maliciously inflicting actual bodily harm on Petra Ehlers with intent to have sexual intercourse with her (Crimes Act, <case>(a): now <case>(a)). He was found guilty of both charges and, on 20 May 1988, he was sentenced to penal servitude for life on the murder charge and penal servitude for 9 years, with no non-parole period, on the sexual assault charge.

The applicant seeks the determination of minimum and additional terms in respect of the life sentence, pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). Of course, the 9 year sentence has expired with remissions.

Facts 
There is no need to dwell upon the facts, which are dreadful, but it is necessary to refer to significant areas of dispute.

The victim of the murder, Terry Ehlers, and of the sexual assault, Petra
Ehlers, were husband and wife. At the relevant time they lived with their two small children at a house at Ulong near Coffs Harbour. The applicant and another man, who had no part to play in these events, lived there as boarders.
In the mid-evening of 8 November 1987, Mrs Ehlers retired to bed, leaving her husband and the applicant in the loungeroom of the house. Her husband was asleep on a sofa. Some hours later the applicant shot Mr Ehlers at close range with a .22 rifle. The circumstances of that shooting will require some examination.

The applicant then went to the bedroom where Mrs Ehlers had been disturbed by the noise. He struck her on the head with the rifle barrel, informed her that she was a widow, and compelled her by threats to remove her clothing. He then subjected her to acts of vaginal and oral intercourse over a period of hours, to which she submitted out of fear. He was also alleged to have indulged in other sexual acts of a more degrading nature, but I do not propose to have regard to that material. The applicant denied those acts when interviewed by police. Proof of them was not essential to the jury's verdict on the sexual assault count and her Honour made no finding about them when passing sentence.

The body of Mr Ehlers was found on the sofa where he had earlier been sleeping. He had been killed by a single gunshot wound to the head. There was expert medical evidence that he had been shot in the position where he was found. Further, Mrs Ehlers gave evidence that that was the same position in which he had been sleeping when she retired to the bedroom. It was the Crown case at the trial that the applicant had shot Mr Ehlers while he was still asleep.

When interviewed by police the applicant readily admitted having shot Mr
Ehlers. Asked early in the interview why he had done so, his enigmatic reply was, "Why does a man go to war?" However, he went on to give an account of Mr
Ehlers being aggressive and violent, including threatening to do harm to the other boarder (who was asleep at the time). He concluded, "I had a gutful. I just got the gun and went bang and that was it." At this time, he said, he was sober, although he "got pissed after". In a subsequent interview he said that he and Mr and Mrs Ehlers had been drinking throughout the day and, when asked what they had been drinking, replied, "Christ, everything." 
In that same interview he admitted having hit Mrs Ehlers on the head with the rifle barrel, but claimed that the ensuing sexual contact was consensual.
Asked why he hit Mrs Ehlers with the rifle, he shrugged and said, "Just one of those things." The sexual activity was what he described as "just ordinary straight out sex", by which he meant "just ordinary sex, couple of head jobs".
He said that the two of them were also drinking wine in the bedroom.

Broadly speaking, this was the account which the applicant maintained in an unsworn statement at the trial. However, his description of the events leading up to the shooting amounted to an assertion that he was acting in self defence and even raised the question whether he had discharged the gun by a voluntary act. He said that Mr Ehlers became aggressive in the course of a conversation about unpaid household bills, and that he was in fear of him. He took up the loaded rifle in the hope of persuading Mr Ehlers to go shooting with him, so as to distract him from the matter at hand and calm him down. He said that Mr
Ehlers approached him in a threatening manner and "the gun went off. I didn't know - you know, automatic reflex." He then picked Mr Ehlers up and put him on the sofa in the position where he was later found.

In passing sentence, Mathews J observed that the circumstances of both offences "could not be more serious". As to the murder, it is clear that the jury were satisfied that the shooting was a deliberate act accompanied by the requisite intent, and that the applicant was not acting in self defence.
However, her Honour expressed herself satisfied that there had been no behaviour whatsoever on the part of Mr Ehlers which could have led to the shooting, and that he was shot in cold blood while he was asleep. On the evidence, her Honour could divine no motive for the shooting except, possibly, the applicant's determination to have his way with Mrs Ehlers.

The matter was governed by <case> of the Crimes Act as it then stood, so that her Honour was bound to impose penal servitude for life in the absence of significant mitigating circumstances contributing to the commission of the crime: R versus Bell [[1985] 2 NSWLR 466.] Counsel for the applicant at the trial - realistically, as the evidence then stood - conceded that there were no such circumstances. Of the sexual assault offence her Honour said "... it is difficult to conceive of any more serious offence of this nature." It is clear that her Honour declined to specify a non-parole period in respect of the sentence for that offence because it was concurrent with the life sentence.

In evidence before me, the applicant gave yet another account of the incident.
While he maintained that the shooting was preceded by an argument about household expenses (in particular a large telephone bill), he said that Mr
Ehlers was again lying on the sofa, although not asleep, when he shot him. He was offended by Mr Ehlers' attitude to the expenses, given that he had voluntarily done odd jobs around the house. He said of Mr Ehlers, "My guts felt hatred for him ... I just exploded." The rifle, in fact, was not already loaded: he obtained it from the bedroom and loaded it. However, he claimed that when he fired it he was not looking at Mr Ehlers and did not aim the weapon at him.

He went on to admit that the sexual activity with Mrs Ehlers was without her consent. He had a "mad idea" that she shared her husband's animosity towards him over household expenses and he wanted to humiliate her. He denied that he had killed Mr Ehlers so as to gain access to her sexually. He denied having said to the police, "Why does a man go to war?" However, he acknowledged that in significant respects he had lied to the police and in his statement to the jury at his trial.

Before me, the Crown prosecutor submitted that I should proceed on the basis that the applicant had killed a sleeping man so as to obtain access to his wife, although he acknowledged that these were matters of aggravation of which
I would need to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt. I am not so satisfied. I am mindful of the marked difference between the applicant's present account and that given before and at his trial, although it must be said that his present account was foreshadowed in the history recorded in a psychological report of 1992, to which I shall refer later. I am also aware of the possibility that he has tailored it to meet the expert evidence about the position of Mr Ehlers when he was shot. Nevertheless, although the shooting was followed by enforced sexual activity between the applicant and Mrs Ehlers,
I consider it improbable that that was the motive for it. From the tenor of her remarks on sentence, it is clear that Mathews J was of the same view. It is much more likely that there had been some abusive, if not violent, exchange between the two men: a matter which the applicant did raise, in a fashion, when interviewed by police.

The expert evidence was to the effect that Mr Ehlers had been shot in the position on the sofa where he was found. The inference that he was asleep arose mainly from the evidence of Mrs Ehlers, referred to above, that his position had not changed since her retirement to the bedroom. Obviously, on the material before me, I cannot determine the accuracy of that evidence. It should be borne in mind that, on any view of the evidence, there was a significant length of time between her retiring to the bedroom and the shooting.

Of course, it is not uncommon for an offender to fabricate an exculpatory account of events to police and at trial, in the hope of acquittal, where the truth would establish guilt but might also raise mitigating circumstances. If found guilty, the offender then stands for sentence without the benefit of that mitigation. It has also been the experience of this court in these applications that, over the years, some offenders gradually come to terms with their guilt and are prepared to acknowledge it, even if they never tell the whole truth about the matter. Time and again judges of this court part with murder cases confident of one thing: that much of the truth has been revealed, but the whole truth never will be.

This, I think, is such a case, and I can deal only with the facts as I find them established on the material before me. It is significant that, in histories recorded by prison psychologists from 1988 onwards, the applicant appears to have abandoned any claim of self defence in relation to Mr Ehlers, or of consent on the part of Mrs Ehlers. I reject his claim in evidence that he did not aim the rifle at Mr Ehlers. I am satisfied that he shot him in the head after taking aim, and I find the inference that he intended to kill inescapable. However, I propose to deal with him on the basis that there had been an earlier altercation, that he was angry, and that he was to some extent disinhibited by alcohol. So viewed, this remains a very serious case of murder, although by no means a worst case.

It will be seen that my assessment of the applicant's criminality is different from that of Mathews J. I am mindful of the respect which her Honour's remarks deserve and the regard which I should have to them, but I am free to depart from them if the interests of justice require: <case>(10A) and see, in any event, Reg versus Cox (CCA, unreported, 19 June 1997). Her Honour did not have before her the account which the applicant gave in evidence before me.
Further, the concession of counsel for the applicant at the trial that there were no mitigating circumstances for the purpose of <case> of the Crimes Act relieved her Honour of the need for any detailed examination of the facts.

Subjective Case 
The applicant was almost 48 years old at the time of the offences and is now aged 59. He has a fairly extensive criminal record in three States between and 1983. It comprises mainly offences of dishonesty, although there are two entries in Queensland for offences in the nature of robbery which might be described as crimes of violence. Nevertheless, given the overall nature of the record and, more particularly, its age, I do not consider it of significance for present purposes.

He is of a rural background, born in Queensland, and one of a large family.
His parents are long dead and for many years he has had no contact with his siblings. He was married but he and his wife separated, although they have not been divorced. They have a daughter, now an adult, with whom he has maintained contact whilst in custody. After separating from his wife, he entered into a longstanding defacto relationship with another woman and that union produced a son, also now an adult. His defacto wife and son live in South Australia and he has maintained contact with them by mail and by phone.

He had little education as a child and, at the time he entered the prison system, his literacy and numeracy skills were poor. He had no trade qualifications and the little material before me about his employment background suggests that he had unskilled jobs in rural areas, interspersed with periods of unemployment, although it seems that at some stage he ran his own truck transport business.

He had been a heavy drinker throughout his adult life. He has a longstanding hearing impairment for which he has received treatment while in custody. He now uses a hearing aid in each ear, which has relieved the problem considerably without, however, eradicating it. Ms Christine Drayden-Thompson, a psychologist who has had a deal of contact with him in recent years, reported that his hearing impairment may have contributed to the offences (and possibly to previous offences) by increasing his level of frustration and hostility. This is an interesting observation, but one about which I am unable to reach any concluded view on the material I have. He has also been treated whilst in custody for skin cancers, but the evidence does not disclose their extent or seriousness.

Over the roughly ten years he has been in custody until the hearing before me, the applicant has made considerable progress towards his rehabilitation.
Prison reports during the period consistently describe him as well behaved and a willing and reliable worker. By his own efforts he has achieved a marked improvement in his literacy and numeracy. He undertook a course in leatherwork, and has achieved such proficiency at it that it could well afford him a means of earning a living upon his release. He has undergone counselling in respect of his drinking, attracting favourable reports from the drug and alcohol worker. All these are significant achievements, the more so because they involved communication with professionals and others in the prison system, and that communication was compromised by his hearing difficulty.

Equally significant is the development of his psychological profile. Prior to his trial he was interviewed by Mr W John Taylor, psychologist, whose personality tests revealed, among other things, a low frustration tolerance and a difficulty in controlling "acting out episodes" when intoxicated. Mr
Taylor reported: "He would experience episodes of acting out which may include excessive drinking and sexual promiscuity. These may be followed by temporary expressions of guilt and self condemnation. However, his remorse does not seem to inhibit the repetition of this behaviour and further episodes of acting out." 
In June 1988, shortly after he was sentenced, Mr Brin Swain, a prison psychologist found him to have "mildly retarded general reasoning ability". He went on: "Mr Elcoate presents in interview as having a very disturbing psychiatric condition, possibly schizophrenia. He is erratic in his thoughts and has little insight into his actions. He displays little emotion towards the offences ..." 
However, by late 1989, a different picture emerges. In October 1989 another prison psychologist, Ms Elzbieta Kobylinska, observed him to express remorse about his crimes. To her he said that "people pay for murder twice: first punishment comes from the court, and the second one from themselves." Ms
Kobylinska reported on him again in July 1992, at which time she found him to be experiencing "strong feelings of guilt", which she considered called for "delicate professional intervention".

Since 1994 that intervention appears to have occurred, principally through the efforts of Ms Drayden-Thompson, to whom I have referred and whose report of
January 1998 I have found most helpful. Initially, she found the applicant "extremely emotional when discussing the offence", saying of himself that "he deserved to be in gaol for ever and that no punishment could be too great, because he had taken a life." However, more recently she found him "more accepting of himself and determined to remain alcohol and therefore, trouble free." Having described the achievements whilst in custody to which I have referred above, she continued: "It is my opinion that Mr Elcoate's accomplishments as outlined above, have increased his self confidence and self-esteem, which has enabled him to finally come to terms with what he has done, and consequentially, more effectively address issues of personal development." 
Ms Drayden-Thompson concluded: "Clinical impressions gained in interactions with Mr Elcoate are that he has made progress in personal growth. He has gained insight into the motivation for his actions and a measure of self-acceptance. Considering his intellectual capacity and his physical limitations he is to be commended for the level he has achieved. Mr Elcoate is realistic in regard to employment opportunities on release and more particularly, the difficulties he will face in re-adjusting to community life. He has been counselled in relation to his vulnerabilities, is aware of community resources and is willing to utilise them, even though he was one who was inclined to `keep his own counsel' in the past. He is now the first to admit that there are other avenues, and I am of the opinion that further progress can best be achieved, with support in the community." 
In evidence before me, the applicant expressed his remorse about his crimes, particularly the killing of Mr Ehlers, saying that he felt "lower than a snake's belly". Indeed, he added, "... to tell you the truth I'd like to just say forget it, leave it as it is. That's what I feel like." I understood him to mean that, at that moment, he contemplated abandoning his application so as to remain in prison indefinitely. However, asked about his plans for the future, he said that he hoped to live in the country, supporting himself by his leatherwork, and he expressed a determination to abstain from alcohol.

At the time of the hearing of the application the applicant was confined at
Grafton and his classification had been reduced to C1. It may be that, upon the application being determined, he will be transferred to Broken Hill where he will be closer to his family in South Australia.

The Application 
The Crown prosecutor did not oppose the application, but submitted that I should fix an additional term for the remainder of the applicant's life. He relied upon the seriousness of the killing itself and the totality of the criminality of both offences. He also argued that there was a risk that the applicant would commit further serious offences of violence upon his release, particularly if he were not successful in his resolve to abstain from alcohol.
Counsel for the applicant submitted that a determinate minimum term was appropriate, arguing that the murder did not fall into the worst class of case, and relying upon his client's substantial progress towards rehabilitation while in custody.

It has been held that, in applications under <case> in murder cases, it is not necessary that the facts constitute a "most serious case of murder" before an additional term of life is justified: Reg versus Spinks (CCA, unreported, 7
August 1997) per Gleeson CJ at pp 6-7. Nevertheless, it is not a course lightly to be adopted. In my view, even in a case of murder, an additional term for the remainder of an applicant's life should be set only where it is demanded by the objective facts of the crime, or in the interests of the protection of society in accordance with the principles enunciated in the joint judgment in Veen versus The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 465] at pp 472-4.

Given my findings of fact, this murder does not call for such a term, even with an eye to the criminality embraced by the killing and the sexual assault.
Nor does the evidence establish that it is required in the interests of the protection of society. True it is that his behaviour on the occasion in question was brutal and, to this day, there is no adequate explanation for it.
However, there is nothing in his history to suggest that he had ever indulged in violence of this order before, despite his longstanding pattern of excessive drinking, and there is no report of any violence whatsoever on his part while in custody. At the time he will become eligible for release on parole he will be in his advanced middle age, and the various reports to which
I have referred engender some confidence that he would then be able to maintain a law abiding life style.

Accordingly, I propose to fix a determinate additional term. That term must reflect the criminality of both the murder and the sexual assault, as must the minimum term: Spinks (supra) per Gleeson CJ at pp 7-8; Reg versus Leaver (CCA, unreported, 23 November 1994) per Hunt CJ at CL at p 5; and see now <case>.
The minimum term I propose will require the applicant to serve a substantial further period before being eligible for parole. The additional term will ensure that, should he then be released, he will be subject to the sanction of parole for a further substantial period, and will have the benefit of the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service for as much of that period as that Service considers necessary.

Counsel for the applicant referred me to the remarks on sentence of Hunt CJ at
CL in Reg versus Bishop (unreported, 10 November 1994), a case somewhat similar to this. In that case the prisoner's defacto partner had left him and formed a sexual relationship with the deceased. Apparently motivated by jealousy, the prisoner went to the house where they were living, shot the deceased, and sexually assaulted his former partner. Hunt CJ at CL found that the killing was premeditated. On the other hand, the sexual assault was very much less serious than that perpetrated by the present applicant and was characterised by his Honour as "part and parcel of the criminality involved in the murder."
His Honour determined that the criminality of the two offences called for an effective sentence of penal servitude for 20 years, comprising a minimum term of 15 years and an additional term of five years.

Obviously, each sentencing exercise turns upon its own facts and the decision in one case can never dictate the proper exercise of that discretion in another. Nevertheless, I have found the sentence in Bishop useful as a broad indication of the range of sentence appropriate for crimes such as these.
Although the killing of Mr Ehlers was not premeditated, I consider that the applicant's overall criminality was greater than that of Bishop, given the gravity of his sustained sexual attack upon Mrs Ehlers. On the other hand, as he stands for sentence now, he has the benefit of his age and his commendable progress towards rehabilitation over the years he has been in custody.

Accordingly, the application for the determination of minimum and additional terms is granted. On the charge of murder, the applicant is sentenced to penal servitude for 21 years, comprising a minimum term of 15 years to date from 9
November 1987 and to expire on 8 November 2002, and an additional term of 6 years. He will be eligible for release on parole on 9 November 2002.
 * * * 
