

Regina versus Kingswell Matter No Cca 60096/97 [1998] NSWSC 412 (2 September )

Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
REGINA versus RAYMOND JOSEPH KINGSWELL 
CCA 60096/97 September 1998 
Smart J, Studdert J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction 
FILE NO/S: 60096/97 
DELIVERED: Wednesday, 2 September 1998 
HEARING DATE: Friday, 3 April 1998 
PARTIES: R versus Raymond Joseph KINGSWELL 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART, STUDDERT & HIDDEN JJ 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: I Barker, QC & E Fullerton 
Respondent: R F Sutherland 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: William O'Brien 
Respondent: Commonwealth DPP 
CATCHWORDS: LEAVE TO CROSS EXAMINE - IDENTIFICATION - EXPERT WITNESS - SS 38 & 79 OF [EVIDENCE ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO. OF PAGES: 36 
HEADNOTE 
X collected packages containing heroin from a private post box at a newsagency. He left the packages on K's balcony then drove away. K placed the packages in his car then drove away. He took an indirect route to the point where he was stopped by police. He claimed he did not know what the packages contained. K was convicted of attempting to obtain possession of a commercial quantity of heroin.

In his statement to police Y said he had seen K near the newsagency close to the time X collected the packages. Y was called by the Crown.

A police officer said that K had employed counter surveillance techniques in driving. K called an expert witness who cast doubt upon some of the police officer's evidence.

Held: - Parts of Y's statement to the police were inconsistent with his evidence at trial and the judge was correct to allow the Crown to question him in his examination in chief as though cross examining him on those points.
 - Sections 38(4) and (5) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) contemplate that the order of questioning is to be determined in advance of a witness being called. However, where that which might not reasonably have been expected first occurs after the party calling the witness has completed his questioning leave might still be given under <case>. Here, leave should have been refused as the Crown was aware that at the earlier trial Y had said he was not entirely sure of which day he had seen K near the newsagency.

R versus Milat (unreported, Hunt CJ at CL, 23 April 1996) - Having regard to the responses elicited by the Crown pursuant to this grant of leave, the subsequent responses elicited by counsel for the appellant, the evidence already given by the witness, and the fabric of the prosecution case as a whole, this error alone does not call for the conviction to be set aside.
 - Though it would have been preferable for the jury to have been instructed in accordance with R versus Clarke the instruction given as to identification was adequate. Neither the omissions nor the repetition of the review of the Crown submissions resulted in a risk of miscarriage.

R versus Clarke (unreported, CCA, 31 October 1997) - Having undergone specialised training and study in the area of surveillance and had extensive experience in that field the police officer had thereby acquired "specialised knowledge" within <case> of the Act. Accepting that he had seen what he claimed to have seen, the opinion he expressed was based upon his specialised knowledge and was admissible subject to discretionary considerations. The trial judge did not err in refusing to exercise his discretion to exclude the evidence under <case> or <case> of the Act.
 - The trial judge was entitled to make comments which conveyed doubt as to the worth of the experiment conducted by K's expert witness. Furthermore, after making said comments the judge reminded the jury that it was a matter for it to decide whether it accepted the evidence of either of the experts.
 - The appellant failed to establish that the summing up generally and the summing up of the respective cases of the defence and the Crown lacked sufficient balance and impartiality so as to deprive the appellant of a fair trial.

ORDER: 
Appeal dismissed.

JUDGMENT 
SMART J: I have read the judgment of Studdert J with which I am in agreement except as to one point. 
I do not think that it can be said that the judge erred in the exercise of his discretionary judgment when he granted the Crown leave to cross examine Mr
Lazaris on his statement that it might have been Tuesday, 3 May 1994 when he saw Mr Kingswell. I take this view even though the Crown had earlier cross examined Mr Lazaris on inconsistencies between his statement to the police and his evidence.

Mr Lazaris was a friend of Mr Kingswell. After the incident of 4 May 1994 Mr
Lazaris had voluntarily gone to the police and insisted on making a statement.
He wanted to ensure that he was exculpated and not a suspect or the subject of suspicion. By the time the trial came around he knew that the police were not pursuing him. He was free to assist his friend.

The judge granted leave under <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), 1995. That section made a substantial change to the previous law as to when a witness may be cross examined by the party calling him. Leave may be granted where the evidence given by the witness is not favourable: R v. Souleyman [(1996) 40
NSWLR 712] at 715.

Section 38(4) provides that questioning under <case> is to take place before the other parties cross examine the witness, unless the court otherwise directs.
The judge in the present case otherwise directed. It was open to the judge to take the view that Mr Lazaris had become keen to help Mr Kingswell. The Crown cannot be expected to explore avenues which would enable Mr Lazaris to depart from his earlier statement.

The cross examination offered Mr Lazaris a further way to resile from his statement.

To overcome any prejudice the judge was prepared to allow counsel for Mr
Kingswell to further cross examine Mr Lazaris after the Crown had cross examined him about the possibility of the sighting taking place on Tuesday, 3
May 1994. The Crown's case had not closed. Mr Kingswell's submissions would have had greater force prior to the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) . That introduced a new and more flexible regime.

It was open to the judge to exercise his discretion in the manner in which he did in the circumstances of the present case. He was entitled to otherwise direct under [s (4).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) 
The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

STUDDERT J: The appellant, Raymond Joseph Kingswell, stood trial in the District Court charged with an offence under <case>(ca) of the Customs Act, of attempting to obtain possession of a commercial quantity of heroin. 
The jury found the appellant guilty and the trial judge imposed a sentence of life imprisonment with a non parole period of fifteen years four months.

The appellant did not pursue an application for leave to appeal against the sentence imposed and the appeal proceeded as one against conviction.

In written submissions counsel for the appellant addressed thirteen grounds, but on the hearing Mr Barker of Queen's Counsel indicated that grounds 1 and were not pursued and in the written submissions themselves it was indicated that ground 5 was not being pursued. Before considering the various grounds of appeal, it is necessary to outline the prosecution case.

On 28 April 1994 four packages were despatched from Malaysia by aircraft and following arrival in Sydney the packages were delivered on 2 May 1994 to their designated addressee: "Mr J. Andrew /379 Anzac Parade 
Kingsford." 
That Anzac Parade address was the address of a newsagency but as part of its business the newsagency provided private post boxes for customers, and Box 14 was rented out to a person who gave his name as "John Andrews". This person rented the box continually from 1992 until the time of the arrival of the packages.

Since the packages were too large for the post box, they were placed on the floor of the newsagency. The newsagent looked in one of the packages and observed a picture frame which he broke open and from it spilled white powder.
The police were alerted to this discovery and they took possession of three of the packages. It is not clear what happened to the fourth one.

The police took the packages away and in due course found and removed heroin from the picture frames in the packages. The heroin on analysis was found to contain 2.0958 kg of pure heroin. The evidence was that the heroin had a street value of $6 million. The packages were reconstructed to contain a "controlled delivery sample" of the original heroin mixture and they were then returned on 4 May 1994 to the newsagency to await collection under police surveillance.

That same day John Frederick Lea who was the lessee of the relevant post box in the name of "Andrews", collected the three packages from the newsagency on the last of three visits made to the shop under observation over a forty minute period. He then drove to the appellant's residence in Tweedmouth
Avenue, Rosebery by an indirect route, stopping on a number of occasions during that journey. In one of those stoppages he used a public telephone but the other stoppages were for no apparent reason. Lea left the packages at the appellant's home, placing them on the balcony there, and then drove off.
Shortly afterwards he stopped to make a telephone call, at approximately the same time as the appellant was observed to receive a call on his mobile phone in front of his home.

After the arrival of the packages the appellant was seen to place a sports bag then containing two of them on the rear seat of his car and he also placed the third package, which was not in the bag, there. The appellant then drove off accompanied by his girlfriend and he took an indirect route to the point where he was stopped by police in Willis Street, Randwick. There the packages were seized.

The appellant made an unsworn statement at an earlier trial. This was proved in the trial in 1997. In that statement the appellant admitted that Lea had delivered the packages to his home but he did not know their content. Lea had just asked if he could leave the packages there for a short time. The appellant's explanation for putting the packages in his car was he and his girlfriend were going out for dinner with another couple and Lea was going to join them. He said Lea had asked him to take the packages to the restaurant if he had not returned to collect them before the appellant left home.

From the above outline, it is to be observed that the critical issue at the trial was the proof not only of possession by the appellant of the packages but knowledge associated with possession that the packages contained the large amount of heroin they had contained before they first came under the control of the police. To prove its case the Crown was reliant upon circumstantial evidence.

Part of the chain of circumstantial evidence was the appellant's alleged role in arranging for Lea to rent the post box.

It was the Crown case that the appellant had requested Andrew Lazaris, who conducted a sports store two doors from the newsagency, to introduce Lea to the newsagency proprietor for the purpose of obtaining a mail box. In his unsworn statement at the second trial the appellant denied making any such request, adding: "It was of no interest to me whether he had a post office box or not." 
Andrew Lazaris was called by the Crown and evidence was elicited from him about the renting of the box at the newsagency and also of seeing the appellant outside his shop close to the time when the packages were collected by Lea from the newsagency. This evidence gave rise to the first of the grounds of appeal that was argued, namely ground 2.

It is convenient to record the various circumstances, apart from his involvement in arranging for Lea to rent the post box, upon which the Crown relied to prove the knowledge of the appellant that the three packages contained heroin. They are conveniently identified in the summing up at pp -478 of the appeal book: that the appellant had known the man Lea for many years prior to May 1994; the sighting of the appellant outside the sports store by Mr Lazaris as already mentioned; that Lea telephoned the appellant at his home minutes before arrival at the appellant's premises with the packages of heroin; the delivery of the packages at the appellant's home and their placement on the balcony there; the appellant's girlfriend handed two of the packages that had been transferred into a sports bag to the appellant, and the placement of the sports bag and the third package in the back of the appellant's car by the appellant; awareness of the size and weight of the packages; the value of the heroin; that the appellant received a telephone call from Lea shortly after Lea had deposited the packages and left the appellant's home; that the appellant then drove away from his home using what was described in the evidence as "counter surveillance" driving techniques; that in the course of his journey the appellant followed a route which did not directly lead to a hotel to which, according to the content of his statement at an earlier trial, the appellant had said he was intending to visit.

This brings me to a consideration of the grounds of appeal 
Ground 2: The trial judge erred in granting leave to the Crown Prosecutor pursuant to [s 38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) to cross examine the identification witness Mr Lazaris 
The trial judge granted leave to the Crown Prosecutor to question the witness as though cross examining him on three separate occasions and Mr Barker submitted that he was in error in so doing on each of these occasions.

It will be necessary to deal with these occasions seriatim, but before doing so it is appropriate to record the language of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/): " (1) A party who called a witness may, with the leave of the court, question the witness, as though the party were cross-examining the witness, about: evidence given by the witness that is unfavourable to the party, or a matter of which the witness may reasonably be supposed to have knowledge and about which it appears to the court the witness is not, in examination in chief, making a genuine attempt to give evidence, or whether the witness has, at any time, made a prior inconsistent statement.

Questioning a witness under this section is taken to be cross examination for the purposes of this Act (other than [section ).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s39.html) 
The party questioning the witness under this section may, with the leave of the court, question the witness about matters relevant only to the witness's credibility.

Questioning under this section is to take place before the other parties cross examine the witness, unless the court otherwise directs.

If the court so directs, the order in which the parties question the witness is to be as the court directs.

Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in determining whether to give leave or a direction under this section, it is to take into account: whether the party gave notice at the earliest opportunity of his or her intention to seek leave, and the matters on which, and the extent to which, the witness has been, or is likely to be, questioned by another party.

A party is subject to the same liability to be cross examined under this section as any other witness if: a proceeding is being conducted in the name of the party by or on behalf of an insurer or other person, and the party is a witness in the proceeding." 
The first application under [s 38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) 
Mr Lazaris gave evidence in chief that he had known the appellant for thirty years, that he had lost touch with him for quite some time but that he then became a regular customer at the sports store in the `90s, by which time he saw him frequently. He said the appellant was a friend who introduced him to
Lee, who Lazaris knew as "Jason". Lea became a customer and Lea and the appellant came to the sports store together. The witness was then asked whether he introduced "Jason" to the newsagent (whose name was Maraconte). The witness was asked the following questions and gave the following answers (AB -264): "Q. Did you ever introduce Jason to Mr Maraconte? 
A. Yes.

Q. Tell me the circumstances of how that came about? 
A. During the time when Jason wanted to move to Sydney and he was looking for a place through Farrars, he wanted to have his mail relocated from Moss Vale,
I think it was, to Sydney and we were discussing that at the time we were in my store.

Q. Who is he? 
A. Jason 
Q. Who was there? 
A. Mario Fenech, the Rugby League player, myself, two other staff of mine and
Raymond and Jason.

Q. Tell me the conversation.

A. We were discussing a lot of other things, but at the time one of the things Jason said to me was, `I will need to get my mail relocated to Sydney,
I am going to open up a postal box.' I said, `John at the newsagency has just opened up, he has boxes now as well, why don't you give him the business?' A few minutes later John actually happened to walk into the shop and as I recall it it was to pay me $50-odd for a pair of shoes he had bought from me. I said, `Speaking of the devil, here is John now.' At the time, if I recall right,
Ray said, `Why don't you introduce him now?' I said, `That is a good idea.'
It was pretty busy and John was in a hurry. I said, `This bloke wants to open up a box.' He said, `Yes, bring him in, no problem.' I took him in and introduced him. John said, `Thanks very much.' He appreciated me giving him a customer. He opened up a box and that was it.

Q. Did you go down to Mr Maraconte's shop? 
A. Yes, I took him in there.

Q. With who? 
A. Jason.

Q. Was anyone else present with you? 
A. No.

Q. Where as Mr Kingswell? 
A. With Mario Fenech having coffee or tea.

Q.. Did anyone ask you to introduce Jason to Mr Maraconte to give him a box? 
A. No, it was my suggestion because I wanted to give him the business. He told me he wanted to open a box at the post office, which is around the corner from us, and I told him he could open a box at Mr Maraconte's." (Emphasis added) 
In the absence of the jury, the last of the responses having been given, application was made pursuant to [s (1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) to question the witness on a "prior inconsistent statement". It seems from the transcript that the judge was provided with a copy of the statement referred to which was a statement that had been made to Detective Sgt Spencer on 18 May
There was at this stage no voir dire examination but the judge granted leave to cross examine in relation to a conversation referred to in paragraph of that statement, which statement reads: "6. About that same time Ray asked me to introduce Jason to John MARICONTE at the Newsagent shop two doors up from the shop in Anzac Parade for the purpose obtaining a mail box. I introduced Jason to John by that name because that was the name I knew him by and then went back to my shop. Since that time Ray and
Jason came into my shop on occasions some time to purchase sporting goods, clothing or just to say Hello." 
It was submitted on the appellant's behalf before this Court that the earlier statement was not inconsistent with the evidence the witness gave before the jury, particularly since the statement made to the police officer was in narrative form and was not detailed as to the circumstances of the introduction or as to precisely what was said.

I do not accept that submission.

Paragraph 6 contains an unequivocal assertion that the appellant asked him "to introduce Jason to John Maraconte". The same paragraph indicates that he did so, by inference at the newsagency, because he "then went back to [his] shop".

Having read the evidence which the witness gave before the application under [s 38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) was made and having compared it with the content of paragraph 6 of the statement to the police, it seems to me that the earlier statement was inconsistent for the purposes of [s (1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) and that the trial judge was correct to allow the Crown Prosecutor to question the witness, as though cross examining him, about that prior inconsistent statement.

The second application under [s 38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) 
The witness was cross examined pursuant to the leave first given, and the
Crown having given notice that it intended to introduce evidence from the witness as to his seeing the appellant outside his shop on the evening of 4
May 1994, counsel for the appellant then sought a voir dire examination. In the absence of the jury the Crown Prosecutor drew attention to paragraph 8 of the earlier police statement which reads: "8. At about 5.45 pm on Wednesday 4 May 1994, I was working in the shop serving customers when Ray KINGSWELL appeared at the front door of my shop.
When I turned around from serving he was gone, he did not speak to me. I locked up the shop at 6 pm and picked up my son Michael from Fitzgerald
Avenue, Maroubra and took him to Rainbow Street, for soccer training. I then went to my parents house at 3 Bass Street, Kingsford for dinner. I stayed there until about 8.30 pm and took Michael home to his mothers house 75
Fitzgerald Avenue, Maroubra. I then went home to 1/44 Wride Street, Maroubra.
That day I was driving my vehicle OUM 939, a 1984 BMW colour silver." 
The Crown Prosecutor then indicated he would be seeking leave to cross examine the witness. This is recorded at p 274 of the appeal book: "I would be seeking leave, I am not anticipating the witness to come up to proof. At the earlier trial he said, `I cannot be sure when I last saw the accused, whether it be the 2nd, 3rd or 4th, if I did see him on the 6th, it could well have been someone else, I may have been mistaken.' He moved back from what he said in his witness statement." 
In the absence of the jury, the witness was asked the following question and gave the following answer (AB 276): "Mr Lazaris, shortly before closing your shop on the evening of 4 May 1994, did you see Mr Kingswell in front of your shop? 
A. I was asked this question some time ago at the last trial and I did state at the last trial, I am here under oath, and I would not swear 100 per cent that it was him. The situation was I was down on my one knee serving a customer with shoes. The distance would have been, my shoe seat would have been longer than this Court and while I was on one knee, because there were customers coming and going, trying shoes on for somebody, I glanced over my shoulder and it appeared to me that it looked like Ray at my front door and I didn't take much notice, just a glance.

I kept serving the customer with his shoes because I was also in a hurry, if
I recall, to get away to take my little boy to soccer training that night, and
I finished serving the customer but I never saw Ray, I never spoke to him, but
I thought I saw him but I could not swear that it was him. I was down on one knee trying shoes on for somebody." 
Detective Sgt Spencer was then called as the officer to whom the statement of May 1994 had been made and he was extensively cross examined by Ms
Fullerton.

The judge was then asked to rule prospectively on the admissibility of evidence of identification from this witness and on the prosecution application under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html), in the event the witness did not adhere to the statement. His Honour's rulings were adverse to the appellant, and the witness then gave evidence in response to questions asked by the Crown Prosecutor as follows (AB 286): "Q. I would like to take you to 4 May 1994, were you working in your shop up until closing time that day? 
A. What day is 4 May? 
Q. A Wednesday.

A. Yes, I believe I was working that day, yes.

Q. Shortly before six, did you see Mr Kingswell at the front of your shop? 
A. As I said, I have been asked this question before. What I can recall, I was serving a customer at the time in my store with shoes, I was down on one knee fitting somebody with shoes. My front door to where my shoe chair is is longer than this Court room and I had a number of customers in the store at the time. I was trying to serve them quickly to get out of there to take my young boy to soccer training and I glanced over because the usual thing to do is to keep a eye on the shop, and I glanced over my shoulder through the shop and I thought I had seen Ray outside the shop. I turned around and kept trying the shoes on but then I never saw him again, if it was him.

Q. How sure are you it was him? 
A. I am not 100 per cent sure.

Q. How sure? 
A. Fifty-fifty chance.

Q. Fifty-fifty? 
A. Possibly." 
It is to be observed that the question seeking the evidence of identification set out above was in a blatantly leading form, but following the nature of the response, and in accordance with the earlier ruling in the absence of the jury, the trial judge then granted leave to further cross examine the witness.
Pursuant to that leave the Crown Prosecutor asked the following questions and elicited the following responses (AB 287-288): "Q. I would like to take you to the first two sentences of paragraph 8 of that statement. Your statement records, does it not, `About 5.45 pm on
Wednesday 4 May 1994, I was working in the shop serving customers when Ray
Kingswell appeared at the front door of my shop. When I turned around from serving he was gone. He did not speak to him.' You will confirm that is what is recorded in your witness statement? 
A. In the wording, that is correct, yes.

Q. They are the words you spoke to the police officer, aren't they? 
A. Yes.

Q. You express no doubt in those two sentences, do you, about seeing Mr
Kingswell in that position? 
A. Yes, if you read it that way, yes.

Q. I am just putting to you what you say on 18 May. You express no doubts, do you, Mr Lazaris, that you saw Mr Kingswell at the front door of your shop? 
A. Yes, the way that it is written, yes.

Q. And you are now telling us there is some doubt? 
A. What I am saying is, the way that is worded in your opinion there is no doubt. I am saying to you I cannot be a hundred per cent sure it was him. You asked me a couple of minutes ago, a 50-50 chance, I glanced over my shoulder and it appeared that it was Ray at my door.

Q. You were the one who went to volunteer to give this statement to the police, weren't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. You rang Detective Spencer to insist on giving this statement, didn't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you went to see Mr Spencer for the purpose of giving this statement to
Maroubra Police? 
A. Yes, for the purpose of protecting my name, I was concerned about Andrew
Lazaris.

Q. You were concerned about any allegations of your involvement in this heroin importation? 
A. Yes, that is why I insisted." 
In my opinion the evidence taken on the voir dire was inconsistent with the prior statement to the police, as was the evidence given in the jury's presence subsequently before the further leave to cross examine was granted.
The discretion of the trial judge to allow the Crown Prosecutor to question the witness as though cross examining was accordingly enlivened by reason of [s (1)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) 
It was submitted that the trial judge should nevertheless have refused the applications because the evidence failed to reveal what the witness was asked to prompt the assertion "Ray Kingswell appeared at the front door of my shop". So it was submitted the application should therefore have been refused in the proper exercise of the judge's discretion. The reasons that his Honour gave for his decision reveal that he weighed discretionary considerations and
I am not persuaded that the decision he reached was incorrect.

The third application under [s 38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) 
In cross examination by counsel appearing for the appellant the witness was asked when his son had soccer training and he said that the son trained on
Tuesdays and Wednesdays. He was then asked these questions and gave these answers (AB 295): "Q. Can you be sure if it was Wednesday that you think you saw Ray at the front door and not a Tuesday, if Tuesday was an optional training night can you be sure? 
A. I can't be 100 per cent sure.

Q. It could have been the Tuesday night that you saw this person at the door who you thought was Ray? 
A. It's possible, I can't really comment on that, it is possible.

Q. You could not swear then that it was the Wednesday that you connected soccer training with seeing this fellow at the door? It could have been
Tuesday if you son, Michael, went to soccer training on Tuesday night that week? 
A. That's possible.

Q. All you can say is this person who appeared in your fleeting sighting through customers at the store, that that person, whoever it was, could have been there on the Tuesday night or he could have been there on the Wednesday night, you cannot say? 
A. It's possible, not to say it's not possible.

Q. And that is because you are connecting in your mind taking Michael for soccer training and needing to close the shop early-- 
A. Yes.

Q. So the soccer training bit of that sequence is an important part of the account? 
A. Yes.

Q. And if you had taken Michael to soccer training on the Tuesday night, all those things could have happened on the Tuesday night? 
A. It's possible.

Q. You don't know? 
A. I can't say 100 per cent.

A. All you know is it was not a Monday night because Michael does not train on a Monday? 
A. That's correct." 
The above cross examination was thus effective to introduce the possibility that the sighting of the appellant outside the shop was not on Wednesday 4 May but rather on Tuesday 3 May and this prompted the Crown Prosecutor to make a third application under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) before re-examination commenced. This application was also successful, for reasons expressed by the trial judge which are recorded at pp 566-567 of the appeal book.

Following this third grant of leave, the Crown Prosecutor took the witness back to the first sentence of paragraph 8 of the statement earlier set out and to the evidence he had already given, and he then asked these questions and elicited these responses (AB 302): "Q. You made no statement in your evidence-in-chief to me about any doubt about the day, namely Wednesday, did you? 
A. No, I did not, no.

Q. The first time you mentioned any doubt even about the day was in cross- examination to my friend, correct? 
A. Yes, because I was asked that." 
Finally, in further cross examination by counsel for the appellant, the witness was asked these questions and gave these answers (AB 303): "Q. My learned friend mentioned to you that the first time you made any mention of the day, namely Tuesday or Wednesday, was when I cross-examined you in Court, do you remember that? 
A. The last time? 
Q. Yes, the last time. When was the last time, was it November 1995? 
A. I suppose so, I am not 100 per cent sure, around then, I guess.

Q. You expressed doubts then, didn't you, on your oath about what day of the week, whether it was soccer training with Michael on the Wednesday or soccer training with Michael on the Tuesday that this sighting occurred? You brought that to the attention of the Court on your oath, didn't you? 
A. Yes, I did." [Section (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) contemplates that in the absence of a direction to the contrary, any questioning in the nature of cross examination under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) is to take place before the party who has called the witness has completed his questioning in chief. The transcript extracts set out above reveal that the
Crown Prosecutor was, in his words, "not anticipating the witness to come up to proof" and he specifically referred to the evidence that the witness gave at the first trial expressing uncertainty about the date. This was the position when the Crown Prosecutor was asking for leave to cross examine for the second time.

As already observed, having been granted leave to cross examine on paragraph 8 of the statement (that is, on the second application already considered), the
Crown Prosecutor in his questioning set out above led from the witness the date of the sighting.

In R versus Milat (unreported, Hunt CJ at CL, 23 April 1996) the Crown was permitted to call a number of witnesses at the request of the accused although their evidence was unfavourable to the prosecution case and to elicit in chief no evidence other than their names and addresses. These witnesses were then cross examined by the accused and thereafter the Crown was given leave to cross examine because the only purpose of the Crown questioning was to demonstrate that the unfavourable evidence was unreliable. However, his Honour observed in the course of his judgment permitting that course to be adopted in
Milat (p 7): "The procedure would no doubt be different where the Crown sought leave to cross examine the witness upon part only of the evidence which he or she had given in chief. In that situation, the Act appears to contemplate that the
Crown would usually cross examine first, followed by the accused and then any re-examination by the Crown in the usual way." 
I agree with the above observations. [Section (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) and (5) contemplate that the order of questioning is to be determined in advance of a witness being called. That will not inevitably be the case and there may be cases where that which might not reasonably have been expected first occurs after the party calling the witness has completed his questioning. In such a case leave might thereafter still be given under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html)
However I do not view this third application in the present case as having warranted further leave when counsel was aware of what had occurred at the earlier trial. In my opinion, therefore, leave should have been refused on this occasion.

It does not follow however that the appeal should be allowed simply on this ground. When consideration is given to the responses elicited by the Crown
Prosecutor pursuant to this third grant of leave and the subsequent responses elicited by counsel for the appellant, and having regard to the evidence already given by the witness, and the fabric of the prosecution case as a whole, I do not consider that this error alone would call for the conviction to be set aside.

Grounds 6-9: Summing up on identification evidence 
Each of these grounds relates to the evidence of identification which was elicited from Mr Lazaris as to which it is submitted the summing up was deficient in a number of respects: that the jury was given inadequate warnings as to the dangers of relying upon it; that the jury was not adequately instructed on the particular features that affected the reliability of the identification; that the directions in point did not meet the mandatory requirements of [s 116](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s116.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/); that the directions gave undue emphasis to the Crown's submissions as to its reliability and insufficient emphasis to the contrary defence submissions.

As already observed, the appellant did not pursue the first ground of appeal which was directed at the statutory discretion under the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) to exclude the evidence of identification. The evidence given by Mr Lazaris on identification has been set out earlier and it is necessary to consider the relevant directions in the summing-up closely.

His Honour reminded the jury of all the evidence given by Mr Lazaris bearing on the identification he made of the appellant and then went on: "The evidence given by Mr Lazaris is known in law as identification evidence.
I instruct you that first [false?] identification evidence is sometimes given in court. This can happen if a witness is lying. It can also happen because a witness who is attempting to be honest is highly mistaken. Because of the dangers of relying on identification evidence, where its reliability is disputed as it is here, because the accused denies he went to Lazaris' sports store on the night of his arrest, you should examine the identification evidence most carefully. You must examine the evidence of Lazaris, bearing in mind your assessment of the witness Lazaris, and also bearing in mind the factors which may affect the reliability of the evidence. You should consider the opportunity that Lazaris had to make the identification, that is the short period of time he had the person in sight and what he says was between him and the person identified. You should also consider the distance over which
Lazaris made the identification. The Crown submits insofar as identification is concerned, Lazaris went to the police to make the identification. Lazaris was a friend of the accused and had known him for many years and had regular contact with the accused for some years prior to the identification. The Crown further submits that in the statement given to police, there was no reservations made by Lazaris to police about the quality of his identification of the accused." (I have highlighted the words "first" and "false"; it is suspected that there has been an error of transcription and that the word "first" should read "false".) 
The summing up was not completed on the day it began, and before the resumption, the judge was asked to give a number of further directions on identification so as to alert the jury to the following additional features:
That there was no exchange of greetings between Mr Lazaris and the appellant such as would ordinarily have occurred;
The sighting was on a soccer night and could have been a Tuesday night not the Wednesday;
The directions about association required modification to accord with the evidence, so as to recognise some period during which the association was broken;
The jury should be reminded that the police officer who took the statement from Lazaris could not remember the questions he asked which led to the recording of the statement in narrative form.

Upon resuming his summing up, his Honour gave the following additional directions on identification: "...the Crown submitted that Lazaris was a friend of the accused, had known him for many years, had regular contact with the accused for some years prior to the identification. The second part of that was incorrect, and there is no evidence that he had regular contact with the accused for some years prior to the identification. There is evidence that he had regular contact with the accused at about the time of the alleged sighting by Lazaris.

The second matter goes to the - it can be described as the deficiencies in the identification by Lazaris of the accused. You may recall I said to you, because of the dangers of relying upon identification evidence, whereas reliability is disputed as it is here, because the accused denies he went to
Lazaris' sports store on the night of the arrest, you should examine the identification evidence most carefully. You must examine I said yesterday, and
I repeat today, the evidence of Lazaris most carefully, bearing in mind the factors which may affect the reliability of the evidence. Now Miss Fullerton has indicated, there are two further matters in the evidence which I failed to present to you, which may affect the reliability of Mr Lazaris' evidence. I will go back to my summing up now and add the two and indicate which the two are. I said, `You should consider the opportunity Lazaris had to make the identification, that is the short period of time he had the person in sight'.
In other words he made the identification. And you should consider what was between him and the person identified and you should also consider the distance over which Lazaris made the identification. In addition to that, you should consider that no greeting was exchanged between Mr Lazaris and the person identified, and further you should consider the evidence that Lazaris was not sure if it was Tuesday or Wednesday when he made the identification because that was the day in which his child went to soccer training.

I will continue and go back to what I said yesterday. The Crown submits that insofar as the identification is concerned, Lazaris was a friend of the accused, and had known him for many many years and had regular contact with him at the time of the alleged sighting. The Crown further submits that in the statement given to police there were no reservations made by Lazaris as to the identification." 
The last paragraph set out above involves a repetition of what his Honour had said in reminding the jury of the Crown's submissions before the interruption of the summing up, and it is relied upon as affording support for the submission that undue emphasis was given to the Crown's submissions on identification.

The Crown correctly recognises that the evidence which Mr Lazaris gave was "identification evidence" by definition under the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) which thereby attracted the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s116.html) of the statue, which provides: "(1) If identification evidence has been admitted, the judge is to inform the jury: that there is a special need for caution before accepting identification evidence, and of the reasons for that need for caution, both generally and in the circumstances of the case.

It is not necessary that a particular form of words be used in so informing the jury." 
The requirements of the section were considered in this court in the decisions of R versus Bruno (unreported, 7 July 1997) and R versus Clarke (unreported, 31
October 1997) and the obligation to address the section imposes a requirement on the trial judge to alert the jury to the "special need for caution" before accepting identification evidence, and also to instruct the jury why this need exists, not only generally, but also having regard to the circumstances of the particular case.

As [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s116.html) makes plain, the section imposed no mandatory method of expression. However it is desirable in as many words that a jury be instructed that there is a special need for caution before accepting identification evidence and it is also desirable that a jury ordinarily be instructed to the effect that in the past innocent people have been convicted upon evidence of identification which was mistaken, albeit honestly: see Clarke (supra, in particular the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL).

The summing up lacked those specific instructions but it did alert the jury to the dangers of relying upon identification and it did give the jury instruction as to the need to examine the identification evidence most carefully, alerting the jury also to the experience of mistaken evidence of identification being given in courts. The instruction given to alert the jury to the need to examine the identification evidence most carefully was repeated on the second day of the summing up. The summing up also addressed specific reasons for the need for caution, although the jury was not reminded that the police officer who took the statement from Mr Lazaris could not remember the questions he asked which resulted in the statement being recorded in narrative form. As to the absence of this direction, it has been pointed out by the
Crown that in the evidence of Mr Lazaris he agreed that the words attributed to him in the statement were the words he used.

It would have been preferable for the jury to have been given the further directions considered above but the instruction given was nevertheless adequate in this case. Neither the omissions to which attention has been directed nor the repetition of the review of the Crown submissions upon which comment has been made resulted in risk of miscarriage in this case.

Grounds 6 to 9 fail.

Since Ground 10 was not pressed, the next ground for consideration is Ground .

Ground 11: The trial judge erred in permitting Constable Gordon to give expert evidence of his opinion as to the accused's manner of driving 
Detective Constable Gordon gave evidence that he followed the appellant after the appellant had placed the packages in his car and drove away from his home.
The witness was permitted to give evidence, having observed the course of driving, that counter surveillance techniques were employed. This was one of the points referred to in the summing up, and to which earlier reference has been made, upon which reliance was placed by the Crown to prove knowledge as to the contents of the packages.

According to Constable Gordon he followed the appellant down Gardeners Road.
He said that in the course of that journey, the appellant changed speed and applied the brake lights twice. He also said that whilst the police officer was in his vehicle travelling four metres behind the appellant's Mercedes, the appellant looked in his rear vision mirror twice, each time for five seconds.
Then, according to Constable Gordon, without first having moved into the right hand turn lane, the appellant, without giving any indication, changed direction from lane three to make a right hand turn across the right hand turn lane and into Isaac Smith Street. The Mercedes then went down Cook Avenue (and this would have involved a left hand turn out of Isaac Smith Street) to
Bridges Crescent where a right hand turn was made, again without use of the indicator. The Mercedes turned left in Bunnerong Road, without the use of the indicator, proceeded into a roundabout and south in Anzac Parade to the intersection of Sturt Street. Approaching that intersection, Anzac Parade carries three lanes to south bound traffic and the Mercedes was in the lane nearest to the centre of the road. The vehicle was observed to turn sharply from that lane into Sturt Street and at the intersection of Botany Street turned left and left again into Rainbow Street. The traffic indicator was not employed for those turns. The Mercedes then went to Willis Street and made a right hand turn, again without any use of the trafficator. The vehicle was stopped in Willis Street.

According to Constable Gordon, he had the Mercedes under observation for 200 metres in Gardeners Road before the right hand turn into Isaac Smith Street.
Constable Gordon did not see the left hand turn that followed into Cook Avenue and his next observation of the Mercedes was as it approached Bridges
Crescent.

Reference to a street map (and such an aid was made available to the jury) demonstrates that the route followed by the appellant from his home to where his journey was brought to a halt by the police was a most indirect route. No objection was taken to Constable Gordon's evidence as to what he observed about the manner in which the appellant drove the Mercedes. Plainly that evidence was admissible. However the appellant did object to the witness being permitted to express an opinion as to the driving technique he had observed.

The evidence in point was the subject of proceedings on the voir dire. The evidence was that Constable Gordon had joined the Australian Federal Police in and that he joined the surveillance branch in July 1989, in which branch he underwent training in surveillance techniques at a course in Canberra in
August and September 1991. He did a further course a year or so later, the latter course being a team leader's advanced surveillance course. The counter surveillance training predictably involved consideration of the behaviour of motorists who were endeavouring to find out if they were under surveillance.
Constable Gordon said that he stayed in the surveillance branch, having undergone the course of training, until May 1995 when he joined a joint
Australian Federal Police and New South Wales Police Task Force to set up and co-ordinate surveillance in that force. Then from March 1996 he continued in surveillance work, and he said that from 1989 onwards his work involved him almost daily in surveillance duties.

The expression of opinion elicited on the voir dire involved the following response to the following question (AB 151-152): "Q. In relation to the manner of his driving, and given your training and experience, did you form any opinion as to any counter or anti surveillance techniques? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. What was that? 
A. That the fact that he looked in his rear view mirror on those two occasions, which I thought was more than the usual time to look in the mirror, the turns that were being made without indication, the differing speed of the vehicle, the route that was being taken, that the one time going along a road, turning down Isaac Smith Street and going back towards Bunnerong Road heading as if we were going back towards the city, and on to the roadway and then heading south and also going back through the side streets and heading back towards Anzac Parade again, that to me was another form of counter surveillance in relation to trying to see if there is anything around you." 
The trial judge was asked to exclude the opinion evidence on two grounds: that it was not properly admissible under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/); even if it was, that it should be excluded in the exercise of judicial discretion.

His Honour allowed the evidence of opinion to be given and Constable Gordon repeated his evidence before the jury. It is submitted that in so ruling his
Honour fell into error.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) provides: "If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person's training, study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of that person that is wholly or substantially based on that knowledge." 
The dictionary in the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) contains no definition for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) as to "specialised knowledge", so that the statute itself does not rigidly confine the scope of that concept.

The Court was referred to no authority directly in point. The Crown referred to the unreported decision of this court in R versus Huynh (13 May 1996) in which it was held that it was a proper field for expert evidence for police witnesses to relate what was secretly recorded of conversation between drug dealers about price, quantity and other aspects of the substance under discussion to their knowledge of the illicit heroin trade, and to express an opinion based on such knowledge that the parties to the conversation were talking about heroin. However the trial at which the evidence was admitted preceded the commencement of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) and the case cited contains no discussion of the scope of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) 
The evidence in this case did establish that Constable Gordon had undergone specialised training and study in the area of surveillance and that he had lengthy and extensive experience in that field. This being so, and absent a statutory definition limiting the expression used in the section, he had acquired "specialised knowledge" for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html), and the section permitted of the expression of an opinion by the witness provided it was based either wholly or substantially on that knowledge. Accepting that the officer had seen what he claimed to have seen, the opinion he was permitted to express was based upon his specialised knowledge and was admissible subject to discretionary considerations.

The trial judge was asked to exclude the evidence under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html), and, alternatively, under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

Constable Gordon was subjected to rigorous cross examination on the voir dire as to the reliability of the evidence that he gave relating to his observations of the manner of driving of the appellant. For instance, it was put to him that the evidence that he saw the appellant looking at him in the rear vision mirror on two occasions was false.

Moreover, the officer acknowledged that he did not bring into account the explanation for the route taken, that was afforded by the appellant in his earlier unsworn statement, in reaching the opinion expressed.

His Honour's reasons for admitting the opinion evidence are to be found at pp to 565 of the appeal book. They demonstrate no error in the exercise of discretion. It was, of course, for the jury ultimately to determine what weight should be attached to the police officer's evidence, and this involved determining, as the tribunal of fact, how reliable the police officer's evidence was as to what he claimed to have seen. If, however, the jury accepted what the witness said that he saw, then it could also accept the opinion based upon those observations.

The decision to allow the evidence of Constable Gordon to go to the jury in the form in which it did does not call for intervention by this Court.

For the above reasons, ground 11 fails.

Ground 12: The trial judge's summary of the evidence of Constable Gordon effectively directed the jury to ignore the evidence called by the accused through Mr Reynolds and undermined the effect of defence counsel's submission on the question of the veracity of Constable Gordon and the weight that should be given to his evidence.

Reference was made in considering ground 11 to the cross examination of
Constable Gordon. The appellant called Mr Murray Reynolds, a licensed inquiry agent who had been in the police force from 1974 until 1989. Mr Reynolds had six years experience in surveillance work and he lectured in surveillance techniques to police officers. On a night in January 1997, whilst driving a
Subaru vehicle, Mr Reynolds followed a person driving a Mercedes Benz and gave evidence that in following that vehicle he was unable to see any reflection in the rear vision mirror of the Mercedes Benz. All he could see, according to Mr
Reynolds, was the black silhouette of the mirror and he considered it impossible to be able to see the eyes of the driver of the Mercedes reflected in that mirror. This evidence was, of course, intended to contradict the evidence that Constable Gordon had given as to what he claimed he had seen when he was following the appellant.

In cross examination, Mr Reynolds said he was unable to say whether the rear vision mirror of the Mercedes he was following had a night-day adjustment, and he conceded that there were variables that may have affected the ability to see a reflection in the mirror, including the angle at which it was fixed and the height of the following driver's position above the ground. However, he expressed the opinion it was impossible to make out any shape other than a black silhouette "under the cover of darkness". He also joined issue as to whether the behaviour of the appellant which Constable Gordon had observed amounted to counter surveillance techniques.

Ground 12 is concerned with directions which the trial judge gave to the jury concerning the evidence of Constable Gordon and Mr Reynolds and it becomes necessary to consider the directions in point. The directions complained of were given in the course of his Honour's review of the evidence given by various witnesses at the trial. At p 508 of the appeal book, the following passage appears: "We then heard from Patrick David Gordon, and he is an agent with the
Australian Federal Police, and he gave evidence about him joining the police in 1986, about him training in Canberra in July 1989 in surveillance. He gave evidence as to what counter surveillance was, and he said counter surveillance were techniques used by persons to see if they were being surveilled. He said that in May 1991, he did a two weeks advanced course and he said he was then seconded to the joint New South Wales Australian Federal Police at Cabramatta, and he there formed a surveillance team. He was in surveillance until March
Now that evidence of Mr Gordon was given to permit him to be a witness known as an expert witness. Now an expert witness is different to a normal witness because normal witnesses are not entitled to give their opinion, they can only indicate what they hear, what they heard and what they saw, and what they felt, but an expert witness is entitled to give an opinion and on that basis I permitted Mr Gordon, and I also permitted a witness called by the accused. Mr Reynolds also allowed him to give evidence as an expert witness. I am going to give you a direction now in law about expert witnesses, and as to how you consider their testimony." 
Later, in a passage commencing at p 509 of the appeal book, which is central to this ground of appeal, his Honour said: "The difference between the two expert witnesses in this case is this, one expert witness did not see what happened, was not followed in a car, so he gave his opinion on facts, broad facts that he has been told, whereas Mr
Gordon so says the Crown, it is disputed by the accused, was able to form his view as to the style of driving from what he saw and not from what he had been told, or from what he had been able to re-create. And there is something I want to say now about that. When the evidence was given in this case by Mr
Reynolds, it has been put to you that that was a scientific experiment. It was put to you by counsel, Miss Fullerton, scientific experiment as to whether one could see the eyes of a person over a period of time in a rear vision mirror.
Well I am not a scientist, and the comment I make may not be of benefit to you, but I suggest that you look at the photograph G1 and G2, which was the car in which the accused was driving on the day in question, a Mercedes 250 you will see from the back. I suggest you compare that with the motor vehicle which was used in the experiment which was carried out by the accused's expert, it is a Mercedes 230 SE, two different cars. I also suggest, you have been told the evidence as to what car Mr Reynolds was in when he made the observations. But you do not know in what type of car or vehicle Mr Gordon was in when he made the observations, there has been no evidence given that the car, or what type of vehicle it was, so perhaps that is something you want to keep in mind when you consider the evidence relating to the question of `Did
Mr Gordon see the eyes of the accused when he drove allegedly behind him in
Gardener's Road?'" 
His Honour acceded to a request that the jury had made then to read the evidence that Constable Gordon gave as to what he claimed to have seen, and then his Honour went on to remind the jury that Constable Gordon was asked to take account of the appellant's explanation for the manner of driving which the appellant had given in his statement at the earlier trial, and the judge reminded the jury that Constable Gordon, having been taken to that earlier explanation by the appellant, said that "Having heard that, he did not wish to alter his opinion as to the style of driving in any way." His Honour went on (at p 516 of the appeal book): "Now he [Constable Gordon] was cross examined at length and the cross examination has been referred to over I should imagine an hour or so, only yesterday. It is not my intention to go over the cross examination, but it was alleged from the cross examination that the witness was a liar, that the witness did not follow the car along Isaac Smith Street, and that the observations that were allegedly made did not occur, and that the observations that were made prior to the vehicle entering the roundabout in Gardener's Road did not occur, and that the observation in Sturt Street did not occur." 
His Honour continued in the summing up with his review of evidence given by the various witnesses and then came to the evidence of Mr Reynolds in a passage recorded at pp 526-527 of the appeal book. Having reminded the jury of
Mr Reynolds' experience in the police force and subsequently, his Honour went on: "He [Mr Reynolds] said that on 15 January he also was in Gardener's Road and on six occasions followed the car, driven by Mr Devine, and that he, at that time, was driving Mr O'Brien's car. He said that at a certain speed, I think it was 90 kilometres an hour, he was able to get behind the car driven by Mr
Devine, but he said he was unable to see the eyes of Mr Devine in the rear vision mirror. He was asked questions in cross examination and he said he was not aware whether the rear vision was a flip type mirror which had day and night vision. He did not know the type of mirror that was in the car which is in exhibit G, that is the champagne coloured Mercedes. He admitted there were many variables available, the type of mirror, the angle of the mirror, the lights of the following vehicle, the degree of turn, the different heights of the cars, and he was asked certain questions about whether he regarded certain parts of driving as being counter surveillance driving and he indicated no he did not. He was re-examined, and he said that he would be reluctant to give an opinion of counter surveillance driving on the route that was travelled. As I said before, there is conflict between the two experts, it is a matter for you to decide whether you accept either or both of what they say. It is a matter for you to use your combined commonsense and your experience of the world." 
At the outset of the summing up (appeal book pp 463-464) the trial judge gave the customary directions to the jury as to the respective roles of the judge and of the jury in which the jury was instructed as to its responsibility to determine issues of fact.

The comment made in that passage of the summing up at p 509 set out above and about which complaint is made in this ground of appeal conveyed a criticism of the worth of the exercise that Mr Reynolds had undertaken but the judge was entitled to say what he did. Moreover, his Honour's comment has to be viewed in its context and ultimately the jury was correctly reminded in the last of the directions set out above that it was a matter for it to decide whether it accepted the evidence of either Constable Gordon or Mr Reynolds.

Ground 12 fails.

Ground 13: That the summing up generally and the summing up of the respective cases of the defence and the Crown lacked sufficient balance and impartiality so as to deprive the appellant of a fair trial.

This ground was not developed in the written submissions, nor was it addressed in oral argument on the hearing of the appeal.

Suffice it to say in these circumstances that I am not persuaded, having read the summing up in its entirety, that this ground is established.

Having considered the grounds that have been argued, I am of the opinion that the conviction is sound and I would propose that the appeal should be dismissed.

HIDDEN J: I agree that the appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Studdert J.
 * * * 
