

Lambert Leasing Inc. versus QBE Insurance Ltd (No 2) [2015] NSWSC 1196 (20
August 2015) 
Last Updated: 25 August 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
See [21] and [39]  
Catchwords: 
EQUITY - Aviation insurance - The effect of a pay to be paid clause - Costs orders - Indemnity costs - Calderbank offers - Reasonable refusal - Offer of compromise under the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) - Walk away offer - Whether genuine compromise  
JUDGMENT
On 12 June 2015 I handed down my reasons for judgment in this matter which arises out of the sale by the first named plaintiff of an aircraft to the second and third defendants and a policy of insurance effected by those defendants with the first defendant, QBE, in which both plaintiffs were named as insureds ([2015] NSWSC 75). I did not express any concluded view on what was described as 'the pay to be paid' issue.
I indicated that I had, in considering my judgment on the pay to be paid point, become aware of a Canadian Court of Appeal decision which contained wording very similar to the QBE wording and in which a view had been taken that supported QBE's contention and was antagonistic to Lambert's contentions. I also made reference to the case of Versicherungs und Transport A/G Daugava versus Henderson (1934) 49 Ll L Rep 252 at p 254; [[1934] All ER Rep 626] mentioned in Derrington's 'The Law of Liability Insurance' (3rd ed, DK Derrington and RS Ashton, LexisNexis Butterworths, 2013) at 8-52 p 845. I indicated that if the parties still required a determination on this point I would give them an opportunity to provide further submissions. On being informed that Lambert wished to have a determination on the pay to be paid point and that QBE did not oppose that course, and that the defendants would be seeking an order that costs be paid on the indemnity basis, I directed submissions to be exchanged on the 'pay to be paid' clause and on the question of costs. I have received submissions on behalf of Lambert and QBE in respect of the pay to be paid point and from all parties on the question of costs.
I shall in the balance of these reasons use the same definitions as were utilised in the judgment. These reasons should be read together with the reasons of 12 June 2015 but in an endeavour to make these reasons accessible I shall set out what I said at [130]- [138] on the pay to be paid point: "The pay to be paid issue (Issue 5)  [130] The QBE Policy [s .1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s3.1.html) provides that QBE will indemnify Lambert  "in respect of all sums which the Insured shall become legally liable to pay, and shall pay, as compensatory damages (including costs awarded against the Insured)" (emphasis added).  [131] QBE contends that there are two preconditions required to be met before QBE is required by the policy to indemnify it:  that Lambert has been found liable to a claimant (or at least has settled the proceedings because of its liability)  that Lambert has paid the amount so determined or agreed to the claimant.  <case>; [(1933) 34 SR 88)] that is not the present focus of concern since no settlement has been reached with any of the claimants in the US. Nor of course has Lambert been adjudged liable for any amount. The dispute is whether QBE does not have to indemnify
Lambert until Lambert has paid whatever amount (if any) it is adjudged to pay.
Both Lambert and QBE seek an answer on the effect of the words "and shall pay" as a precondition. QBE relies on the decision of the House of Lords in
Firma C-Trade SA versus Newcastle Protection & Indemnity Association (The
Fanti) [[1991] 2 AC 1] ("Firma C"). QBE points to the fact that the wording adopted in the QBE Policy is commonly found in Aviation Insurance
Contracts: see Margo on Aviation Insurance (4th ed, 2014) and that Mr Lake,
Global's underwriter accepted the policy found in Margo is a standard one.
Firma C was approved by the Full Court of Queensland in Re Dixon [[1994] 1 Qd R 7.] Lambert relies on Charter Reinsurance Co Ltd versus Fagan [[1997] AC 313] ("Charter Re"). Lambert says that the claim should not be construed as QBE contends. Lambert also submits that, if, contrary to its contention the clause does operate to require Lambert to pay the money to the claimant before QBE is required to indemnify, QBE is prevented by reason of the duty of utmost good faith from relying on it.  [133] Attention was drawn to the fact that the UK has recently legislated to preclude the use of "pay to be paid" clauses. No such prohibition exists in
Australia.  [134] In Firma C, the House of Lords considered whether a clause by which the club would  "Protect and indemnify members in respect of losses which they as owners of the entered vessel shall have become liable to pay and shall have in fact paid"  was effective to bar a claim by cargo owners on the club whose member had been placed in liquidation. The House of Lords held that payment to a third party was a precondition of indemnity and that the equitable principle that an agreement to indemnify permitted the party to whom the indemnity was given to require the indemnifier to pay the amount to the claimant without the indemnified person having to pay it out first did not oust an express clause of the policy: see Johnston versus Salvage Association <case>; <case> at <case>-[66].  [135] In Charter Re, reinsurance contracts provided that the reinsurer would be liable for the losses of the insurers in excess of ultimate net loss of a specified amount. The term "ultimate net loss" was defined as meaning  "the sum actually paid by the reinsured in settlement of losses or liability after making deductions for all recoveries, all salvages" [and the like]. 
The House of Lords held that it was not necessary for the insurers (ie the insureds under the reinsurance policies) to first have made payment of the relevant claim by way of transfer of funds to its insured. The insurer was insolvent and had not made such payments. The principal judgment is that of
Lord Mustill (with whom Lords Goff, Griffiths, Browne-Wilkinson agreed). He explained that initially he had thought the words "actually paid" were clear and that they imposed a condition precedent to liability of the reinsurer however at p 384-386 his Lordship explained why as a matter of contractual interpretation the words in question, adopting the approach of Mance J at first instance  "did not have the purpose of introducing a temporal precondition to recovery in the form of disbursement or other satisfaction of the precise net commitment between Charter and its reinsured, but were there "for the purpose of measurement." 
His Lordship in approaching the question said that the words of the policy  "must be set in the landscape of the instrument as a whole." 
Lord Mustill then said:  "Whilst I have come to this conclusion simply from a study of the document
I ought to comment on a number of other matters which are said to bear upon it. In the first place, there is an argument ad absurdum to the effect that the parties cannot have intended Charter to retain such liquidity as would enable it to answer claims under the incoming policies without recourse to the reinsurance. At a time when the use of money was a vital element in the profitability of insurance business it is impossible to suppose (the argument runs) that Charter should have agreed to finance its own outlays, the more so since, if the syndicates' interpretation of clause 2 is right, Charter would have to find, not only the funds required to disburse the sum due under this particular layer, but also the total of the underlying reinsurances. This would be a wholly impracticable arrangement, and would bear especially hard on
Charter if it fell into financial trouble and lacked the means to make the payments necessary to unlock the reimbursements due under its contracts with the syndicates. This argument draws strength from the shape of the policy. As
I have already suggested, under this form of words, although perhaps not under all forms, the policy covers not, as might be thought, the suffering of loss by the reinsured in the shape of a claim against him under the inward policies, but the occurrence of a casualty suffered by the subject-matter insured through the operation of an insured peril. The inward policies and the reinsurance are wholly distinct. It follows that in principle the liability of the reinsurer is wholly unaffected by whether the reinsured has satisfied the claim under the inward insurance: see, amongst several authorities, Re
Eddystone Marine Insurance Co.; Ex parte Western Insurance Co. [[1892] Ch ] . This result can undoubtedly be changed by express provision, but clear words would be required; and it would to my mind be strange if a term changing so fundamentally the financial structure of the relationship were to be buried in a provision such as clause 2, concerned essentially with the measure of indemnity, rather than being given a prominent position on its own."  [136] Firma C was a case involving a protection and indemnity club where members were both insurers and insureds and the notion that there was some purpose in members being sufficiently solvent to meet liabilities was discussed at p 36 D-G per Lord Goff and p 42 C-E per Lord Jauncey: see Sutton at para 15680 fn 487 in which the learned authors treat such clauses as operating in the field of protection and indemnity liability covers.  [137] Lambert also contended in the alternative that QBE should be precluded from relying on the clause, by reason of an asserted breach of the duty of utmost good faith. Mr Williams pointed to Mr Beach-Nash's evidence that QBE has never required any insured to pay out a judgment or settlement amount as a precondition of indemnity notwithstanding QBE's frequent use of the clause: see T193-194. Mr Sullivan submitted that the duty cannot extend to precluding an insurer from relying on a contractual term of the policy: see per Macdougall J in Prepaid Services Pty Ltd versus Atradius <case> at <case>-[91].
Lambert's response is that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s14.html) of the ICA specifically extends the duty to prevent reliance on such a provision of a contract in appropriate circumstances.  [138] Lambert contends that the broad approach taken in Charter Re both in the House of Lords and by Mance J at first instance in which many cases relating to the construction of contracts and insurance contracts in particular should be applied here and see the further cases relied on by
Lambert: Eddystone Marine Insurance Co, Re Ex parte Western Insurance Co [[1892] 2 Ch 423] per Stirling J, Horsell International Pty Ltd versus Divetwo
Pty Ltd <case>-[153], F G Strang Pty Ltd versus N Z I Insurance Australia Ltd <case>; [[1990] VR 1016] at 101, Pioneer Concrete (UK) Ltd versus National
Employers Mutual General Insurance Association [1985] 1 Lloyd's Rep 274, p , Raiffeisen Zentralbank Oesterreich AG versus Five Star Trading LLC <case>; [[2001] 3 All ER 257],
Teal Assurance Company Ltd versus W R Berkley Insurance (Europe) Ltd  <case> and Calliden Insurance Ltd versus Chisholm <case> [27]- <case>,
Penn versus Simmons [[1971] 1 WLR 1381], Tovir
Investments Pty Ltd versus Waverley Council <case>,
Maintek Services Pty Ltd versus Stein Heurtey SA <case> and Duffy versus Da Rin <case>
It submits that the QBE clause does not say "shall have been paid" but uses the different phrase "shall pay", and that the approach taken in Firma C should be confined to P & I club policies. QBE contends that the words mean what they say and that when words in a policy are clear they should be given that meaning citing Baulderstone Hornibrook Engineering Pty Ltd v
Gordian Runoff Ltd <case>"
In Conohan versus Cooperators (2002) Fed Ct App 60 ; 2002 Fed Ct App LEXIS 45, the clause in question was in the following terms: "It is further agreed that if the vessel hereby insured shall come into collision with any other vessel and the insured shall in consequence thereof become liable to pay and shall pay by way of damages to any other person or persons any sum or sums in respect of such collision for:  a. loss of or damage to any other vessel or property on any other vessel;  b. delay to or loss of use of any such other vessel or property therein; or  c. general average of, salvage of, or salvage under contract of, any other vessel or property thereon. 
The insurer will pay the insured such sums so paid provided...."
QBE points out that Conohan followed Firma C notwithstanding Charter Re and notwithstanding that the policy in Conohan was not part of a mutual insurance scheme as was the case in Firma C. It submits that Conohan was correctly decided and that the construction for which it contends is the ordinary meaning of the words and also relies on what Derrington says of pay to be paid clauses at p 1640 ie: "if it is construed to have its prima face meaning, it will be found to mean what it says and the indemnity will not be payable until the insured has paid. If it is too clear for the application of equitable principles, the condition is generally applied for what it says; and it is not modified by the insurer's wrongful denial of cover, nor is it a breach of utmost good faith for the insurer to rely on the condition."
In Conohan Stone JA (with whom Evans and Malone JJA agreed) said of Charter Re "[24] In Charter Reinsurance Co. v. Fagan, [[1997] A.C. 313 (U.K.]
H.L.), an issue arose under excess loss contracts of whether the reinsurers would only be liable "if and when" the ultimate net loss sustained by the insured exceeded a specific amount, "net loss" being defined in the contracts as being "the sum actually paid". Lord Mustill was of opinion, at 386, in the light of the policy as a whole that the "'the sum actually paid'...is not to impose an additional condition precedent in relation to the disbursement of funds, but to emphasise that it is the ultimate outcome of the net loss calculation which determines the final liability...under the policy". He went on to state that 'actually' means 'in the event when finally ascertained' and 'paid' means 'exposed to liability as a result of the loss insured...'". In expressing this view, Lord Mustill noted, at 386, that this may be "far from the ordinary meanings of the words, and they may be far from the meanings which they would have had in other policies" but that the words were to be interpreted "in a very specialised form of reinsurance". Again, as is apparent, the meaning of the clause there in issue was clearly a matter of construction in the light of the intended purpose. Lord Mustill distinguished
Firma, supra, on the basis that a condition precedent was found to have been intended in that case but not in the case before him. In my view, Charter
Reinsurance, supra, is of no assistance in determining whether compliance with the "pay to be paid" requirement in Clause 16 of this ordinary marine insurance policy should be viewed as a condition precedent to recovery thereunder." 
His Honour held that the ordinary meaning of the words employed "plainly required that payment first be made to the third party as a condition precedent to recovery. In my opinion, the ratio of Firma, supra, applies to the construction of Clause 16, the language of which is too clear as to admit of the application of equitable principles" (see [26]).

His Honour also found support for the construction which he preferred in a later portion of the clause in question: see [27].
QBE submits that Henderson merely recognises that there would be no good reason to require an insured to pay damages to the third party as a precondition to payment were there not a specific clause but that in this case there is a specific provision in which, according to the ordinary construction of the words, has that effect.
Lambert contends that the expression used in Conohan is more easily read as a condition precedent than the words in the QBE Policy and also draws attention to the fact that conditions precedent are dealt with in a separate section of the QBE Policy. QBE submits that the word 'shall' is not merely a reference to future events but conveys the intention that payment is a requirement for indemnity.
Lambert criticises the judgment in Conohan asserting that it * (a) rejected the reasoning of the House of Lords (and Mance J at the trial) in Charter Re without properly grappling with their Lordships' reasoning and process of construction * (b) failed to give due weight to the importance of the mutual insurance obligations that existed in Firma C and were not present in Charter Re or Conohan * (c) failed to take into account the use of the future tense unlike the position in Firma C. In Firma C the phrase being "and shall have in fact paid"
Lambert draws attention to what Derrington said: "The purpose of insurance is to protect the insured against financial loss from its liability, and there is a powerful reason for a construction to the effect that unless there is a specific provision in the policy to the contract the insurer cannot insist that the insured pay out a claim before making payment to the claimant." and to what Scrutton LJ said in Henderson in relation to the policy of reinsurance ie that the insurer "can recover against the reinsurer though [the insurer] has not paid the assured; for [the insurer] is liable for the ascertained amount and the reinsurer must indemnify him". (See Derrington 8-52 pp 844- 845)
It is important to bear in mind that Firma C was a case involving a protection and indemnity club where members were not only insureds but also insurers and the notion that there was some purpose in members being sufficiently solvent to meet liabilities was discussed at p 36 D-G per Lord Goff and p 42 C-E per Lord Jauncey and see 'Sutton on Insurance Law' (4th ed, RM Merkin and WIB Enright, Lawbook Co, 2015) para 15-680 fn 487.
Baulderstone is a case relied on by QBE. The Court did not regard Charter Re as determinative of the problem before it. The clause in the reinsurance policy imposed liability on the reinsurer if the insurer had paid or admitted liability or been held liable. The insurer had not been held liable or admitted liability so the only basis on which the reinsurer could be liable was if the insurer had paid the insured's claim. Allsop P (with whom Beazley and Campbell JJA concurred) said at [281]: "Unlike the relevant phrase in Charter Reinsurance versus Fagan, the words of clause C express a clear commercial purpose of expressing a precondition to the attachment of liability. A composite phrase which might need to be disaggregated to discover its full meaning has not been used. The disaggregation is express: paid or admitted liability or held liable. One, at least, must be present for Gordian to be liable.  [282] Here, in my view, "paid" has its usual or ordinary meaning and means funds disbursed."
Baulderstone demonstrates (as does Firma C) that a Court can construe a clause as being sufficiently clear to require payment out by an insured before liability is imposed on the insurer (or reinsurer). The construction advanced by QBE does not preclude a claim because it has not met any one of various specified criteria but rather requires its insured not only to have been found liable (or by settlement or by agreement to have accepted liability) but to also pay the amount of liability so adjudged (or agreed) before QBE need pay it.
I note what Stirling J said in Eddystone Marine Insurance Co, Re Ex parte Western Insurance Co [[1892] 2 Ch 423:] "The words "to pay as may be paid thereon" do not stand in strict grammatical connection with those which immediately precede; but the effect of them is to impose an obligation as to payment on the reinsurers. The contention on behalf of the official liquidator comes to this - that those words make payment by the reinsured a condition precedent to payment by the reinsurer. Now, a main object of reinsurance is to relieve the reinsured from a portion of the risk previously undertaken by him; and the result of giving effect to the liquidator's contention would be that, before the reinsured obtains the benefit of his reinsurance, he must himself have paid on the original insurance, even though bankruptcy might be the result. 
I think that this could not be intended, and that such a construction ought not to be put on the language of the policy unless it is clearly called for.
In my opinion the words do not clearly require to be so construed." which is a sentiment echoed in Charter Re.
It would, I think, be entirely surprising that an insured would have to meet a most significant claim or claims following an aviation crash before it could recover from the insurer with the real risk that it could not, out of its own resources, meet that liability and with the prospect that the insurer would be excused from payment under the policy because the insured, unable to pay, had become insolvent. Insurance of the kind involved here is designed to avert the risk of financial ruin.
The approach for which QBE contends seems to me to be inherently inimical to the concept of insurance and for such a claim to operate I think it would require the clearest language.
Firma C and Conohan establish that if the Court regards the wording as imposing a requirement that the insured pay out the third party claimant first equity cannot override the contractual requirement. In Firma C the interpretation favoured was consistent with the mutual scheme but in Charter Re there was no mutual scheme. Their Lordships in Charter Re were clearly concerned to read the relevant words in a way that made commercial sense. The Court of Appeal of the Canadian Federal Court rejected the appellant's contention that the approach taken in Firma C should be restricted to mutual schemes and in my respectful view did not give adequate consideration to the question of whether the interpretation urged by the insurer made commercial sense in the context of a policy of insurance in the manner that exercised the minds of their Lordships in Charter Re.
I think there is certainly a commercial justification for an insurer not wishing to be required to indemnify an insured for liability incurred where the insured has not been called on to pay any amount to the third party to whom the insured is liable as referred to above, and I accept that a reading of the phrase "shall pay" as requiring an insured to pay the claimant before being entitled to call for indemnity is very much open although not as obviously as the words "actually paid" were first understood by Lord Mustill in Charter Re but what Charter Re encourages is the need to consider the "landscape" of the contract as a whole (see Lord Mustill p 384) and the possibility that some other meaning was intended as a matter of objective interpretation when the reading contended for by one party produces a result that is inconsistent with the commercial realities and appears to have no obvious or sound rationale (Lord Mustill pp 386H- 387D and see Lord Hoffman at pp 394E- 396A).
The phrase used is "shall pay" not "shall have been paid". The words "shall pay" are amenable to an interpretation that does not require the insured to first pay out of its own money the amount of damages for which it has been adjudged liable (or agreed in a settlement to pay). The requirement that the insured shall "pay" is capable of being viewed as a requirement that the insurance money to be paid to the insured is to be used for the purpose of paying the claimant to avoid the problem identified in Henderson. Such a construction is consistent with the obvious underlying purpose of the contract of insurance, and precludes an insured claiming payment because of its liability to a third party without meeting that liability to the third party.
I hesitate to depart from the conclusion in Conohan but the issue is, as was recognised in Conohan, a matter of construction and the QBE clause did not have the additional words to which the Court in Conohan referred at [26]. I feel more confident in treating the words in the manner I have indicated having regard to the decision in Charter Re, their Lordships agreeing with Mance J that it was "entirely inappropriate" for a pay to be paid clause to be considered to represent a condition precedent to indemnity outside a club mutual insurance arrangement (see p386G of Charter Re).
My conclusion as to the meaning of the pay to be paid clause is that QBE is not entitled to require Lambert pay out any liability itself first to the claimant as a precondition of indemnity. What is required, however, is the imposition on Lambert of liability by a Court or agreement in settlement of a claim so that an amount is required to be paid by Lambert for which QBE is required to indemnify Lambert and to do so by paying the money to Lambert so that it can pay it to the claimant or more conveniently by paying that amount to the claimant directly on behalf of Lambert.
Lambert pointed to Mr Beach-Nash's evidence that QBE has never required any insured to pay out a judgment or settlement amount as a precondition of indemnity notwithstanding QBE's frequent inclusion of the clause in its aviation policies: see T193- 194. That is not a matter relevant to construction of the clause but rather to the question of whether QBE's reliance on the clause constitutes a breach of its duty of good faith, a matter which I do not need to determine.

Costs
QBE and the Partnership seek indemnity costs orders against Lambert. There does not seem to be any contest by Lambert that it is liable to pay costs on the ordinary basis but it does dispute that an order for indemnity costs should be made.
The claim for indemnity costs by QBE and the Partnership is based on two separate offers. The first was made on 5 June 2014 and was in the form of a Calderbank letter. The second was made on 15 January 2015 and was an offer expressed to be made under the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) ("UCPR").
The difference in approach to the two species of offer has been explained in Leichhardt Municipal Council versus Green  <case> and Miwa Pty Ltd versus Siantan Properties Pte Ltd (No 2) <case> In the case of unaccepted offers of compromise made in accordance with the UCPR the consequence is normally that indemnity costs will be ordered unless the offeree establishes some special basis that the normal rule should not apply, but in the case of Calderbank offers the offeror must establish that the offer was genuine and that the offeree acted unreasonably in not accepting the offer. Lack of genuineness of an offer is relevant to offers of compromise but the onus is on the offeree to establish that the offer made was not a genuine compromise or alternatively that the Court should exercise its discretion not to make an order for indemnity costs.

The Offer of 5 June 2014
In relation to the offer of 5 June 2014 (see Annexure A to the affidavit of Mr Henry Holland of 21 July 2015) the offer was that all previous costs orders would be vacated and each party was to pay its own costs, that the proceedings would be dismissed as against all defendants and Lambert would covenant not to bring any further proceedings arising out of the circumstances pleaded. No evidence was tendered of what costs orders had been made against whom or what costs had been incurred by QBE as at the date of that offer but there is evidence that by 13 January 2015 QBE had incurred costs of approximately $307,000 exclusive of GST (see para 5 of Mr Holland's affidavit).
The letter by which the offer was made pointed out what QBE contended were significant problems in the plaintiffs' case: "Everything about this case is unsatisfactory. It is not a proceeding brought by the Plaintiffs. There is not a jot of evidence from the Plaintiffs.
It is a proceeding by the Global Aerospace insurers brought on an entirely false premise and the case will fail for reasons which include:  it is for an indemnity when the Plaintiffs have already been indemnified;  it is a claim under a reimbursement or "pay to be paid" policy where there has been no finding of liability and no payment by the Plaintiffs; and  until completion of the Missouri proceedings it is premature for QBE to make a final decision upon whether its policy responds."
The letter pointed out that QBE's solicitors "anticipated" that the Partnership would agree and that QBE would obtain the Partnerships' agreement. That confidence may well have been connected to the fact that the Partnership was an insured under the QBE Policy.
Lambert attacks the Calderbank letter on two bases. The first basis is that the offer was really a "walk away" offer and did not involve any genuine compromise on the part of QBE or the Partnership. The second basis is that it was not unreasonable for Lambert not to accept the offer.
It is relevant in viewing these questions to consider what the offeree would gain by accepting the offer. The less that it would receive the more difficult it is to establish that failure to accept the offer was not reasonable. All that Lambert would receive was relief from a costs order that QBE and the Partnership might obtain against it for costs incurred by the defendants up to that point in time.
Whilst I have found against Lambert in those latter claims, Lambert had a claim against the Partnership that was not frivolous or ridiculous. I do not think it was unreasonable for Lambert to reject the offer from QBE that required Lambert to drop all of its claims including the claims against the Partnership, nor do I think that the offer was a genuine compromise of the claims against all defendants.
In my view it is not appropriate to make an indemnity costs order against Lambert based on the offer of 5 June 2014.

The Offer of 15 January 2015
It is not disputed by Lambert that the January 2015 offer, in the same terms as the June 2014 offer, was one made in accordance with the procedural requirements of UCPR Rule 26. What is disputed is that the offer was genuine.
UCPR [Rule 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s42.html) requires the offeror to have obtained a result equal to or better than the offer of compromise. In one sense QBE has not done better because Lambert obtained a decision in its favour on the wording of the policy both in respect of the pay to be paid and the nervous shock issue and also a conclusion that QBE could not insist on the provision to it of privileged reports as a precondition for providing a response on the issue of indemnity: see [169]- [171]. The problem with these conclusions however is that they do not as a practical matter assist Lambert because of my conclusion that Lambert will not have to pay money to the claimants because Global has agreed to do so and that these proceedings were really proceedings brought at the behest of Global: see [193]- [199].
Once again Lambert attacks the genuineness of the defendant's offer. The position in relation to offers of compromise is explained in Dean versus Stockland Property Management Pty Ltd (No 2)  <case> per Giles JA, Handley AJA and Whealy J: " <case>;
Herning versus GWS Machinery Pty Ltd (No 2) <case> An offer which does not involve a real and genuine element of compromise will not be taken into account in relation to costs under the Rules (The
Anderson Group Pty Ltd versus Tynan Motors Pty Ltd (No 2) <case> ; [(2006) 67 NSWLR 706).] It has been said that indemnity costs will not be granted where the offer of compromise is designed simply to trigger the entitlement: for example, Tickell versus Trifleska Pty Ltd [(1990) 25 NSWLR ]
at 355 per Rogers CJ Comm D. An offer of compromise will always be intended to trigger the entitlement. The force of "simply" is the need for a real element of compromise."
It appears that walk away offers are more likely to be viewed as not involving any real element of compromise (see Robb Evans of Robb Evans & Associates versus European Bank Ltd (No 2)  <case> and Regency Media Pty Ltd versus AAV Australia Pty Ltd  <case> but this is not always the case as is demonstrated by Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales versus Refrigerated Roadways Pty Ltd (No 2) <case> and Bennette versus Cohen (No 2)  <case>
I readily accept this the case was one in which it was difficult for QBE to fashion an offer that involved some genuine compromise with Lambert having regard to QBE's contentions, but what was in fact offered to Lambert by QBE was of very limited benefit and required Lambert to completely abandon not only its claim against QBE but also its claim against the Partnership which involved a question of construction of the Sale Agreements' indemnity clause and application to the facts of the case. Although Lambert was unsuccessful in that claim against the Partnership its claim was not frivolous or vexatious, a relevant matter when all that is offered is a walk away offer: see Evans.
I do not think that there was any compromise even disregarding the issues surrounding Lambert's claims against QBE and regarding those as problematic and it appears to me that the offer was one sent simply in order to trigger a costs outcome.
It follows that the order that should be made in respect of costs is that the plaintiffs pay the costs of the defendant on the ordinary basis.

Amendments August 2015 - Typographical error * * * 
