

Crisp and Anor versus Blake and Ors Matter No 11805/90 [1998] NSWSC 497 (26
August 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
CRISP & ANOR versus BLAKE & ORS /90 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiffs (Mr and Mrs Crisp) were the registered proprietors of a property known as 50 The Crescent, Vaucluse (the property). They were directors and shareholders of Mr Juicy Fruit Juices Pty Limited (the Company). The Company later changed its name to Mr Juicy Pty Limited. In June 1978, the plaintiffs entered into an agreement for the sale of the property to the Company. 
The Statement of Claim names eight defendants. The plaintiffs did not proceed with the claim that had been made against the fourth and fifth defendants. The first, second and third defendants were chartered accountants carrying on practice under the name "J I Moore & Partners". From time to time, these defendants had provided accounting services for both the plaintiffs and the
Company. The sixth, seventh and eighth defendants had carried on practice as solicitors under the name "Barraket Kemp & Strang". From time to time, these defendants had provided legal services for both the plaintiffs and the
Company.

The proceedings were commenced on 24 April 1990. The plaintiffs claim, inter alia, damages. The claim is founded on a cause of action framed in tort only. It is common ground that any claim founded on breach of contract is statute barred. The claim presently propounded is that pleaded in the Amended Statement of Claim (filed in Court on 30 June 1998).

This process alleges, inter alia, the following:- "7. In or about May 1978 the third defendant on behalf of the first to fifth defendants stated and represented to the plaintiffs: a) that it would be to the financial advantage of the plaintiffs and each of them to transfer the title to the Vaucluse Property to the Company; b) that the transfer could and would be effected in such a manner that the plaintiffs would retain their beneficial interest in the Vaucluse Property; and c) that the said transfer could and would be effected in such a manner that the plaintiffs would have the right to re-acquire the title to the property from the Company at any time in the future.
In or about May 1978 the eighth defendant on behalf of the sixth, seventh and eighth defendants stated and represented to the plaintiffs: a) that it would be to the financial advantage of the plaintiffs and each of them to transfer the title to the Vaucluse Property to the Company; b) that the said transfer could and would be effected in such a manner that the plaintiffs would retain their beneficial interest in the Vaucluse
Property; c) that the eighth defendant would take steps to transfer the Vaucluse
Property to the Company in such a manner that the plaintiffs would have the right to re-acquire the title to the property from the Company at any time in the future.
In or about June 1978 the eighth defendant on behalf of the sixth, seventh and eighth defendants and to the knowledge of the third defendant: a) prepared forms of power of attorney for execution by each of the plaintiffs; b) advised and requested the plaintiffs to execute the said forms of power of attorney; c) prepared a form of agreement between the plaintiffs and the Company for the sale of the Vaucluse Property; d) made arrangements for the execution of the said contract on behalf of the plaintiffs.
In consequence of the matters pleaded above, the defendants and each of them were under a duty of care to the plaintiffs: a) to take steps to protect the plaintiffs' interest in the Vaucluse Property; b) not to cause or permit the transfer of the plaintiffs' interest in the
Vaucluse Property in a manner which would jeopardise or risk the plaintiffs' interest therein.
In breach of the duty of care pleaded in paragraph 10 above and negligently the first to fifth defendants prior to 19 June 1978 or alternatively prior to 22 May 1984: a) failed to advise the plaintiffs of the consequences of the execution by them of the said documents; and b) failed to warn the plaintiffs that the execution of the said documents was likely to result in the loss of their interest in the Vaucluse Property.
In breach of the duty of care pleaded in paragraph 10 above the sixth to eighth defendants: a) failed to advise the plaintiffs of the consequences of the execution by them of the said documents; b) failed to warn the plaintiffs that the execution of the said documents was likely to result in the loss of their interest in the Vaucluse Property; c) failed to prepare the said powers of attorney and agreement in such a manner as to ensure that the plaintiffs had a right to recover their interest in the Vaucluse Property.
Acting upon the faith of the statements and representations pleaded in paragraphs 7 and 8 above the plaintiffs: a) executed the powers of attorney; and b) authorised the eighth defendant to proceed with the transaction." 
There is no issue that the plaintiffs executed the Powers of Attorney and authorised the eighth defendant (Mr Strang) to proceed with the transaction.
There is no issue that an Agreement was executed for the sale of the property by the plaintiffs to the Company. There was ultimately some urgency (perhaps because of earlier delay by Mr Strang) so that it could be brought into effect by 30 June 1978. The form of Agreement appears to contain a number of errors.
It was executed in Canberra by the donee under the Powers of Attorney. It bears date 19 June 1978. The property was sold subject to a first Mortgage that had been granted to The Mercantile Mutual Life Insurance Company Limited (Mercantile Mutual). The terms of the Agreement did not confer any option to repurchase in favour of the plaintiffs. There were provisions which enabled termination of the Agreement in the event of default (clauses 2 and 10). The documentation was not stamped (it was tendered after an undertaking to pay the duty had been given). Mr Moore drafted a resolution which recorded a rental agreement between the Company and the plaintiffs and he advised that it be incorporated in the Minutes of the Directors' Meeting held on 19 May 1978. At some stage, it seems that Mr Strang prepared a Declaration of Trust. It appears that it was not executed. There was no transfer of title.

After its execution, the Agreement remained in the ACT. On 17 October 1979, after some considerable effort, a copy with handwritten alterations (together with an unexecuted form of the Declaration of Trust prepared in 1979 by Mr
Strang) was received by Mr Holt (the audit partner of J I Moore &
Partners). The original Agreement was probably destroyed in or about 1982 (at the instance of Mr Strang).

During the twenty years that have elapsed since the execution of the documentation, memories have faded and documents (including relevant files and records) have been either lost or destroyed. Accordingly, there is, inter alia, vagueness and uncertainty as to what happened during the period.

There is material which demonstrates that, following the Agreement, the
Company treated the property as one of its assets. I shall merely mention a few matters. The accounts did not reveal that the plaintiffs retained any interest in or right to re-acquire the property. The plaintiffs were signatories to the accounts. The property was shown in the Company records as an asset as early as 30 June 1978, when the purchase price was credited to the first plaintiff's loan account with the Company (which was then substantially in debt). The Company paid, inter alia, the interest due to Mercantile Mutual and land tax. The accounts recorded rental payments. There was a revaluation of the property. In November 1980, it was shown in the books as having a value of $1.9 million. Shares in the Company were allocated to Overseas Investment
Corporation Limited.

At some stage thereafter, the issue of further shares was contemplated. It seems that there was a need for the first plaintiff's loan account to be reduced and the plaintiffs contemplated the seeking of part of their shareholding to provide the necessary funds. Also, a need for funds to exercise the option was in contemplation (see p 0 of Exhibit A). In December , the Company wrote to CBA Limited advising that the property "will be transferred fully and effectively to, and will remain the property of" the plaintiffs and that the agreement "will be cancelled and the value of the property will be removed from the Company Balance Sheet". There is material to suggest that there may have been some activity in 1982 concerning the sale or transfer back of the property (see pp 138 and 139 of Exhibit A).

On 10 April 1979, the plaintiffs gave a second Mortgage over the property to
The Commercial Bank of Australia Limited. There was conflicting evidence concerning the question of the purpose of this security. In August 1982, they gave a third Mortgage over the property to PNB International Finance Co.
Australia Limited (PNB). This Mortgage was given to secure company indebtedness.

By 1982, the Company was in financial trouble. PNB had become its major financier. The plaintiffs became concerned to find out whether or not they held an option to purchase the property. Mr McGowan was asked to contact Mr
Stracey (another solicitor). Mr Stracey was retained. Largely, it appears that he was retained to act on behalf of the Company. It seems that he acted during a period commencing in the third quarter of 1982 and ending in July 1983. His inquiries appear to have revealed that there was no option. At least by
November 1982, the first plaintiff was aware that there were, inter alia, problems (Transcript p 57). He had reached the view that there was no option because no one could find "this mysterious document" (Transcript p 76). The retainer of Mr Strang was terminated in about January 1983. Later, in 1983,
Charles T Comino & Co were acting, inter alia, for the plaintiffs.

On 15 July 1983, Messrs Struthers and Harrison were appointed as receivers of the Company by PNB. On 13 April 1984, a Provisional Liquidator was appointed.
The Company was wound up on 22 May 1984 at the instance of another creditor,
Marac Australia Limited (Marac).

The Liquidator of the Company commenced proceedings No. 3087 of 1984 against the plaintiffs. Subsequently, the proceedings were compromised. The compromise involved a sale of the property and a division of the net proceeds of sale between, inter alia, the Liquidator and the plaintiffs. There was also other documentation (including releases of guarantees given by the plaintiffs).

I should digress to add that the Liquidator has not made it easy for the parties. Documents have been either lost or destroyed. The parties were led to believe that the Liquidator had no documents to produce. On the fourth day of the trial, four boxes of files were voluntarily made available to the solicitor for the plaintiffs. There was a need to inspect this material. This caused a significant disruption to the trial and a loss of valuable hearing time together with additional expense to the parties.

Broadly speaking, the case that was argued on behalf of the plaintiffs concerned an alleged failure to make provision for an option to repurchase the property in the 1978 documentation. In the case of the sixth, seventh and eighth defendants, it was said that they failed to prepare the documentation that achieved such purpose. In the case of the first, second and third defendants, it was principally said that they had an ongoing duty to advise and warn the plaintiffs that the documentation did not confer such an option and of the consequences thereof.

There are three essential ingredients of a cause of action founded on the tort of negligence. Questions of the existence of a duty of care, breach thereof and damages are all in issue. The defendants also allege that the claim is statute barred by reason of the expiry of the relevant limitation period.

The hearing occupied about six days. In addition to the issues thrown up in the original proceedings, there were also Cross-Claims. As is often the case in old litigation, there was considerable last minute activity (including pleading amendments). The hearing was disrupted to enable steps of a preparatory nature to be taken. As previously mentioned, it was later disrupted by the late production of documents by the Liquidator. Much time was consumed by what seemed to be a general attack on the competence of the services provided by the first, second and third defendants. This attack had little bearing on the real issues in the case.

During the third day of the trial, some consensus was reached. This saw, inter alia, the plaintiffs consenting to judgment in favour of the sixth, seventh and eighth defendants as well as the dismissal of Cross-Claims. Whilst it could have been thought to be a daunting task for the plaintiffs to continue with their claim against the first, second and third defendants, undeterred, they pressed on with the further hearing of that part of the claim.

A considerable volume of material has been adduced. Apart from oral and affidavit evidence, there has been a bulk of documentary material (including a large bundle of agreed documentation which was tendered as Exhibit A). Each of the plaintiffs have sworn an affidavit. Mr Cahill provided a Witness Statement which has been tendered. The plaintiffs also called Mr Stracey. His notes were tendered (Exhibits C and D). Each witness gave supplementary oral evidence.
All, save Mr Cahill, have been cross-examined.

Each of Messrs Moore (the third defendant) and Holt have provided a Witness
Statement which have been tendered on behalf of the first, second and third defendants. Supplementary oral evidence was given and cross-examination of each of them took place.

Between 1974 and 1980, Mr Cahill was employed by the Company. In 1978, Mr Holt was one of Mr Moore's partners and he took over the role of audit partner for the Company.

This is not a matter in which it is necessary to embark on a detailed analysis of all of the evidence. There is a considerable body of material which, if not irrelevant, was at best peripheral. Counsel have produced written submissions.
These were supplemented by oral argument. I do not propose to expressly deal with all of the matters raised in submissions.

The case for the plaintiffs is founded on statements and representations allegedly made by or on behalf of the defendants. The statements and representations were said to have been made orally in or about May 1978. It is conceded that the alleged duty of care depends in part on the resolution of factual controversies.

The material throws up conflicting versions as to relevant matters.
Consequently, questions of credibility have assumed importance. Relevant matters happened so long ago and material that may have afforded some corroboration has been lost. In the circumstances, it is difficult for a fair trial to now take place.

I have closely observed the demeanour of witnesses during the giving of evidence. In assessing credibility, I have had regard both to demeanour and evidence.

The principal witness for the plaintiffs was the first plaintiff. The acceptance of his evidence is crucial to the case for the plaintiffs. The evidence provided by the second plaintiff does little more than give support to some of his evidence. She was not present when the statements and representations were allegedly made.

The first plaintiff was not an impressive witness. He has given conflicting evidence. His oral evidence saw attempts to embellish what had been said in his affidavit. His evidence stands in conflict both with other oral evidence and documentary material (including material given on oath for the purposes of earlier proceedings). He did not appear to me to have either a good or reliable recollection for relevant events. I gained the impression that he resorted to unresponsive answers when he perceived that it was to his advantage to do so. He has given a significant body of evidence that I do not accept (inter alia, where there is conflict and/or an absence of independent corroboration).

Mr Moore was an impressive witness. I formed the impression that he did his best to give honest and reliable evidence. Where there is conflict, I prefer his evidence to that given by the first plaintiff. Largely, I accept what he has said. He was faced with the problem of a lack of records and recalling conversations and events that took place about twenty years ago. He gave his file to the Liquidator in 1984. He has not seen it since that time and it has been apparently lost. He readily made concessions and conceded error when he was shown to have been mistaken in his recollection. Largely, what he has said is consistent with what Mr Holt has told the Court. He readily conceded a diminished recollection.

The claim against the first, second and third defendants is founded on what is deposed to by the first plaintiff in paragraphs 11 and 12 of his affidavit. If the version of the alleged conversations propounded therein is not accepted, the claim must fail. It stands in conflict with other material (including the evidence given by the third defendant).

In his affidavit, Mr Crisp deposed to the following:- "11. Shortly after completion of the purchase of the Vaucluse Property in , I realised that the interest repayments required under the Mercantile
Mutual mortgage were substantial and that as matters stood I would have to find the money after tax to make those payments. This prompted me to speak to
Mr John Moore, at the companies' offices one day. Words were then said to the following effect: 
Myself: `With this mortgage on the Vaucluse property I will have a tax problem. Is there any way that this can be minimised through the company?' 
Moore: `I will have a think about it and see if I can work out something with
Ross Strang.'
Shortly after this, I had a further conversation with Mr Moore in which words were said to the following effect: 
Moore: `I have had a word to Ross Strang about the mortgage. We believe that we can do something by selling the Vaucluse property to the company which will then get the benefit of a tax deduction for the interest payments.' 
Myself: `But I would still want Carmel and I to be able get the property back at any time in the future at the original purchase price if it were to be done that way.' 
Moore: `That can be done. I will speak to Ross Strang and he can speak to you about the matter.' " 
The bulk of documentation does throw up some competing material concerning the background to and the purpose of the exercise.

There is material which suggests that the original intention was for the
Company to purchase the property and that this was not done because the
Company could not raise the finance. The question of whether or not this was the position was not really explored during the hearing.

The presentation by the first plaintiff was that the property came to be acquired under a terms contract in about May 1976. Completion of the contract did not take place until early 1978. In order to complete the purchase, it was necessary to borrow additional funds (from Mercantile Mutual).

It may not have been strictly accurate for the first plaintiff to describe his then situation in terms of a "tax problem". The oral evidence of the first plaintiff made it clear that the after tax salaries of the plaintiffs were insufficient to enable them to meet the interest repayments. This seemed to be a persisting situation. Any increase in salaries, if the Company was in a position to pay the same, would merely increase the tax burden. At the very least, the first plaintiff had in mind the possibility that tax could be minimised through using the Company.

There was also some suggestion in other material that the transfer of the property to the Company had a benefit in strengthening the Company's Balance
Sheet. This suggestion was not pursued during the hearing.

At the time of the alleged conversations, it does seem that the plaintiffs had a financial problem. Firstly, in connection with the servicing of the moneys payable to Mercantile Mutual. Secondly, there was a significant indebtedness to the Company recorded in the loan accounts. There was the advantage of a tax benefit to the Company, if it was placed in a position where it could claim the payments to Mercantile Mutual as a deduction.

I shall now turn to the version given by Mr Moore in his Witness Statement.
There were significant differences between it and the version given by the first plaintiff. He said as follows:- "17. At some point in 1978 after the Crisps purchased the Property, I remember being consulted by John Crisp on a particular tax issue concerning the
Property. Given the time that has passed since then, I do not remember what was said exactly. However I can remember a conversation in words to the following effect took place between John Crisps and myself: 
Crisp: `We have a tax problem. We want the company to obtain an income tax deduction for the interest incurred on the mortgage granted to purchase the property at Vaucluse. If the house was owned by the company, would the interest payments on the mortgage be tax deductible to the company?' 
I: `Yes, but you could end up with a different tax problem. By living in the house, you [meaning John and Carmel Crisp] may end up being taxed on the benefit you receive as an employee under section 26(e) of the Income Tax
Assessment Act.' 
Crisp: `The house would be used substantially for the entertainment of business clients, therefore we don't really derive the same sort of benefit at all.' 
I: `You may be able to get around the section by paying the company some rent.
If rental is paid, this will probably cause the Tax Commissioner a problem in assessing a benefit.'
To the best of my recollection, this conversation took place in Tony
Cahill's presence." "22. I did not discuss the proposed transfer of the Property with Ross Strang or any one else at Barraket Kemp & Strang.
I refer to paragraphs 11 and 12 of John Crisp's affidavit sworn on 13
November 1997 in the proceedings. I did not have the conversations with John
Crisp, or any conversations along similar lines to those conversations, referred to in those paragraphs.
I was not asked by John or Carmel Crisp to check the documentation to effect the transfer. I did not see the agreement for sale or, indeed, any other document relating to the transfer of the Property prior to the documents being signed by the Crisps and the company." 
His version was repeated during oral evidence. It is consistent with other material.

In his Statement, Mr Cahill said:- "I agree generally that the matters set out in paragraph 17 of Mr Moore's statement were discussed in this period".

The Statement made by Mr Cahill also contained the following:- "10. In a conversation at about the same time with Mr Crisp either Mr Moore or
Mr Strang or both of them were also present. In that discussion, the subject matter of an option to repurchase the house was discussed. I cannot remember the exact words but words were said to the following effect: 
Crisp: `The arrangement is that we can buy back the house at any time in the future at the same price.' 
Myself: `But is that going to be effective if the company gets into trouble?' 
Either Mr Moore or Mr Strang said words to the following effect in response to my question: `Yes, the documents can be registered in Canberra (or perhaps Darwin) and be effective that way. There will be no duty payable in the ACT or the Northern
Territory.'
With the passage of time I cannot be precise about the date when this took place. I am certain that Mr Crisp was present when the words were said." 
This does seem to be a conversation that was more likely to take place with Mr
Strang. It has some similarity to the version of a conversation with Mr Strang deposed to by the first plaintiff in paragraph 13 of his affidavit. I am not satisfied that Mr Moore was present during any such conversation.

There was dispute between Messrs Moore and Cahill (inter alia, concerning what was said in paragraph 13 of Mr Moore's Witness Statement). Although Mr Cahill was not cross-examined, there is other evidence that supports the contention that the firm had a decreased role during the period that followed Mr Cahill's appointment.

The decision making process starts with an evidentiary exercise. The first question is whether or not the Court should accept the version of conversations given by the first plaintiff.

It is trite to say that the onus rests with the plaintiffs. The task involves satisfying the Court that the first plaintiff's version should be preferred to that given by the third defendant. Not only am I not so satisfied, but in fact
I prefer the version given by the third defendant. In my view, the onus has not been discharged.

Accordingly, the claim must fail (for this reason alone). Although this finding is determinative of the matter, I shall now proceed to address some further matters.

Before proceeding further, I should observe that, at the very least, there are discrepancies between the case for the plaintiffs as put in argument, the alleged representations which are pleaded as founding the duty of care and the evidence relied on to establish the making of the representations themselves.
Whilst it is unnecessary to dwell on these discrepancies, some observations may be helpful.

The term "option" does not make an appearance in either the first plaintiff's affidavit or the Amended Statement of Claim. It appeared in legal argument. It seems to have received use sometime after execution of the 1978 documentation.
There is material consistent with a presentation by the plaintiffs, at least in about 1982, of claiming that they had an option over the property. The case that was argued centred on the failure to provide for an option in the documentation. The alleged breach is expressed in terms of failure to advise and warn in relation to the consequences of the execution of the documentation. These are functions which could be regarded as falling within the legal domain.

The evidence raises a number of matters. I shall mention some of them. An awareness by the plaintiffs that the property is now worth a lot more than had been paid for it. A contemplation that there be a sale to the Company and an entitlement to get it back, at any time in the future, at the original purchase price. There was no identification of any particular mechanism for getting the property back. The material suggests that the choice of the mechanism may have been left to Mr Strang.

The claim that had been pleaded raised different matters. There was an alleged representation of financial advantage to the plaintiffs to transfer the property. There was an alleged representation that the transfer could be effected with a retention by the plaintiffs of the beneficial interest in the property and a right to re-acquire title at any time in the future. Apart from the concept of financial advantage to the plaintiffs themselves, this scenario would seem to involve the concept of a trust whereby the Company held the property in its name for the benefit of the plaintiffs.

Whilst the plaintiffs place much stress on Mr Moore's acceptance of his role as trusted adviser, it is interesting to look at some of the evidence adduced on behalf of them. Mr Moore was looked to for tax advice and accounting problems (Transcript pp 60 and 66). His firm provided accounting (including auditing) services. The first plaintiff said, "There weren't too many personal problems ... It was more company matters" (see Transcript p 61). The legal advice came from Mr Strang and/or his firm (see paragraph 5 of Exhibit B).

It seems that the affairs of the plaintiffs and of the Company were closely intermingled. It was regarded by them as their Company. In 1978, the Company was under their control. Company funds were used to meet personal expenditure.
What was contemplated in 1978 was an exercise which met pressing personal financial exigencies and which also gave tax benefits to the Company.

I am satisfied that the role of Mr Moore in this transaction was to provide tax advice. The advice was given during the conversation had in 1978. There were two aspects to the advice that was given. There was advice to the effect that, if the Company owned the property, it could obtain taxation benefits by claiming the interest payments as deductions. There was advice given as to the related problem (the payment of a rental to the Company). He later drafted a resolution (for incorporation in Company Minutes) to give effect to such a rental arrangement. No complaint is made as to the advice that was given. It was followed. It is not said that the Company did not obtain tax benefits as advised. It is not said that the plaintiffs suffered the impost of any additional tax.

Even on the version propounded by the plaintiffs, Mr Moore is merely said to have assured that the benefit of the tax deduction for the interest payments could be done in a way which enabled the plaintiffs to get the property back, at any time in the future, at the original purchase price. It is not suggested that this could not be done.

Even this version is consistent with the advisers having discrete roles (Mr
Moore having the function of advising as to certain tax matters and Mr Strang having the function of doing the legal work).

Mr Moore is merely alleged to have said, "That can be done. I will speak to
Ross Strang and he can speak to you about the matter." According to his own version, the first plaintiff did speak thereafter to Mr Strang. He gave him instructions and received advice. He was the person who followed up the instructions. Mr Strang forwarded documentation to him and he arranged for its execution.

For completeness, it should be observed that, save for the inconclusive material in Mr Cahill's Statement, there is no evidence that discussion took place between Messrs Moore and Strang concerning either the "tax problem" or the documentation. Mr Moore does not recall any such discussion. Further, Mr
Moore says that he did not see the documentation prepared by Mr Strang prior to its execution and that he does not recall seeing it at all. I accept his evidence on those matters.

It was the function of Mr Strang to be the provider of legal advice and draft the documentation. The first plaintiff knew that he would be the person drawing up the agreement and that was lawyer's work (Transcript p 65). This was the task that he carried out. If he had instructions to the effect that an option was to be part of the agreement, he had a responsibility to see that one was granted. It is said that he did not give a copy of the agreement to the plaintiffs and that he did not give an explanation of the arrangements. It could be thought that his responsibility also extended to these matters (including any necessary explanation of the documentation and the consequences of the execution thereof) and that his failure to do so may be the cause of any loss thereby suffered.

Yet, although the claim made against the sixth, seventh and eighth defendants was brought to an end by a consent judgment in their favour, the hearing of the claim against the remaining defendants (for failing to advise and warn as to the consequences of executing that documentation) proceeded.

In substance, it was sought to place these defendants in a supervisory position, in effect, looking over Mr Strang's shoulder for the purpose of reviewing the performance of his legal duties. In my view, these defendants did not assume any such function and owed no duty to perform such a role.

It must be borne in mind that the Agreement drawn up did contain the default provision. It had the potential to return the property to the plaintiffs. At the time, the control of the Company was in the hands of the plaintiffs. The default provision was never put into effect. The plaintiffs contend that this provision fell well short of what an option would have given them. It seems to be accepted that its operation came to an end when the loan account was credited with the payment of purchase moneys for the property.

I should add that there seems to have been substance in what was said by Mr
Holt of the first plaintiff (viz, that he was an intelligent man, who knew what was happening in the Company and had some knowledge of accounts and the implication of an option to purchase). Mr Moore seemed to hold a similar view.
I am not satisfied that he needed Mr Moore or anyone else to tell him whether or not the Agreement contained an option. By November 1982, he had reached the view that there was no option.

I should digress to mention one matter. Both sides contend that what has been described as a Jones versus Dunkel inference should be drawn against the other.
There was no analysis of what was said in that case (and what has been said about it in later decisions). Where the rule applies, the inference may be drawn that uncalled evidence would not have assisted that party's case. There are conditions that must be satisfied (inter alia, the witness needs to be a witness that the party might have been reasonably expected to call). In my view, the rule does not have application in this case.

Although the plaintiffs have failed to establish the representations upon which the alleged duty of care is founded, I should add that it seems to me that an acceptance of the plaintiffs' evidence would not have given rise to the duty of care pleaded. Further, I do not consider that the material placed before the Court was sufficient to demonstrate that a relevant duty of care existed in this case.

Even if a different view had been taken on those matters, there were further obstacles confronting the plaintiffs. Apart from questions of breach of duty and loss, there was the limitation defence.

For completeness, it may be of assistance to make further observations. I would not have been satisfied that there was evidence of breach of the alleged duty. Further, I would not have been satisfied that the loss claimed had the requisite causal connection with the alleged breach.

The question of quantum of loss is yet another area that excited considerable argument. The claim is for $610,980.15 plus interest. The calculations made on behalf of the plaintiffs have their complexity. Largely, they were expounded during oral argument. The defendants say that the plaintiffs suffered no loss through not having an option. Indeed, it is said that they were ultimately better off by not having it.

In the light of what has already been said, it is not necessary to embark on the extensive exercise thrown up by this area of dispute.

Finally, I turn to the question of the limitation defence. An abortive attempt was made in 1992 to have it determined as a separate question. The question does not now need to be determined because the plaintiffs have not demonstrated the existence of a cause of action. However, it may be helpful to make a few observations.

It is accepted that the claim is doomed to failure, if the alleged cause of action accrued prior to 24 April 1984. The plaintiffs contend that their cause of action accrued on 7 September 1984 when the Liquidator claimed adversely to the existence of an option. In support of that contention, reliance was placed on what was said in Wardley Australia Limited versus The State of Western
Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] at 527 and 531 and Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR at 101.

The Court was referred, inter alia, to dicta which relates to a situation where, as a result of a defendant's negligent misrepresentation, the plaintiff enters into a contract which exposes him or her to a contingent loss or liability. The dicta expresses the view that there is no actual damage until the contingency is fulfilled and the loss becomes actual.

In this case, the plaintiffs say that the contingency was fulfilled in about
September 1984. I do not accept this contention. I am not satisfied that the alleged breach of duty would have given rise to a contingent loss or liability only prior to 7 September 1984. Indeed, I prefer the view that there would have been actual loss as early as 1978.

It is the plaintiffs' case that the documentation should have contained an option to repurchase, at any time in the future, for the original purchase price. The documentation did not contain such an option. The property had been disposed of without a reservation of any such right. The plaintiffs were left in a situation where they had lost the right at law to compel a sale to them, at any time in the future, for the price of $400,000. There was no contingency to be fulfilled. It is not a situation where, inter alia, the disadvantageous character or effect of the Agreement could not be ascertained until some future date.

The Agreement did contain the default provisions. These provisions conferred an entitlement which differed from the required option in a number of respects (inter alia, it depended on the happening of specified events). In any event, any entitlement to recovery of the property under the default provisions contained in the documentation also came to an end in 1978.

These observations are not intended to be exhaustive. It is simply not necessary to undertake an analysis of other circumstances which may be looked at to demonstrate that there would have been actual loss prior to 24 April .

Perhaps, I should also add some further observations. In my view, the fact that there may have been, at certain times, the potential to reverse the sale by the exercise of de facto control over the Company does not make the alleged breach productive of contingent loss only. It may be argued that it could be of significance if the Court was considering a question of contributory negligence. But, that is not in issue in this case.

I direct the entry of judgment for the first, second and third defendants against the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of the first, second and third defendants. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
