

Regina versus Clark Matter No 60307/97 [1997] NSWSC 380 (5 September 1997) 
Regina versus Kelly James Clark /97 September 1997 
Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown appeal against inadequacy of sentence (Mahoney DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60307/97 
DELIVERED: 5 September 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 5 September 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Kelly James CLARK 
JUDGMENT OF: Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
COUNSEL: 
CROWN - P G Berman 
RESPONDENT - P Bryne SC 
SOLICITORS: 
CROWN - S E O'Connor 
RESPONDENT - T A Murphy 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - Crown appeal against sentence - whether circumstances justified a "Griffiths remand" for drug and alcohol rehabilitation programme - serious risk of suicide if incarcerated at that time. [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), [s
D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) 
Griffiths (1977) 137 CLR 293 
Crotty (CCA 28 February 1994, unreported) 
Jones (CCA 15 April 1994, unreported) 
Tindall and Gunton <case>; [(1901) AC ]

Lattouf (CCA 12 December 1996, unreported) 
Sorenson (CCA 7 July 1997, unreported) 
Electricity Commission of NSW versus Plumb [(1992) 27 NSWLR 364] 
No. of pages: 14 
REGINA versus KELLY JAMES CLARK 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: This is a Crown appeal under [s 5D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). The respondent pleaded guilty to a charge of assault with intent to rob. On 14 May 1997, Mahoney DCJ remanded the respondent to a date to be fixed not later than 1998 on conditions which included that the respondent undertake a programme of drug and alcohol rehabilitation as an inmate at Bennelong Haven, near Kempsey. This was what has come to be known as a "Griffiths remand". 
The respondent, in company with another person, waylaid the victim with a view to stealing either money or drugs; there were competing versions. His Honour was right in thinking that it did not matter which version was correct. On his
Honour's findings, the respondent wounded the victim with a screwdriver, knocking him to the ground, and then inflicted further injury. Objectively, the offence was a very serious one.

The respondent had a deprived childhood. He had no father. He had been molested when a young boy. He had taken to sniffing petrol and smoking marijuana at a young age. He had become dependent on alcohol and drugs. He had a bad criminal record, including offences involving violence for which he had been to gaol.

At the sentencing hearing, his Honour was concerned about the respondent's physical and mental health, judging by his appearance. The respondent had been remanded in custody pending sentence. According to a report by Ms Anne
Robilliard, psychologist, which his Honour accepted as to factual matters, the respondent had contemplated suicide while held at the Long Bay Remand Centre.
He was transferred to Goulburn Gaol, where he became extremely distressed and was actively suicidal. He was transferred to a safety cell where he could be continuously observed. When he became increasingly distressed and suicidal, he was transferred back to Sydney. When interviewed by Ms Robilliard a week before the respondent came before the court for sentence, he was, in Ms
Robilliard's opinion, very suicidal and depressed. She said he would need to be observed continuously for his court appearance. This was consistent with his Honour's impression.

His Honour was obviously very concerned about the possibility of suicide if the respondent was retained in custody in his present condition, and rightly so. His Honour said he had regard to the recommendations of the Enquiry into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, which confirmed the nature of his Honour's fears.

On the hearing of this appeal, the following arguments have been advanced on behalf of the Crown: 
That this was not a most exceptional case such as to justify a Griffiths remand order.

That the material did not demonstrate a real prospect of rehabilitation.

That the case was one in which, on authority, the sentencing judge was required to proceed immediately to conviction by way of a full-time custodial sentence because that was necessary in this kind of case in order to preserve the confidence of the community in the criminal justice system, because postponement was likely to be antipathetical to rehabilitation and because the postponement would be inhumane.

That the risk of suicide is a matter for the prison authorities and not for the sentencing judge.

Reference was made to the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
Sorenson, (CCA 7 July 1997, unreported). It should be observed, however, that what was said in that case about the responsibility of the prison authorities in relation to the risk of suicide, rather than that being the responsibility of the sentencing judge, did not involve consideration of a
Griffiths remand as in this present case.

His Honour, the sentencing judge, acknowledged the line of authority which emphasises the need for a full-time custodial sentence in cases of armed robbery and similar offences. He went on to say, however: "(I)t seems to me that the very first thing that needs to be done for this man is to afford him the maximum chance of retrieving himself from the state of dependence upon stimulants and intoxicants in which I have no doubt he was on the night of 17 May 1996 and quite likely on many another night extending back for a long time in his life." 
The date was the date of the offences. His Honour also said: "(I)t seems to me in all the circumstances of this case, it is more important to deal with the matters of greatest urgency and to allow the matters of lesser urgency to be dealt with in due course".

That, obviously enough, reflected his Honour's perception that there was a significant risk of suicide if the respondent remained in gaol in his present state.

It seems that his Honour did have in mind that, whatever the outcome of the rehabilitation programme, it was likely that a full-time custodial sentence would ultimately be imposed. That appears to have been his Honour's expectation judging from the following passage in his remarks: "What I propose to do is to give him the chance to turn the corner here and now and then perhaps qualify for a shorter term of full-time custodial imprisonment before being released to an additional term, subject to strictures and conditions and supervision." 
In a nutshell the Crown's argument is in two steps, namely: 
This is a case requiring a full-time custodial sentence; 
Therefore, a Griffiths remand ought not to have been ordered.

The accused challenges both steps in the argument. In view of what follows, it may be assumed, without deciding, that the first step is correct. It appears to accord with his Honour's expectation in any event.

As to the second step in the argument, I provide the following review of the relevant authorities. Griffiths (1977) 137 CLR 293 (the case which appears to have provided the label for this type of order) was decided by the High
Court before an amendment to the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) which made such an order appealable by Crown appeal. The main point decided by the case was that as the legislation then stood, the New South Wales Court of
Criminal Appeal had no jurisdiction to entertain a Crown appeal against such an order. In a passage which must be recognised as obiter, Barwick CJ said at :
 "(I)t seems to me, I can properly say that, in my opinion, the interests of the community are not by any means necessarily disserved by a judge taking the course which the trial judge took in this case. It is a course which must be reserved for proper cases, cases in which the guilty person will accept the delay in the determination of the sentence and submit to the compulsion towards reformation which that delay and the terms of a recognizance may involve: and in which there is a real expectation founded upon solid ground and not on mere sentimentality that such reform is likely to occur." 
It may be noted that, in stating the criteria for making such an order,
Barwick CJ did not say that such an order should not be made if a full-time custodial sentence was inevitable, albeit at a later stage.

Jacobs J in a passage which likewise must be recognised as obiter, took a much stricter line. He said (at 325-6): "... I should not be taken to approve the course taken by Judge Goran in this particular case. The applicant's crimes warranted a substantial sentence of penal servitude. If it was intended that he would be sentenced to penal servitude, then there was no justification for delay. If, on the other hand, it was contemplated that there might not be a prison sentence, then for the trial judge to take such a view was wrong. This was not a case for a bond. The best test whether or not this view is correct is to ask oneself whether, no matter which judge the matter had come before, the likelihood or probability was that the applicant might have been spared a prison sentence." (There is no reason to suppose that Barwick CJ did not also think that the offences necessarily warranted a substantial period of penal servitude).

Stephen J said he agreed with what was said by Jacobs J on the topic.

Murphy J disagreed on the point. He said he did not think Judge Goran was mistaken in what he did (at 330).

The remaining justice, Aickin J, did not deal with the point. (There was of course no need to do so).

In Crotty, (CCA 28 February 1994, unreported), Sully J (with whom
Gleeson CJ and Newman J agreed) reviewed a case of a Griffiths remand, the order having been made to enable the offender to undergo a drug rehabilitation programme. The offence was armed robbery which, in the opinion of the court, required the sentencing judge to impose a custodial sentence of some kind. It was held to have been wrong to impose a Griffiths remand.

Jones (CCA 15 April 1994 unreported) was also a case of armed robbery.
There were two such offences, although the weapon with which the victims were threatened was a toy rather than a real pistol. The sentencing judge had imposed a Griffiths remand to enable the offender to complete a drug rehabilitation programme. Smart J (with whom Gleeson CJ and Ireland J agreed) recognised that the offences were such as normally and rightly attract a custodial sentence. However, it was said, there were exceptional circumstances. Which of the circumstances were regarded by the court as exceptional is not immediately apparent. Perhaps it was the toy pistol.
Perhaps it was some other feature of the case. It is sufficient to note that, in the opinion of that court, offences such as armed robbery, which ordinarily attract an immediate custodial sentence, could permissibly be dealt with by way of a Griffiths remand in exceptional circumstances.

A stricter view was taken in Tindall and Gunton [(1994) 74 A Crim R .] It is convenient to refer first to the judgment of Carruthers
J who summarised the facts. In a separated judgment, Hunt CJ at CL reached the same conclusion as Carruthers J. Bruce J dissented.

The Griffiths remand was described by Carruthers J as an unsatisfactory practice. He quoted a passage from the judgment of Street CJ in that case, (en route to the High Court): [(1975) 1 NSWLR 229] to 232.
Street CJ said that the Griffiths remand was "not a permissible sentencing procedure". (In condemning the Griffiths remand altogether, Street CJ was not consistent with what was said by Barwick CJ in the same case on appeal, albeit in obiter, in the passage which I have quoted. Barwick CJ approved the making of such an order in "proper cases". Street CJ's view does, however, it should be recognised, appear to have been supported, albeit in obiter, by Jacobs and
Stephen JJ.) 
Carruthers J's own view is reflected in the following passage from his judgment (at 282): "The offences committed by the two respondents called unequivocally for the imposition of a full-time custodial sentence, allowing for all the relevant subjective circumstances, including their period of `rehabilitation' at
Odyssey House. When a custodial sentence is required, it is better that it be imposed sooner than later. Thus, his Honour should have imposed custodial sentences when the respondents first came before him." 
After quoting the passage from the judgment of Street CJ in Griffiths,
Carruthers J (at 283) said he was not unmindful of the approach adopted in
Jones. He said that Jones may be considered as a special case, and that
Crotty was more analogous. This was an apparent approval by Carruthers J of the decision in Jones and, therefore, a recognition that a Griffiths remand is not necessarily wrong in the case of offences such as armed robbery or the like. The implication was that such an order is permissible in a special case.

Hunt CJ at CL referred to the decision of the High Court in Griffiths and said at (276-7): "(S)uch a remand should only be granted where, in the event that rehabilitation and reform are achieved, it would be appropriate to impose a non-custodial sentence (at 325 to 326). I have no doubt as to the validity of the Crown's argument in this appeal that an offender would have a justifiable sense of grievance if a custodial sentence were to be imposed after he had complied with all the terms of a Griffiths remand.

The issue in a Crown appeal in relation to the grant of a Griffiths remand is therefore whether the circumstances of the offence and of the offender are such that, in the event that rehabilitation and reform are achieved whilst on remand, a non-custodial sentence would be manifestly inadequate." (The reference to pages 325-326 in Griffiths is a reference to the passage in the judgment of Jacobs J which I have quoted.) 
Because a non-custodial sentence would, in his Honour's view, have been manifestly inadequate, the granting of a Griffiths remand was, in his opinion, erroneous. Later, his Honour referred to Crotty but not to Jones.

The authorities, as is apparent, do not speak with one voice. There is a range of opinions, extending from condemnation of the Griffiths remand under any circumstances, to condemnation in the case of serious offences such as armed robbery which would warrant a full-time custodial sentence (whether then or later), to approval of such an order in "proper" circumstances or in "special" circumstances even in the case of offences of that kind.

In relation to the stricter views which have been expressed in these decisions, I think that the observations of Lord Halsbury LC in Quinn v
Leathem <case>; [(1901) AC 495], 496, are in point: "(E)very judgment must be read as applicable to the particular facts proved, or assumed to be proved, since the generality of the expressions which may be found there are not intended to be expositions of the whole law, but governed and qualified by the particular facts of the case in which such expressions are to be found." 
That statement of principle has been applied here: Electricity Commission of
NSW versus Plumb [(1992) 27 NSWLR 364], 371.

I do not think that Jacobs J or Stephens J in Griffiths, or Street CJ for that matter, or the Court in Crotty or Hunt CJ at CL or Carruthers J in
Tindall versus Gunton, when expressing themselves in the terms in which they did, had in contemplation a case where the sentencing judge has properly, on the evidence before him, formed a view that a serious risk of suicide might be averted if, instead of proceeding immediately to impose a custodial sentence, the offender were first to be given the opportunity of undergoing a course of drug and/or alcohol rehabilitation treatment. They had no reason to have such a case in mind.

In Lattouf (CCA 12 December 1996, unreported), the Court of Criminal
Appeal dismissed a Crown appeal against an order that a custodial sentence for armed robbery be served by periodic detention. Mahoney ACJ (with whom Sully J and Adams AJ agreed) said: "(I)n the present case there are, inter alia, several matters which have influenced me to conclude that this appeal should not be upheld. First, this is a case in which it was necessary and appropriate that the judge exercise a careful discretion in arriving at the sentence to be imposed. It is in my opinion necessary that the law allow to a sentencing judge a discretion to determine the sentence appropriate for the particular offence, for the particular offender, and for the circumstances of the particular case. General sentencing principles must be established, so that the community may know the sentences which will be imposed and so that sentencing judges will know the kind and the order of sentence which it is appropriate that they impose. But, of course, principles are necessarily framed in general terms. General principles must, of their nature, be adjusted to the individual case if justice is to be achieved. For this reason, it is in my opinion important in the public interest that the sentencing process recognise and maintain a residual discretion in the sentencing judge.

Second, it is important to recognise the nature of the interests involved in the sentencing process. There is a public interest in the adoption and articulation of sentencing principles which will deter the commission of serious crime and punish those who commit it. That is clear from what I have said as to the principles in Readman and Roberts. But there are other interests to which the sentencing process must have regard; there are other objectives which the sentencing process must seek to achieve. Paramount amongst these is the achievement of justice in the individual case. To see the sentencing process as involving no more than stern punishment for each offender is not merely simplistic; it damages the public interest. A sentencing process which is seen by the public merely as draconian and not just will lose the support of those whom it is designed to protect. If a sentencing process does not achieve justice, it should be put aside. As I have elsewhere said, if justice is not individual, it is nothing: Kable versus Deputy
Director of Public Prosecutions [(1995) 36 NSWLR 374] at 394.

But, in addition, a sentencing process must be capable of discriminating between cases. There is, as I have said, a public interest in punishment. But if the desire to punish results in a person who would otherwise not become a confirmed criminal becoming such, that sentencing process is inconsistent with the public interest.

It is to be recognised that imprisonment may convert a person who will not be a persistent criminal into one who is. Particularly is this so where the person to be sentenced is a first offender of a comparatively young age whose family circumstances are such that he may, with assistance, not become a criminal. It would be wrong to the individual and costly to the community not to attempt the rehabilitation of such a person." 
The passage illustrates the legitimacy of a flexible approach to sentencing and the need to maintain a broad view. Where special circumstances warrant departure from the usual practice, justice may require a departure from the usual practice. The categories of special circumstances are not closed.

I would not hold, assuming a custodial sentence to be mandatory, that a sentencing judgment is bound to impose such a sentence there and then in a case involving a serious risk of suicide which, in the judgment of the sentencing judge, might be avoided altogether or, at least, significantly reduced by allowing a course of treatment, not available in prison, to be interposed.

Having regard to the special circumstances of the present case, a Griffiths remand as ordered by the sentencing judge was within the ambit of the proper exercise of judicial discretion.

Nor would I be disposed to hold that it would be wrong to order a Griffiths remand even if the sole purpose of doing so was to provide an opportunity for rehabilitation by treatment of some kind which, if successful, might result in a significantly shorter custodial sentence than would otherwise be the case.
However, it is unnecessary to decide that point for the purposes of the present appeal. There were, in the circumstances of this case, far stronger reasons for doing what the sentencing judge did.

I would propose, therefore, that, in substance, the appeal be dismissed.
However, I note that his Honour made it a condition of the order which he made that the respondent be remanded to appear at a date and place to be fixed not later than 1998. I think that is too long for the control which the Court should exercise over the proceedings. I am confirmed in that view by a recent letter from the institution which mentions a period of six months. I recognise the difficulties which judges of the District Court have in fitting matters into their lists, because of their heavy commitments, including circuit work.
Notwithstanding those considerations, I would propose that the date be brought forward to 31 May 1998. An application could be made to extend that time if there prove to be, in due course, good reasons for doing so.

Orders 
I propose the following orders: 
Conditions of the order varied by substituting "31 May 1998" for "1998"; 
Otherwise, appeal dismissed.

SMART J: I agree. I regard the circumstances in this case as most exceptional. The description by the judge of the condition of Mr Clark when he came before him, was indeed eloquent and in large measure dictated the result to which the judge came. I agree with the orders proposed. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree with the orders proposed and with the reasons that have been given by Sperling J and Smart J. 
SMART J: They will be the orders of the Court. * * * 
