

Regina versus Drl [1997] NSWSC 202 (16 May 1997) 
REGINA v. DRL /96 
Friday 16 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: The applicant seeks leave to appeal against the severity of a concurrent sentence of a fixed term of eighteen months penal servitude for armed robbery and a sentence comprising a minimum of two years penal servitude and an additional period of three years for armed robbery with wounding.

The applicant contends that when these sentences are compared with those imposed upon the co-offender, Wayne Johnson, the applicant has been dealt with too severely. There was a parity argument and an argument that the sentences were too severe. The arguments tended to be linked. Johnson received a minimum term of three years and an additional term of three years. This sentence was cumulative on a sentence Johnson was already serving. Johnson was going to spend three years nine months in a detention centre.

I am indebted to the sentencing judge for his careful and thoughtful analysis of the material and his comprehensive remarks on sentence.

The applicant was born on 21 October 1979 and was thus aged sixteen years two months at the time of the offences. Johnson was born on 16 January 1978 and was thus almost eighteen years of age at the time of the offences.

During the afternoon of 8 January 1996 the applicant and Johnson discussed the robbery of a newsagent's shop on the Northern Beaches. The newsagency was entered by both youths just before closing time. The applicant had with him a bag in which he was carrying a chef's knife with a 25cm blade. It was taken by the applicant to the shop for the purpose of using it to do the armed robbery.
The knife was produced by the applicant and waved in the face of the proprietor of the newsagency and the applicant and Johnson demanded money and cigarettes. On their demands being met both left the shop.

No one was injured physically. Nevertheless the robbery must have had an impact upon the owner of the newsagency and his wife. The youths had been to the newsagency before the robbery to find out what time the shop closed. The judge noted as an aggravating feature that the robbery had been discussed in advance, the best time selected for the robbery to be carried out and the knife was taken and used. The judge held that there had been a calculated and premeditated offence. Both youths were short of ready cash. Neither tried to justify the offence in any way. Both youths had been arrested in December 1995 and were on bail for graffiti offences. Johnson was also subject to a probation order.

Three days later, on 11 January 1996 the two youths determined that they would lure a pizza delivery man to a quiet area and rob him. Johnson placed the order, giving an address which was close to where the youths lived and which they knew was a quiet dead end street with little light. Before going to this spot with some of their friends who wanted to watch what happened, Johnson armed himself with a chef's knife which he wrapped in a beanie. He intended to strike the delivery man over the head with the knife as soon as he alighted from his vehicle. When the delivery man arrived he was set upon by Johnson almost immediately.

The judge accepted that there was no evidence that the applicant knew that
Johnson was going to use the knife to strike the delivery man before Johnson left their home to carry out the robbery. According to what the applicant told the police, he saw what Johnson did to the delivery man with the knife and assisted him by punching and hitting the delivery man while he was trying to get away to safety.

The delivery man was taken to Mona Vale Hospital. On admission he was suffering from contusion to the upper lip, abrasions to the left side of the forehead, a laceration on the left hand and confusion and amnesia surrounding the period of the assault. There were sutures to the left hand, neurological observation and a cerebral CT scan.

The judge did not find that the cut to the victim's hand was deliberately inflicted by either of the youths. It was probably a defensive wound. The judge found that both knew the knife would be used and that at least there was the possibility of such a wound being inflicted upon the victim. It was not intended to stab the victim but to use the knife as a cosh.

The judge found that the applicant was aware prior to the incident that
Johnson did intend to assault the pizza delivery man in order to rob him.
While the influence of Johnson could not be ignored, that was only part of the picture. The judge accepted that the applicant would not have committed the offences without Johnson and the environment in which he was living and that Johnson would probably not have committed these offences but for the applicant. The judge held that they were jointly responsible for the offence and that neither should be considered as the prime mover, as the more responsible, in a moral or legal sense.

The judge added that the sentences imposed should not be identical, given the difference in their criminal records and the stronger subjective features of the applicant.

Johnson left home aged fourteen and since that time had led a somewhat itinerant existence. He had a variety of non-custodial sentences throughout the four years prior to the robberies. He had been given many opportunities to rehabilitate himself. He had a number of problems including drug dependence, peer group pressures and an inability to appreciate the consequences of his actions. He was of average intelligence but emotionally immature.

On 21 March 1996 Johnson was sentenced to a twelve months control order, the minimum term being nine months. During his period in custody he had been involved in endeavours to further his education and acquire a skill which he could use in the community. He was to commence an apprenticeship in motor mechanics at the start of 1997. He had been receiving counselling for his drug dependence and to assist him in overcoming his lifestyle. It was accepted that
Johnson had made advances during the five months he had been in custody.

The applicant's upbringing was much disturbed by the acrimonious break-up of his parents' marriage when he was aged seven. This break-up was preceded, according to his sister, by much distressing conduct on their part. She believed that the parents did not understand the damage which their conduct was causing to their son. His mother went to Queensland. For a period he was placed in a boarding school in that state. Initially he saw her at weekends but when she moved to
New Zealand his difficulties and rebelliousness increased and, apparently, he was asked to leave the school. The applicant went to New Zealand for a period but that proved to be unsatisfactory. He missed his father and wanted to return to his father and to a more interesting and familiar life. He did so at the end of 1994. He spent 1995 at a good school in Sydney in Year 10. That was interrupted by traumas at home. The applicant was forced to leave his father's house because of the tension his presence created between his father and his father's then partner.

The applicant stated that his parents' separation and divorce caused him some distress but gradually he seemed to come away from that problem. The applicant appeared to have been seriously affected by having to leave the father's home.
This seems to have precipitated a downward trend. Ultimately the applicant found himself in housing supplied by the Youth Assistance Scheme. He worked for a period as an apprentice chef and was highly regarded by his employer.
However he drifted away from his employment and committed these offences.

Counsel for the applicant correctly stressed that the applicant had made significant progress after being charged in March 1996 with the armed robbery offences and prior to being sentenced in late August 1996. That progress included employment, offers of future employment as an apprentice chef by his former employer, based on his performance, and taking up a commercial cooking course. The applicant was also undergoing counselling for his present problems. As from July 1996 the applicant had been attending psychotherapy on a weekly basis whenever possible.

The psychotherapist reported that the applicant experienced feelings of rejection, alienation and lack of love on the part of his parents. Her report discloses a sad state of affairs. She thought that with ongoing support the applicant would be able to put his past life behind him and lead a happy lifestyle. She thought that he was making every effort to deal with the emotional issues which were troubling him. The applicant was much helped by being able to live in the home of his sister where there had been love and stability.

There was a considerable body of material before the judge as to the applicant's good qualities as well as his weaknesses. That material sought leniency. The material also suggests that the applicant is an intelligent young man. The judge correctly accepted that rehabilitation in the case of young offenders is of great importance. Much effort was now being directed to his rehabilitation and there were good prospects, indeed a probability of that occurring. It is a pity that the applicant was not given comparable support at an earlier stage.

Serious crimes, especially when threats and violence are involved, demand appropriate punishment even where the offender is a young man. The sentence is not nearly as long as that which would be imposed on an adult of mature years.
Deterrence also has a place when dealing with young offenders. The luring of a young man delivering pizzas to a quiet place to be set upon and robbed was a very bad armed robbery.

The judge noted that the applicant had no criminal record prior to the matters for which he was granted bail in December 1995. The judge felt that the three separate incidents of December 1995 and 8 and 11 January 1996, the latter two offences being committed while on bail and being so serious, deprived the applicant of much of the benefit his otherwise good record would have given him.

The judge correctly dealt with the offences at law. He was at pains to apply the provisions of the Children's (Criminal Proceedings) Act, especially <case>.
They have been at the forefront of my consideration.

Both the applicant and Johnson would have received much more severe sentences if they had been somewhat older. Both were entitled to leniency for their ready admissions to the police when the only material implicating them came from people at the home where they were living, their very early pleas of guilty, their remorse and their acceptance of full responsibility for their actions. The sentences show that they received such leniency. The applicant received further leniency because of his subjective features and his lack of a record prior to the offences in December 1995. That leniency was substantial and fair. It allowed for the applicant's younger age.

I am unable to accept the submission that the judge did not grant sufficient leniency and that there should have been a greater difference between the sentences imposed. I reject the disparity argument.

Having regard to the gravity of the offences, any further leniency would have resulted in sentences which were inadequate. The judge made the sentences for the separate offences concurrent. That was in itself a significant measure of leniency. I agree with the judge that there were special circumstances and that the applicant will need a longer than usual additional term for support and rehabilitation purposes. I agree with the judge's approach in that regard.

The judge gave the sentences anxious consideration and struck the right balance between rehabilitation, which is so much in the applicant's and the public interest and lenient but appropriate punishment for two very serious crimes. The sentences were not excessive.

It is possible for rehabilitation to take place in the detention centre. Our attention was also drawn to the fact that while the applicant was on bail between March 1996 and August 1996 his liberty was very much restricted because of the curfew. This is so but the judge could not have reasonably imposed a more lenient sentence. There has been no error by the judge. He was right, for the reasons which he gave. The sentences were not merely within his sentencing discretion, they were correct.

Leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders are as proposed.
 * * * 
