

Donald versus Kent and Ors [2002] NSWSC 690 (2 August 2002) 
Last Updated: 22 August 2002 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Donald versus Kent & Ors <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 20214/01  
HEARING DATE{S): 2 August 2002  
JUDGMENT DATE: 02/08/2002  
PARTIES: 
Ms Catherine Clare Donald 
Dr Chester Kent 
Northern Sydney Area Health Service 
Dr Carol Pollock  
JUDGMENT OF: Sperling J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr R O'Keefe for the Plaintiff 
Mr G Gemmell for the Second Defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
Slater & Gordon Lawyers for the Plaintiff 
Blake Dawson Waldron for the First Defendant 
Government Insurance Office of NSW for the Second Defendant 
Ebsworth & Ebsworth for the Third Defendant  
CATCHWORDS: 
Interrogatories  costs  no question of principle  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
The second defendant is to answer the plaintiff's notice to answer the amended interrogatories by 30 August 2002 
The parties have liberty to apply on one day's notice.  
JUDGMENT:  - 1 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
Professional Negligence List  
Sperling J  
Friday, 2 Aug 2002  /01 Catherine Clare Donald versus Dr Chester Kent & 2 Ors  
Judgment  His Honour: Mediation has been fixed for 12 September 2002. There is no agreement as to the form of interrogatories to be answered by the second defendant at the request of the plaintiff. The plaintiff asks for an order that the interrogatories be answered by 30 August allowing fourteen days for final preparation of the plaintiff's position paper. It will be necessary for the defendant to contact four persons who are no longer in the employment of the second defendant, raising some uncertainty about the practicability of answers by the date sought.  I propose to make the order that is sought but to give liberty to the second defendant to apply for an extension at that time in the event that best efforts do not make answer by that date practicable.  If that liberty to apply is to be exercised, it should be done by notice to my associate and I will list the matter before me one morning at 9.15am.  I make the following orders:  
The second defendant is to answer the plaintiff's notice to answer the amended interrogatories by 30 August 2002.  
The parties have liberty to apply on one day's notice.  On 12 June 2002 the plaintiff filed a notice of motion seeking orders that the second defendant answer interrogatories. As a result of discussion between the legal representatives of the parties, a somewhat shorter form of interrogatory was ultimately agreed. In consequence of that, I have made a consent order today for answers to be given to the interrogatories as agreed.
On behalf of the plaintiff an order is sought that the costs of the notice of motion should be costs in the cause.  On behalf of the second defendant it is submitted that there should be no order as to costs with the intent that each party would pay their own costs of the notice of motion. My analysis of what has occurred is that the second defendant has been put to work and expense in order to achieve what is ultimately agreed to be a reasonable and shorter ambit of interrogation, nevertheless, it appears, having taken a position where it opposes an order for interrogatories in principle. That being the case, I think it is appropriate that each party should bear its own costs of the notice of motion.
Accordingly, I make no further order with the intent that each party will bear its own costs of the notice of motion.  -oOo-  
LAST UPDATED: 12/08/2002 * * * 
