

Cowie versus Oliva [1997] NSWSC 14 (3 February 1997) 
Cowie versus Oliva /96 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff was involved in a motor vehicle accident that took place on 31 January 1993. She claims to have suffered personal injury (including a back condition) arising from that accident. She wishes to commence legal proceedings and prosecute a claim for damages. She is not entitled to commence such proceedings without leave under section 52(4) of the Motor Accidents Act, 1988 (the Act).

A Summons was filed on 23 October 1996. The relief now claimed is to be found in a Further Amended Summons filed on 4 November 1996.

In support of her application, she relies on three affidavits. She has sworn an affidavit herself. She gave supplementary oral evidence and was cross- examined. Her solicitor (Mr Curtis) has sworn two affidavits. The first of which was voluminous in size. She tendered Exhibit A (MBF documentation).

The application is opposed. The defendant relies on an affidavit sworn by Mr
Chadwick.

It is not said that the plaintiff was an untruthful witness. Her evidence as to her state of knowledge was not challenged. I accept her as a truthful and reliable witness.

The relevant facts appear in the affidavits and the other evidence. For the purposes of dealing with this application, it is not necessary to provide a detailed recitation of those facts. However, I shall mention some of them.

Before proceeding to mention those matters, I should make some preliminary observations as to the evidence relied on by the plaintiff. In particular, comment needs to be made as to the first of the two affidavits sworn by Mr
Curtis. It is a bulky document. Unfortunately, the bulk is provided by the large number of annexed documents. It seems to be a product of the misguided view that the annexation of voluminous documentation to an affidavit is the appropriate device to provide a satisfactory explanation. Save for the annexures, this affidavit provides little probative material as to his conduct of the case on behalf of the plaintiff.

I should add that these observations are made for the purpose of assisting litigants in applications of this nature. As it transpired, in this case, the defendant did not put in issue any question of delay either on the part of the solicitor or subsequent to his taking over of the conduct of the plaintiff's case.

The plaintiff was born on 3 October 1938. She had suffered from back problems prior to the accident. There had been surgery (including a fusion). She gave evidence that, at the time of the accident, she had not been experiencing back problems (apart from some twinges).

It seems that, after the accident, the plaintiff experienced certain symptoms (including some back problems). Thereafter, her back condition continued to deteriorate. She says that, in January 1996, she first became aware of the relationship between the accident and her deteriorating back condition. She sought legal advice in February 1996. On 21 February 1996, Mr Curtis gave her certain advice concerning the provisions of the Act. She says that, prior to that time, she was unaware of the provisions of the Act.

Notice of her claim was given in March 1996. It seems to be accepted that a claim for the purposes of the Act was not given until April 1996. The relevant limitation period expired on 31 January 1996. By reason of the late giving of the claim, she was not entitled to commence proceedings until
October 1996.

The material indicates that the plaintiff may have a good cause of action. If she is successful on the question of liability, she may recover substantial damages. If relief is refused, she would not be entitled to prosecute her claim by the commencement of proceedings.

On the question of quantum, the defendant did submit that her pre-accident condition may be material to the amount recoverable by her. However, this submission lacked evidentiary support.

In dealing with this application, I bear in mind what was said in Brisbane
South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866.] The granting of leave to the plaintiff will deprive the defendant of the benefit of a statutory defence to her claim.

During the hearing, the issues between the parties were defined. There are the usual issues of lack of diligence and prejudice. In addition, it was said that threshold requirements to the granting of relief had not been satisfied. These are the requirements to be found in (a) and (b) of (4B) of section 52.

There has been delay. The defendant became aware of the claim shortly after the expiry of the limitation period. It may be said that there has been some prejudice. Delay itself gives rise to a general presumption of prejudice (see
Taylor at p 873). There may be some actual prejudice. The defendant has been deprived of the opportunity of early medical examination of the plaintiff's condition. She was medically examined by Dr Ireland on behalf of the insurer in June 1996. To some extent, the situation may be complicated by her pre- accident problems. The defendant has not tendered Dr Ireland's report. There is no evidence to suggest that the delay had made his task more difficult. It is not said that the plaintiff's pre-accident medical records are not available to the defendant.

The Court cannot grant leave unless the threshold requirements of subsection are satisfied.

Subsection (4B)(a) requires the plaintiff to provide a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay. The provisions of section 52(1) indicate that the relevant delay for the purposes of (4B)(a) is the three year limitation period. This approach was accepted by both Counsel.

In my view, the plaintiff has satisfied this requirement. I do not accept the submissions made on behalf of the defendant to the contrary.

Delay subsequent to the three year period (and the explanation offered for that delay) may be relevant as a discretionary consideration in applications of this nature. Whether or not the evidence of Mr Curtis may be the subject of some criticism, such matter is not of significance in this case. The defendant does not contend that there has been delay since February 1996.

The only evidence as to potential damages comes from the plaintiff. On the material before me, I find that (b) of (4B) has been satisfied. I should add that, ultimately, it was not said that the plaintiff had failed to satisfy this requirement.

The Court has a judicial discretion to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff. The onus of satisfying the Court that the discretion should be exercised in favour of the applicant lies on the applicant.

The Court is required to take into account the relevant circumstances of the case. After the exercise of the balancing of the relevant circumstances has been performed, I have reached the view that justice is best done if leave is granted.

Counsel for the defendant also had instructions to appear on behalf of a proposed second defendant (Reginald Cowie). It was common ground that, if the plaintiff's application for leave was successful, leave should be granted to her to bring proceedings against both the existing defendant and the proposed defendant.

I grant leave to commence such proceedings by the filing of a Statement of
Claim within 28 days.

The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs of the Summons. It is common ground that the defendant will not seek to enforce this order for costs until the substantive proceedings have been disposed of.

The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
