

Regina versus Cpc [1997] NSWSC 183 (8 May 1997) 
REGINA versus CPC /97 
Thursday 8 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, STUDDERT J, LEVINE J 
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCING - AGGRAVATED ARMED ROBBERY - KIDNAPPING - WHETHER
SENTENCE IMPOSED WAS TOO SEVERE - On application for leave to appeal: the applicant argued: (1) the trial Judge did not grant an appropriate reduction in light of the applicant's co-operation with the police; (2) disparate sentences were imposed upon the Applicant and his co-offender; and, (3) the
Trial Judge considered the wrong maximum penalty under s90A Crimes Act.
Held: No error by sentencing judge, and in any event the sentence imposed was within the appropriate sentencing range.

ORDERS 
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal dismissed.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: Despite the well presented and careful submissions of Mr Kintominas in these proceedings, the Court is of the view that although leave to appeal should be granted, the appeal itself should be dismissed. 
The first thing that needs to be said is that the sentence imposed by his
Honour Judge Shillington on the applicant cannot by any means be regarded as severe. The crimes to which the applicant pleaded guilty were two separate robberies in company, armed with a dangerous weapon, and one of kidnapping.
The maximum sentence for armed robbery is twenty-five years and for kidnapping twenty years, subject to a qualification I will refer to subsequently.

The crimes took place on two separate occasions. The first was on 24 June 1996 at Bankstown. The sentencing judge summarised the circumstances of that crime as follows. He said: "It was a home invasion which involved breaking into a home. A number of young men took part in the breaking into the home. Some, although not including the applicant, were disguised with balaclavas. A shotgun and rifle were used. 
The rifle had a bayonet fixed to it. The occupants of the home were menaced by the intruders. A substantial amount of property was taken including $10,000 in cash, wallets, video cassette recorders and a motor vehicle." 
The judge mentioned also, as was relevant to the way in which the sentencing of the applicant should be approached, the fact that this crime came to the attention of the police more or less accidentally and was going to be one difficult for them to investigate unless they obtained information which, in the circumstances, they were going to have difficulty in obtaining.

The second armed robbery was on 3 July 1996. On that occasion, again, a number of young men broke into a home, this time at Canley Heights. There were seven offenders on this occasion, some of them carrying pistols and revolvers. The inhabitants were "rounded up", to use a term adopted by the sentencing judge, they were beaten, the premises were ransacked. The young men were looking for money, gold and anything else of value. Property was taken. There was intimidation of the occupants. One of the offenders at one stage was carrying a large kitchen knife as a menacing weapon. Something of the order of $2,000 in cash was taken, along with a quantity of jewellery and a mobile phone. An eleven year old girl in the house was taken away. The family were told that she would be kept until $50,000 was paid, when she would be released. It was also said if the money was not paid, she would be killed. She was taken from the house and, after a short time the applicant and another young man took her to a hotel at Parramatta where they booked a room and kept her during the night.

In favour of these two young men is the fact that she was not physically abused and, apparently, was quite well looked after while under their control.
In the morning, as a result of the girl having been able to pass a note into the corridor of the hotel underneath the door, the police had been called and were able to arrest the two people who were detaining her and return her to her family.

The sentences imposed by his Honour Judge Shillington were, on each of the three charges, a minimum term of two and a half years with an additional term of three and a half years, a total sentence of six years, to commence from 4
July 1996, being the morning of the arrest of the applicant. The judge altered the statutory prima facie proportion of the minimum term and the additional term because he found special circumstances, something as I understand it of which no complaint has been made in this application.

The other offender who had been concerned with keeping the girl in the hotel room overnight was also arrested when the applicant was, also pleaded guilty, and received, for the two crimes to which he pleaded guilty, namely, the armed robbery and kidnapping of 3 July 1996, the same overall sentence as the applicant.

In the application Mr Kintominas for the applicant relied on three grounds.
The first was based on the fact that when the applicant was arrested he almost immediately told the police the full story of the armed robbery and the kidnapping of the night before. In telling the full story, he identified all the participants in the crimes. Mr Kintominas stressed that this was quite an unusual step and that police investigators frequently encounter silence on the part of persons in the position of the applicant who, for one reason or another, will not give information about other people connected with crimes in regard to which they themselves are being investigated.

A further unusual feature was that the applicant indicated early on that he was prepared to give evidence against the other offenders. Mention was made of the apparent fact that he had been threatened by one of the other offenders with harm if he were to give evidence against them. Nevertheless as matters stood before the sentencing judge it appeared clear that the applicant was prepared to go ahead and give evidence when proceedings against the other offenders came before the courts.

Additionally, the applicant told the police about the circumstances of the earlier armed robbery of 24 June at Bankstown. Again he gave the police full information concerning the offenders and indicated his willingness to give evidence. It was suggested that, in accordance with the authorities laid down by this court, this attitude on the part of the applicant required the judge to make a very substantial reduction in the sentence that could have been imposed upon him had he simply pleaded guilty without giving the information to the police or indicating that he would give evidence in addition against the co-offenders.

That is quite correct, but the next step in the submission is one with which I do not agree, and that is that, in the present case, the judge did not grant an appropriate reduction because of the applicant's attitude. The sentencing judge said: "With regard to the prisoner, I substantially reduce the appropriate sentences by reason of his co-operation and the assistance which he has indicated." 
When there are taken into account the fact that there were two quite separate offences, each of them carrying a maximum penalty of twenty-five years, as well as the kidnapping offence, it seems to me there can be no doubt that, even taking into account matters relevant to the applicant apart from co- operation and assistance, such as age and absence of prior convictions, the judge must have substantially reduced the appropriate sentences.

The second matter relied upon for the applicant was that when the extent of his information giving and future co-operation as promised were taken into account, and when the sentence he received was compared with that of his co- offender, who received the same sentence without giving any information to the police and without any indication that he would give evidence that would be helpful in prosecuting the other offenders, the disparity that emerges is such as shows the Court below must have been under-estimating both the comparative gravity of what had been done by the two offenders and the extent of the co- operation furnished by the applicant to the police.

Again, I do not think that this submission should be accepted. The obvious differences between the applicant and the other offender are, first of all, the difference in age, the other offender being about two years younger than the applicant, a significant difference in view of the youth of both of them and the fact that the other offender had taken no part in the armed robbery at
Bankstown. The applicant was being sentenced for two criminal expeditions, the co-offender for one only. These differences seem to me to be quite sufficient to explain the attitude taken by the judge in arriving at his sentences on the two offenders.

The third matter relied on was what the judge said about section 90A of the
Crimes Act. That section deals with kidnapping and stipulates that somebody who commits an offence under this section: "... shall be liable to penal servitude for twenty years or, if it is proved to the satisfaction of the judge that the person kidnapped was thereafter liberated without having sustained any substantial injury, to penal servitude for fourteen years." 
At the sentencing proceedings it was submitted for the applicant that the judge should be satisfied that the kidnapped girl had been liberated without having sustained any substantial injury. There was argument before the judge about, amongst other things, the question whether "substantial injury" could include psychological injury or trauma. The judge said that: "Although in one sense the question of the maximum penalty is somewhat academic, I think it is appropriate that I should record the view I have taken of the matter." 
He then referred to Rowe's case, a recent decision in this Court, which had made it clear that the onus was on the accused person, or the person subject to be sentenced to establish, or point to evidence, from the court could conclude that the kidnapped person had been liberated without having sustained any substantial injury.

For the applicant today it was put that what the judge went on to say about these matters was part of the sentencing process which involved legal error on his part. I do not agree with this. I would think myself that the better reading of what his Honour said about the meaning of "substantial injury" in section 90A was that it was an opinion he expressed which did not play any part in his arriving at the sentence he imposed. It seems to me that he was indicating, by what I have already quoted from his remarks, that he would have arrived at the same sentence in regard to all three charges whether he considered the maximum penalty for the kidnapping charge to be twenty years or fourteen years, or perhaps, to put it more accurately, that he was saying that even if the proper answer to the section 90A question were that the penalty should be treated as penal servitude for fourteen years, then, on that basis he would arrive at the same overall decision he later pronounced.

Making that assumption, it seems to me that it could not be complained that the sentence imposed was not well within an appropriate sentencing range for the particular offence. What he said on this aspect of the case could also be read as indicating that he was not satisfied by the material before the Court relied on by the applicant that the girl had not sustained any substantial injury and, on the material before him, it would seem to me that that would be a conclusion - not a positive one, but one of not having had the onus discharged - which he was entitled to reach.

Finally if, against my own opinion, it were right to say that the judge had taken as part of his reasoning process twenty years as the maximum for kidnapping, and if he was wrong in that - on which I express no opinion because I think it unnecessary in this case - then, if as a matter of technicality, it became necessary for this Court to consider the sentence for itself, I would see no reason for departing from the sentence arrived at by the sentencing judge.

I should, however, make it clear that my view in this matter rests upon an opinion that the judge was not doing more than expressing an opinion on the proper construction of section 90A which he did not feel to be necessary for the formation of his conclusion in the sentencing process. In technical terms what he said was in my opinion by way of obiter dictum.

Reference was also made to the further subjective factors relating to this applicant. There was a good deal of material before the sentencing judge concerning his own family and personal circumstances. As I follow his Honour's reasons, he took appropriate account of these matters.

Looked at overall, I see no basis for interfering with the sentence imposed upon the applicant by his Honour Judge Shillington. Although I think it is appropriate to grant leave to appeal, I would dismiss the appeal.

STUDDERT J: I agree.

LEVINE J: I agree.

PRIESTLEY JA: The orders of the court are that leave to appeal is granted, the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
