

Gray versus State of New South Wales Matter No 2391/96 [1997] NSWSC 280 (31
July 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 `John Gray & Anor versus State of New South Wales & 2 Ors` ` 2391/96` `31 July 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `2391/96 - JOHN GRAY & ANOR versus STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES & 2 ORS` `JUDGMENT:` 
HIS HONOUR: This case concerns a dispute between the plaintiffs, who are the registered proprietors as joint tenants of land at number 17 Wilberforce Avenue, Rose Bay and the owners and occupiers of the Rose Bay Public School which adjoins it roughly to the east. The Rose Bay School has been carried on at its site since 1891. The plaintiffs came to their premises well after this in 1983. 
The school has doubtless changed with the times and that has meant that the population on the school campus has changed, both in numbers and in the make up of those numbers. At present there are slightly more infants, that is, those in kindergarten, 1st or 2nd class, than in the primary school, that is those in 3rd to 6th class.

In addition to the school, the second defendant, under licence from the first defendant, carries on business as an out of school hours child caring centre.
This centre operates approximately between 7.30am and 9.20am and 2.30pm and pm during school term and approximately 8 to 6pm during school vacations.

The school is bounded by streets or lanes on three sides, but the plaintiffs' property is on the fourth side and indeed, the school adjoins the property of the plaintiffs both to its east and its south.

Prior to approximately 1991, immediately over the plaintiffs' eastern boundary, there were some three coral trees and to the south of those coral trees was some wooden play equipment. Somewhere between 1991 and 1993 the coral trees were removed and in 1993 to 1994 some new play equipment was erected, the western extremity of which is approximately four metres from the plaintiffs' fence.

About this time, disputes started to emerge between the plaintiffs and the school. The plaintiffs' main complaint was that the children from the infants department of the school and the children from the out of school hours centre made a large amount of noise on the new equipment that was a nuisance to the plaintiffs. There were other objections as well.

The law in this sort of case is tolerably clear. The law of nuisance, the tort upon which the plaintiffs sue, is not to protect people, but to protect property values. That is so because it is an ancient remedy that has come down through the ages. Thus the mere fact that one is disturbed by noise or one gets irritated by prying children or one's privacy is invaded is not sufficient to make out the tort of nuisance. For some of those invasions there are remedies, for others none at all. For some, the matter is dealt with in most sites by Local Government planning policies, but that is of no assistance in the instant case because the Crown site of the Rose Bay School is not subject to those policies.

The plaintiffs are, however, entitled not to have the value of their property diminished by the noisy activities of the defendants. When judging noisy activities one realises that there has to be noise in a modern community and that no one can really complain about noise until it gets to such a stage that the average member of the community objectively would say that the noise is unreasonable. All parties have furnished written submissions and that proposition comes from the cases that they have cited, particularly the recent decision of Hodgson J in Seidler versus Luna Park Reserve Trust 21 September , unreported.

It is a question of fact as to whether the noise is unreasonable or not.

There are two defendants in this case, the State of New South Wales, which owns and controls the school, and the second defendant, Rose Bay Out of Hours
Care Centre Inc, a non-profit corporation formed under the Associations
Incorporation Act. The school occupies the site between 9.20 am and approximately 3.30 pm each day during the school term. The second defendant occupies it outside school hours at the times I have mentioned.

I have yet to make a final determination and I will formally reserve my decision. However, it seems to me at the moment that whilst the noise during the lunch hour is very loud noise and would cause some irritation, I am not yet convinced that it is so unreasonable as to amount to an actionable nuisance. I will consider my decision on that matter, because it will be necessary for me to listen again to the tape and to read again the evidence, but that is my provisional view at this time.

The other possible aspect of the case against the first defendant is that it failed to exercise its powers of control over the second defendant to ensure that it did not commit a nuisance. The first defendant had granted a licence to the second defendant which has actually expired, but seems to be continued on informally, and under that licence the second defendant was to submit to the control of the Headmaster of the school. For instance, under covenant (i) the second defendant is to ensure that any children are properly supervised and to make sure that their activities are not detrimental to the good name of the school. I thought that part of the case against the first defendant was that the Headmaster had failed to give sufficient directions to make sure that the second defendant abided by that. However, there was a singular lack of cross-examination on that point and it seems to me at the moment that again that case has not been made out, but that is a further matter that I will need to consider.

If my view, after looking at the evidence again, remains as it is at the moment, then the consequence is that the plaintiffs fail against the first defendant and there should be a verdict for the first defendant with costs.

As against the second defendant the matter is much clearer. It would seem to me that the second defendant is generating noise far in excess of what is reasonable. A problem is that that noise appears to be not only noise from people playing on the equipment, but also generally shrill noices emanating from the children that the second defendant does not really appear to be making any realistic attempts to stop. It may be that the second defendant is performing a useful community service in watching over children whose parents are at work from 8.30 am until 6 pm, but it is conducting that business on land which is not subject to any planning controls and so it is left for the common law tort of nuisance to control what is reasonable and what is unreasonable. Again, it will be necessary for me to consider the evidence in detail, but my present view is that the noise, at least from the wooden play apparatus, is excessive, and there should be an award of damages of say $1,000 and an injunction at common law to prevent repetition, and that would probably also carry an award of costs. There may be some argument as to whether any
Bullock or Sanderson order should be made.

The practicalities are, however, that the second defendant is an impecunious corporation and that one practical result, if the case turns out that way, is that there will just be a new corporation formed which will not be bound by any order and the problem will continue all over again.

To date, there has been criticism of both sides that they are not willing to talk to each other. The parties are entitled to take this stance and to go to law and to have a decision made. I will make that decision. However, it seems to me, and the parties consent to this, that it would be appropriate merely to grant an interim injunction at this stage for, say, two to three months. In that period the parties may be able to settle the matter, having some guidance from the preliminary reasons I have given, or it may be that, at least a fortnight before the period expires, they will tell my Associate that the matter cannot be resolved and that they require a formal judgment.

It seems to me that the main complaint is as to the wooden structure. I will formulate an order which will be primarily addressing this problem, but I will permit counsel to tidy up the wording and to bring in short minutes at a convenient time, but that the order should be somewhat as follows:- 
Upon the plaintiffs, by their counsel, giving the usual undertaking as to damages, up to and including 3 November 1997, the second defendant, by itself, its servants and agents, is restrained from permitting any child to stray over a line drawn ten metres parallel to the dividing fence between the eastern boundary of the plaintiffs' land and western boundary of the school site, between 3.40 pm and midnight, with liberty to apply.

The Court will note that it expects that a line will be painted on the surface to ease policing of this order and the Court also expects that the Headmaster and the person in charge of the school centre will use their best endeavours to ensure that children do not emit screaming noises, nor throw objects over the dividing fence.

That is not an injunction, that is merely indicating what I expect. The short minutes should provide for the 4 boxes, PX08, to leave the Court's custody.
Either these can go back to the plaintiffs or the contents returned to the defendants after photographing.

I will then stand the matter over to 9.50 am on 3 November 1997. I would hope that counsel would let me know by the middle of October whether there needs to be a formal judgment or something else.
 * * * 
