

Chia versus Rennie and Ors Matter No 2345/97 [1997] NSWSC 200 (16 May 1997) ` 
Peng Tin Chia versus Kenneth John Rennie & Ors` ` 2345/97` `16 May 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 - PENG TIN CHIA versus KENNETH JOHN RENNIE & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a mortgagor to restrain the sale by a mortgagee. There is a cross-claim by the mortgagee to remove the mortgagor's caveat. 
There are four parties to these proceedings, namely: the plaintiff mortgagor, Dr Chia; the receiver for the mortgagee, Mr Rennie, the first defendant; the mortgagee, the State Bank of New South Wales Limited, which is the second defendant; and the purchaser from Mr Rennie, Hoyts Cinemas Limited, the third defendant.

For ease of reference, I will merely refer to those parties as the mortgagor, the receiver, the mortgagee and the purchaser respectively.

The mortgagor owes a considerable amount of money to the mortgagee, which debt is secured not only by the mortgage over the property in question in the present case, but also over other property. The property in question in the instant case can be conveniently described as the Astro Cinema at Mt Druitt, which, it would appear, is a centre consisting of four cinemas together with the usual appendages. The purchaser is another operator of cinemas in the area.

The mortgagee appointed the receiver some time ago but there was a dispute as to the validity of the appointment, which, in due course, was resolved. What happened during that dispute, it would seem, further detrimentally affected the relationship between the mortgagor and the mortgagee.

The mortgagor had been seeking to settle with the mortgagee from, at least,
October 1996. However, the settlement contemplated was not that the full amount owed to the bank would be paid, but rather the deal was, in colloquial financial language, that the mortgagee would "take a hair cut", that is, the bank would take less than its full debt in final satisfaction. The question was: how severe a hair cut would the mortgagee take? That, of course, depended, so far as the mortgagee was concerned, on what it could get for the property which it held as security, and its assessment of the worth of the personal covenant.

The mortgagor seems to have attempted, as a wise mortgagor would, to offer as little as possible hoping that in due course he could make the best deal possible. He and his negotiator, a Mr Platcher, made various offers to the mortgagee, especially during the month of March 1997. On 23 April, Mr Soulos, an officer of the mortgagee, wrote to Mr Platcher a letter, the third paragraph of which read: 
The correct position is that your clients [sic] settlement offer in an amount of $2,750,000 has been received however, no decision will be made as to acceptance or rejection until such time as the tender process for the sale of the Astro Cinema has been concluded.

There had, indeed, been a large number of telephone calls between Mr Soulos and Mr Platcher both before and after this letter. Both gentlemen have filed affidavits. The conversations which they set out in their affidavits differ in their terms, sometimes on critical matters, but there is no doubt at all that there were continued negotiations or - perhaps that word is too heavy - discussions.

It would seem to me that these discussions may reasonably have produced in the mortgagor and Mr Platcher the impression that they would be afforded a reasonable period, once the tender process had been completed, to make a final offer to the mortgagee.

At the same time as this was going on, the receiver, an experienced insolvency accountant, was considering what was the best price to get for the Astro
Cinema. He obtained a valuation from a reputable valuer. The valuer had to value the business rather than just the land and there were obviously various "X factors" considered by the valuer, which were more or less professional guesses. But, even taking that into account, the valuer provided the receiver with a well reasoned assessment of the worth of the Astro Cinema. That assessment was that the cinema as a going concern would be worth between $2m and $2.3m.

The receiver considered the various people who might be interested and made contact with them and also placed advertisements in The Financial Review and
Sydney Morning Herald. The best offer that was received was an offer by the purchaser for $2.3m.

The offer was made by the purchaser by letter of Friday 2 May, the penultimate paragraph of which said: 
This offer remains valid for acceptance up until 5 pm Monday 5 May 1997 after which it lapses.

The solicitor for the mortgagee wrote to the solicitors for the mortgagor on 2
May a letter which included the following: 
We are instructed that if your client wishes to increase his offer to compromise the amount owing to the mortgagee, he should put the offer in writing to us by 3 pm Monday 5 May 1997.

After that date, our client will deal with all offers received, but cannot offer "last right of refusal" to your client or any other party.

On 5 May the mortgagor's solicitors wrote in reply quarrelling with some of the propositions in the letter but going on to say: 
Without prejudice to our client's rights and without any admissions, we are instructed to make a further "compromise offer" for the settlement of the whole of our client's debt of $3.3m. ...

It is necessary that you advise us as to the acceptance or otherwise of this offer by 5 pm today.

At about 5 pm that day, by letter the receiver accepted the purchaser's offer.
The letter reads as follows: 
I would like to formally accept your offer to purchase the Astro Cinema on the terms and conditions as set out in you letter dated 2 May 1997.

To recapitulate, the key terms are ... [five terms were then set out]... .

I have instructed my solicitors to draw the appropriate sales documents based on the above terms ...

Various issues arise between the parties. The first is whether it is now open to the mortgagor to redeem the mortgage. If it is, Mr Hodgekiss of counsel for the mortgagor, made an offer to redeem and asks that the matter be sent to the
Master to assess the pay-out figure with a default order that if that sum were not paid within 28 days the mortgagor would be foreclosed.

Mr Jackman for the receiver and mortgagee, who is joined in this by Mr Lever and Mr Gooley for the purchaser, put that it was too late to redeem because a binding contract for sale by the mortgagee destroys the equity of redemption.
He referred to Waring versus The London & Manchester Assurance Co Ltd [[1935] Ch 310] and to the summary of the law in Fisher and Lightwood's Law of Mortgage Australian Edition paragraphs 20.7 and 20.34.

Mr Hodgekiss submitted that that proposition was not applicable to Torrens land in Australia. I appreciate that there is a difference with Torrens land, but it seems to me that the Waring case is as much applicable to
Torrens land in Australia as it is to common law title land in England and that although the words "equity of redemption" are used in different senses in the different jurisdictions the net effect is the same.

Has there then been a binding contract for sale? 
The well known decision in Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] at 360 sets out three classes of cases where persons have made an agreement to sell land but have not yet entered into a formal contract. However, as pointed out by McClelland J and the Court of Appeal in
GR Securities Pty Ltd versus Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd [(1986) 40
NSWLR 622] and 631 respectively, there is really a fourth class of case where the parties are content to be bound immediately and exclusively by the terms upon which they have agreed whilst expecting to make a further contract in substitution for the first contract containing "by consent" additional terms. These words come from the judgment of the High Court in Sinclair-
Scott & Co versus Naughton <case>; [(1929) 43 CLR 310], 317.

Both Mr Jackman and Mr Lever submit that the case is in the fourth class. I think it would be wrong for me to determine that matter finally because there may be other factors involved. There is, for instance, the factor that with contracts for the sale of land there is at least a weak presumption that parties do not intend to bind themselves finally until they have exchanged formal contracts and when parties are dealing with a property worth $2.3m that presumption becomes stronger. However, on the material before me at present, it would seem to me more likely than not that the contract does fall into the fourth class, so that there is a binding contract which doubtless, in due course, will be succeeded by exchange of more formal and detailed forms of contract.

Accordingly, at this stage, I find more likely than not that there is a binding contract which would preclude redemption.

That then takes me to the other aspect of this case, whether an interlocutory injunction should be granted because the mortgagee has conducted itself in a way which was false and misleading in trade or commerce contrary to either s of the Trade Practices Act or <case> of the Fair Trading Act.

On the material before me at this stage, I would think that there is a prima facie case that there has been such conduct. There is a prima facie case that the mortgagee did give the impression to the mortgagor that it would be willing to deal with him and to listen to offers after the tender process was concluded. However, the mortgagee's internal documents show that its attitude to the mortgagor was that he had been "unco-operative, dishonest and obstructive throughout the course of his banking relationship", and accordingly it would give him very little credibility.

The case appears to be that there was false and misleading conduct because the negotiations between Mr Platcher and the mortgagee were proceeding on the basis that they were bona fide negotiations and that after the tender process had been completed, there would be a reasonable time to make an appropriate offer whereas the mortgagee was never intending to "do a deal" with him and inadequate time was to be left for dealing after the offer from the purchaser was made.

As Mr Jackman pointed out, there is authority for the proposition that the mortgagor is not entitled to be told what is the highest offer anyone else is making before a deal is done with the highest bidder. See Stoyanovich v
National Westminster Finance (1984) 3 BPR 9310. However, where an expectation has been engendered in a mortgagor that that will occur, the situation might be quite different.

Although the authorities express the proposition in different terms, normally before a person can take advantage of a breach of <case> of the Trade Practices
Act or <case> of the Fair Trading Act, the person must show that he or she has been induced to do something or has refrained from doing something because of the false and misleading conduct. See, eg, Kabwand Pty Ltd versus National
Australia Bank Ltd [(1989) 11 ATPR 40-950] at -378.

In the instant case, the mortgagor's evidence that he might have conducted himself differently is relatively sketchy. Mr Hodgekiss says that the mortgagor had no opportunity to act differently. I give some credit for that answer, but it is not the complete answer because the mortgagor knew he owed a lot more money than he was prepared to offer to the mortgagee and that the mortgagee was pursuing other avenues and so probably he should have been ready at short notice to make his best offer.

However, even if the mortgagor succeeds on the issue of a prima facie case, the other matters which the court must consider when deciding whether or not to grant an interlocutory injunction, to my mind, tell against the mortgagor.
The whole picture that is presented is that the mortgagor would be extremely fortunate under any circumstances to be able to save much of his previous empire, and I am not persuaded that in this sort of case damages would not be an adequate remedy. The mortgaged property is not the mortgagor's home. It is an investment property, and in commercial terms, money is usually a fair equivalent for what is lost.

So far as the balance of convenience is concerned, the mortgagor is not able to provide an adequate undertaking as to damages. The damages could be quite considerable so far as both the mortgagee and the purchaser are concerned.

These factors make me consider that I should not grant interlocutory relief.
Accordingly, the interlocutory claim fails. If the matter is to proceed it should be by way of pleadings. So I direct that the plaintiff file and serve a statement of claim within 28 days and thence pleadings go in accordance with the Rules. I order that the plaintiff pay the costs of the proceedings to date.

I make an order that caveat 3042082 be withdrawn before 4 pm on 19 May 1997.
The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
