

C L Millard versus Allco Steel Constructions P/L [1996] NSWSC 402 (4 September )

COLIN LESLIE MILLARD versus ALLCO STEEL CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LIMITED /95 
WEDNESDAY 4 SEPTEMBER 1996 
REVISED THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an action in which the plaintiff seeks damages for the consequences of injuries which he sustained in an accident on 31 March 1992 whilst in the employ of the defendant. Thanks to the co-operation of counsel, the issues have been refined and focused to such a degree that it will be possible to give judgment forthwith.

The plaintiff was born on 4 September 1946. He therefore attains his fiftieth year today. After leaving school he eventually found work as a rigger, and that has substantially been the type of work which he has followed throughout his life. A subsidiary occupation has involved his being a driver. When he was aged twenty-six he travelled to New Zealand, where he met and married. He and his wife had three children. That marriage was in the process of breaking down when the plaintiff returned to Australia to seek work. Whilst he was here, a conclusion was reached that the marriage was no longer viable, and as I understand it he is now divorced, although he maintains contact with his children. He had spent something in the order of eighteen to twenty years in total in New Zealand.

After he returned to Australia, I am satisfied that it was his intention to seek to re-establish his career as a rigger, and so far as the evidence reveals, he was well on the way to so doing. He did have a period in which he was occupied as a casual driver, but the inference I draw from that is that he was prepared to do other forms of work whilst seeking to re-establish himself.

At the time of injury he was working on the construction of a pot line at the
Tomago aluminium smelter. The particular task upon which he was engaged involved the fixing of galvanised iron purlins about fourteen feet long to erect reinforced steel joists. At the relevant time the operation involved two riggers, each ascending one of the RSJs to which the purlin was to be affixed.
After each had done so in a turnabout fashion, one of the riggers would move along the length of the fixed purlin to the approximate centre point in order to detach the hook and sling. This apparatus had been used to raise the purlin into position.

On the day in question it had been raining on and off, and about fifteen minutes after a shower I accept that the leading hand told the riggers to return to their task. I am satisfied that at that time the purlin would not have been completely dry and its surface would have been slippery.

After the fixing of one of these purlins, which was situated about four metres above the concrete ground level, the plaintiff moved to detach the sling and hook. He was equipped with a safety belt and lanyard. The lanyard itself was looped around another purlin fixed above his head. In order to bend down, there was sufficient play to enable him to release the hook, but not to undo the sling. In order to achieve this, he undid the lanyard. He performed the required task and was in the process of reattaching the lanyard when his foot slipped and he fell to the ground.

No submission was made that the facts do not involve breach of the relevant regulations made under the Construction Safety Act which have been pleaded against the defendant. I am satisfied that the operation was carried out in a method which I infer was known to the defendant and it contained not only the potential for breach of the regulation but, I would say, self-evident risks.

Mr Dodd of counsel for the defendant, in his usual realistic fashion, did not contend that the plaintiff had not made out a case for damages, but limited his submissions to the issue of contributory negligence, now made available in such circumstances, pursuant to the Workers Compensation Act, 1987, s
N.

In my view the facts do not demonstrate that the defendant has sustained the assertion of contributory negligence. I have not elaborated a number of assignments of negligence upon which the plaintiff relied, and it suffices to refer to the presence of a dogman or crane chaser who may have been equipped with a ladder of sufficient height to enable him to safely detach the sling.
The plaintiff also indicates that he was supplied with safety boots which were, when compared to safety shoes, less suitable for the task involved. In this regard I accept the evidence of the witness Daly, who had been a longer term employee and apparently had had the benefit of an earlier choice of available safety footwear.

It is true that the plaintiff himself detached the lanyard, but accepting as I do his evidence that it was he who was required to undo the sling, there would seem to be no other practicable way of his being able to get down to perform the necessary task, other than that which he undertook. As I have already said, this method by implication, having been used before, was within at least the imputed knowledge of the defendant and I am unprepared to find that in conducting himself in an approved albeit risky fashion, the plaintiff is to be found guilty of contributory negligence. In my view he should have a verdict undiminished by such a consideration.

The plaintiff's injuries were serious. Indeed, except as regards emphasis, there is little real dispute in the medical material, all of which has been received by way of report. There has been some submission made concerning the psychological effects upon the plaintiff, but having regard to the extent of injury and residual disability, I find that is of but peripheral significance.

The plaintiff's major injuries were to the left foot and to the back. Somewhat understating the extent of complications a list of injuries can be given as: 
Fracture of the left os calcis; 
Crush fractures of the 11th and 12th thoracic vertebrae; 
Lumbo sacral disc prolapse; and 
Lumbar spondylosis.

It is a sufficient indication of the seriousness of the plaintiff's injuries that one can schedule the four major surgical interventions which have been necessary. On 28 April 1993 there was an excision of the lumbo sacral disc. On September 1993 there was, at separate operation, a fusion at that level. On May 1994 a triple arthrodesis was performed in the area of the left foot and ankle. That failed to take, and a revision was undertaken on 6 June 1995. The treating surgeon who attended to his foot described the injury as significant, both as to injury and disability. For what it is worth, he expressed himself as rating a permanent disability of 20 per cent with regard to function of the left lower limb below the knee.

The back surgery was undertaken by Prof Ghabrial, who noted the plaintiff's complaints as recently as August 1996 as including low back pain and pain radiating to the back of the thighs. This was a history relating to earlier days, and of course, the surgical intervention was undertaken in order to ameliorate the plaintiff's condition.

Prof Ghabrial opined that the plaintiff was likely to continue with disabilities in the lower back as well as, of course, the left leg. He thought that the plaintiff was not fit for any activities involving lifting, excessive bending, sitting or standing for lengthy periods, walking on uneven grounds, climbing ladders or going up and down stairs excessively. He commented that he believed that the plaintiff would never be able to get back to any useful employment because of his disabilities. Again, for what it is worth, in terms of percentage he rated the permanent impairment of the back at 45 per cent.

I accept the various opinions of Prof Ghabrial and Dr Mitchell, as I accept the thrust of the evidence given by the plaintiff himself. The consequence is that the damages to reflect his losses must be co-ordinately substantial.

It is agreed between the parties that the out-of-pocket expenses to date are $45,256.15. There should also be included in the judgment sum $10,258.52 in order to avoid the detriment identified by the High Court in Fox versus Wood.

It is agreed between the parties that the amount of $10 per week should be included in the damages to enable the plaintiff to purchase necessary medications over the period of his approximate present life expectancy of twenty-five years. To take that into account, $7,537 should be included in the damages.

I turn then to the issue of economic loss. I am satisfied that but for the accident the plaintiff would have continued in employment as a rigger throughout the substantial balance of his working life, and that any change towards the end of it would involve him selecting other suitable employment which would be equally remunerative to him.

When the plaintiff was employed by the defendant his average nett earnings were $545 per week. That employment extended over a period of only about seven or eight weeks. There is an abundance of evidence that the nature of the employment of riggers is that they move from job to job as particular projects are undertaken. I am satisfied on the evidence that a rigger of the plaintiff's talents would be likely to be employed on a regular basis in the sense that there would be no untoward unpaid gaps in employment other than those that he elected to take. I am fortified in that conclusion by the evidence of Mr Daly and Mr Vesperman who are both riggers and who have continued in congenial employment in this district during the years since the plaintiff's accident. It is true that the plaintiff is slightly older than one of them and somewhat older than the other, but I do not regard that as a factor which should lead to any diminution in the calculation of damage.

Accordingly I have come to the conclusion that, approaching the matter in the conventional fashion as to past economic loss and then looking at the future, it will, for the purpose of loss to the present, be appropriate to take a figure of $545 a week as an appropriate guide.

Mr Dodd, noting that the latest revision operation to the left foot was performed as recently as June of 1995, conceded that at least till the end of that year the plaintiff could be regarded as totally incapacitated for any practical paid employment. I accept, of course, that concession, but in my own judgment there is no good reason to terminate the loss at that extent at that point, and I see no reason why the plaintiff should not recover, as tort induced damage, loss for the period up to the present, and as I have indicated, using the figure of $545 a week nett as a guide.

The element to be included in the damages for economic loss to date therefore should be $125,895.

I turn to what can conveniently be referred to as future economic loss. The plaintiff postulates this claim, through Mr Callaway of Queens Counsel and Mr
Kirby, at a sum of $563 per week. I should elaborate, however, on the nature of this submission.

There is evidence specifically concerning Mr Vesperman and Mr Daly that their average earnings have exceeded this sum. Therefore it is put there is in-built into the submission some allowance for residual earning capacity, and the submission is that I should take the figure of $563 per week and project that over the next fifteen years of the plaintiff's working life to the age of sixty-five, capitalise it using the authorised 5 per cent tables and discount by the conventional 15 per cent to take account of presumed excess of adverse over benevolent vicissitudes.

The plaintiff is, as I have indicated, obviously unfit for most forms of manual endeavour. He is without agility and he is afflicted with pain from time to time. Such residual capacity as he has is likely in the future, in my view, to be productive of only a modest return. I consider that the approach submitted on his behalf is perhaps slightly too much in his favour, but on the other hand I regard the approach contended by the defendant as slightly too much tending in the other direction. That submission was that I should assume that as against a calculated loss of $563 per week, there should be a contra for the value of residual earning capacity of something in the order of $150 per week.

The plaintiff was, prior to his injury, an active man. There is evidence that whilst in New Zealand he was an active and successful club golfer. Although he has been handicapped for four years now, he still presents as a man who keeps himself, within his limitations, reasonably fit.

I have come to the conclusion that it will do justice between the parties to approach the matter of future economic loss in this fashion. I do so on the basis that I would not have applied in this particular case a discount for adverse vicissitudes as high as 15 per cent, but what I propose to do is to capitalise on a loss of $563 per week and to discount that by 20 per cent.
That discount will include within it not only the discount for adverse vicissitudes but the value of any residual capacity.

The undiscounted capitalised figure at the authorised rate is $312,465. A discount of 20 per cent would reduce that to $249,972 and I propose to include that sum within the damages to represent future economic loss.

This leaves outstanding the final element of the plaintiff's damages, being a solatium payable to him for non-economic loss. I am required by the dictates of the statute to approach this matter by proportioning the plaintiff's loss against the notion of a most extreme case. I emphasise that what is involved is the notion of a most extreme case, and not the most extreme case.

I think I have sufficiently indicated the overall handicaps which the plaintiff has suffered. I take into account his age and his former apparent outstanding fitness. Taking all those matters into account, I proportion his losses at 55 per cent of a most extreme case. The relevant representative figure for a most extreme case is $204,000. Therefore the element to be included in the plaintiff's damages would be $112,200.

It is convenient to recapitulate the ingredients in this assessment of the plaintiff's damages.

The out-of-pockets expenses $45,256.15 
Fox versus Wood 10,258.52 
Future medication 7,537.00 
Economic loss to date 125,895.00 
Future economic loss 249,972.00 
Non-economic loss 112,200.00 
Total $551,118.67 
In para 4 of the defence the defendant pleads payment pursuant to the statute already mentioned. It is undisputed that that defence is sustained to the extent of $111,551.03. Taking that defence into account, there is a nett amount of $439,567.64.

I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $440,000. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of action. I grant liberty to either party to apply to correct any of that arithmetic after it has been checked.

CALLAWAY: The only outstanding matter is the matter of interest, your Honour. That is only available in certain circumstances, which I need I think to discuss with my friend.

HIS HONOUR: I will add, to the liberty to apply, liberty to apply in respect of interest, during these sittings.
 * * * 
