

Serobian & Anor versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia [2009] NSWSC 1312 (27
November 2009) # [![\[AustLII\]](1312.1.gif)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/) Supreme Court of
New South Wales Decisions [[Index](index.html)] [[Search](/cgi-bin/sinoform.pl)] [[Download](1312.rtf)] [[Help](/help/cases-help.html)] * * * 
Serobian & Anor versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia [2009] NSWSC 1312 (27
November 2009) 
Last Updated: 1 December 2009 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Serobian & Anor versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /09  
HEARING DATE(S):  November 2009  
JUDGMENT DATE:  November 2009  
EX TEMPORE DATE:  November 2009  
PARTIES: 
First Plaintiff: Shahen Serobian 
Second Plaintiff: Christine Serobian 
Defendant: Commonwealth Bank of Australia  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Slattery J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiffs: Christine Serobian (Self-Represented) 
Defendant: Mr J Falconer  
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiffs: Christine Serobian (Self-Represented) 
Defendant: Henry Davis York  
CATCHWORDS: 
EQUITY  equitable remedies  injunctions  borrower/mortgagor seeks an injunction restraining the defendant bank's exercise of a power of sale over the security property  borrower/mortgager unable to tender or pay into Court the moneys secured  party seeking equity unable to do equity  injunction refused  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CATEGORY: 
Principal judgment  
CASES CITED: 
Inglis versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia (1971) 126 CLR 161 
Wilby versus St George Bank [(2001) 80 SASR 404]  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Injunctive relief against defendant declined. Adjourned to Tuesday 1 December before the Duty Judge.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
DUTY LIST  
SLATTERY J  
FRIDAY 27 NOVEMBER 2009  /09 SHAHEN SEROBIAN AND CHRISTINE SEROBIAN versus COMMONWEALTH BANK OF
AUSTRALIA 
JUDGMENT HIS HONOUR: At approximately 4 pm today Christine Serobian appeared in person before the Court upon her notice of motion seeking injunctive relief against the Commonwealth Bank of Australia. Although her claim is put in several ways, she seeks to restrain the bank's proposed sale of a property in Addison Road, Manly. In conformity with the Court's policy of reducing the risk of identity theft, the precise address of the property is not published in this judgment. At this time of day and because of other business in the duty list I have had limited time to become familiar with the wider history of this case. I have read Ms Serobian's principal affidavit of 27 November 2009. I have also read her submission in support of her motion.  Ms Serobian says that until very recently she had understood that the property would be sold by auction on Saturday 5 December 2009. She says that only in the last day or so she discovered that the bank might sell the property before auction. The property will be opened for inspection this coming weekend.  I have asked Mr Falconer, who appears on behalf of the bank, whether any interim undertaking is to be provided by the bank that the bank will not exchange contracts on the property over the weekend, if a buyer is found by the bank before Tuesday of next week when the matter is next before the Court for directions. At the very short notice Ms Serobian provided of her application, the bank is not able to get instructions this afternoon. The officer in charge of the file is not currently contactable at the bank.  Many matters between the parties have been determined in related proceedings by Hammerschlag J after a contested hearing. His Honour made orders for possession of a number of properties including the subject property.  Ms Serobian has said to me that she wishes to make allegations of fraud and various forms of malpractice against the bank in these proceedings. The bank says that these allegations were substantially already dealt with in the proceedings before Hammerschlag J. I have asked Ms Serobian to outline some of them to me. In her outline she referred to matters relating to aspects of the evidence before Hammerschlag J and to the alleged failure by the bank to credit proceeds of sale of about $275,000 from another security property against the bank's claim against her and her family companies.  I am told that the overall debt owing by the interests associated with Ms
Serobian together with accumulated interest is about $8,000,000. Approximately $6,000,000 is said by Ms Serobian to be the accumulated interest.  I have explained to Ms Serobian that there is a long standing principle stated by the High Court in Inglis versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia (1971) CLR 161 that a mortgagor in default seeking the assistance of a Court of
Equity to restrain a mortgagee from exercising a power of sale, over a security must tender or pay into Court the funds owed. The principle is based on the maxim that he who seeks equity must do equity. In the case of a transaction involving the loan of moneys it has invariably been held to be incumbent on a borrower seeking relief in equity to tender the amount due together with interest: Wilby versus St George Bank [(2001) 80 SASR 404] at [77].  I have asked Ms Serobian whether she is in a position to comply with this principle and tender the funds owed or at least those equivalent to the bank's security property in question. She has candidly indicated to the Court that she is not able to do this. In those circumstances I must apply this principle of law.  I decline to grant the relief sought in the motion today on an interlocutory basis. I will not, however, dismiss the motion. Ms Serobian had only limited time to present her case today because of the press of other matters in the duty list. Also there may be other relief that Ms Serobian still seeks under the motion. I will therefore adjourn this motion before the Duty Judge on
Tuesday next week, when the matter is listed for directions.  
LAST UPDATED:  November 2009 * * * 
