

Regina versus Hood Matter No 60127/97 [1997] NSWSC 252 (9 July 1997) `Regina versus Anthony James Hood` ` 60127/97` `9 July 1997` `Gleeson CJ, James J, Sperling J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` /97 REGINA versus ANTHONY JAMES HOOD 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask James J to give the first judgment. 
JAMES J: This is a Crown appeal brought by the Director of Public
Prosecutions pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act against sentences imposed on the respondent, Anthony James Hood, by his Honour Judge Moore in the District Court on 21 February 1997.

The respondent was sentenced by Judge Moore on the following charges: 
A charge of falsely representing to another police officer, Const Moore, that a particular motor vehicle, which was in fact owned by the respondent, had been stolen, with intent to pervert the course of justice.

This was an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act and carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for fourteen years.

A charge that on or about 24 January 1992 by a deception, namely, that he falsely represented that he was not the driver of the same motor vehicle, he dishonestly obtained for himself a financial advantage from NRMA Insurance
Limited, being the value of repairs to the vehicle in the sum of $8,873.

This was an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act, which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for five years.

A charge that on 8 December 1995, being a person giving evidence on oath before the Police Royal Commission, he gave evidence which was to his knowledge false in a material particular; namely, that on 1 November 1991 he did not know the driver of the same motor vehicle which had been involved in the collision.

This was an offence under <case> of the Royal Commissions Act and carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for five years.

The respondent had been committed for sentence after entering pleas of guilty in the Local Court and before Judge Moore the respondent had adhered to those pleas of guilty.

The respondent asked Judge Moore to take into account, and Judge Moore took into account in sentencing the respondent, a further offence under <case> of the
Royal Commissions Act that on 8 December 1995 he gave knowingly false evidence before the Police Royal Commission, that he had never received any money from a man called Panebianco. At the time of committing all of the offences the respondent was a serving police officer.

On each of the three charges to which the respondent had pleaded guilty Judge
Moore imposed a sentence of a minimum term of penal servitude or imprisonment of nine months eleven days, commencing on 21 February 1997, the day on which the sentences were pronounced, and an additional term of six months.

The unusual duration of the sentences imposed by his Honour was explained by his Honour in his remarks on sentence as arising from the existence of a sentence previously imposed on the respondent to which he was still subject and from the need to observe the sentencing principle of totality.

On 13 February 1997, only a few days before Judge Moore sentenced the respondent, the Court of Criminal Appeal had delivered its reserved decision on an application by the respondent for leave to appeal against a sentence which had been imposed on him in the District Court in 1996, following a plea of guilty to a charge of unlawfully and intentionally obtaining access to data being stored in a computer being data he ought reasonably to have known related to the personal affairs of a person. This was an offence under s 309(3)(e) of the Crimes Act and carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for two years. This offence had also been committed while the respondent was a serving police officer.

The respondent had used his position as a police officer to obtain information from RTA computer records and had supplied it to a man named Panebianco, who was the same person as is referred to in the second offence of giving false evidence before the Royal Commission. The respondent had actually been tried on this charge in 1995 but the jury had been unable to agree. Before a retrial was held the respondent had given evidence before the Police Royal Commission and had thereafter changed his plea to a plea of guilty.

In its reserved decision of 13 February 1997 the Court of Criminal Appeal granted the respondent leave to appeal, allowed his appeal, and substituted for the sentence which had been imposed at first instance, which had been a sentence of twenty months consisting of a minimum term of fifteen months and an additional term of five months, a sentence of imprisonment for sixteen months, consisting of a minimum term of imprisonment of twelve months commencing on 3 June 1996 and expiring on 2 June 1997, and an additional term of four months. The Court of Criminal Appeal allowed the respondent's appeal, principally on the ground that in the proceedings on sentence before the sentencing judge the respondent had been wrongly compelled to answer a question about evidence given by him before the Police Royal Commission.

When Judge Moore came to sentence the respondent for the present offences his
Honour said that he had to observe the principle of totality in sentencing.
His Honour said that, in his opinion, an appropriate total sentence for the offence of unlawfully obtaining access to the data stored in the computer, the three offences to which the respondent had pleaded guilty and the further offence to be taken into account, would be two years, consisting of a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months. Accordingly, in each sentence passed by his Honour his Honour imposed a minimum term of nine months eleven days, commencing on 2 February 1997 and expiring on 2 December , so that the total period the respondent would have to spend in prison would be eighteen months from 3 June 1996 to 2 December 1997 and there would be an additional term of six months. It may be that in making the sentences he imposed commence from the date of sentence and not from the expiration of the minimum term of the sentence previously imposed his Honour did not comply with s 9 of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).

A notice of appeal by the Director of Public Prosecutions against the sentences imposed by Judge Moore was filed on 13 March 1997 and the respondent was served with the notice of appeal on 14 March 1997.

The statement of the objective facts of the offences by the sentencing judge in his remarks on sentence closely followed a statement of the facts of the offences which had been admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence.

All of the three offences for which the respondent was sentenced arose out of a motor vehicle accident which occurred in the early morning of 1 November
On the night of 31 October/1 November 1991 the respondent had been at a function at which he consumed alcohol. The function seems to have been a wake for a friend of the respondent who had died in hospital that afternoon. At about 3 o'clock on the morning of 1 November 1991 the respondent's vehicle, which he was driving, ran into the back of another vehicle travelling in the same direction. After the collision the respondent left his vehicle and ran from the scene of the accident. He was chased by a number of unidentified persons. They succeeded in catching him but he told them he was a police officer and persuaded them to let him go. The respondent then went to a function at a nightclub, at which a number of police officers were present and where alcohol was being consumed.

Two police officers from Fairfield police station were called to the scene of the accident - Const Moore and another officer. Const Moore recognised the respondent's car. A witness told Const Moore that he had seen the driver of the respondent's car leave the scene. The two police officers, Moore and his companion, returned to the Fairfield police station. Moore made certain enquiries and as a result of those enquiries the two officers went to the nightclub where the respondent was and spoke to the respondent.

At about 5.30am on 1 November 1991 the respondent went to the Fairfield police station and reported to Const Moore that his vehicle was stolen. This conduct gave rise to the first charge of acting with intent to pervert the course of justice.

Later on the same day the respondent told Moore, when they were alone together, that he had in fact been driving his car at the time of the accident and that he had been drinking.

Some time later the respondent submitted a claim to NRMA Insurance Limited, which was the comprehensive insurer of his vehicle, for the cost of repairs to his vehicle as a result of the collision. In his claim the respondent represented that he had not been the driver of the vehicle at the time of the accident. The respondent alleged that he had left the vehicle parked in a street near Fairfield police station on the afternoon of 31 October 1991, that he had been driven by another police officer to visit the dying friend in hospital and that he had then spent the night at the home of a girlfriend at
Rose Bay. NRMA Insurance Limited caused the respondent's vehicle to be repaired, at a cost borne by the insurer of $8,873. Under the comprehensive insurance policy NRMA Insurance Limited would have been entitled to refuse a claim if the insured was not truthful and frank in any statement made in the claim or if the vehicle was being driven at the relevant time by a person who was under the influence of alcohol. These facts gave rise to the second charge against the respondent.

On 8 December 1995 the respondent gave evidence before the Police Royal
Commission. He was asked questions about the motor vehicle accident on 1
November 1991. He said in his evidence that he did not know who was driving his car at the time of the accident. The respondent was then asked to stand down and to listen to evidence to be given by another witness. Evidence was then given by another witness which demonstrated the falsity of the evidence which the respondent had given. After the evidence was given by the other witness the respondent was recalled and in his further evidence he admitted that he had been driving his car at the time of the accident and that he had previously given false evidence to the Commission. These facts gave rise to the third charge against the respondent.

In later evidence given by the respondent on the same day, 8 December 1995, before the Police Royal Commission, the respondent said he had never received money from anybody called Panebianco and, in particular, had not received a cheque for $550 from Panebianco. In fact, a cheque for $550 from Panebianco had been deposited in a bank account in the respondent's name on 12 October and this could be proved by production of bank documents. These facts gave rise to the offence to be taken into account in sentencing the respondent.

As I have already stated, the respondent was at the time of committing all the offences a serving police officer. At the time of committing the three offences charged he was a Det Const First Class and at the time of the offence to be taken into account he was a Det Snr Constable. At the time of being sentenced he had been dismissed from the Police Service. The respondent was thirty-three years old at the time he was sentenced.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge observed that the offences were grave ones and committed by a serving police officer, from whom a high standard of conduct was to be expected. His Honour said that the giving of knowingly false evidence before a Royal Commission was a grave offence.
However, his Honour considered that the respondent's offences were not as serious as many of the matters which had achieved publicity in the Police
Royal Commission. His Honour also considered that the offence in the second charge was connected with the offence in the first charge and could be explained on the basis that the respondent, having represented to Const Moore that his car had been stolen, was obliged, in order to maintain that initial deception, to falsely represent to the insurance company that he had not been the driver of the car at the time of the accident.

His Honour found that the motive for the respondent committing the three offences relating to his car was his desire to remain a police officer. His
Honour found that all the material before him indicated that the respondent was a person of exemplary character. His Honour referred to the evidence of a number of character witnesses and to the evidence of employment which would be available to the respondent after he was released from prison.

His Honour considered that the respondent had already suffered extra-curial punishment in the form of humiliation and disgrace for himself and for his family, which the respondent felt keenly, and in the loss of his job as a police officer. Imprisonment would be more than usually onerous for the respondent, by reason of his being a former police officer.

The sentencing judge then referred to the then recently delivered judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal and to the principle of totality in sentencing and explained, in a way which I have already outlined, how he had arrived at the sentences he was imposing.

The additional terms of the sentences imposed by his Honour exceeded one-third of the minimum terms but his Honour held that the existing sentence to which the respondent was subject constituted special circumstances. Overall, taking into account both the sentence imposed by the Court of Criminal Appeal on 13
February 1997 and the sentences imposed by his Honour on 21 February 1997, the respondent was sentenced to minimum terms of imprisonment totalling eighteen months and an additional term of imprisonment of six months, the additional term not exceeding one-third of the total minimum terms.

It can be seen that under the sentences imposed by his Honour the respondent had to serve only a further six months of actual imprisonment for the three offences for which his Honour was sentencing the respondent and the further offence which his Honour had to take into account.

On the hearing of this appeal it was submitted on behalf of the Crown that the sentencing judge had erred in a number of specific respects. One respect in which it was submitted that the sentencing judge had erred was in treating the offence charged in the second count as simply being a consequence of the offence charged in the first count. Apart from specific criticisms, it was also submitted on behalf of the Crown that the sentences imposed by the sentencing judge, having regard to the objective seriousness of the offences, were so manifestly inadequate that this court should intervene.

Counsel for the respondent referred the court to the decision of this court in
R versus Warfield [(1994) 34 NSWLR 200], where at p 209 the Chief Judge at Common Law summarised the principles to be applied in determining a Crown appeal against sentence which had been stated by the court in its earlier decision of R versus Allpass, CCA, 5 May 1993.

Reference should also be made to the decisions of the High Court in
Griffiths versus The Queen (1987) 137 CLR 293 and Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295.] 
It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that the respondent had pleaded guilty, that he had favourable subjective circumstances, that he had been severely punished by losing his career as a police officer and that as a former police officer his imprisonment would be more than usually onerous. It was submitted that the sentencing judge's remarks on sentence, which his
Honour had considered overnight after the conclusion of the hearing of the proceedings on sentence, were lengthy and carefully considered.

In my opinion, the sentencing judge did err in regarding the offence the subject of the second charge as being merely a consequence of the offence charged in the first charge. Although there was some connection between the two offences, it seems to me that the conduct of the respondent in committing the offence the subject of the second charge involved further independent criminality on the part of the respondent.

I am also of the opinion, after making full allowance for the matters favourable to the respondent referred to in the remarks on sentence or in counsel's submissions, after taking into account the principle of totality in sentencing and assuming that that principle could be applied in the way his
Honour did and after paying due regard to the principles to be applied by this court in determining Crown appeals against sentence, that nevertheless the sentences imposed by his Honour were, by reason of the objective seriousness of the offences, so manifestly inadequate as to indicate error in point of principle.

I have already stated the objective facts of the offences and I do not propose to repeat them. The offences for which the respondent was sentenced were that as a serving police officer he had made a false representation to another police officer with intent to pervert the course of justice; he had made a separate false representation to an insurance company so as thereby to dishonestly obtain a financial advantage for himself; and he had twice given knowingly false evidence before a Royal Commission.

Before he gave the first piece of knowingly false evidence before the Royal
Commission the respondent had been warned that the giving of false evidence before the Royal Commission "inevitably attracts a gaol term." The respondent gave the second, independent, piece of knowingly false evidence after he had admitted that the first piece of evidence he had given was untrue.

The respondent did not appear before Judge Moore as a person of unblemished character but as a person currently serving a prison sentence for a quite separate offence. Even if his Honour was correct in the manner in which he applied the principle of totality, the weight which could be given to previous good character was very limited, where the question to be determined was the appropriate total sentence for, at the very least, two quite distinct episodes of criminality.

I do not consider that there is any discretionary reason why the Crown appeal should not be upheld and, accordingly, I would propose that the appeal be upheld and that the respondent be resentenced by this court.

In resentencing the respondent this court should observe the principle that if a Crown appeal against sentence is upheld the Court of Criminal Appeal should, at least usually, impose a sentence or sentences which are somewhat less than the sentence or sentences which the Court of Criminal Appeal considers should have been properly imposed at first instance. The sentences to be imposed by this court should, in my opinion, commence from 3 June 1997, that is, at the end of the minimum term of the sentence imposed by the Court of Criminal
Appeal on 13 February 1997. I would propose that the appeal by the Crown against the sentences imposed by Judge Moore on 21 February 1997 be upheld and that those sentences be quashed and that in lieu thereof on each of the three charges the respondent be sentenced to imprisonment or penal servitude for two and a half years.

I consider that there are special circumstances within [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) in the existence of the previous sentence to which the respondent is still subject. This court should impose sentences such that the additional terms under the sentences passed by this court approximate to being one-third of the total minimum terms to which the respondent will be subject under the sentence previously imposed by this court and the sentences being imposed by this court.

I accordingly propose that on each of the three charges the respondent be sentenced to a sentence of imprisonment or penal servitude of two and a half years consisting of a minimum term of eighteen months, commencing on 3 June and expiring on 2 December 1998, and to an additional term of twelve months, commencing on 3 December 1998 and expiring on 2 December 1999. The court should direct the release of the respondent on parole at the end of the minimum terms on 2 December 1998.
 
GLEESON CJ: I agree.
 
SPERLING J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the court will be as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
