

Moran versus Moranco Enterprises P/L and Ors [1996] NSWSC 482 (10 October 1996) 
MORAN versus MORANCO ENTERPRISES PTY LIMITED & ORS /93; ED 5075/92 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY ACJ, MEAGHER JA, SIMOS AJA 
CATCHWORDS: COMPANIES - Issue of shares - Notice of meeting - Irregularity - Whether share issue validated - Discretion of trial judge - Corporations Law, <case> 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
Family company - Dispute over share issue to family members - Failure to give notice to shareholders of special general meeting at which shares issued - Whether irregularity in procedure should be validated such as to validate share issue - Appeal against refusal by trial judge to validate share issue - Discretionary power of trial judge pursuant to <case> Corporations Law to determine what was just and equitable in the circumstances - Whether discretion miscarried such as to be overturned on appeal - Weight given to relevant considerations - Held, appeal dismissed, no error in trial judge's determination of what was just and equitable in the circumstances.

Kokotovitch Constructions Pty Ltd versus Wallington <case>; [(1995) 17 ACSR 478]; Lovell versus Lovell <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 513]; Gronow versus Gronow <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 513]; applied.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY ACJ: Moranco Enterprises Pty Limited ("the Company") was incorporated in 1970 to acquire a rural property owned by the father of the plaintiff Mr Joseph Francis Moran and of, inter alia, Mr Andrew James Moran and Mr Christopher Moran. It was formed with a view to minimising the impact of death duties. The arrangements envisaged that shares would be issued to (I shall follow the descriptions adopted by the parties) the father, the mother and their children. At or about the formation of the Company shares were issued, inter alia, to (as I shall describe them) Joseph, Andrew and Christopher. 
Subsequently, in 1976 and in 1980, further ordinary shares were issued to
Joseph. (Preference shares were issued at various times but nothing turns directly upon the issue of the preference shares).

Various disputes arose between the members of the family and, in 1992, proceedings were brought by Joseph. Those proceedings came to trial before
Windeyer J in 1993. By his judgment of 16 July 1993, his Honour made orders in respect of the matters then at issue between the parties.

Those matters included a cross-claim brought by the defendants: they claimed that the allotments of shares made to Joseph in 1976 and in 1980 were invalid.
Joseph contended that, if they were invalid, relief should be given to him under <case> of the Corporations Law and that the issue of the shares should be validated.

Windeyer J held that the issue of the shares was invalid and refused to validate the issue of them.

Joseph has appealed to this Court against some of the orders made by Windeyer
J. In the end, the only matter pressed in argument before this Court was ground 3 of the Notice of Appeal. Joseph, by that ground, contended that when he refused to validate the share issues in question the trial judge's discretion miscarried . All other matters have been abandoned.

As far as is here relevant, <case> of the Corporations Law provides: "194. (1) Where a company has purported to issue or allot shares and: the creation, issue or allotment of those shares is invalid by reason of any provision of this or any other Act or of the memorandum or articles of the company or for any other reason; or the terms of the purported issue or allotment are inconsistent with or are not authorised by any such provision; the Court may, on application by the company, by a holder or mortgagee of any of those shares or by a creditor of the company and on being satisfied that in all the circumstances it is just and equitable so to do, make an order: validating the purported issue or allotment of those shares; or confirming the terms of the purported issue or allotment of the shares; or both.

On the lodging of an office copy of an order made under subsection (1), the shares to which the order relates shall be deemed to have been validly issued or allotted on the terms of the issue or allotment of the shares." 
The power exercised by the trial judge was a discretionary power. The principles involved have not been significantly in contest in argument. They were recently reviewed by Kirby ACJ in his judgment in Kokotovitch
Constructions Pty Ltd versus Wallington <case>; [(1995) 17 ACSR 478] at 494. It is sufficient to say that it was for his Honour to determine what, in the circumstances, was just and equitable and whether it was just and equitable to make the orders sought.

The factual context in which the discretion was to be exercised may, for present purposes, be recorded but briefly. The land owned by the Company was occupied by the father and mother as their home and the father carried on their rural pursuits. The mother died in July 1980 and the father in January
None of the three sons, Joseph, Andrew and Christopher, elected to follow the conduct of rural pursuits on the property as his sole occupation.
Christopher was an animal geneticist/scientist and lived in Sydney. Andrew was a dental surgeon and lived at various places. Joseph was concerned with the property, not exclusively, but (as was conceded by Mr Hilbery for the respondents) much more than were Andrew and Christopher.

Joseph claimed that in 1969 the father had told him that he Joseph was to have per cent of the ordinary shares issued in the Company. It was said that there was no cross-examination upon this contention at the trial. But, as the evidence disclosed, Joseph was not, in 1970 or thereafter, issued with 60 per cent of the ordinary shares.

I shall not pursue the detail of the share issues. It is sufficient to say that in 1970, Joseph had 500 shares and Andrew 50 and Christopher 4000 shares.
In 1971, Andrew was issued a further 5000 shares. In 1973 Joseph was issued an additional 4000 shares.

It is the issues of shares in 1976 (4000 shares) and in 1980 (2000 shares) to
Joseph which alone is in issue. Prior to the 1976 issue, Joseph held 4500 shares, Andrew 4050 shares and Christopher 4000 shares. It is important to note that there is no evidence as to why shares were issued to Joseph in 1976 or in 1980 or of what occurred on either of those occasions. The issue is recorded, in a manuscript entry, in the minutes of the Company but that record does not indicate why the shares were issued or relevantly what took place.
Counsel are agreed that there is no evidence, affidavit or oral, which deals with these matters.

It is, however, common ground that, under the Articles of Association of the
Company, Andrew and Christopher were entitled to notice of the special general meeting at which the shares were issued. It is, I think, suggested that the shares might have been issued pursuant to a resolution of directors, but that what was done was done at a meeting of the Company and not of the directors.
However this be, no notice was given to those entitled to notice. At the time of the 1976 meeting Andrew was absent from Australia. But no point is taken in respect of this because it is accepted that in each case Christopher was entitled to receive notice and was not given notice. The matter has been conducted upon the basis that, by reason of the absence of notice, the issue of the shares was prima facie invalid. The only question pressed has been whether the invalid issues should have been validated.

Windeyer J dealt with the matter as follows: "I now come to the most difficult question and that is whether the 1976 and issues ought to be validated or set aside. Those issues were invalid.
They were made at meetings of which no notice was given to Andrew and
Christopher. They were accordingly in breach of Article 41 of Table A to the th Schedule of the [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/). Ordinarily they would be set aside.

Section 194 of the Corporations Law provides that in these circumstances the
Court may, on being satisfied that in all the circumstances it is just and equitable to do so, make an order validating the purported issue or allotment.
The plaintiff says that it is just and equitable to order validation in the circumstances which arise here because (a) the family respected the wishes of their father and the issues were made with his knowledge, (b) had the question been raised while Ando (sic) was alive a confirmatory meeting would have been held to validate the issues and (c) it is fair because the plaintiff has for the most part lived and worked on the property.

While I consider there is some force in these arguments so far as Andrew is concerned I do not think the evidence of Christopher goes so far as to say he would necessarily have agreed. He would have wanted to discuss the issues with his parents and particularly his father and if finally pressed he would probably have agreed, but this is all hypothetical as it did not happen.
Neither Christopher nor Andrew had a chance to express their views. I do not think the breach was just a technical breach. To some extent also Andrew and
Christopher both regarded themselves in some way as being under an obligation to their sisters and brothers so far as their holding of shares is concerned.
Thus they might have been able to or wished to discuss the problem with their mother. I do not think that in general an irregularity arising from disregard of basic procedures should be validated." 
Mr Gye, for the appellant Joseph, commenced his oral submissions by accepting that he must approach the appeal upon the basis that the judge was in a position of advantage of the kind referred to in Abalos versus Australian Postal
Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167]; and that it was necessary for him to show that, within the relevant authorities: he referred to Mace versus Murray [(1955) 92 CLR 371] and
Australian Coal and Shale Employees' Federation versus Commonwealth <case>; [(1953) 94 CLR 621]; the exercise of the discretion had miscarried.

He accepted that, in assessing the evidence of Joseph and the other parties, the judge could have been influenced by what he saw of Joseph in giving oral evidence before him. It is not necessary for present purposes to pursue the extent to which this may have been a factor of importance in the judge's determination. There was difference between the parties, and between counsel before this Court as to the extent to which Joseph had remained upon the property and been involved in the conduct of it. Mr Hilbery, for the respondents, submitted that Mr Gye had, in his submissions, put Joseph's case too high in this regard. In the end, I do not think that the determination of this appeal requires that this matter be pursued in detail.

In approaching the submission that the judge's exercise of his discretion had miscarried, Mr Gye had, initially in his amended written submissions, submitted that: the judge acted upon wrongful findings of fact; he had failed to consider all of the relevant facts and circumstances; and that he had erred in law in the particular ways there referred to. These matters were particularised in the written submissions. They were not abandoned. But the case of the appellant was, I think, put essentially as it was put in the oral submissions: that the judge had taken too narrow an approach to the discretion granted by <case>; and that, whilst it could not be said that relevant matters had been ignored or irrelevant matters taken into account, his decision was vitiated by failing to give proper weight to some of the factors to be taken into account.

I do not think that his Honour erred in the approach he took to <case>. Mr Gye pointed to the fact that his Honour said that the breach in question, the failure to give notice to shareholders entitled to notice was not "just a technical breach". His Honour said: "I do not think that in general an irregularity arising from disregard of basic procedures should be validated".

The breach was not "technical". Notice is required to be given to a shareholder entitled to attend a meeting in order that he may attend and attempt to influence the result. The Court does not know, and no attempt was made to show, why notice was not given. Mr Gye submitted that it was an "irregularity". But this was not an omission in respect of one of a large number of shareholders. At the time, Andrew and Christopher held the majority by far of the preference shares and, notwithstanding the distribution of voting power, it was shares of the class which they relevantly held which were to be affected by the share issue. Mr Gye argued that the evidence suggested that, had they had notice, the shares would yet have been issued because the parties would have done what their father wanted. But it is not possible now to know what the father ultimately would have wanted had Andrew and
Christopher had the opportunity, at the meeting, to put to him (and possibly to their mother) matters against the issues of the shares.

Mr Gye then argued that the weight given to relevant considerations was wrong.
There is nothing in what Windeyer J said which, in my opinion, indicates in terms that the weight given to the relevant matters was wrong. The problem of attacking a discretionary act upon such a basis as this has been referred to in the cases. In Lovell versus Lovell <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 513] at 519, Latham CJ said: "But when the appellate tribunal is considering questions of weight it should not regard itself as being in the same position as the learned trial judge. In the absence of exclusion of relevant considerations or the admission of irrelevant considerations an appellate tribunal should not set aside an order made in the exercise of a judicial discretion (as to which see Sharp v
Wakefield [(1891) AC 173] at 179) unless the failure to give adequate weight to relevant considerations really amounts to a failure to exercise the discretion actually entrusted to the court. The words used by their Lordships in the
House of Lords in this connection are not always easy to apply, but they ought not to be read as denying the long established principle (which, indeed, is expressly recognized in the cases in the House of Lords) that on an appeal from an order founded upon the exercise of a discretion the appellate tribunal has no right to substitute its discretion for the discretion entrusted to the primary tribunal." 
In Gronow versus Gronow <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 513] at 537, Aickin J developed the principle further. His Honour said: "Statements of the general principles to be applied by an appellate court when asked to set aside an order made in the exercise of a judicial discretion generally include a reference to the trial judge giving inadequate weight to some factors and excessive weight to others. It is however a mistake to suppose that a conclusion that the trial judge has given inadequate or excessive weight to some factors is in itself a sufficient basis for an appellate court to substitute its own discretion for that of the trial judge.
As Kitto J said in Lovell versus Lovell (1950) 81 CLR at 533: 'The proposition that the appeal court will consider whether "no sufficient weight" has been given to relevant considerations is not inconsistent with the principle that the appeal court does not deal with the appeal as if it were exercising the original jurisdiction; even if it considers that insufficient weight has been given to some relevant consideration, it will still not substitute its judgment for that of the primary judge unless it comes clearly to the conclusion for that reason that the discretion has been exercised wrongfully.' 
It is clear that that test will not be satisfied merely by reason that the appellate court, considering the matter de novo, would itself have arrived at a different result. The fact that a decision on custody depends upon the exercise of a judicial discretion recognizes that in many cases different minds may arrive at different conclusions.

The advantage which a trial judge has of seeing and hearing the witnesses is of particular importance in matters of custody where so much depends on an evaluation of the characters and personalities of the parents, and their attitudes, not only to the child, but also to each other. The attribution of comparative weight or importance to various factors will generally be influenced by the impression formed on seeing and hearing each parent and in appropriate cases the child or children involved. Some objective matters such, for example, as relative financial resources and adequacy of accommodation may stand in a different position but in the present case it is not suggested that any error occurred in that respect." 
Relevant observations were made by Stephen J: at 519-520.

As I have indicated, it has not been suggested that there is in what the judge said a statement in terms which shows that he erred in the weight which he gave to the relevant considerations. The suggestion is, I think, that it is to be inferred from his conclusion and the order that he made that he must have attributed wrong weight to some of the relevant considerations. The suggestion was, inter alia, that the father's promise of 60 per cent of the ordinary shares to Joseph and Joseph's work upon the property merits on his part that the discretion should have been exercised so as to give effect to the two share allocations.

His Honour took such matters into account. I do not think that what he did indicates an error of this kind. The error was not "just a technical breach".
One of the "basic" requirements of the holding of a meeting is notification to the persons entitled to be present and, at the meeting, press a point of view.
An omission to give notice would ordinarily, there being nothing to the contrary, not warrant validation. (The judge in this regard used the words: "I do not think that in general an irregularity arising from disregard of basic procedures should be validated".) As I have said, there was little or no evidence as to either the meeting of 1976 or of 1980. The conclusion to which the judge came was in my opinion one to which properly he could come. He was required to determine what was "just and equitable" in the circumstances. I see no error in his conclusion.

It is proper, before parting with this matter, to refer to one matter. There was reference in argument to, as it may be described, the respective merits of the persons concerned. It is to be understood that this judgment does not constitute a judgment as to the respective merits of the persons concerned.
This matter is not determined merely according to whether one or other of those parties deserved well or better than the others at the hands of their parents. The decision of this Court turns upon a legal matter, namely, whether this Court can and should interfere with the discretionary decision of the trial judge made under <case>.

For these reasons the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with Mahoney ACJ.
 
SIMOS AJA: I agree with the judgment of Mahoney ACJ.

I would only add that I do so, in particular, upon the basis that his Honour has, in my opinion, correctly interpreted the statement of the learned trial judge that: "I do not think that in general an irregularity arising from disregard of basic procedures should be validated", as meaning, in the facts of the present case, that: "An omission to give notice would ordinarily, there being nothing to the contrary, not warrant validation" (underlining supplied). Consistently with this approach section 194 should, in my opinion, be construed on the basis that a validating order should be made, if, in all the circumstances, including the circumstances which give rise to the invalidity, it is just and equitable to do so.

This approach to the construction of section 194 is, in my opinion, consistent with the principles stated and approach taken in relation to that section in the judgment of Kirby ACJ (with which Priestley JA and Handley JA agreed) in this Court in Kokotovich versus Wallington <case>; [(1995) 17 ACSR 478] at 487-489. I note that, in the course of that judgment,
Kirby ACJ quoted (at 483), without disapproval, the following passage in the judgment of Young J at first instance:- " the Court has power whenever it is just and equitable to validate the issue of shares not only where the validation is noncontentious. Indeed the main thrust of <case> is to validate defective titles where there has been a bona fide transaction involving the issue of shares which is flawed for some technical reason: Millheim versus Barewa Oil and Mining NL [[1971] WAR ."] * * * 
