

Application of Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd Matter No 2800/97 [1997]
NSWSC 266 (22 July 1997) 
Application of Permanent Trustee Australia Limited /97 July 1997 
Hodgson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
NO. 2800 OF 1997 APPLICATION OF PERMANENT TRUSTEE AUSTRALIA LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings, to which there is no defendant, the plaintiff, Permanent Trustee Australia Limited, seeks orders granting easements over part of a piece of land called Queens Lane, which abuts Dalley Street, Sydney. These orders are sought under s.88K of the Conveyancing Act, which is in the following terms: 
K(1) The Court may make an order imposing an easement over land if the easement is reasonably necessary for the effective use or development of other land that will have the benefit of the easement.

Such an order may be made only if the Court is satisfied that: use of the land in accordance with the easement will not be inconsistent with the public interest, and the owner of the land to be burdened by the easement and each other person having an estate or interest in that land that is evidenced by an instrument registered in the General Register of Deeds or the Register kept under the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) can be adequately compensated for any loss or other disadvantage that will arise from imposition of the easement, and all reasonable attempts have been made by the applicant for the order to obtain the easement or an easement having the same effect but have been unsuccessful.

The Court is to specify in the order the nature and terms of the easement and such of the particulars referred to in section 88(1)(a)-(d) as are appropriate and is to identify its site by reference to a plan that is, or is capable of being, registered or recorded under Division 3 of [Part 23.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/index.html#p23) The terms may limit the times at which the easement applies.

The Court is to provide in the order for payment by the applicant to specified persons of such compensation as the Court considers appropriate, unless the Court determines that compensation is not payable because of the special circumstances of the case.

The costs of the proceedings are payable by the applicant, subject to any order of the Court to the contrary.

Such an easement may be: released by the owner of the land having the benefit of it, or modified by a deed made between the owner of the land having the benefit of it and the persons for the time being having the burden of it or (in the case of land under the provisions of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/)) by a dealing in the form approved under that Act giving effect to the modification.

An easement imposed under this section, a release of such an easement or any modification of such an easement by a deed or dealing takes effect: if the land burdened is under the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), when the Registrar-General registers a dealing in the form approved under that Act setting out particulars of the easement, or of the release or modification, by making such recordings in the Register kept under that Act as the Registrar-General considers appropriate, or in any other case, when a minute of the order imposing the easement or the deed of release or modification is registered in the General Register of Deeds.

An easement imposed under this section has effect (for the purposes of this Act and the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/)) as if it was contained in a deed.

Nothing in this section prevents such an easement from being extinguished or modified under section 89 by the Court.

The plaintiff says that the easements which it seeks are reasonably necessary within that section, and that it is simply not possible to identify the owner of the land over which the easements are sought.

The plaintiff is the registered proprietor of two parcels of land in Pitt
Street, Sydney, on each of which a city building is erected. The first parcel is the land in Certificate of Title Volume 10635 Folio 181, being Lots 1, 2 and 3 in Deposited Plan 1092, Lot 4 in Deposited Plan 524036, Lot 5 in
FP54694, Lot 6 in FP75338, and Lot 7 in FP11046, on which is erected 37-49
Pitt Street, Sydney. The second parcel is the land in Certificate of Title FI /513109, being Lot 1 in Deposited Plan 513109, on which is erected 51-57 Pitt
Street, Sydney.

The private laneway called Queens Lane runs from Dalley Street along the rear, that is the western, boundary of Lot 1 in DP 1092, and along the western boundary of Lot 7 in FP11406; and it terminates at a boundary, part of which is part of the southern boundary to Lot 3 in DP 1092.

That part of Queens Lane which abuts Lot 7 is owned by the Sydney County
Council, and is part of the land in Certificate of Title Volume 4102 Folio
By Transfer C700936, dated 12th August 1938, the Sydney County Council granted a right of way, in terms which would substantially involve was is called a right of footway and a right of carriageway in the Conveyancing Act, over this part of Queens Lane in favour of Lot 7.

The remainder of Queens Lane has never been brought under the provisions of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). It abuts
Lot 1 in Deposited Plan 1092, and is the land sought by the plaintiff to be burdened by easements. It was included in a Crown grant in the early 1800s to
Samuel Marsden and others as trustees for an orphans institution; and was subsequently, by virtue of some instruments dated 1826 and 1827, vested in trustees of the Clergy and Schools Lands. In 1832, these trustees conveyed to one transferee certain lands, including that part of Queens Lane now owned by the Sydney County Council, together with a right of way over this remaining part of Queens Lane, and also conveyed to another transferee land, including this part of Queens Lane, subject to the right of way conveyed in the other conveyance. Thereafter, there were a number of dealings in the 1830s, 1840s and 1850s which make it now virtually impossible to document the title to this part of Queens Lane.

The records of the Sydney County Council list the ownership of this land as unknown; although there is information in its records to the effect that it is owned by the estate of one William Montague Manning, to whom certain land, possibly including this land, was conveyed in 1851. According to Land Tax records, the ownership of this land is unknown. According to records held by the Valuer-General, the owner is listed as J. Norton, who may possibly be the
J. Norton who was the Chairman of the Bank of Australia from October 1843 to
November 1844, that Bank have received a conveyance which possibly included this land in September 1843.

In a valuation report submitted by the plaintiff, there is a suggestion that a right of way created by Instrument B989194 may affect this part of Queens
Lane, but it seems quite clear that it did not. The only recent title document affecting this part of Queens Lane is the resumption of an easement noted in the Government Gazette of 20th August 1965, this being in favour of the Sydney
County Council for the purposes of works relating to electricity supply, presumably in connection with an electricity sub-station which adjoins Queens
Lane to the west.

In those circumstances, I accept the opinion of the legal searcher, Bruce
MacKinlay of Galloway & Co., that it is not possible to ascertain the documentary ownership of this part of Queens Lane.

There is evidence that the land has been used as a laneway since the 1830s. It appears that it may well still remain subject to the right of way granted in , in favour of land which includes Lot 7 owned by the plaintiff. It is currently used by the plaintiffs' two buildings, and also by 6-8 Underwood
Street, this use probably commencing from the original construction of these buildings, which apparently began during the 1930s. It is not clear when the last of these buildings was constructed, but it seems that it was many years ago.

There is evidence that the easements now sought are necessary for the building -57 Pitt Street. This part of Queens Lane provides the only means of vehicular access to a car park in the building, and the only means of access to the fire escape for the building. It is necessary also for access to effect repairs to the rear of this building. The easements sought in relation to encroachments appear to be necessary for the proper functioning and use and enjoyment of the properties.

As regards the easements sought in favour of 37-49 Pitt Street, Sydney, it appears that they are necessary for obtaining access to the existing right of way in favour of Lot 7 over the part of Queens Lane owned by Sydney County
Council, and that in turn provides one means of access to that building.

There is evidence from a valuer to the effect that the grant of these easements would only nominally affect the value of the subject land. This valuation may be affected by an apparent mistake, to the effect that the easement created by Instrument B989194 affects the subject land; but having regard to the easement resumed by the Sydney County Council, and the probability that there are quite extensive prescriptive easement rights over the land, it seems probable that the nominal valuation is correct.

There is evidence from the plaintiff's solicitor of conversations with officers of the Land Titles Office confirming that it is not possible to make out a documentary title to this land. These conversations were also to the effect that the absence of any documentary owner would not create any difficulty in noting any easements granted by the Court pursuant to s.88K.

In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the easements sought are reasonably necessary for the effective use or development of the land within s.88K(1). I am satisfied that the use of the land in accordance with those easements will not be inconsistent with the public interest. Having regard to the impossibility of finding an owner, I am satisfied that all reasonable attempts have been made by the plaintiff to obtain such an easement without success.

So far as compensation is concerned, although s.88K(1)(b) provides that an order may be made only if the Court is satisfied that the owner of the land to be burdened by the easement can be adequately compensated, I note that s.88K(4) in effect provides for a determination that compensation is not payable because of special circumstances. In my view, the impossibility of identifying an owner of this land, together with the apparent nominal value of any loss or disadvantage from the easement, would amount to special circumstances under s.88K(4); but because this case has been dealt with in the absence of any defendant, I think it is appropriate to require an undertaking to the Court from the plaintiff to the effect that, if any person can establish ownership to this land, and can establish any loss or other disadvantage from the easements, the plaintiff will pay adequate compensation to that person, and also to reserve leave to any such person to make an application for such compensation in these proceedings.

I order, pursuant to s.88K of the Conveyancing Act, that easements be imposed over the land known as Queens Court, excluding Lot B in Deposited Plan 104160 in favour of the lands comprised in Certificates of Title FI 1/513109 and
Volume 10635 Folio 181 in accordance with the easements set out in the draft s.88B instrument which I initial and date, and a plan substantially in accordance with Annexure A to the affidavit of Maryanne Hutt sworn 4th June .

I reserve leave to the owner of land burdened, or any part thereof, to apply in these proceedings for compensation for any loss or other disadvantage which will arise from the imposition of these easements.

I note that the plaintiff undertakes to the Court that it will pay to any such owner adequate compensation for any such loss or disadvantage.
 * * * 
