

Regina versus Sherwood Matter No Cca 60165/97 [1998] NSWSC 283 (24 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 August 1998 
REGINA versus SHERWOOD 
CCA 60165/97 July 1998 
Priestley JA, Grove J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence.

FILE NO: CCA 60165/97 
DELIVERED: 24 July 1998 
HEARING DATE: 27 May 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus SHERWOOD 
JUDGMENT OF: Priestley JA, Grove J, Sperling J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant - M C Ramage QC / H Dhanj 
Respondent - L M B Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant - Sydney Regional Aboriginal Corp Legal Service 
Respondent - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law - murder - Crimes Act <case> - directions to jury regarding expert evidence 
NO OF PAGES: 28 
REGINA versus SHERWOOD 
CRIMINAL LAW - MURDER - CRIMES ACT S 23A - DIRECTIONS TO JURY REGARDING EXPERT EVIDENCE - appellant charged with murder - defence of diminished responsibility pursuant to <case> of the Crimes Act, not accepted by the jury - appellant convicted and sentenced - the trial judge's summing up of "substantial impairment", which constitutes part of the third element needed for a <case> defence criticised - issue whether the trial judge failed to direct jury correctly as to expert medical evidence. 
On appeal the appellant submitted:
The jury's verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory; when expert medical evidence goes unchallenged a trial judge should give a stronger direction to the jury about their obligation to take account of this kind of evidence than was given here;
Studdert J failed (i) to warn the jury of the dangers of rejecting the uncontradicted evidence of the expert medical witnesses and (2) to direct the jury that they should not eliminate the opinions of the expert witnesses unless they were satisfied that they had no valid foundations; critical passages of Studdert J's summing up discussed expert opinions in a way that did not sufficiently distinguish between the three elements of the defence of diminished responsibility and further may have left the impression that the jury were at liberty to disregard the expert opinion on all three elements.

Held:
In the present case there was no need for stronger directions by the trial judge on expert evidence than those he gave, because first, the expert opinions were in fact challenged; second, the expert psychologist conceded that she was not satisfied with the information she had on the appellant's prior history; third, the psychiatrist agreed that his diagnosis would be stronger with more reliable information and finally, there was a good deal of lay evidence on the appellant's behaviour that the jury had to consider, in conjunction with the expert opinions; Taylor versus R and Hardy versus Gillette distinguished; "substantial impairment", within the meaning of <case>, is a matter for the jury to decide upon proper instruction and "not a matter within the expertise of the medical profession", Ryan as per Hunt CJ at CL; therefore, in the present case, the jury was entitled to take account of both the expert opinions and the evidence of the five lay witnesses, who had first hand knowledge of the appellant's behavioural history, in determining whether the appellant's mental responsibility had been substantially impaired; in summing up, the trial judge clearly and properly directed the jury separately in regard to the three elements and further in the use of expert evidence in arriving at their conclusions on those elements.

Chayna <case>; [[1976] VR 392] 
Ryan [(1995) 90 A Crim R 191] 
Taylor versus R [(1978) 22 ALR 599] 
Trotter [(1993) 68 A Crim R 536] 
Tumanako (19920 64 a Crim R 149 
Crimes Act <case> 
ORDERS 
Appeal against conviction dismissed.

REGINA versus SHERWOOD 
PRIESTLEY JA: Miss K. Sherwood was seventeen when, at about 10 pm on 13 June 1994, she and Miss M. Gieselmann killed Mrs M. Bisen, a worker at the Bankstown Youth Refuge, in the office of the Refuge, with a knife and by strangulation. Studdert J, the trial judge, described what happened: "... together they first stabbed her in the back, each of them holding the knife to do so, and they then proceeded with her along the hallway to a position outside the office where there was a struggle. Gieselmann was seen holding the knife in the hall and before that one of the residents, David
Fratus, saw Gieselmann with it. The two young women then forced Mrs Bisen into the office and closed the door before participating in the savage attack which caused her death. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that each offender did what she did in that office intending to kill the deceased.

Mrs Bisen was stabbed altogether fourteen times, and in addition she sustained a number of small superficial cuts. One of the wounds penetrated the abdominal cavity, and the front wall of the lung, and entered the aorta. Two other wounds penetrated the liver, one cut into the breast bone, another cut through the seventh rib, another through the fifth rib, ... The wound in the back, presumably being the wound first sustained, penetrated to a depth of 140 mm. I am satisfied that each of these young women used the knife, and that each of them inflicted a number of wounds. Not content with wounding their victim, the young women acted together to strangle her, using Sherwood's blouse to do so. Mrs Bisen died from the effects of the stab wounds and from asphyxia due to strangulation." 
In August 1995 both Miss Sherwood and Miss Gieselmann were tried for murder.
They both pleaded not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. The offered pleas were based on <case> of the Crimes Act, on the ground that each accused had diminished responsibility at the time of the killing. The pleas were not accepted by the Crown. The jury found both accused guilty of murder and each was duly convicted and sentenced.

The present proceedings are an appeal by Miss Sherwood against her conviction.
An appeal by Miss Gieselmann against conviction was dismissed on 12 November .

When Miss Sherwood's appeal came on for hearing, her counsel, Mr M. Ramage QC, told the court that Miss Sherwood also wished to seek leave to appeal against her sentence if the appeal against conviction failed. However, he said, there was some concern whether her application for leave to appeal against sentence had been properly instituted and her legal representatives were not ready to present that application, if required. The court ascertained from the Crown that if it were the fact that no application for leave to appeal against sentence had been filed in time, the Crown would not oppose the time for filing being extended. In the circumstances the court ordered that an extension of time be granted to Miss Sherwood either to lodge an application for leave to appeal or alternatively to amend her present notice of appeal to include an application for leave to appeal. The application for leave to appeal against sentence was then adjourned to await the result of the appeal against conviction.

That appeal relies upon three grounds, all related to the jury's non acceptance of the appellant's <case> defence. The first ground is that the jury's verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. The second is that the trial judge failed to warn the jury of the dangers of rejecting the uncontradicted evidence of expert witnesses. The third is that the trial judge failed to direct the jury that they should not reject the opinion of the expert witnesses unless they were satisfied that they were not validly based.

In the appellant's written submissions the first ground is supported as follows. It is said that all the medical evidence supported the defence of diminished responsibility; the opinions of the medical practitioners had a basis in the evidence; there was no other evidentiary material that conflicted with or outweighed the opinions expressed by the medical practitioners: so, the result was that the verdict of murder should not stand, and various authorities were cited. This was the only basis relied on for saying the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The result is that all three grounds revolve around the expert medical evidence and whether his Honour gave appropriate directions to the jury concerning it, either by way of wrongly telling the jury how to handle such evidence or by failing to direct the jury correctly about the way they should deal with the evidence.

So far as relevant, <case> is as follows: "23A. Diminished responsibility (1) Where, on the trial of a person for murder, it appears that at the time of the acts or omissions causing the death charged the person was suffering from such abnormality of mind (whether arising from a condition of arrested or retarded development of mind or any inherent causes or induced by disease or injury) as substantially impaired his mental responsibility for the acts or omissions, he shall not be convicted of murder.

It shall be upon the person accused to prove that he is by virtue of subsection (1) not liable to be convicted of murder.

A person who but for subsection (1) would be liable, whether as principal or as accessory, to be convicted of murder shall be liable instead to be convicted of manslaughter.
 ..." 
Thus, the appellant here, in relying on subs (1), had the onus of showing, on the probabilities, that she was suffering from abnormality of mind when she joined in killing Mrs Bisen and in addition that that abnormality was such as in fact substantially impaired her mental responsibility for joining in the killing. The way in which this is to be explained to juries has been elaborated in a number of cases (see p 17 below).

The central submission for the appellant in regard to each of the three grounds of appeal was based on the assertion that the only medical evidence at the trial relevant to the appellant was all called in the appellant's case and was all one way in being of the opinion that the appellant had been suffering an abnormality of mind, but that the judge in his directions to the jury had left it open to the jury whether they accepted that medical evidence. It was submitted that it was a mistake to leave that question to the jury in that way.

Studdert J began his summing-up to the jury on 14 August 1995. As both accused were relying on <case>, he was able to give the one explanation to the jury regarding the meaning of that provision and the way the jury should consider their findings of fact in relation to the various parts of the provision but then, in dealing with the evidence, had to explain separately, because there were considerable differences in the evidence relating to the claimed abnormality of mind and substantial impairment of mental responsibility of each accused, how the jury should approach the evidence relating to each accused in regard to each accused's <case> defence.

Studdert J began these explanations in the afternoon of 14 August. He read subs 1 of <case> to the jury shortly before the adjournment that afternoon.

When Studdert J came to the summing-up again next morning he returned at once to the directions he had been giving about diminished responsibility. He explained to the jury what each accused had to prove in order to discharge the onus of proof which lay upon her in seeking to establish the defence. He said there were three elements to be proved, as follows: "One, that at the time she committed the acts that caused death, her state of mind was abnormal; two, that such abnormality arose in one of three ways - firstly, from a condition of arrested or retarded development of mind; secondly, from any inherent cause, or thirdly, that it was induced by disease or injury. Now the third major element to be proved before this defence can be established is that the abnormality established, substantially impaired her mental responsibility for what she did." (S/U 54) 
Then, in the following two paragraphs, he dealt more fully with the first element: "Those are the elements and I am going to look at them more closely with you.
Let us go back to the first one, that at the time she committed the acts which caused death, her state of mind was abnormal. You will see it has to be at the time of the committing of the acts that caused the death. The state of mind has to be abnormal. What does that mean? Well, in this sense that her state of mind was so different from that of an ordinary human being that a reasonable person would call it abnormal. Clearly it involves some value judgment.

This concept of abnormality of mind covers the mind's activities in all its aspects. It covers the perception of physical acts and matters. It covers the ability to form a rational judgment, whether an act is right or wrong. It covers the ability to exercise willpower to control physical acts in accordance with rational judgment." (S/U 54) 
In the next two paragraphs he dealt with the second element: "Just going back then to where the abnormality came from, the second of those major headings that has to be considered, you have to address there the aetiology or the cause of the abnormality. You have to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the abnormality arose in one of these particular ways, either from a condition of arrested or retarded development of mind, or from some inherent cause, or that it was induced or brought about by disease or injury.

When you are looking at the cause or origin of the abnormality it does not have to satisfy all those alternatives. They are optional - they are alternatives in the strict sense. If there is an abnormality of mind, for instance, that arose from retarded development, then you do not also have to be satisfied it arose in one or other of the other ways. Indeed, some of these categories, you may think, would be mutually exclusive anyway, but it has to arise in one of those particular ways." (S/U 54-55) 
Then he came to the third element, which appears to have given rise to the principal issue at the trial: "Turning to the third element, and perhaps the element where counsel have concentrated their submissions to you most, is this element that the accused is required to prove that the abnormality established substantially impaired mental responsibility for what was done. This notion of mental responsibility is concerned with the extent to which the accused's mind is answerable for her physical acts. It must include a consideration of the extent of her ability to exercise willpower to control her physical acts.

So when you are considering whether the abnormality substantially impaired the mental responsibility of the accused for what she did, you are concerned to address the extent to which the mind of the accused is answerable for what she did, and you are concerned to address a consideration of the extent of her ability to exercise willpower to control those physical acts which the Crown has accused her of having committed." (S/U 55-56) 
The trial judge then returned to the beginning again, briefly summarising the jury's task in regard to the first two elements: "Now, members of the jury, whether the accused at the time of the killing was suffering from any abnormality of mind in the sense I have described, is a matter of fact for you to determine, and you will determine this on your assessment of the evidence that you have heard." (S/U 56) 
Then, he again went over what the jury had to do regarding the third element: "Further, if the accused was at the relevant time suffering from an abnormality of mind it is for you to determine whether as a consequence, her mental responsibility for what she did was substantially impaired, and I emphasise the word `substantially'. That is for you to determine and I remind you it is for the accused to prove. All those ingredients in the defence of diminished responsibility the accused must prove. It is not for the Crown to disprove them. The accused must prove them on the balance of probabilities on that standard of proof about which I gave you directions yesterday.

So this section we are considering requires the accused to prove, if you are satisfied that there was an abnormality of mind as defined, that this substantially impaired mental responsibility for what the accused did. The word `substantially' in this context does not mean totally impaired, or obliterated, or completely destroyed, but neither does it mean at the other end of the scale that it impaired mental responsibility to a slight or minimal degree.

Parliament has not defined the meaning of `substantially' in this context and it is for you to determine, as the tribunal of fact, whether any abnormality of mind you may have found to have been proved substantially impaired the mental responsibility of the accused for what she did. That is a value judgment you have to make when you assess the evidence.

In determining this, you address the issue broadly using your commonsense, and you would ask yourselves was there a substantial impairment of mental responsibility. If you answer that in the affirmative, you would not find the particular accused guilty of murder, but rather guilty of manslaughter." 
There was no complaint in the appeal about his Honour's summing-up to this point. However, there was criticism of the immediately following lines which are next set out, and which I have underlined for ease of reference when I later discuss the submissions for the appellant. The other passages criticised in the appellant's submissions are set out subsequently and are underlined also, for the same reason.
 "If you do not find a substantial impairment - if, for instance, you thought that there was an abnormality of mind, but that although it impaired mental responsibility so as to make it just a bit harder for the accused to control herself, then you would not find the defence proved, because there has to be more than a minimal impairment. There has to be a substantial impairment." (S/U 56-57) 
The next passage criticised was a paragraph a few pages later: "When you are looking at those assessments and opinions of the experts, you apply those qualities that you bring to this Court as judges of the facts. You do not blindly accept anything that a doctor tells you, any more than a lay witness, simply because he has expertise. You apply your common sense in relation to the evidence you have heard." (S/U 61) 
A little later there was another criticised passage as follows: "Now it is important for you to remember that what the accused told the doctors and the psychology by way of history, is not evidence of the fact. The doctors are entitled to base their opinions on histories given to them, but to the extent that any opinion is based upon a particular piece of history, that history has to be proved by evidence to be the fact before the opinion which is based upon it, and it alone, can be valid." (S/U 63) 
Subsequently the trial judge went on to relate the relevant parts of the evidence to each of the three elements separately. He did this first with the evidence relevant to Miss Gieselmann and then with the different evidence relevant to the appellant.

In regard to the appellant he said this about the evidence relevant to the first of the three elements: "...again there is support, expert support, for the assertion that at the time the accused committed the acts causing death, her state of mind was abnormal. That support comes from the evidence of Dr Lewin. He told you that
Kylie Sherwood was suffering from a severe mixed personality disorder which had anti-social features and borderline syndrome features as well. Reliance is also placed upon the evidence of the psychologist, Miss Duffy, who refrained from expressing a diagnosis, regarding that as being the province of the medical practitioner rather than the psychologist but nevertheless told you that she considered Kylie Sherwood had some of the symptoms of a borderline personality disorder." (S/U 85) 
Moving on to the evidence relevant to the second element, he said: "Dealing with the origin of this disorder, that is to say, its aetiology or its cause - did it arise from a condition of arrested or retarded development?
Dr Lewin says yes, it arose from a condition of retarded development.

The disorder was one in which life's events for the accused had produced retarded emotional development. The psychologist, Miss Duffy, did not consider herself qualified to say how any disorder was caused. Was it induced by disease - that is not suggested. Did it arise from inherent cause, or was it induced by injury? Dr Lewin considers that the disorder was induced by emotional injury but again, in this case, as in the case of Melissa
Gieselmann, I remind you that the accused does not have to qualify by bringing herself within more than one of the accepted origins.

It is sufficient that an accused satisfies you on the balance of probabilities that the abnormality arose from a condition of arrested development, or a condition of retarded development, or any inherent cause, or that the condition was induced by disease, or that it was induced by injury - they are all alternatives. Any one suffices.

Dr Lewin says there are two qualifying causes here, that is to say, that the disorder was induced by emotional injury. It was also a disorder produced by retarded emotional development." (S/U 85-86) 
Then he came to the evidence relevant to the third element: "Did the abnormality, turning to the third element, substantially impair mental responsibility for what this accused did? Reliance is placed here upon the evidence of Dr Lewin, to which I will take you, and the evidence of Miss
Duffy. Dr Lewin told you he considered the disorder contributed to a major degree to her acting impulsively and without great planning; that there was an escalation of the mood and the accused became aroused as the victim struggled, and at that stage the situation got out of her control. He said it was very likely that the accused knew what was happening was wrong but she had a reduced ability to restrain herself.

I will take you more closely, as I did in the case of Melissa Gieselmann to a review of the evidence, but what I am endeavouring to do at the moment is just to give you a thumbnail outline as to how it is that the accused Kylie
Sherwood submits her defence is made good.

Again I would remind you, as in the case of Melissa Gieselmann, that it is for you to determine whether the abnormality of mind substantially impaired mental responsibility for what was done. You would attach to the medical evidence you have heard such weight as you consider it merits, and I will give further directions about this in due course, but you determine the question as to whether the abnormality substantially impaired mental responsibility.

You should have regard not only to the medical evidence, but to the non- medical evidence, in asking yourselves whether it has been proved on the balance of probabilities that there did exist an abnormality of mind of the type we have been considering, and if so, whether it substantially impaired mental responsibility for what was done. If it did substantially impair mental responsibility, the defence is established, and if it did not, the defence fails.

How does the evidence of what was done by the accused fit in with the medical opinions? You are entitled to have regard to what the accused did, to what she said and to any evidence as to her demeanour when you are considering this defence. Was the accused capable of forming a rational judgment as to whether what she was doing was wrong? Was she able to exercise willpower to control her physical acts in accordance with rational judgment? What do you make of the planning which was involved in the criminal activity? 
Dr Lewin took a very detailed history from Kylie about the events of the night in question, as well as her background. Once again it is important to remind you that what the accused told Dr Lewin by way of history is not evidence of the fact. A doctor, as I have already said to you, is entitled to base his opinion upon a history given to him, but the extent any opinion is based upon history, that history has to be proved by the evidence of the fact before an opinion which is solely based upon it is valid. Dr Lewin did say in cross-examination that he was reliant to a large degree upon the history Kylie gave him in forming his opinion. That history is not evidence of the fact, and to the extent that you may think any opinion expressed by the doctor was based upon that history, and that history alone, then such opinion would have no valid basis.

What has been proved by way of history has been proved by Michael Gray, Miss
White, Mr and Mrs Daniels and by documents which you will have, and which I shall shortly remind you about. Of course, you also have, upon which you will make an assessment, the recorded interview.

Before I come to look at the evidence with you, can I just again remind you in the broadest of outline of the competing submissions, and I trust in doing so I do not dull the impact of counsels' addresses to you about this.

Mr Boulten submitted that the evidence supporting the defence of diminished responsibility is overpowering and Dr Lewin's evidence and that of Miss Duffy has not been challenged by any contrary evidence introduced by the Crown. He submitted that sufficient has been proved about the upbringing of Kylie
Sherwood to establish that her life was anything but normal, and that sufficient history to support Dr Lewin's opinion has been established through the evidence of the uncle, Eddie Stehlik, through Leonie White, through the
Daniels and the Departmental records.

Mr Boulten submitted that the starting point for the loss of control springing from the personality disorder was when the two girls joined together to knife the victim in the back, and what followed happened because Kylie
Sherwood had an abnormality of mind which impaired her mental responsibility to a substantial degree.

In other words, the Crown submitted you would not come to this conclusion, applying your commonsense to what had happened. The activity was planned. You look at the behaviour throughout, you consider from the outset that this knife was selected out of three and the very appearance of it shows its capacity to cause physical harm. It was submitted that the planning and foresight and preparation was such to suggest deliberate, intended and wilful conduct. It was submitted that whilst you might find abnormality of mind, you would not be satisfied that there was impaired mental responsibility for what was done to a substantial degree and that being so, the defence has not been established.

Well, as I say, that is a very broad summary of the competing submissions." (S/U 86-89) 
Studdert J then went on to go through the evidence relevant to the appellant's s 23A defence. Expert evidence in her case came from two witnesses, one a psychologist, who had agreed in her evidence that for the psychological make- up of the accused before the killing she had a very incomplete picture from which to assess the appellant (see S/U 92).

The other expert was Dr Lewin who had diagnosed the appellant as having a severe mixed personality disorder with anti social features, recognisably abnormal, which had a significant impact on her ability to exercise willpower and which contributed to a major degree to her acting impulsively and without great planning. Studdert J then summarised what Dr Lewin had said in cross- examination. This summary was not criticised in the appeal and it is therefore appropriate to reproduce it here, which I do in full, as it is of particular importance in the consideration of the submissions for the appellant: "In cross-examination he agreed that this personality disorder was widespread in the community. He said in Kylie's case it was of a significant proportion.
He agreed that he was reliant upon the history she gave to a large degree. He said he was disadvantaged by having to look back to the event occurring before he saw her. He said that in acting as she did, Kylie was not acting autonomically on the night of 13 June but her ability to form a judgment was impaired. He agreed there was an element of volition in taking off her shirt and strangling the deceased. He agreed there was an element of volition in stabbing the deceased. He agreed that the planning of the robbery showed a degree of sophistication and awareness that it was wrong.

The planning, including the selection of the knife, he agreed could have been understood by her to involve its possible use in the robbery if the victim resisted, although he thought it might also have been merely selected with an intention that it be used to warn or frighten the victim. He agreed that the diagnosis would be stronger if he had more reliable information. Nevertheless, the opinion he expressed was that Kylie suffered from a severe mixed personality disorder, which was both developmentally induced by emotional injury with genetic factors also playing a part, and it was a disorder which contributed to a major degree to her acting impulsively and without great planning." (S/U 94-95) 
Studdert J then reviewed the evidence of the lay witnesses who had given details of a considerable part of the appellant's life. There were five of these and they supplied much directly observed information concerning the appellant. There was also documentary evidence relating to the appellant.

At this stage the jury were sent out and counsel for the accused made submissions concerning the summing-up. Counsel for the appellant was seeking a direction to the effect that the jury should accept the evidence of the appellant's expert witnesses on all three elements. He relied on what was said by Smithers J in Taylor versus R [(1978) 22 ALR 599], which I will come back to later, and also on a passage in the decision of Anderson J in Hardy versus Gillette <case>; [[1976] VR 392] in which he had said: "On general principles, where uncontradicted evidence, which is inherently reasonable, probable, and conclusive of the matter, has been given, the court is bound to accept it. ... There is the qualification, of course, that no judge or tribunal is bound to accept evidence which in itself is inherently improbable and unreasonable which is hesitating, shuffling, inconclusive and unconvincing ..." (at 396-397).

Based on these cases, counsel for the appellant, after agreeing that the third element of the defence was a matter for the jury, submitted they should nevertheless be directed, "that in the light of the evidence which is unanimous from the experts, they should not bring in a verdict contrary to the experts' evidence unless they can, from the other material in the case, form the view that the experts' evidence has been rendered inherently unreasonable and improbable." 
Some other directions were asked for concerning matters which have not been raised in the appeal.

Crown counsel opposed the direction concerning the medical evidence in the terms sought by the appellant's counsel. He referred to cases in which there had been unanimity of medical evidence but nevertheless the primary role of the jury had been recognised, particularly in regard to the third element. He also pointed out that the prosecution in the case before the court had challenged the medical evidence.

Studdert J considered the authorities during the adjournment and when the hearing resumed said he did not propose to give a direction as sought by counsel for the appellant.

Subsequently, when continuing his summing-up concerning the appellant he came again to the three elements of the diminished responsibility defence and, as I read what he then said, at least in regard to the first two elements, he went a long way towards the direction the appellant's counsel had sought. In regard to the first element he said: "Now in considering the elements of diminished responsibility with you, I have reviewed the medical evidence and the opinions that the various doctors have expressed. There has been no challenge to the qualifications of any of those doctors, all of whom, you may think, are very well qualified professionally. To the evidence then of each such doctor you will doubtless give careful consideration in light of the expertise behind the doctor's opinion, and indeed, if you consider that the factual basis upon which a particular doctor has formed his opinion, that there exists an abnormality of mind has been established, then absent contrary professional opinion, you should accept such opinion unless you regard it as inconsistent with other medical evidence in the case, or unless you regard it as being unreasonable or improper." (S/U 110) 
The last part of this paragraph seems to be derived from the passage in Hardy v Gillette reproduced above and read to the court by counsel at the trial, and reflected in the direction asked for by counsel, also reproduced above. It would seem that the word "improper" at the end of the paragraph is a slip, either by the judge or in the transcript for the word "improbable".

The judge dealt with the second element as follows: "When it comes to the second of the elements that the accused must prove, that is, going to the cause of an abnormality of mind, that has to be determined upon expert evidence. It has to be determined upon medical evidence. You could not determine on non-medical evidence that a particular abnormality of mind arose from a particular cause. You need a doctor, or the doctors to prove that for you, so that when you are considering this second element, that is to say, if you have first been satisfied that an abnormality of mind has been proved, you would determine its cause on the medical evidence.

You would act on the medical evidence, unless you found it to be absolutely unreasonable or unacceptable, but you would not go straying into the non- medical evidence to determine the cause of an abnormality of mind, because it is essentially a medical issue." (S/U 110-111) 
Then he dealt once more with the third element.
 "When you come to the third element, that is to say, this element as to whether the abnormality substantially impaired mental responsibility, the question here for your consideration is not merely a medical one of whether there was an impairment, but it is also a non-medical question as to whether that impairment could properly be called substantial, and this is a matter where you could quite legitimately differ from the medical experts.

That is not to say you would lightly dismiss any evidence that a doctor has given at all, but whether or not there has been a substantial impairment, is a matter for you to determine as a tribunal of fact, and you must determine it in a broad commonsense way. It involves a value judgment by you as the jury representing the community." (S/U 111) 
This last passage is a more or less direct transcription of a paragraph in the reasons of Hunt CJ, with whom Grove and Allen JJ agreed, in Ryan [(1995) 90
A Crim R 191] at 196. It represents the established view of the proper approach to the third element.

Before coming to deal with the appellant's submissions, I note that, subject only to those submissions relating to the effect of the criticised portions of the summing-up, the whole of the summing-up in its dealing with the diminished responsibility defence is in accordance with the law as it has been explained in a series of cases in England and here. To justify this statement it is sufficient to refer to the following local cases: Tumanako [(1992) 64 A
Crim R 149]; Chayna [(1993) 66 A Crim R 178];
Trotter [(1993) 68 A Crim R 536]; and Ryan [(1995) 90 A Crim R 191.]
This view of Studdert J's summing-up was not contested by the appellant, except in the specific respects which I have foreshadowed and with which I will now deal.

In both the written and oral submissions supporting the appellant's three grounds of appeal, arguments were put in a number of ways, but having considered what differences of substance there may be between them, they seem to me to come down in the end to two principal submissions, which themselves overlap to some degree.

One submission was based on what Smithers J said in Taylor. It was said that rules were stated by Smithers J in that case which were both sound and established, that they should have been applied in the present case and that a much stronger direction concerning the expert evidence in its bearing on the third element of the defence should have been given.

In Taylor the accused sought to establish a defence of insanity. The medical evidence on this issue was taken, on the appeal, to have been all one way, and to have been unchallenged by the Crown. The accused was nevertheless found guilty of murder. One point on appeal was that the jury had not been properly directed concerning their use of the medical evidence.

A passage from the reasons of Smithers J upon which the appellant here particularly relied was as follows: "It is clear, therefore, that in a case such as the present the jury should understand that the medical opinions are central to the case for the accused that they may be sufficient of themselves to prove as a fact what the state of mind of the accused was at the critical time, and that, where they are accepted as honest and competent and are unchallenged, then unless the facts on which the medical witnesses have relied to form their opinions are not satisfactorily established or are contradicted by other acceptable evidence, or the jury are not persuaded that steps of reasoning in the formation of those opinions were soundly taken, or there is some other factor before them reflecting on the validity of the opinions expressed, the jury should not reject or ignore those opinions." (at 608) 
Reliance was also placed on an earlier comment made by Smithers J: "Indeed, in respect of a charge of murder where the accused has pleaded diminished responsibility, there is authority for the proposition that where the medical evidence is unchallenged and there is no evidence to the contrary a verdict of murder cannot stand and a verdict of manslaughter must be substituted: ..." (at 607) 
It was said for the appellant that these statements and like statements in other cases required a much stronger direction to the jury here about their obligation to pay heed to the expert opinion than was given. On the facts of the present case I do not think this submission should succeed. For one thing, the expert evidence called for the appellant was under challenge, in the sense that cross-examination of the expert witnesses tested their views both as to the facts upon which they were relying and their opinions. When this is taken together with (a) the psychologist's concession that she was not satisfied with the information she had about the prior history of the appellant; (b) Dr
Lewin's agreement that his diagnosis would be stronger if he had more reliable information; and (c) the body of direct lay evidence of the appellant's behaviour over a long period, it seems plain that there was a good deal of material the jury had to consider both in conjunction with and in assessment of the experts' opinions, when making up their minds about the third element.
The strong statements by Smithers J in Taylor and Anderson J in Hardy were not directed to cases of this kind. Studdert J did give strong directions in regard to the first and second elements of the defence, somewhat along the lines requested by counsel, although no doubt not as strong as he would have liked, but nevertheless, to my mind, quite adequate in the circumstances of the case.

It was in regard to the third element that the appellant's submission was particularly directed in the appeal, and in respect to this element, it is much more difficult for the submission to be put, in view of the judgmental element involved. As I earlier mentioned, the passage from Studdert J's summing-up set out at p 16-17 above is directly based on the decision of the
New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in Ryan, where Hunt CJ at CL said that whether the impairment to the accused's mental responsibility may properly be called substantial within the meaning of <case> "is not a matter within the expertise of the medical profession" (at 196). It is a jury question, in regard to which juries need careful direction as to the use of medical evidence, but which is a matter for the jury to decide, upon proper instruction.

In the present case there was the expert opinion and also the evidence of the five witnesses earlier referred to who had first hand knowledge of the appellant's behaviour over very lengthy periods, which the jury were entitled to take into account, along with their assessment of the degree of planning and deliberation, together with the expert opinion, in answering the critical question whether the abnormality of mind which the expert opinion supported was such as substantially impaired the appellant's mental responsibility for the killing.

The second principal submission for the appellant concerned the passages in
Studdert J's summing-up which I have underlined earlier. The submission was that the criticised passages, some more obviously than others, discussed the expert opinions in a way that did not sufficiently distinguish between the three elements of the defence. The extract taken from p 61 of the summing-up for example (see pp 8-9 above), it was submitted, could have been understood by the jury as applying to all three elements of the defence. It was submitted that if the jury took that passage in that sense then they would have considered it open to them, based on their own opinion, to find that the first or second element had not been established, thus freeing them from the difficult assessment involved in deciding whether the third element had been established.

Similarly, in regard to the passage taken from p 63 of the summing-up (set out at p 9 above) it was submitted that although it was literally correct (the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) had not yet come into operation) nevertheless, it may have given the jury the impression they could disregard the expert opinion in regard to all three elements of the defence notwithstanding that the case for the appellant in regard to the first two elements was made very strong by the expert opinion in a way not subject to the same limitations as were involved in the third element.

I do not think this submission is strong enough to warrant its being upheld. I have formed this view after considering the whole of his Honour's summing-up and trying to see whether the passages complained of could reasonably be considered to have possibly had the effect on the jury contended for by the appellant. I have set out considerable portions of the summing-up particularly relevant to this question in order to show why I have reached the opinion that
I have. As I said earlier, subject only to the possible exceptions complained of by the appellant, the summing-up seems to me to have been very much as required by the authorities and to have (a) related the facts relevant to the appellant's <case> defence to the various legally required elements of that defence in a clear and correct way and (b) properly instructed the jury on their approach and their duty in regard to assessing the evidence in relation to the three elements of the defence.

In considering whether the passages in the summing-up of which the appellant complains could have the effect contended for, I have borne in mind the following: the passages complained of occurred in parts of the summing-up given on the first day of summing-up in a context where it was clear the judge was going to say something further about them later on; it was following the part of the summing-up in which the passages complained of appeared that the submissions were made by the appellant's counsel concerning the directions sought in regard to the expert evidence; after that the judge partially acceded to counsel's submissions in regard to the first and second elements of the defence and adopted a position (and gave directions accordingly) in regard to the third element which seems to me to have been both correct and, as expressed the next day, quite clear. On a close reading of the passages complained of, in their full context and not simply in isolation, I am not at all sure that they conflated the judge's directions concerning all three elements of the defence in the way counsel submitted; but, assuming in the appellant's favour that they did, I do not think they can have had the effect upon the jury for which counsel contended. When the summing-up is read as a whole, it seems to me that the jury were clearly and properly directed, separately in regard to each of the three elements, and in regard to their use of the expert evidence in coming to their conclusions concerning the three elements. If there were problems created by the passages complained of, in my opinion they were cleared away in the overall correctness and particularity of the summing-up.

In the course of oral argument, the court inquired whether the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground of appeal required the court to look beyond the aspects of the case concerned with the judge's directions to the jury in regard to their use of the expert evidence. The court was told that the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground was directed only to that aspect of the trial.

In my opinion the second and third grounds of appeal have not been made out, nor, in light of what I have referred to in the preceding paragraph can the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground succeed.

In my opinion the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

REGINA versus KYLIE GAYE SHERWOOD 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I agree with Priestley JA. 
REGINA versus Kylie Gaye SHERWOOD 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: I agree with the orders proposed by Priestley JA and with his reasons. * * * 
