

United Overseas Bank Limited versus Tan and Ors Matter No 10737/97 [1998] NSWSC (28 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
UNITED OVERSEAS BANK LIMITED versus TAN & ORS /97 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 12 March 1997. There are three defendants. The process advanced a monetary claim founded on default under a Guarantee. 
Following service of process, Notices of Appearance were filed. Particulars were requested by the third defendant and supplied.

Default judgment was obtained against the first and second defendants (the judgment took effect on 30 June 1997). Later, default judgment was entered against the third defendant (it took effect on 14 January 1998). Large sums are involved.

The first and second defendants are husband and wife. The third defendant is their daughter.

The first defendant has not taken any steps to have the default judgment set aside. In May 1998, the second and third defendants made separate applications for the setting aside of the default judgment. These defendants remain separately represented.

A bulk of documentation has been placed before the Court. Two affidavits have been sworn by the second defendant. Her solicitor (Riccarda Stock) has sworn an affidavit. The third defendant has sworn an affidavit. Her solicitor (Dean
Groundwater) has sworn an affidavit. Documentation has been tendered.

The second defendant has been cross-examined. The third defendant has not been cross-examined. She lives in the USA.

For present purposes, it suffices to refer briefly to just some of the material. This recital is not intended to be an exhaustive statement of all relevant material.

The first defendant has been described as carrying on business of investing in property. He appears to have bought a substantial number of properties. It has been said that he rented out properties. These activities saw him engage in substantial borrowings.

It seems that, initially, he carried on these business activities in
Singapore. The first and third defendants came to Australia in about 1981. The second defendant joined them shortly thereafter.

The first and second defendants have continued to live in Australia. The first defendant continued with his activities as a property investor. There had been a company known as Brastagi Singapore. Later, there was a company Brastagi
Holdings Pty Limited. This company was used as a vehicle for the business activities. The business activities were carried on for the benefit of the family. Property was bought in various names (including in the names of the second defendant and the third defendant).

The second defendant was a director of the company. She was content to leave the conduct of the business activities in the hands of her husband. It would seem that these activities may have been conducted successfully for many years. The activities were conducted with legal assistance (Mr Waters). From time to time, the second defendant signed documents. Sometimes, she attended at the lawyer's office with her husband to sign the documentation. At other times, the lawyer would bring the documents to their home for signature.

The second defendant says that she did not read the documents. She said that they were never explained to her.

She is able to read English. Whilst she says that she does not understand legal terminology, it is not said that she lacked understanding of the nature of documentation such as a guarantee and a mortgage. Her oral evidence tended to suggest that she had an understanding of what was going on and of a mortgage. The business had been a source of family income for many years.

On 8 March 1991, a Deed of Guarantee was given on behalf of each of the defendants to the plaintiff. The default judgment is founded on this document.
The second defendant says that she did not know that she had signed the Deed and that she did not receive any advice from a solicitor in relation to the meaning or effect of the document.

This Guarantee provided security for certain facility arrangements.
Substantial sums were then due under the existing arrangements. In about 1995, the second defendant had become aware that there were difficulties. In 1996, she became aware that properties were being sold to repay monies owed to the plaintiff. The residential home was one of the properties sold. Since the sale of the residential home, the first and second defendants have lived in rented accommodation with the rent being paid by the third defendant.

The second defendant was aware that solicitors had been retained to look after their interests in relation to the plaintiff. She had been told by the first defendant that he was engaged in some very large scale projects with the
Chinese Government and had the expectation of getting a large commission which would enable him to pay out the plaintiff.

The position of the third defendant is somewhat different to that of the second defendant. Since 1984, she has spent much of her time in the USA. She now has United States citizenship. She is 34 years of age. She is a person of some education. In 1988, she was described as an Economist. It is not said that she would have lacked understanding of relevant documentation.

Whilst she was living in Singapore, from time to time she signed documents at the request of her father. She was aware only of a company known as Brastagi
Singapore. She was aware that he was buying properties and "renting them out so as to provide for our retirement and for the family".

On 19 February 1988, she executed a General Power of Attorney. Prior to execution, her father had told her that it would be best to have some arrangement "so that I can do transactions for you and for Brastagi's business while you are away". She says that, between February 1988 and November 1996, she was unaware that her father had used the Power of Attorney either to execute documents or to do anything else on her behalf. The first defendant used the Power of Attorney to execute the Deed of Guarantee on her behalf.

In late December 1996, she became aware of the claim made by the plaintiff pursuant to the Deed of Guarantee. She left it to the first defendant to look after her interests in relation to that claim.

The Court has a discretionary power to set aside the default judgment. The power is exercised so as to ensure that justice is best served between the parties. The onus of demonstrating an entitlement to relief rests with the applicant.

The real issues agitated were whether or not the second and/or the third defendants had a bona fide defence on the merits to the plaintiff's claim. It is a monetary claim of a large order.

The question of delay was raised during argument, but largely it disappeared as a real issue. There is material which goes towards explaining delay.

Before proceeding to deal with the real issues, I should mention that the evidence disclosed that the second defendant was a person who had no source of funds. In these circumstances, in one sense, the maintaining of proceedings against her and her application seemed to be largely academic.

Defences and Cross-Claims were prepared for each of these two defendants. They are lengthy documents and appear to have been prepared by the same draftsman.
It is common ground that they contain much material that is not maintainable by either defendant. The thrust of the case advanced by each of these two defendants is that they have entitlement to relief under either equitable doctrines or the provisions of the Contracts Review Act, 1980 (the Act).
Each claims relief in respect of obligations imposed by the Deed of Guarantee.
There were some additional matters advanced on behalf of the third defendant.
However, it is not presently necessary to dwell on those matters.

The case for the second defendant placed heavy reliance on what have been referred to as the principles in Yerkey versus Jones <case>; <case> (6
August 1998). The High Court allowed an appeal from the Court of Appeal of this State. The Court of Appeal having earlier held that it was not bound to follow Yerkey versus Jones.

In my view, what was said in Garcia does not assist the second defendant in this case. There are a number of reasons for reaching that view. It is not necessary to express them all. Some are self-evident from what has already been said. I should stress one other matter. There is evidence that the plaintiff was provided with material demonstrating that the Deed of Guarantee had been executed by the second defendant after receiving what purported to be independent advice (see Certificate of Independent Advice being annexure `A' to one of her affidavits).

In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the second defendant has an arguable bona fide defence on the merits to the plaintiff's claim. I consider that she has failed to discharge the onus of showing an entitlement to relief.

As I have earlier mentioned, the position of the third defendant is somewhat different to that of the second defendant. Whilst there is a relationship which throws up a presumption of undue influence, the other evidence does not support any claim of undue influence. She did arm the first defendant with a
General Power of Attorney. The Deed of Guarantee was executed on her behalf by her father pursuant to the Power of Attorney. There is a purported Certificate of Independent Advice, but it merely demonstrated that advice was given to the donee of the power (her father). Not only did she not in fact get advice, she was unaware of the existence of the Deed until late 1996. There must be real doubt, at the very least, whether the plaintiff can look to the Certificate for any comfort. I bear in mind that the potential liability under the Deed was enormous.

At this stage of the proceedings, it can be difficult to assess the prospects of success of at least the claims for relief under the Act. This is the position in which the Court is faced with here in her case. The decision for the Court is not an easy one. Presently, it does not have the advantages available to a judicial officer at a trial. I bear in mind that relief under the Act may involve the exercise of discretionary power. In the circumstances of this case, after some deliberation, I am of the view that justice would be best served if the third defendant was allowed to go to trial on, inter alia, her claims to relief under the provisions of the Act.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion brought by the second defendant. The second defendant is to pay the costs of that Notice of Motion. I order that the default judgment entered against the third defendant be set aside. I direct that any Defence or Cross-Claim be filed within seven days. The third defendant is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion filed on her behalf. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
