

Matchbox Toys Pty Limited versus The Chief Executive of Customs and Anor Matter
No 10810/96 [1997] NSWSC 494 (17 October 1997) 
Matchbox Toys Pty Limited versus The Chief Executive of Customs & Anor /96 October 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Name of Case: MATCHBOX TOYS PTY LIMITED versus THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF CUSTOMS & ANOR 
Proceedings: 10810/96 
Date of Hearing: 21 August 1997 
Further Submissions: 25 September 1997 
Further Written Submissions: 13 October 1997 
Further Written Submissions: 16 October 1997 
Date of Judgment: 17 October 1997 
Counsel for Appellant: Mr R W R Parker QC/Mr S K Collingridge/Mr C Hoy 
Solicitors for Appellant: Martin Churchill 
Counsel for Respondent: Mr A Robertson SC/Mr G M Elliott 
Solicitor for Respondent: Australian Government Solicitor 
Stated Case from decision of a Magistrate to order judgment for the respondent for the amount of customs duty paid, but not owing under the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/).

Requirements for a Stated Case: [Part 32](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/index.html#p32) rule 4 of the Supreme Court Rules. Glover versus MacDougall [[1976] 2 NSWLR 359] and Waterloo Holdings Pty Limited versus Timso (Court of Appeal - 28 August 1997 - unreported) followed.

Consideration of ss.163 and 167 of the Act and Regulations 126 and 128(A)(5).

Held there was a dispute as contemplated in s.167 where the owner was aware of matters giving rise to a dispute, or would have been so aware if he had made reasonable enquiries or acted reasonably to protect his rights in relation to the payment of duty.

Comptroller-General of Customs & Anor versus Kawasaki Motors Pty Limited (1991) 32 FCR followed. A.G. International Pty Limited versus Collector of Customs (1995) 129 FLR considered and doubted on this point. Collector of Customs versus Gaylor Pty Limited [(1994) 35 NSWLR 649] applied.

Held that s.163 does not give rise to an action at law, save for proceedings for judicial review.

Held that Regulation 128(A)(5) is not ultra vires.

Ira L. & A.C. Berk Limited versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1930) 30 SR 119] distinguished 
A & G International Pty Limited versus Collector of Customs (1995) 129 FLR followed on this point. 
I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Stated Case 6 
Sections Of The [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (Cth) And 
The Customs Regulations To Which Reference Has Been Made 13 
A Consideration Of The Submissions 17 
Do Sections 167 And 163 Provide An Exclusive Statutory Code? 19 
The Views Thus Far Reached 53 
The Validity Of Regulation 128A(5) 54 
Restitution 58 
Conclusion And Orders 58 /1996 - MATCHBOX TOYS PTY LIMITED versus THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF CUSTOMS & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The appellant, Matchbox Toys Pty Limited, is an importer of toys and, as such, liable, in certain circumstances, to pay Customs duty. The liability depends on whether the terms of the agreements, in respect of each toy it imports, make it liable to pay a royalty to the manufacturer of the toy. The appellant made certain payments to the second respondent, which were demanded as Customs duty allegedly payable, on and after 12 October 1990. It formed the view in , with which the respondents agreed, that the Customs duty was not payable, and in 1992 it instituted proceedings in the Local Court of New South
Wales, which were heard by Mr R.K. Pogson LCM from 30 August to 1 September , to recover those moneys. In a reserved judgment, delivered on 15
December 1994, the Magistrate dismissed the appellant's proceedings and ordered "a verdict in favour of the defendant". The appellant asked that a case be stated and, by a Summons filed on 21 February 1996, it sought a decision on or a determination of the questions and matters in that Stated
Case. Mr R.W.R. Parker of Queen's Counsel appeared for the appellant with Mr
S.K. Collingridge of Counsel on 21 August 1997, and with Mr C. Hoy of Counsel on 25 September 1997; and Mr A. Robertson of Senior Counsel and Mr G.M.
Elliott of Counsel appeared for the respondents. Further written submissions were received on 13 October 1997.

The appellant tendered, without objection, its Further Amended Statement of
Liquidated Claim in the Local Court, to which was annexed a schedule of payments, and the Defence thereto: Exhibit A. It pleaded its cause of action, firstly, on the basis that money was paid by it to the first respondent "under a mistake" as to its liability to pay Customs duty. The first particular referred to money paid on or about 12 October 1990 pursuant to a demand based on a claim for Customs duty "short paid", "which claim the first defendant later abandoned". The second particular referred to money paid "under the same mistake" and to the subsequent abandonment of the claim. Further, or in the alternative, the appellant asserted that there was doubt as to the proper defendant and claimed in essentially the same terms against the second respondent. The pleading does not assert any common money count for money had and received nor a claim, in terms, for restitution. There is no allegation, in terms, that the money paid was not paid in the character of Customs duty.

The respondents admitted the payment of $24,029.19 on or about 12 October , which was claimed as Customs duty short paid by the appellant, and did not admit that the payment was made under a mistake. They admitted that duty was paid conformably with the schedule, but did not admit that that occurred under a mistake. They denied the alleged liability to pay interest and, in answer to the whole of the appellant's claim, denied that if it had a cause of action the first respondent was the correct legal entity to be sued, (a point which assumed no further importance); and asserted that the appellant was prevented from recovering the amount claimed:- "... because an application for refund of duty was not made within 12 months after the date on which duty was paid as required by [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) and sub-regulations 126(1), 127(1), 128(1) and 128A(5) of the Customs Regulations." 
This pleading accepted, as I read it, that proceedings for the recovery of overpaid Customs duty may be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/), ("the
Act"). This stance is not necessarily consistent with some authority to which
I shall refer and, in his written submissions of 29 September 1997, Mr
Robertson submitted that [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) did not confer a right of action in the sense that an owner or taxpayer may sue the Commonwealth or either of the present respondents directly for the sum paid by way of duty. He submitted that the Act provided for the administrative review of decisions under that section, which is clearly correct, and were that not so a refusal to deal with an application for a refund or a jurisdictional error might give rise to a public law remedy such as mandamus or its statutory equivalent. In these circumstances he submitted that the observations of Ormiston J on this point in A & G International Pty
Limited versus Collector of Customs [(1995) 129 FLR 23] are correct.

Mr Parker, in his further written submissions of 13 October 1997, submitted that [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) gave a cause of action, although not an exclusive one, and that that had been recognised by the Full Court of this State in Ira L. & A.C. Berk Limited v The Commonwealth of Australia <case>; [(1930) 30 SR 119.]
He further submitted that in so far as A & G International is to the contrary, it is wrong and should not be followed.

It is to be noted that the pleading did not assert, in terms, that the duty had been paid "through manifest error of fact or patent misconception of the law": [Regulation (1(e).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s126.html)
Presumably the general reference to "sub-regulation 126(1)" was intended, or may have been intended, to encompass this, although as a matter of language the defence seems to be directed only to a time limitation. It was not in issue that the proceedings were instituted more than twelve months after payment. However, Regulation 126(1) does not deal with time limitations.
Initially, it was not asserted before me by Mr Parker that an issue not before the Magistrate was whether the duty was paid "through manifest error of fact or patent misconception of the law". In his further written submissions Mr
Parker raised the point that "manifest error of fact or patent misconception of law" was not pleaded before the Magistrate and that he should not have found those facts. The Stated Case only hinted at this point in raising the following contention on behalf of the appellant:- "4. If the money was Customs duty, Regulation 126(1)(e) does not debar recovery." 
I raised with Mr Parker what this was intended to mean and I assume, from his submission, that it is a reference to the absence of a pleading of manifest error of fact or patent misconception of law. However, although the point was thus raised, there is no evidence before me as to how the case was finally contested before the Magistrate. In addition to the fact that the pleading, at least arguably, raised the matter, it may have become an issue before him without an express pleading: Dare versus Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 658.] If the point sought to be raised was that it was not an issue before the Magistrate it should have been unequivocally stated, so that the
Magistrate could have made the necessary findings to enable it to be argued properly.

In the alternative it was pleaded that the appellant was prevented from recovering the amount claimed because the duty was not paid under protest as required by s.167(1), (3) and (4), or no action was commenced to recover "the sum paid" within six months after the date of payment as required by s.167(4) of the Act.

The Stated Case 
In paragraph 2 of the Stated Case the Magistrate, after noting certain of the matters to which I have referred, set forth facts which were agreed between the parties and additional facts he found. They are:- "2. FACTS 
Facts agreed for Local Court hearing: . On 12 October 1990 the Collector of Customs issued a debit note to the Plaintiff which sought payment of: $23,207.86 for Customs duty on royalties; $821.33 for Customs duty on artwork.
 . The said sum of $23,207.86 concerned Customs duty of $9,001.68 for the products `Oh Penny' and `Ring Raiders', and the balance of $14,206.18 being Customs duty for the products `Connectables', `Hush-a-Bye', `Porsche', `Illusions', `Vic Doll' and `Garage'.
 . The debit note of 12 October 1990 was paid by the Plaintiff on 12 October 1990.
 . Customs duty in the sum of $14,206.18 was not and is not payable on the products `Connectables', `Hush-a-Bye', `Porsche', `Illusions', and `Vic Doll' referred to in the debit note of 12 October 1990.
 . The Plaintiff paid the sums referred to in the `Duty Paid' column of Exhibit 7 (the Schedule to the Further Amended Statement of Claim) to the Collector of Customs on or about the dates that appear in the column headed `Date of Entry'.
 . The total of the duty paid after the debit note of 12 October 1990, referred to in Exhibit 7, was $12,052.14.
 . The said sum of $12,052.14 was not and is not payable as Customs duty.

Other facts as found by myself: . The demand for duty in the sum of $23,207.86 referred to in paragraph 1 of the facts agreed for the Local Court hearing as set out above was made by the second Respondent following an audit of the Appellant's records by Customs Officers in June 1990.
 . Officers of the second Respondent's audit team explained to officers of the Appellant company prior to the said audit that if any additional duty was sought as a result of the audit then payment of that duty could be made under protest (see findings in paragraph 2 on page 2 of my reasons for decision).
 . Subsequent to 12 October 1990, the Appellant imported further goods upon which royalties were paid. The amount of $12,052.14 demanded by the second respondent as duty in respect of the royalties was paid by the appellant to the second respondent (as detailed in Exhibit 7 which is the schedule to the amended Statement of Claim).
 . On or about 19 December 1991 Price Waterhouse on behalf of the Appellant lodged with the second Respondent requests for Customs advice to determine if royalty payments for certain products were dutiable. The products covered by these requests included `Connectables', `Hush-a-Bye', `Porsche', `Illusions', and `Vic Doll' (see paragraph 3 on page 2 of my reasons for decision).
 . On 18 May 1992 the second Respondent advised the Appellant that the royalty payments for certain products, including `Connectables', `Hush-a-Bye', `Porsche', `Illusions', and `Vic Doll', were not liable to Customs duty (see findings, paragraph 4, page 2 of my reasons for decision). The amount paid to Customs affected by these particular advices were the sums of $14,206.18 and $12,052.14 referred to in paragraph 4 and 7 of the agreed facts set out above.
 . The monies paid by the Appellant were at all material times paid as duty (see paragraph 4 page 4 of my reason for decision).
 . The monies paid by the Appellant were paid without protest (paragraph 3, page 4 of my reasons for decision).
 . There was no reason why monies paid as duty could not have been paid under protest (see paragraph 5, page 4 of my reasons for decision)." 
The document referred to in paragraph 5 of the agreed facts discloses that between 16 October 1990 and 25 March 1991 eighteen payments of duty were made, which totalled $12,052.14. No payments were made under protest.

The facts agreed in paragraphs 4 and 7, and found in paragraph 5, established that notwithstanding the demands and payments the appellant was not liable to pay those amounts to the respondents as Customs duty. It was not suggested there was any other justification for demanding the payments, or any other obligation requiring them to be made. Hence, the respondents have received money as Customs duty to which they claim no present entitlement, but they refuse to repay it for the reasons stated in their Defence. The attitude of the respondents was made clear by Mr Elliott, who appeared before the
Magistrate, when he said, (transcript before the Magistrate at pp.3 and 4), which transcript was incorporated in the Stated Case:- "It is also agreed that subsequent to that audit a Mr Merchant issued a valuation determination that determined that a number of those items that were part of that debit note, other than the Ring Raiders and O'Penny, ones I've just mentioned were not dutiable and had that been the case at the time may need not have been paid as duty to the collector. The major issues that we can see is that under the [Customs Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) there is a regime of limitation provisions that in due course I'll be taking your Worship to." 
This passage appears at the commencement of the hearing. That fact and the reference to "major issues" do not negate that the further defence may have been raised.

Whilst defences based on statutory limitation periods, and in circumstances where it is not suggested that the recipient of the money had a legal entitlement to it, do not, initially, appear to have much "merit", it must be borne in mind that, once collected, Customs duty becomes part of Consolidated
Revenue, which the Act shows a clear intention to protect, except in the circumstances specifically laid down by the Act for its recovery. These statutory remedies will prevail unless it can be shown that there are common law rights additional to them.

The Magistrate incorporated, as part of the Stated Case, his reasons. It is appropriate to refer to part of them, including paragraph 5 on page 4 to which he refers in paragraph 8 above:- "Having found as I do, as a fact, that the moneys paid were at all material times duty it must now be determined whether that duty can be refunded. Hill and Heerey JJ held in the case The Comptroller General of Customs versus Kawasaki (1991) 103 ALJ page 637 that: [Section 167](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) represents the only method whereby an action for recovery of overpaid Customs duty can be brought where there is a dispute between the owner and the Collector as to the liability or matter affecting liability and that it operates to exclude the availability of any alternate common law remedy.

It would therefore appear that the prima facie entitlement to moneys paid under mistake of fact or law would in this instance be subject to [s.167.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) The Court also held in the Kawaski case that [s.167](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) may not operate where no protest was possible. There was certainly no reason why the moneys paid as duty could not have been paid under protest. The evidence of Mr Edmonds at page 21 of the transcript: 
I actually went to CCH myself which I subscribe to in many areas and I purchased a copy of the [Customs Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) and I read as much as I damn well could about it.

Going to page 19: 
Question: At the time you received the letter you were aware that there was a payment under protest facility, weren't you? 
Answer: Yes.

This, combined with the evidence of Mr Hayward, that he explained to Mr Edmonds his right to pay under protest there is no reason why payment could not have been made under that protest procedure. I do not accept the owner's proposition that as there was no protest [s.167](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) cannot apply. [Section 167(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) is capable of standing alone and as stated by Hill and Heerey in the Kawasaki case page 656 the words of sub-section (4) in its widest form precludes (sic) any action for the recovery of any money paid as Customs duty unless the requisite protest has been made under sub-section (1) and further, unless the action is taken within the time limits by sub-section (4-9), that is six months after the date of payment. Clearly this did not happen.

I now turn to the right of the refund under [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) and [Regulation 126](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s126.html), the duty paid through a manifest error of fact or patent misconception. Having regard to the Macquarie dictionary definition of manifest and patent I am not of the view duty was paid through either. Even if I were, I accept that [Regulation 126(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s126.html) has been applicable, [Regulation 128(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s128.html) (sic) (5) was not complied with, that is application was not made within 12 months. Having regard to all the evidence and the submissions of both parties and the case law referred to me I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the plaintiff has not established his (sic) claim and I make a verdict in favour of the defendant." 
The concluding paragraph would lead me to infer that the issue of manifest error or patent misconception was raised before the Magistrate. He found, as a matter of fact, that there was no such error or misconception. No submission in relation to this finding, save for the one to which I have referred, was made. Further, if [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) was applicable the further difficulty presented by [Regulation (A)(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s128.html) had to be overcome.

In paragraph 3 of the Stated Case the Magistrate set forth his grounds for determination, they being:- "3. GROUNDS OF DETERMINATION: . The money paid over by the Appellant to the Respondent was paid over as Customs duty.
 . The Appellant is not entitled to a refund under [Section 163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) , because the duty was not paid through manifest error of fact or patent misconception of law as required by [Regulation 126(1)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s126.html) and, in any event, no relevant application was made within 12 months of 12 October 1990, the date of payment of duty, as required by Regulation 128A(5).
 . There was no reason why the appellant could not have paid the said monies under protest.
 . Having failed to pay the duty under protest as provided for by [Section 167](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) the appellant could not succeed on an action for the recovery of the duty.
 . The said monies were not paid through a manifest error of fact or patent misconception of the law within the meaning of [regulation 126(e).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s126.html) . Regulation 128A(5) was not complied with and an application was not made within 12 months under that provision." 
In paragraph 4 he set out the appellant's contentions, they being: "4. APPELLANT'S CONTENTIONS: 
The Appellant contends that my determination was erroneous in point of law upon the grounds that:--- . Before money can be paid under protest there must be a `dispute' within the meaning of [Section 167](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) and that relevant `dispute' did not exist in this case.
 . To the extent that is implicit from my reasons for decision that a relevant dispute existed the appellant contends there was not evidence to support such a conclusion.
 . [S 163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) and the Regulations did not apply because the monies paid to the second Respondent were not `duty' as relevantly defined.
 . If the money was Customs duty, [Regulation 126(1)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s126.html) does not debar recovery.
 . Customs Regulations 128A(5) is not a valid exercise of the regulation-making power granted by the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) ." 
Sections Of The [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (Cth) And The Customs Regulations To Which Reference Has Been Made 
Section 153 of the Act provides:- "All duties shall constitute Crown debts charged upon the goods in respect of which the same are payable and payable by the owner of the goods and recoverable at any time in any court of competent jurisdiction by proceedings in the name of the Collector." 
Section 163(1) provides:- "1. Refunds, rebates and remissions of duty may be made: in respect of goods generally or in respect of the goods included in a class of goods; and in such circumstances, and subject to such conditions and restrictions (if any), as are prescribed, being circumstances and conditions and restrictions, that relate to goods generally or to goods included in the class of goods.

A. The Regulations may prescribe the amount, or the means of determining the amount, of any refund, rebate or remission of duty that may be made for the purposes of sub-section (1)." 
Regulation 126(1)(e) provides:- "Each of the following circumstances is prescribed for the purposes of section 163 of the Act, namely where: ...
 duty has been paid through manifest error of fact or patent misconception of the law." 
Regulation 128A(5) provides:- "An application for a refund of duty in any circumstance other than a circumstance referred to in any of the preceding provisions of this regulation or in paragraph 126(1)(ea) may be made within twelve months after the date on which duty was paid." 
Section 167 provides:- "(1) If any dispute arises as to the amount or rate of duty payable in respect of any goods, or as to the liability of any goods to duty, under any Customs Tariff, or under Customs Tariff or Customs Tariff alteration proposed in the Parliament (not being duty imposed under the [Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/cta1975295/)), the owner of the goods may pay under protest the sum demanded by the Collector as the duty payable in respect of the goods, and thereupon the sum so paid shall, as against the owner of the goods, be deemed to be the proper duty payable in respect of the goods, unless the contrary is determined in an action brought in pursuance of this section.

The owner may, within the times limited in this section, bring an action against the Collector, in any Commonwealth or State Court of competent jurisdiction, for the recovery of the whole or any part of the sum so paid.
 ...

No action shall lie for the recovery of any sum paid to the Customs as the duty payable in respect of any goods, unless the payment is made under protest in pursuance of this section and the action is commenced within the following times: in case the sum is paid as the duty payable under any Customs Tariff, within six months after the date of the payment; or in case the sum is paid as the duty payable under a Customs Tariff or Customs Tariff alteration proposed in the Parliament, within six months after the Act, by which the Customs Tariff or Customs Tariff alteration proposed in the Parliament is made law, is assented to.

Nothing in this section shall affect any rights or powers under section 163." 
Section 270(1) provides:- "The Governor-General may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act prescribing all matters which by this Act are required or permitted to be prescribed or as may be necessary or convenient to be prescribed for giving effect to this Act or for the conduct of any business relating to the Customs, and in paricular for prescribing: .........." 
Section 273GA provides:- "(1) Subject to this section, applications may be made to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for review of:- ...

A decision of a Collector under s.163 in relation to an application for a refund, rebate or remission of duty; ...

Where a dispute referred to in sub-section 167(1) has arisen and the owner of the goods has, in accordance with that sub-section, paid under protest the sum demanded by the Collector, an application may be made to the Tribunal for review of the decision to make that demand and of any other decision forming part of the process of making, or leading up to the making of, that first-mentioned decision." 
Because submissions were made to me in relation to the validity of Regulation
A(5) it is desirable to set out certain provisions of the Act as they existed before the decision in Ira L. & A.C. Berk. Section 163(1) provided:- "(1) Whenever goods:- have received damage or have been pillaged during the voyage; or have whilst under Customs control been damaged pillaged lost or destroyed; or whenever duty has been paid through manifest error of fact or patent misconception of the law a refund or remission of the duty as the case may require shall be made in manner prescribed." 
Relevantly, for present purposes, s.167 was in the same terms as now. The decision in Ira L. & A.C. Berk was given on 24 February 1930. It held that s.163 did not authorise the imposing of a time limit to claim a refund, rebate or remission and that, accordingly, there was no power to make a regulation which did so. On 29 March 1930 the Act was amended to add the following proviso:- "Provided that no refund, rebate or remission of duty under this section shall be made unless application therefor is made within such time as is prescribed." 
The amendment, save in so far as it related to the Ira L. & A.C. Berk proceedings, was deemed to have commenced on the date of the commencement of the Act. Section 163(1)(b) now provides that refunds, rebates and remissions may be made "in such circumstances, and subject to such conditions and restrictions (if any), as are prescribed". The respondents' submission was that these words are wide enough to allow the imposition of a time limitation on the making of such an application. Support was, of course, sought to be drawn from the circumstances leading to the 1930 amendment.

A Consideration Of The Submissions 
It was submitted by Mr Parker, firstly, that the Magistrate was wrong to construe s.167 as applicable to the circumstances described in the Stated Case because when the payments were made there was no dispute, which would give rise to the making of a protest. It was submitted that it was only later, when it was asserted by the appellant that the respondents were in error in demanding the additional duty, which assertion the respondents accepted, that any question as to the obligation to make payment arose. Accordingly, it was submitted that as there was no dispute when payment was made the appellant had no ground for making a protest, and that it could not have done so in the absence of having a basis as s.167(3A)(c) requires that a statement of the grounds on which the protest is made be given. This submission was expanded in the further written submissions.

Before considering the wide ranging submissions made on this point, I think it appropriate to note that [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/cta1975295/index.html#p32) rule 4(b) of the Supreme Court Rules requires a stated case to "state concisely the facts ... necessary to enable the Court to decide the questions arising ...". In the present case the Magistrate did not find expressly, in the facts stated as found in the Stated Case, that there was a dispute. It may be that such a finding is implicit in his finding that there was no reason why the moneys could not have been paid under protest. This construction of the
Stated Case obtains some support from the passage of the judgment to which I have referred. It may also be implicit in his finding that there had not been compliance with s.167. The Magistrate seems to have adopted this approach in noting paragraph 2 of the appellant's contentions. In my opinion, the proper inference is that the Magistrate, in finding that there was no reason why a protest was not made, was holding that there was a dispute when viewed objectively.

But, in my opinion, this Court, on the hearing of a stated case, should not be required to speculate on whether or not a factual finding was made or to dredge it out of implications. A fact necessary to determine the correctness of the Magistrate's decision on s.167, in the way in which the appellant has argued this Stated Case, was, in my opinion, whether there was a dispute at the time a protest was required to be made. The appellant, which I assume took an active part in the formulation of the Stated Case, should have ensured that an unequivocal finding on this point was included in the Stated Case. As
Yeldham J said in Glover versus MacDougall [[1976] 2 NSWLR 359] at p.361:- "It is also clear from the authorities that the magistrate, in the stated case, which I appreciate in practice is drafted by the parties, should categorically and clearly set out all the facts found by him upon the evidence before him which are relevant to the questions posed for determination by this Court." 
In that case his Honour remitted the matter to the Magistrate to state the facts he had found. I was not requested to do that in this case and, depending on the view which I take, it may or may not be necessary to do so. A similar point was made forcefully by Powell JA in Waterloo Holdings Pty Limited v
Timso (Court of Appeal - 28 August 1997 - as yet unreported).

Do Sections 167 And 163 Provide An Exclusive Statutory Code? 
Mr Parker's first submission raises for consideration the question whether s.167 or s.163 or ss.167 and 163, depending on the facts, provides or provide an exclusive statutory code for the recovery of money, which has been paid pursuant to a demand for the payment of Customs duty, or whether money paid in respect of a demand colore officii is recoverable as money had and received or by reference to the wider principles of restitution in an action at law. I hasten to note that Mr Parker, at least in part of his submissions, did not concede that the money paid was Customs duty. He stated that the duty had been paid pursuant to s.165(1), although, in itself, this indicates that the payment made was of "duty", which is defined as "duty of Customs". The basic submission, in so far as it referred to s.163, masked a potential difficulty, viz whether that section can be the basis of proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of Customs duty by way of refund, remission or rebate. So much was assumed in Ira L. & A.C. Berk, it not being necessary for the decision in that case, but it may not be consistent with the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in Comptroller-
General of Customs & Anor versus Kawasaki Motors Pty Limited (No 2) <case>; [(1991) 32 FCR 243], and, on my reading, it is inconsistent with the decision in
A & G International.

I shall proceed, for the moment, on the basis that the payments made were payments of duty. This will enable the questions as to whether the Act provides in one or both of the relevant sections an exclusive code for the recovery of overpaid, (in the present case admittedly overpaid), Customs duty.
A consideration of this question can be commenced, conveniently for present purposes, by reference to the comprehensive judgments of the Full Court of the
Federal Court in Kawasaki. The majority, Hill and Heerey JJ, held that s.167 provided the only method whereby an action for recovery of overpaid
Customs duty could be brought where there was a dispute as to the liability or matters affecting liability, and that the section operated to exclude the availability of any alternative common law remedy. Beaumont J dissented on the basis that the dispute was not one "as to the liability or matters affecting liability". I do not understand that his Honour would have come to a different conclusion to the majority if he had found that the dispute could be so characterised and, in their further written submissions, the parties agree with this.

In Kawasaki the facts were that on 4 October 1989 the Comptroller-General purportedly revoked a commercial tariff concession order in respect of ski craft. The respondent challenged this decision pursuant to the [Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/adra1977396/) (Cth), ("the ADJR Act"), and the Comptroller-General made a new decision to revoke that order on 6 July 1990 and consented to an order being made setting aside the purported revocation on 4 October 1989. The route thus taken was by reference to the alternative procedure available through s.273GA. It was agreed by the parties that no written protest was made by the respondent when the duty in dispute was paid, so that if the dispute was one which fell within s.167(1) proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover the duty in reliance on s.167 were bound to fail.

The respondent sought to recover the amount which had been paid by it as duty on the importation of jet skis between 4 October 1989 and 6 July 1990, and which would not have been payable had the tariff concession order remained in force. The Comptroller-General agreed to refund the duty, but refused to pay interest on it. At first instance he was ordered to do so, from which decision he appealed. Hill and Heerey JJ came to the conclusion to which I have referred and further held that this dispute was not "an abstract dispute as to the validity of the revocation of the" tariff concession order, but that the consequence of its being resolved in favour of the respondent was that there was no liability to pay Customs duty. Accordingly, so they held, there was a "dispute as to duty" within the meaning of s.167(1) of the Act. It is important to observe, having regard to the submission by Mr Parker that the appellant's payment was not a payment of Customs duty, that the majority considered that the payment should be characterised in that way, notwithstanding that it was found that no duty was payable.

At p.256 their Honours said:- "His Honour" (the learned trial Judge) "held that, in the circumstances of the case, the duty had been demanded ex colore officii, but held that the provisions of s.167 of the Act, which confer a right to recover Customs duty overpaid provided certain pre-conditions are observed, provided an exclusive code for the recovery of overpaid Customs duty by action. This holding is the subject of the respondent's notice of contention. However, his Honour held that s.16(1)(d) of the ADJR Act would have authorised an order requiring the Comptroller to refund the overpaid duty and that the making of such an order would not have been precluded by s.167. His Honour held, indeed, that, but for the repayment of the overpaid duty by the Comptroller voluntarily, his Honour would have made an order for the repayment. In these circumstances, his Honour was of the view that the Court had power to order the payment of interest on the overpaid Customs duty also pursuant to the provisions of s.16(1)(d) of the ADJR Act and that it was a proper exercise of that power to direct the Comptroller to pay the sum of $49,735, the rate of interest (21%) and the quantum involved not being in dispute." 
Their Honours set forth s.167 and, at p.257, noted the agreement of the parties that no written protest was made by the respondent when it paid the duty:- ".. so that if the dispute between the Collector and the respondent were one as to the liability of the goods to Customs duty, proceedings brought for the recovery of the duty, relying upon s.167, in a court of competent jurisdiction were bound to fail." 
They set forth the submissions on behalf of the appellant, which were that s.167 provided an exclusive code for the recovery of overpaid duty; that as the payments were admittedly not paid under protest as required by that section no action for recovery lay; that s.16(1)(d) did not operate to permit the circumvention of the mandatory requirements of s.167; that since there was no right to recover the overpaid duty there could be no right to interest; and, alternatively, that if s.167 was not an exclusive code, the respondents had not satisfied the requirements of a common law action for the recovery of money had and received and, for that reason, had no right to recover the overpaid duty.

At p.258 their Honours commenced a consideration of whether s.167 constituted an exclusive code for actions to recover overpaid duty and assumed, as the trial Judge had held, that in the absence of a provision such as s.167 the respondent would, in the circumstances of that case, have been entitled to recover the overpaid Customs duty in an action at common law. That led them to consider whether the enactment of s.167 "in its present form" operated to exclude that common law right of recovery, so that in any such proceedings the section operated as an exclusive code:- ".. with the result that, unless there has been compliance with that section, as, for example, by the making of a protest in writing at the time of payment of the disputed duty, the action for recovery would fail." 
Their Honours accepted that unless the common law right was taken away expressly or by necessary implication it would continue to exist and that it was not taken away expressly. They considered the legislation and its various precursors in detail which, for present purposes, I respectfully adopt without repetition, and the decision of the High Court in Sargood Bros versus The
Commonwealth <case>; [(1910) 11 CLR 258], and noted that thereafter a new s.167 was inserted. They referred to the Second Reading Speech and traced the further history of the section. At p.263 they said:- "It may be conceded that s.167 confers upon an importer, who is in a relevant dispute with the Collector, a choice whether or not to pay under protest, but it does not follow, from that, that it also confers upon the importer a choice not to comply with the terms of the section but rather to take action freed from its limitations. Equally, of course, the owner of the goods is not required to bring an action against the Collector under sub-s.(2). He may elect, for whatever reason, to bring no action at all. But if he does bring an action, that action will be governed by sub-s.(4). The wording of sub-s.(4) is in the widest form. It precludes any action for the recovery of any sum paid as Customs duty unless the requisite protest has been made under sub-s.(1) and further, unless the action is taken within the time limited by sub-s.(4)(a)." 
Their Honours continued:- "Whenever there is a dispute of the kind described in sub-s.(1), the owner of the goods, if he wishes to protect his position, must not only pay the duty, but also must protest in the manner provided by that section. The sum so paid is deemed by the section to be the proper duty and may accordingly be appropriated to general revenue, albeit that in the recovery action the contrary may be found, in which event the amount paid is to be refunded. Further, the action for recovery must be commenced within the relevant period provided in the statute. If it is not, the action for recovery will be statute-barred. Thus the Commonwealth will know, by the formal procedure of protest and by the timely bringing of a recovery action, what duty it may become liable to refund. If s.167 were but an alternative procedure, it is hard to see, assuming that an action for money had and received could be brought against the Comptroller, why any person would adopt the procedure in s.167, which would seem to be greatly more restrictive than that applicable at common law. Further, the Comptroller has the advantage of the deeming of the duty to be correct in the statutory context of a s.167 action. There would be no such deeming provision applicable to a common law action.

It follows that s.167 represents the only method whereby an action for recovery of overpaid Customs duty can be brought where there is a dispute between the owner and the Collector as to liability or matters affecting liability and that it operates to exclude the availability of any alternative common law remedy." 
Their Honours stated that that approach was consistent with the approach adopted by Brennan J in Re Carey [(1978) 1 ALD 455] at pp.457-458; by the Tribunal in Re Pilkington ACI Limited and Collector of
Customs [(1985) 3 AAR 279] at p.284, and in Dahlia Mining Co Limited versus Collector of Customs [(1989) 17 NSWLR 688.] 
In relation to the decision in Dahlia their Honours said:- "In the last-mentioned case, Giles J held, as we understand his Honour, that where an owner elected, rather than to bring proceedings under s.167, to adopt the procedure under s.273GA(7) to seek review of the question of the proper duty payable, the prohibition under s.167(3) had no application. To hold otherwise was to render the right to obtain administrative review under s.273GA of the Act nugatory. It is not necessary here to consider the correctness of that decision, although we should not wish to be thought to suggest that the decision was incorrect. The result is, however, to construe s.167 as inapplicable to a case arising under s.273GA; it is not to construe s.167 as providing no more than a general alternative remedy to the common law.

It was submitted by the respondent that the present was not a case which fell within s.167, that is to say, that the present was a case where no protest was possible. No doubt if this were the case, an action at common law might be taken to be outside the prohibition in sub-s.(4). The argument proceeds on the basis that there never was any `dispute as to duty' whether in terms of amount, rate or liability of goods to duty. Rather there was a dispute as to whether a TCO had been validly revoked. This argument places too narrow a construction upon the words of s.167(1). The dispute was not an abstract dispute as to the validity of the revocation of the TCO. The consequence of that dispute being resolved in favour of the owner of the goods was that there was no liability to pay Customs duty. To characterise such a dispute as not being a dispute as to the liability of the relevant goods to duty is in our view pedantic and to prefer form over substance." 
In my opinion, it is inherent in what their Honours said that if it was possible to make a protest there was "any dispute" which had "arisen" and, accordingly, the owner must protect his rights by paying under protest. The same approach is manifest in A & G International. It would be too narrow an approach to s.167 to say that it only applied if the owner raised the matter of disputes with Customs at the time of making payment. It may be that at the time of making payment the owner does not consider that there is an obligation to do so but does not raise that with Customs. In those circumstances it could not be said, in my view, that some other remedy is available to the owner because the obligation remains upon the owner to protect his rights. In such circumstances I consider that the requirements of s.167 would have to be fulfilled. This approach overcomes a difficulty, which
Ormiston J perceived in A & G International, viz the failure by the owner to raise a dispute of which he was aware.

I also consider that on a proper construction of s.167 there is an obligation on the owner, at the time of paying duty, to satisfy himself that the duty demanded is payable. If this were not so then, arguably, the provisions of s.167 would be circumvented by an owner not bothering to consider or to consider properly whether such an obligation arose at the time of payment, but later concluding that the duty was not properly payable. Of course it may be that all the relevant facts and circumstances are not known to the owner and could not have been known even with the exercise of due diligence. In such circumstances it may be, depending on the facts, appropriate to say that "no protest was possible". But it is not possible to say that if the owner has simply failed to direct his mind to the issue properly.

These views are, I believe, consistent with the evident intention of s.167, which deems the amount paid to be the proper duty, to ensure that if duty is paid without protest it cannot be recovered by recourse to an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. Thus there will be an element of certainty so far as the revenue authorities are concerned. The legislative intention to which I have referred is expressed in Kawasaki and A & G
International.

A consideration of all that Hill and Heerey JJ said, and particularly the passage I have last quoted, indicates to me that they were concerned with a case where there was a dispute at the time when a protest could be made, viz at the time when the Customs duty was paid.

Beaumont J considered the history of s.167 at length and, at p.253, he said:- "In my opinion, s.167, properly construed, applies to any dispute which, as a matter of substance, may be characterised as a dispute as to the amount or rate of duty payable or as to the liability of any goods to duty. The provision does not, in my view, extend to a dispute which, in substance, is a dispute as to other matters, for instance, the constitutional validity of the Customs legislation in question, even if, as an incidental matter, consequential relief is also sought that duty, paid under the legislation claimed to be invalid, is sought to be recovered. In other words, that matter should, I think, properly be characterised as a dispute as to the validity of the Customs legislation, rather than a dispute as to the amount or rate of duty or as to the liability of goods to duty, notwithstanding that an additional, consequential claim is made that, if the constitutional challenge were to succeed, duty paid under the invalid law should be repaid.

Did s.167 apply in the present case? 
In my opinion, s.167(1) did not apply. This was a dispute as to the validity of the administrative action revoking the TCO. Although consequentially, Kawasaki claimed a refund of duty overpaid as a result of the alleged invalid revocation, this claim was incidental to the main dispute which had a different character. The true character of the dispute between the parties is, I think, confirmed by reference to the nature of the proceedings brought to resolve that dispute. They were proceedings for judicial review, brought under the ADJR Act, challenging the validity of administrative action in an area other than the matters specified in Schedule 1 of that Act.

In my opinion, s.167(4) provided no answer to Kawasaki's claim for interest. It is clear, in my view, that the prohibitions in s.167(4) are confined to disputes of the kind described in s.167(1)." 
It is therefore apparent where the difference in approach between the majority and Beaumont J lay. But for that I do not discern in his Honour's reasoning that he would have come to a different conclusion. What does emerge is that s.167 provides an exclusive code for the recovery of Customs duty where there is a dispute as to the amount of duty payable or as to the liability of any goods to duty. But if the owner pays the duty demanded voluntarily, in the sense that the owner is unaware that the duty demanded is not lawfully payable, and, accordingly, does not make the payment under protest, the question to which I have referred arises as to whether it was possible for the owner to make a protest. As I have suggested the purpose of s.167 would be seriously subverted if an owner could assert that he was not obliged to make a protest because there had been a failure to investigate at the time of making payment whether there was a legal obligation, in the circumstances, to do so.
But that, in essence, was the submission made by Mr Parker in the present case, namely that as the appellant was unaware of the obligation to pay duty there was no dispute, which activated s.167. It was submitted by Mr Parker that in so far as the majority stated:- "Whenever there is a dispute of the kind described in sub-s.(1), the owner of the goods, if he wishes to protect his position, must not only pay the duty, but also must protest in the manner provided by that section" that must be read as meaning whenever there is a dispute between the parties at the time the payment has to be made. That tends to beg the question. The true question is whether, on a proper consideration of all the relevant facts and circumstances, the owner should have disputed the obligation to pay and thereby raised a dispute, which was supported by a protest. If, subsequently, a dispute arises it was not, so Mr Parker submitted, a dispute falling within s.167 and, accordingly, one would be able to avail oneself of rights at common law. However, this submission ignores, if I may say so with respect, the two situations to which I have referred.

Although the appellant contended in the Stated Case that there had to be a dispute to enliven s.167; that one did not exist in this case; and that to the extent that it was implicit in the Magistrate's reasons that there was a dispute there was no evidence to support that conclusion, it did not challenge the finding that there was no reason why a protest could not have been made.
In my opinion there is an obligation on an owner to raise a dispute at the time duty is paid if that is possible in the way I have stated. I am not satisfied that there was no evidence to support this finding. The Magistrate pointed to the evidence on which he relied in finding that there was no reason why the protest could not have been made in the passage from his reasons I have quoted. His reasoning was that the appellant had made investigations and had been told expressly of the right to protest. In these circumstances if it did not do sufficient to find the basis for a dispute that did no relieve it of the obligation to comply with s.167. There was no suggestion of any concealment of relevant facts and circumstances. As I have sought to say it would be an all too easy way of avoiding the obligation to comply with s.167 to simply say one was unaware of circumstances giving the right to pay under protest. In these circumstances I agree with Mr Robertson's submission that a dispute exists if a protest is possible viewed objectively. Mr Parker submitted that the appellant could not have been aware of the basis for a dispute, because it was not disclosed until the decision of Sheppard J in
Estee Lauder Pty Limited versus The Comptroller-General of Customs in which his
Honour gave judgment on 28 June 1991. I do not regard this as assisting the appellant. If a person paying duty accepts the current law or does not choose to challenge existing authority it is implicit that he is aware of the position and does not wish to challenge it. Therefore, having directed attention to the point, a decision is taken not to challenge it. I do not consider that in these circumstances an owner can assert that he was not obliged to comply with s.167. If the owner is not aware, or does not take steps to make himself aware, of the current state of the law he is in no better position.

My views are, I consider, consistent with the preservation by s.167(5) of the rights or powers under s.163. Therefore, if the payment was made when it was not appropriate to make a protest because there was not and could not, in the sense I have said, have been a dispute raised, the provisions of s.163 may be available. The requirements imported into that section of manifest error of fact or patent misconception of the law assist the conclusion that on a proper construction of s.167 a mere failure to appreciate the existence of the right to protest, or to take steps to decide whether a right can be enforced, are not sufficient.

I did not understand the respondents' submissions to suggest that there could only be recovery of duty if there was compliance with s.167. Their written submissions stated:- "The decided cases establish that when there is a dispute of the kind described in s.167(1), including where protest was possible but not made, s.167(1) represents the only method whereby an action for recovery of overpaid Customs duty can be brought." 
The submission accepted the qualification of Hill and Heerey JJ in the event of it not being possible to make a protest. In my opinion the Magistrate's findings of fact, on the basis of the evidence on which he relied, are sufficient to establish that there was a dispute, or that it was possible to make a protest because there was no reason why the appellant should not have been aware, when the duty was paid, that a situation existed in which the payment of the duty could be challenged by a protest. That finding, for the reasons I have sought to explain, is sufficient to activate the necessity to comply with s.167 in bringing proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction. As Mr Robertson submitted, which submission I accept, an owner wishing to take advantage of s.167 has an obligation to find out relevant matters and consider its position before the payment is made. If no dispute is raised the only relevant enquiry is whether it could have been on the facts which existed at the time of payment and viewed objectively.

If this view is not correct I do not think it follows that because there was no obligation to comply with the procedures laid down in s.167, there is an alternative remedy at common law. The alternative remedy is, in my opinion, on a proper construction of the Act, provided by s.163, which is expressly reserved by s.167. Although, in my opinion, s.163 does not give a right to sue in a court of competent jurisdiction, it allows for the making of an application, which, if unsuccessful, may be the subject of an application for judicial review. The various ways in which s.273GA impact on ss.163 and 167 reinforce my view that the Act provides its own code for and, hence, its restrictions upon, recovery of duty. In coming to this conclusion I adopt the reasoning that the Act lays down a code for the recovery of Customs duty.
Section 167 is directed to a particular circumstance and if that applies its requirements must be met. Section 163, which is expressly reserved by s.167(5), refers to other circumstances, but if reliance is placed on it, its requirements must also be met.

Firstly, one must make an application within twelve months of the payment of the Customs duty and, secondly, one must establish that the duty has been paid through either manifest error of fact or patent misconception of the law. No doubt these stringent requirements are to ensure that owners, who pay duty without protest, do so in circumstances where any error of fact is "manifest" or any misconception of law is "patent". These requirements underline the legislative intention manifested in s.167, as expounded in Kawasaki, and the determined legislative policy that it is only if there has been compliance with that section or s.163, if its beneficial effects can be availed of, that
Customs duty can be recovered. In my opinion Ira L. & A.C. Berk is not authority to the contrary of what I have just said. It was not concerned with the point and, as the proceedings were by demurrer, it could not have been.

I do not consider that anything said in Collector of Customs versus Gaylor Pty
Limited [(1994) 35 NSWLR 649] by the
New South Wales Court of Appeal is to the contrary of what I have said. That case was concerned with circumstances where the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal had ruled, pursuant to s.273GA, that a lesser amount of duty was payable, the duty in that case having been paid under protest. The issue before the Court of Appeal was whether an owner, who had the benefit of an order under s.273GA, could bring proceedings at law to recover the amount so ordered, or was obliged to seek an order by way of mandamus to require the
Comptroller to carry out his obligation consequent upon that determination.
Clarke JA concluded that upon a proper construction of s.167 and s.273GA, in the light of [s.43(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aata1975323/s43.html) of the [Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aata1975323/) (Cth) and in circumstances where the challenge was made pursuant to s.273GA, s.167(4) had to be read down to that extent.

At p.652 his Honour said:- "Following the 1910 amendment to s.167 there was only one available procedure for the recovery of duty paid under protest and subsequently found not to be due. So much is made clear from s.167(4), the obvious purposes of which are to deny the availability of other actions for the recovery of the amount paid and to require the commencement of an action within six months of the date of payment in order to enable the customs authorities properly to regulate their financial affairs." 
He continued at pp.653-4:- "At the time when s.167 provided the sole means of challenging an assessment of duty it is obvious that the meaning and effect of sub-s.(4) was clear. There simply was no other way in which the challenge could be mounted." 
These remarks apply with equal force to the instant case, there being no reliance placed on s.273GA.

Handley JA agreed with the statement of Hill and Heerey JJ in Kawasaki that:- ".. s.167 represents the only method whereby an action for recovery of overpaid Customs duty can be brought where there is a dispute between the owner and the Collector as to liability or matters affecting liability and .. it operates to exclude the availability of any alternative common law remedy." 
His Honour was of the view that the procedure through the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal for determining such disputes was a parallel procedure, and that once a decision had been made that the proper rate of duty was less than that demanded by the Collector and paid by the importer that operated retrospectively to the time of the original decision, so that the demand by the Collector for the payment of additional duty was "retrospectively exposed as unlawful and the payment to obtain release of the goods is recoverable in an action for money had and received or in modern terms, restitution". His
Honour continued:- "Mr Sullivan QC for the Customs contended that s.167(4) applied in the present case but in my opinion that provision has no application to proceedings against the Customs for restitution in which no issue arises as to the duty properly payable." 
At p.656 Cole JA stated the issue as being:- ".. whether an owner of imported goods which are wrongly assessed for duty by the Collector of Customs which duty is thereupon paid by the importer under protest, is entitled to recover interest upon the moneys so paid, and if so from what date, where the correct duty payable is determined by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal." 
His Honour was of the view that as the Collector demanded and received more duty than the legislature had made exigible, the owner had been deprived of that duty, which had been levied wrongly, for the period from payment under protest and was entitled to be compensated by an award of interest from that date.

It is made clear in the judgment of Cole JA, at p.660, that a review of a decision under s.273GA is only available if there has been compliance with s.167(1). His Honour said:- "The Collector accepted that, since the amendments to the [Customs Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (Cth) which introduced [s.273GA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s273ga.html) in 1980, and presumably since the corresponding amendments introduced by the [Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aata1975323/) (Cth), there were two methods by which an owner who paid under protest could contest the propriety of the duty imposed. The first method was by bringing an action pursuant to s.167, and the second was by way of review pursuant to s.273GA. If the owner of the goods was successful under either process, the result would be that there was an obligation upon the Collector to refund the wrongly imposed duty. The source of that obligation if the s.167 route was followed, is the order of the Court in an action permitted by s.167(2) brought within the time limitation specified in s.167(4). Such an action permitted by s.167(2) is clearly an action for the recovery of money within the meaning of s.94 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) and, if the action be brought in the Supreme Court of New South Wales, interest may be awarded.

It is in my view implicit in s.167(2) that the cause of action to recover duty paid under protest is complete at the time of payment under protest for otherwise there would be an incomplete cause of action insufficient to ground the contemplated proceedings." 
His Honour also stated, at p.662, that the appellant's contention that interest was payable only from the date of the Tribunal's award was, in his view, "unsustainable for at least two reasons":- "First, s.167(2) which permits an action to be brought against the Collector after payment of the duty under protest and prior to there being any Court determination as to what constitutes the proper duty payable, necessarily implies that the cause of action so permitted is complete. The action may be commenced on the day the duty is paid under protest. The purpose of interest is to compensate a party, here the owner, for wrongfully being deprived of the money so paid. That deprivation commences when the moneys are paid. Secondly, [s.43(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aata1975323/s43.html) of the [Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aata1975323/) (Cth) makes clear that the Tribunal's decision speaks from the date of the initial wrongful determination. The `proper duty', once determined by the Tribunal, was always the proper duty. The consequence is that the Collector demanded and received more duty than the legislature had made exigible. The owner had been deprived of that wrongly levied duty for the period from payment under protest and should be compensated by an award of interest from that date." 
It may be necessary to reconcile these views with those of Hill and Heerey JJ in Kawasaki at some time, although that reconciliation may be found in the fact that there was no protest in Kawasaki, and a protest in Gaylor.
However that may be, there is no contradiction of the presently relevant view that s.167, in an appropriate case, provides the basis for the remedy, whether the remedy is pursued under it or s.273GA.

In A & G International Pty Limited the plaintiff overpaid Customs duty to the defendant in respect of imported air conditioning parts. At first the overpayments were not made under protest, although subsequently the question of the correct classification of the goods was raised and later payments were made under protest. The plaintiff obtained Judicial Review of the defendant's decision to classify the goods so as to make the higher rate applicable, ultimately succeeding in the Full Federal Court. Thereupon the defendant refunded all excess duty paid on imports in respect of which duty had been paid under protest. The head note continued:- "[Section 163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (Cth) gave the defendant a discretionary power to make refunds in certain conditions prescribed by the regulations, one of which was that duty had been paid `through .. patent misconception of the law'. By [s.273GA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s273ga.html), an application could be made to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for review of a decision under [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) in relation to payments made under protest. The power in [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) was expressly unaffected by [s.167.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) That section permitted the owner of goods to make payments of customs duty under protest [(s.167(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html), to commence an action to recover the duty [(s.167(2))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html), and provided that no action lay for the recovery of customs duty unless the payment had been paid under protest and the action to recover was commenced within six months after the date of payment [(s.167(4)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) 
The plaintiff applied under [s.273GA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s273ga.html) to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, which found that there had been a patent misconception of the law. The plaintiff then commenced the present proceedings in the Supreme Court to recover amounts of duty that had not been paid under protest, and interest on those sums. Shortly thereafter, the defendant refunded the relevant amounts of excess duty, but did not make any refund in respect of interest." 
Ormiston J held, firstly, that there was no enforceable right to recover any excess duty paid unless the provisions of [s.167](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html), including that the payment was made under protest, had been complied with, and that [s.167](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) must be read down to the extent necessary to enable [s.273GA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s273ga.html) to have effect, but no further. Secondly, his Honour held that [s.167(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) is not qualified by [ss.167(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s167.html) or (2) and that it applies whether or not there has been a dispute at the time of the payment and whether or not a protest has been made. Thirdly, his Honour held that [s.163](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s163.html) provides a discretionary power, not an obligation, on the Collector to refund duty, and it does not give rise to a remedy in restitution and, fourthly, that there is no cause of action for repayment of moneys of a kind which carries with it a right to interest.

It is important, in my opinion, to bear in mind that his Honour was not concerned with whether or not there was an entitlement to recover duty. All the duty, whether paid under protest or not, had been refunded. His Honour was thus concerned only with the question as to whether interest on amounts of duty, which had not been paid under protest, was recoverable. It was in the light of these findings of fact that his Honour said, at p.25:- "Consequently at the time of importation there was no disagreement between the parties and the Customs duty was paid in accordance with the Collector's calculations on each occasion.

Thus, it was accepted on both sides that each of the subject payments of duty was not made under protest. However, the payments were held, by a decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, given on 18 December 1992, to have been made by the plaintiff under a patent misconception of the law, within the mean of [Regulation 126(1)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolreg/cr1926233/s126.html) of the [Customs Regulations 1926](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolreg/cr1926233/) (Cth), which prescribe the circumstances under which refunds of duty `may be made' by a collector of customs pursuant to the power given under s.163 of the Act." 
At p.26 his Honour said:- "There remains, of course, for consideration in this proceeding the question of interest. The Collector says that he was originally under no obligation to pay the excess duty, but, his decision not to exercise his discretion to repay it having been reversed, he did so. Moreover the defendants say that there was no right of action to recover that duty and so no interest was or is payable thereon, whether by statute or otherwise. It is agreed by both parties that, if s.167(4) is properly held to apply to these claims, then no right to the interest claimed can be pursued and the proceeding should be dismissed. Other questions were raised on the pleadings but for the present it is unnecessary to consider them.

Essentially this action raises for consideration the proper interpretation of s.167 but in a context where the statute contains provisions such as ss.163 and 273GA. The defendants say that s.167, and in particular sub-s.(4) thereof, has a recognised interpretation which was accepted, at least by the majority of the Full Federal Court, in Kawasaki. On the other hand the plaintiff contends that the present proceeding is not controlled by the provisions of s.167(4) for reasons analogous, but not identical, to those considered by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Gaylor .. ." 
His Honour then set out various of the provisions and, at p.28, expressed the opinion that:- "No proceedings lie to recover any excess duty paid unless that right of recovery is explicitly or implicitly recognised by the Act. Sub-section (4) of s.167 recognises a policy which precludes a right to challenge the amount of duty imposed on the importation of goods, or to enforce any right to recover excess duty paid, unless the procedures laid down by the Act have been complied with. The strictness of the rule, which to some may seem draconian, is explained in the judgments in the Kawasaki case. It is unnecessary and inappropriate for me to reconsider those reasons in this judgment since I am bound by the reasoning relevant to the conclusions of any appellate court which has jurisdiction to consider and has considered this Commonwealth legislation." 
His Honour referred to various statements of Hill and Heerey JJ at p.263 in
Kawasaki and said, at p.28:- "Whether one agrees with the legislative policy or not, it has been held in the Kawasaki case, and in cases to which that court referred, that the object of s.167 is to produce certainty in relation to the payment of customs duty." 
His Honour observed that the alternative remedy provided by s.273GA related to the correctness of the amount of duty imposed where payment had been made under protest, which was confirmed in Gaylor. He said:- "This was confirmed in the Gaylor case, the significance of which is, not that that (sic) there is an alternative means of reviewing the imposition of customs duty, which was obvious from the terms of the section, but that the Court of Appeal held that it also makes implicitly available a general law remedy in restitution where the Collector's determination has been successfully reviewed but he fails to repay the excess duty. The decision in the Gaylor case was in effect confirmed when the High Court refused special leave to appeal in that case on 13 October 1995. Leave was refused upon the basis that the decision of the Court of Appeal was `not attended with sufficient doubt to warrant a special leave to appeal', but the observations of the members of the court and its conclusion makes clear that a remedy for recovery after a successful review should not be denied a person held to have overpaid duty merely because there might in theory also be a remedy by way of mandamus to compel the Collector to repay the duty. The leave application was decided after this case was argued but there is nothing in their Honours' observations upon that hearing which was inconsistent either with the Gaylor case or the Kawasaki case and thus I did not consider it either necessary or appropriate to seek further submissions in relation to that refusal of leave: it merely confirmed what had already been held by the Court of Appeal." 
His Honour was of the view that Gaylor merely required that s.167 be read down only to the extent necessary to enable s.273GA(2) to be carried into effect and he said:- "Although s.167 is referred to in the relevant provisions of s.273GA, the latter section does not deal with the consequences of a determination in favour of the payer of customs duty and leaves that to the general law. The Gaylor case must be taken as concluding that a right to sue to recover the excess duty in restitution is implicit in that section, but it cannot be taken, as was submitted for the plaintiff, as otherwise constituting detracting from the parliamentary intention to treat s.167 as otherwise a code in relation to recovery of any overpayments of customs duty. Nothing that was said in the Gaylor case should therefore be taken as having the effect or intended to have the effect of denying the authority of the Full Federal Court's decision in the Kawasaki case as to the general nature and effect of s.167." 
His Honour said, at p.30, that in his opinion it was implicit in the reasoning of Gaylor:- ".. that s.167 should be treated as a code in respect of disputes relating to customs duty except to the extent that the relevant provisions of s.273GA allowed the review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal of decisions to demand excessive duty which has been paid under protest. Sub-section (6) of the latter section makes it clear that the exclusion of the right to bring proceedings against the Collector under s.167(2) is confined to circumstances of protest and overpayment described in s.273GA(2). That subsection relates to an application to review a `decision to make that demand and of any other decision forming part of the process of making, or leading up to the making of, the first mentioned decision' (that is, in respect of a disputed and protested payment of duty as described in s.167(1))." 
At p.31 his Honour said:- "It is sufficient to say that the plaintiff's broad view of s.163 would render pointless the scheme of the Act represented in s.167, howsoever it may be justified, whereby stringent conditions are laid down for the reconsideration of such payments by requiring protest and by imposing time-limits upon proceedings for such reconsideration, whether commenced pursuant to s.167 or s.273GA(2). If s.163 gave rise, directly or indirectly, to a right to recover duty upon a reconsideration of the amount imposed, then, in circumstances not dissimilar to the present case, the importer could deliberately fail to protest and could wait well beyond the six month period, without making any protest, but could still raise the issue of the correctness of the amount of duty imposed by a Collector in respect of particular goods imported to Australia." 
It is clear, if I may say so with respect, that his Honour was somewhat troubled by the effect of s.167, particularly, I think, in so far as sub-s.(4) is relied upon as determining the circumstances in which an action shall lie.
In my respectful opinion it is necessary to return to sub-s.(1), which is predicated upon "any dispute" arising as to the matters specified. The terms of the section make it clear that there is to be a dispute at the time payment is demanded because it is then that the owner may, if he wishes to dispute any of the relevant matters, pay under protest. Uninstructed by authority it seems to me that if there was no dispute at the time the payment was made, in the sense I have sought to state, there could be no basis for a protest, a matter which is made clear by the statutory requirement that "a statement of the grounds on which the protest is made" shall be furnished. Accordingly, so it seems to me, if there is no dispute at the time the payment is made there is no basis upon which it is required to be made "under protest". I do not understand Kawasaki to say to the contrary. I have set forth the circumstances in which, in my opinion, it can be said that there is a dispute.

It is only if the owner can establish, in the manner to which I have referred, that it was not possible to make a protest because there is no basis for doing so, that it is relieved of the requirement to do so. In that way, I think that the potential problem suggested by Ormiston J of an owner "deliberately" failing to protest is overcome, as it could not be said that there was not a dispute at the relevant time and, accordingly, that there was not an obligation to make payment under protest if the owner wished to retain the right to bring action under s.167.

Further, sub-s.(4) cannot, in my respectful opinion, be divorced from the balance of s.167 because the prohibition on bringing action is conditioned by the words:- ".. unless the payment is made under protest in pursuance of this section .. ." 
Therefore the protest must be made in circumstances where there is a dispute and where the various other requirements of the section in relation to the making of a protest have been met, including the furnishing of a statement of the grounds on the basis of which the protest is made.

At p.33 his Honour said:- "It follows that neither s.163 nor that section in combination with s.273GA(1)(haaa) provides any exception to the scheme of the Act to which I have already referred. It likewise follows that there is consequently no right to sue for the recovery of moneys given under those provisions. No further exception was or is engrafted onto s.167 and the remedy is different in kind from that granted in the Gaylor case." 
At pp.33-34 his Honour continued:- "It follows that the scheme of the Act imposing restrictions on importers from disputing the amount of customs duty and which is reflected in s.167 (and in particular sub-s.(4) thereof), qualified only in respect of the mechanism for review under s.273GA(2), is not further qualified so as to permit an action for recovery of `overpaid' duty in the circumstances of the present case, at least upon consideration of the provisions of s.273GA and s.163 and the related regulations. There remain a number of arguments which were advanced so as to qualify the apparent effect of s.167." 
His Honour turned to consider the submissions that there was "no relevant dispute" and that s.167(4) was qualified "in that the `action' which is there stated not to lie for recovery of sums paid to Customs was confined to cases where the dispute arose at the time that duty was payable and, or in the alternative, that the duty imposed was paid under protest".

He referred to the following passage in the judgment of Handley JA in
Gaylor at p.655:- "Mr Sullivan QC for the Customs contended that s.167(4) applied in the present case but in my opinion that provision has no application to proceedings against the Customs for restitution in which no issue arises as to the duty properly payable." 
Ormiston J said:- "Although that passage might appear to cover the present case, nevertheless his Honour's object, as I perceive the passage and the rest of his judgment, was to show that, if the exception to s.167 under s.273GA(2) applied, then the restrictions contained in s.167(4) were not relevant as the issue had already been resolved by review to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, so giving rise to an obligation to refund duties invalidly imposed." 
Ormiston J continued:- "However I consider that s.167(4) imposes a restriction consistent with the purpose of the statute to prevent late disputes and claims relating to overpaid duty. The terms of sub-s.(4) are unqualified because, subject to the implication which necessarily flows from the later passing of s.273GA(2), it was intended that no action should lie for such overpaid duty unless the conditions of the sub-section were complied with, namely that the payment was in fact made under protest and the action was commenced (for relevant purposes) within six months of the time the sum was paid. If the court were to conclude that an importer could refrain from raising a dispute and likewise fail to make a protest at the time of entry of the goods, then for all practical purposes no importer would take those steps since adopting that course would immediately restrict its capacity to raise the validity of the duties imposed." 
This decision points up an essential difference between s.167 and s.163.
Section 167 gives the owner the right to sue in the circumstances specified.
An owner complaining about the requirement to pay Customs duty in those circumstances can only do so by the procedures provided by that section.
Section 163 does not give any right to sue. As his Honour pointed out it gives a right to apply for a refund and, if that application is refused, to seek to have judicial review of that decision. In the present case the Magistrate seems to have treated s.163 as providing a cause of action so that if its conditions and those prescribed by the Regulations were met he could have made an order based on that section. His approach is understandable as one of the defences raised by the respondents was that the appellant was prevented from recovering the amount claimed "because an application for refund of duty was not made within 12 months after the date on which duty was paid" as required by the Regulation. In so far as this may have been an error, it does not affect the result.

His Honour noted that under s.273GA the right to apply to a tribunal is confined in the ways to which he referred, and continued:- "The consistent policy of the parliament reflected in both sections is to prevent an importer from raising a dispute and claiming an incorrect imposition of duty except in the stringent circumstances laid down by each of the sections. It cannot have been intended that if a party fails to dispute a matter at the moment of importation, it is free to raise the matter at any time thereafter and whether or not it chose to protest when paying the duty. Thus I would first conclude that sub-s.(4) of s.167 is not qualified by the terms of sub-s.(1) or sub-s.(2), although for various purposes some passages in the Gaylor case might suggest that that is the case." 
His Honour recognised, obviously correctly, that in Gaylor the payment had been made under protest, that being a condition precedent to the application of s.273GA in the circumstances of that case. He concluded, at p.35:- "But the point of the decision" Gaylor "was that s.167 had been later qualified by the introduction of s.273GA(2) which permitted a review of the imposition in similar circumstances by an alternative procedure of a review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. The use of the words in sub-s.(1), `If any dispute arises as to the amount or rate of duty payable ...', is not intended to confine the whole of the section to circumstances where there was an existing dispute at that time. The sub-section was intended only to provide a remedy in case of dispute, by way of protest and action which is permitted under sub-s.(2), but qualified as to time by sub-s.(4). It was not otherwise intended to qualify the broad scope, restrictive though it may be, of sub-s.(4)." 
Ormiston J then referred to the submission that in Kawasaki the majority was referring to circumstances where there was a dispute, and he noted a submission whereby counsel "sought to draw the inference that the dispute referred to by their Honours was confined to the kind of dispute referred to in sub-s.(1) of s.167". He continued:- "In turn, from a consideration of the language of sub-s.(1), it was said that such a dispute must be confined to a dispute which existed at the time the goods were imported into Australia and duty paid thereon. It was likewise argued that sub-s.(4) had to be read in the context of at least sub-ss.(1) and (2), so that the reference to `sum' in sub-s.(4) should also be confined to a sum which had been paid by way of duty after a dispute arose and which was paid under protest in the manner described in sub-s.(1). It was further said that sub-s.(4) was in effect the obverse of sub-s.(2), sub-s.(4) prohibiting an action and sub-s.(2) permitting an action under certain circumstances `for the recovery of the whole or any part of the sum so paid'. Thus it was said that the sum `so paid' could only be a sum which had been paid where a dispute had arisen and the payment had been made under protest pursuant to sub-s.(1)." 
I do not find difficulty with these submissions provided that "dispute" is read as meaning "an actual dispute raised between the owner and the Customs"; or facts and circumstances, which would give rise to a dispute and of which the owner was aware, but did not raise; or facts and circumstances, which would give rise to a dispute and of which the owner would have been aware had the matter been fully and properly considered before duty was paid. His Honour said:- "In my opinion none of these arguments is persuasive. One may fairly concede that the `dispute' referred to in sub-s.(1) could only refer to a dispute which existed at the time of the importation of the goods, or more precisely at the time of the payment of the customs duty, because the object of sub-ss.(1) and (2) is to permit such an action which would be pointless for all practical purposes unless a dispute had arisen. Likewise the only purpose, or only practical purpose, of paying under protest pursuant to sub-s.(1) is to put in motion the procedure for the bringing of an action in respect of `the sum so paid' pursuant to sub-s.(2). Thus a dispute of the kind referred to in sub-s.(1) is a necessary factual pre-condition to a payment under protest and the bringing of any action disputing the amount of duty paid. But to make it a condition of payment under protest for the purposes of sub-s.(1) and consequentially for the bringing of an action pursuant to sub-s.(2) says nothing as to the operation of sub-s.(4) which is clearly designed to deny a right of action, except in specified circumstances. To say, as the plaintiff appeared to contend, that the limitation in sub-s.(4) is confined to events and circumstances where there has been a dispute at the time of payment (and, so it was further said, also at the time when the action was brought), would be to render sub-s.(4) almost nugatory, containing at best restrictions confined to cases where there had been a continuing dispute. If there be a dispute then almost certainly the importer will pay under protest and if there be any merit in the dispute it is highly likely that it will bring the action permitted under sub-s.(2) within the relevant time or bring an application for review to the tribunal under s.273GA(2) within the same time." 
I respectfully agree with his Honour that sub-s.(4) is designed to deny a right of action "except in specified circumstances". The issue is what are the "specified circumstances". One of those, in my opinion, is that the payment is made under protest in pursuance of this section, which his Honour seems to recognise can only happen if the dispute existed at the time the payment was made.

None-the-less, at p.36 his Honour continued:- "In my opinion, however, sub-s.(4) is not confined to circumstances in which there has been a dispute at the time of payment of duty. The clear purpose of sub-s.(4), as construed in the cases by which I am bound, is to prevent actions from being brought disputing customs duty unless the requirements of that section have been satisfied." 
The statement, in my respectful opinion, does not address the words "unless the payment is made under protest in pursuance of this section". By way of emphasis I should add that they are followed by the words "and the action is commenced within the following times". Therefore, there are two pre-requisites in sub-s.(4). There can be no doubt that the latter words govern the operation of the section and, in those circumstances, I can see no reason at all why the former do not. However, there is no difference between his Honour and me if the broader meaning to dispute, to which I have referred, is given.

His Honour said, at pp.36-37, after referring to the statement by Handley JA in Gaylor, that s.167(4) had no- application to proceedings in restitution "in which no issue arises as to the duty properly payable":- "A similar view was taken by Beaumont J in the Kawasaki, although that was the basis of his dissent. Although the dictum of Handley JA may appear to have a wide operation, I cannot accept that it was intended to confine s.167(4) to cases where there had always been a dispute from the moment of payment. Rather he was leaving open a properly founded claim in restitution of the kind for which there was otherwise no remedy after the hearing of a review pursuant to s.273GA(2) .. ." 
His Honour then said, p.37:- "Nor do I accept that sub-s.(4) only applies, as was contended, where a protest has been made. Indeed the submission was qualified so that it was contended that the exclusive code related only to `proceedings of this kind where protest had been possible'. I would not accept this qualification, but in any event the factual basis for it in this case was absent. It was asserted that no protest had been possible because the plaintiff, and its customs agent, had not been aware of the alternative classification and were thus, as it was held in the later review proceedings, under a mistake of law. However, being under a mistake of law does not lead to a conclusion that a protest by the plaintiff was not possible. Despite the plaintiff's ignorance all the factual and legal matters existed so as to permit the making of a protest. The absence of protest has no effect upon the exclusionary provisions of sub-s.(4) of s.167." (My emphasis.) 
The words I have emphasised are, in my respectful opinion, consistent with the view I have put forward as to certain of the circumstances in which a dispute may exist.

His Honour concluded, pp.37 and 38:- "As a consequence I am of the opinion that s.167(4) contains, subject to s.273GA(2), a code excluding recovery unless the conditions stated in that sub-section have been complied with, namely a protest and action within the time-limit stated. I am conscious of the rule of interpretation referred to by the majority in the Kawasaki case whereby it was accepted that a statute will be presumed not to take away a previously existing common law right `unless that right is taken away expressly or by necessary implication' (at 258). Nevertheless, as was held in that case, by which I am bound, the clear and necessary implication of s.167(4) is that the plaintiff has no right of recovery in this proceeding." 
The Views Thus Far Reached 
The right to proceed in a court of competent jurisdiction flows from s.167 if there is a dispute, in the senses to which I have referred, when the duty is paid and provided the payment is made under protest. In the present case there was evidence that there was no reason why a protest could not have been made, so that there was, relevantly, a dispute. This was a finding of fact, which cannot be impugned in these proceedings. Accordingly, s.167 applied, but the requirements for bringing an action under it were not met.

Section 167 specifically reserves the rights conferred by s.163. In so far as s.167 has been held to lay down an exclusive code for the recovery of duty it incorporates s.163. Section 163 does not give the right to bring an action, but rather to seek an exercise of a discretionary power, which is subject to judicial review. Before an owner can rely on s.163 it must be shown that there was a manifest error of fact or patent misconception of law. The Magistrate has found that there was neither, which is consistent with his findings that it was implicit that there was a dispute and that there was no reason why it was not possible to enter a protest. But even if that situation had been overcome the appellant, on the assumption, (which I think is incorrect), that it could rely before the Magistrate on s.163 had to overcome the hurdle that the proceedings, as was conceded, were not commenced within the time limited by the section. This was attempted to be done by an attack on the validity of [Regulation
A(5).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolreg/cr1926233/s128a.html) 
The Validity Of Regulation 128A(5) 
Because I do not consider that s.163 gives rise to a right of action in a court of competent jurisdiction, it is not strictly necessary for me to consider the further submissions of Mr Parker that s.163 is inapplicable because the money paid by the appellant was not duty and, if it was, the time limitation imposed by Regulation 128A(5):- "... is ultra vires because, properly construed, there was no provision in the Act, at any material time, permitting the making of a regulation prescribing the time in which an application for a refund may be made." 
However, as the matters were fully argued I shall deal with them.

Firstly, in my view, the payment was clearly a payment of Customs duty and it cannot be characterised in any other way. Section 167 deems it to be duty properly payable. The issue the appellant wishes to litigate is whether it is entitled to recover that which was paid as such. In so far as its case is predicated on s.167 the deeming provision constitutes it as duty, and in so far as it was based on s.163 that section demands that there be a finding that the money paid was duty. I appreciate that the appellant argues that because the money was subsequently agreed not to be payable as duty, it does not have that character, and that the money is recoverable as money had and received or by way of restitution. But I do not think that the character in which the money was paid relevantly changes because it is either found or agreed not to be properly payable as duty. The statutory code provided by the Act allows for the recovery of excess duty.

Secondly on the issue of ultra vires, Mr Parker relied on the decision in
Ira L. & A.C. Berk. In that case the Full Court had to consider whether Regulation 126(2), which provided that claims for a refund, rebate or remission of duty should be made "not later than three days after the goods have been placed under the control of the Customs, or the duty has been paid, or within such further time, not exceeding one week, as the Comptroller in writing allows ...", was permitted by s.163, which provided that a claim for a refund, rebate or remission should be made "in manner prescribed". The plaintiff sued the defendant under that section, as it then stood, alleging that duty had been paid through manifest error of fact or patent misconception of the law and claiming a refund or rebate of the duty. The defendant pleaded, inter alia, that the demand was not made within the time limited by Regulation (2). The plaintiff demurred to that plea on the ground that the regulation was ultra vires and void. The submission was that s.163 gave a statutory right to recover, which Regulation 126(2) purported to limit or cut down, and as the regulation making power existed by virtue of the words "in manner prescribed" in s.163 and by virtue of s.270, Regulation 126(2) did not deal with the manner in which a refund was to be made, but purported to prescribe conditions as to time within which a claim should be made.

I have set out the terms of s.163 at that time. Street CJ, speaking for the
Court, said, at p.121, after quoting from the section:- "The words `in manner prescribed' obviously have reference only to the procedure to be adopted where a refund, rebate, or remission of duty has to be made. They do not interfere with, and are not intended to interfere with, the right to a refund, rebate, or remission of duty. The Act does not contain any express provision as to the manner in which claims arising under s.163 may be asserted, but s.270 provides that `the Governor-General may make regulations, not inconsistent with the Act, prescribing all matters which by the Act are required or permitted to be prescribed or may be necessary or convenient to be prescribed for giving effect to the Act or for the conduct of any business relating to the Customs'. In exercise of this power, regulations have been framed relating to refunds, rebates, or remissions of duty under s.163, and, so far as it is necessary to refer to them, they are as follows ..." 
His Honour set out the regulation relating to time limits and referred to the pleadings. He noted, at p.122, that the regulations must not be inconsistent with the Act and that, in his opinion, Regulation 126(1), which directed the manner in which claims arising under s.163 were to be made, was clearly within the rule-making power. He considered Regulation 126(2) went much further and was not a regulation giving effect to the rights conferred by s.163. He continued:- "It is a regulation restricting the time within which those rights may be asserted. No such limitation of time is imposed by the Act, and the effect of the imposition of such a restriction by regulation is to make an addition to the law. This is outside the rule-making power. From the standpoint of administration it is, I have no doubt, looked upon as necessary, or, at all events, convenient, that some limited time should be imposed, but, if the Act does not impose any restriction as to time, this cannot be done by regulation under the guise of giving effect to the provisions of the Act. Such a regulation does not give effect to the provisions of s.163. It modifies them, and it is inconsistent with them." 
Mr Parker's written submissions annex a helpful summary of amendments to the legislation. This was accepted as accurate by Mr Robertson. Immediately after the decision in Ira L & A.C. Berk the proviso I have quoted was added to s.163.

For present purposes I find it unnecessary to trace through the further amendments, although it would seem very strange if, in the light of that decision and the very swift legislative response to it, there was any intention to remove the power to prescribe time limits. However, whether there was will depend upon a consideration of the precise words used considered in the light of the legislative policy. Relevantly s.163(1)(b) provides that refunds, rebates and remissions may be made "in such circumstances" and "subject to such conditions and restrictions (if any), as are prescribed". The circumstances, conditions and restrictions relate either to goods generally or to goods included in the class of goods. Mr Robertson submitted, correctly in my view, that the imposition of a time limitation is either a condition or a restriction, or both, on the making of a refund, rebate or remission contemplated by s.163. In these circumstances I do not consider that
Regulation 128A(5) is invalid.

Restitution 
I note that Mr Robertson submitted that the bare facts found by the Magistrate are insufficient, if the other submissions of the appellant had found favour, to enable the Court to order restitution. It is not necessary to pursue this further in the light of the conclusions to which I have come.

Conclusion And Orders 
In my opinion the question asked by the Stated Case should be answered "No".

I order that the appellant's Summons be dismissed with costs and that the exhibit be returned.
 * * * 
