

The Manly Fishing and Sporting Association Ltd versus Total Quality
Constructions P/L and Anor [1996] NSWSC 473 (4 October 1996) 
THE MANLY FISHING & SPORTING ASSOCIATION LTD versus TOTAL QUALITY
CONSTRUCTIONS P/L & ANOR /96 
FRIDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
CONSTRUCTION LIST 
BAINTON J  
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The Manly Fishing and Sporting Association Limited has its Club premises at 270 Pittwater Road, Manly. Total Quality Constructions Pty Limited is a building company. Edward Charles Brincat is its managing director. The Common Seal of Total Quality Constructions Pty Limited and the signature of its then President, J.A. Nunn and the Common Seal of Total Quality Constructions Pty Limited and the signature of Mr Brincat appear on the final page (dated 12 September 1994) of a contract for refurbishment of the Club premises. It includes the General Conditions of AS2124-1992. The execution of that contract came after several quotations the most recent being dated 12 August 1994. The quote was for $618,688 - plainly a major refurbishment.

Work on the refurbishment was carried out and progress payments were made.
Progress claim No 6 dated 19 December 1994 for $229,007, as certified by the
Superintendent, was not paid. This claim included for variations of $128,398, an increase of $100,000 on the variation claimed in claim No 5 of 29 November
The major component was described as "Kitchen - approx value only - costs to be approved". The builder suspended work on 24 January 1995, after a warning that it could not continue if it remained unpaid. It asserted that $185,007 was then outstanding.

On 12 January 1995 the builder gave formal notice of dispute. The giving of that notice was preceded and succeeded by assertions and counter assertions of non-compliance with various requirements of the contract and with failure to attend meetings convened to endeavour to resolve these disputes.

AS2124-1992 deals with dispute resolution in Clause 47. The builder resorted to it choosing arbitration. Clause 47.3 requires arbitration by a single arbitrator to be nominated, as it turned out, by "the Chairperson for the time being of the Chapter of the Institute of Arbitrators Australia in the State or
Territory named in the Annexure" . That Chairperson initially nominated
Ms Janet Grey. She initially, I assume with the concurrence of both parties, attempted mediation, but without success.

The builder on 30 May 1995 requested the "Chairperson" to appoint a new arbitrator. On 2 June 1995 Norman George Fisher was appointed arbitrator. He held a preliminary conference on 16 June 1995. It was decided at that stage to determine as a preliminary issue whether or not the contract asserted by the plaintiff had been entered into. The argument, or perhaps more accurately the assertion, on behalf of the Club was that the written contract did not comply with Section 164(4) of the Corporations Law.

Section 164(3) of the Corporations Law deals with assumptions which a person dealing with a company is entitled to make in relation to those dealings. They include the assumption that at all relevant times the company's constitution has been complied with, that a person recorded in returns lodged pursuant to
Sections 242 or 335 to be a director, the principal executive officer or a secretary has been duly appointed as such and other like assumptions, including by Section 164(3)(c) "that a document has been duly sealed by the company if (i) it bears what appears to be an impression of the seal of the company; and (ii) the sealing of the document appears to be attested by two persons .....".

Section 164(4) is in the following terms: "Despite subsection (1), a person is not entitled to make an assumption referred to in subsection (3) in relation to dealings with a company if: the person has actual knowledge that the matter that, but for this subsection, the person would be entitled to assume is not correct; or the person's connection or relationship with the company is such that the person ought to know that the matter that, but for this subsection, the person would be entitled to assume is not correct; and where, by virtue of this subsection, a person is not entitled to make a particular assumption in relation to dealings with a company, subsection (1) has no effect in relation to any assertion by the company in relation to the assumption." 
As I have earlier recorded the contract between the Club and the builder has the Club's common seal affixed to it and it is signed by a director, but only by one director. 
I think that the argument for the Club was probably intended to be an assertion that the written contract did not comply with Section 164(3) of the
Corporations Law, because there was only one person who attested the sealing of the document embodying the contract. So far so good. But unless such a contract said to be executed under the Club's common seal to be enforceable the want of a second person's attestation of the common seal is irrelevant.

The argument before the Arbitrator appears to have been that a contract so signed on behalf of the Club was not binding upon it, notwithstanding that there is no requirement that such a contract be executed under the Club's common seal, that work of a major nature had been going on for some months after the Club in general meeting had approved the contract for the refurbishment and that by the time that progress claim No 6 was presented the
Club had made progress payments to the builder of $456,233.60, and that, according to its cross-claim in those proceedings it had by then paid (and was seeking to recover from the builder) a total of $510,233 which it contended it had made "by a mistake of fact and law and as a result of the pressure exerted by the Contractor".

The Arbitrator, whom I do not believe to have had legal training, by his interim award of 5 September 1995, found that there was a contract for the refurbishment of the premises, namely the document to which I have earlier referred bearing date the 12th September 1994. That means that he rejected the submission that the contract was not valid unless executed under the Club's common seal.

There appears to have been issues of fact canvassed before the Arbitrator because he recorded in his reasons: "11. Brincat has sworn that on 12 September 1994 he spent time with Nunn filling out the contract. This evidence was supported by Duriam. Nunn denies he signed the contract on that day or the day after. I find that the annexures to the contract were filled out on 12 September 1994 but not signed on that day." 
Later he recorded: "16. Brincat has sworn that the contract was signed and sealed by him on 10 October 1994, signed by Nunn on the same day and stamped and returned to him three days later. . Galway has sworn that on 18 November 1995 (sic) Brincat said to her words to the effect 'the contract is being signed to-day' and she infers that it was sealed on the same day. I accept that the above date should be 18 November 1994.
 . Nunn has sworn that the contract was signed by him on 18 November 1994. I prefer the evidence of Nunn and I find that the contract was signed by Nunn and sealed on 18 November 1994." 
The Arbitrator then went on to deal with a number of matters under the heading "Legal Matters". For the most part his findings favoured the builder. I add that each party was legally represented at this hearing.

The significance of the above is that the Arbitrator found for the builder on one matter because he believed Brincat rather than Nunn and for the Club on another matter because on that he believed Nunn rather than Brincat.

The evidence does not reveal what, if anything, relating to this dispute went on over the ensuing eight months. On 30 April 1996 Brincat telephoned Fisher with a request that he second Brincat's application for Associate Membership of the Institute of Arbitrators Australia. He did, but without seeing or speaking to Brincat. This was eight days after he had notified each party that the "matter" (which could only be the remaining issue of quantum) was set down for a five day hearing commencing 4 July 1996. The nominator was Ms Janet
Grey, the initially appointed arbitrator who disqualified herself after the unsuccessful mediation. Before her Mr Brincat appeared for the builder without legal assistance. Ms Grey must have been impressed by his performance. On the day following his seconding of that application, Mr Fisher sent a fax to the
Club's Solicitors, apparently because of a telephone inquiry from the Club's solicitors, saying simply: "Yesterday Mr Brincat of TQC telephoned my Secretary and attended my office to have me second his application for associate membership of the Institute of Arbitrators Australia.
 
I did not meet or speak with Mr Brincat." 
The Club's Solicitor on receipt of that fax telephoned the Arbitrator to ask whether he did in fact second that application and he said Yes, he did. The Club's solicitor says he said "Won't you have to disqualify yourself" and the Arbitrator replied "That's an application for you to make". The Club's Solicitor asked to be furnished with a copy of the application "and any written observations made by you in relation to the application".

The Arbitrator furnished a copy of the application which he had seconded on 2
May 1996, adding, "There were no other written observations or communications made by me in relation to the application". The Application itself contains the following: "Nomination Conditions 
Applicants shall be proposed and seconded by a Fellow or an Associate of the Institute who shall recommend the applicant as a suitable person for membership based upon personal knowledge of the applicant ........." 
The Club commenced these proceedings by a Summons issued on 21 May 1996. It sought the following relief: "1. A declaration that the second defendant misconducted himself within the meaning of [section 44(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s44.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) in seconding an application by Edward Charles Brincat for associate membership to the Institute of Arbitrators on 30 April 1996.
 . A declaration that the second defendant misconducted himself within the meaning of [section 44(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s44.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) in failing to disclose that he had seconded the application by Edward Charles Brincat for associate membership to the Institute of Arbitrators in the second defendant's letter to the plaintiff's solicitor dated 1 May 1996.
 . A declaration that the second defendant's conduct in forwarding the documents produced to him pursuant to a subpoena served on the National Australia Bank to the first defendant's solicitors indicates his unsuitability to deal with the dispute between the plaintiff and the first defendant within the meaning of [section 44(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s44.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/).
 . A declaration that the interim award made by the second defendant on 5 September 1995 should be set aside pursuant to [section 42(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s42.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/).
 . An order that the interim award made by the second defendant on 5 September 1995 be set aside pursuant to [section 42(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s42.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/).
 . Such further and other declaration and order as the Court sees fit.
 . An order that the second defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the Arbitration proceedings conducted before him pursuant to [section 36](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s36.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/).
 . An order that the second defendant refund all moneys paid to him by the plaintiff.
 . An order that the first defendant refund all monies paid to it by the plaintiff in consequence of the interim award.
 . An order that the second defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of these proceedings on an indemnity basis.
 . Alternatively to orders 7 and 10 sought above, the first defendant pay or contribute to the payment of the costs sought in orders 7 and 10 above." 
Mr Fisher filed, on 31 May 1996, an appearance by which he "submits to the Orders of the Court, save as to costs and refund of fees". I record at this stage of these reasons that the builder did not oppose the Arbitrator's removal; it confined itself to supporting the interim award and to resisting costs being ordered against itself.

The relevant principle was stated by the High Court in Reg versus Watson; Ex parte Armstrong <case>; [(1976) 136 CLR 248] at 262, namely that "a judge should not sit to hear a case if in all the circumstances the parties or the public might reasonably suspect that he was not unprejudiced and impartial, and that if a judge does sit in those circumstances prohibition will lie, is not only supported by the balance of authority as it now stands, but is correct in principle". The same principle applies to persons such as arbitrators exercising quasi judicial authority. In my judgement a person being made aware that in May 1996 an arbitrator had seconded a person's application for membership of a professional association, probity of whose members is important, and knowing no more than that might reasonably conclude that he may not be impartial in thereafter determining a dispute in which that person's credit may be in issue, as I assume may be the case in determining the quantum of the builder's claims under the contract.

It does not follow that seconding such an application would give rise to a reasonable apprehension that he did not act impartially in making his interim award. A person knowing of the nomination and reading the interim award would observe, as I have done above, that in at least one matter the Arbitrator believed Brincat rather than Nunn and one matter Nunn rather than Brincat.
Such a person would, more probably than not, not entertain any such apprehension of partiality as founds a disqualification. He, if he thought about the matter, would conclude that the Arbitrator, in considering his interim award, had accepted Brincat's evidence as to the execution of the contract and formed a view of Brincat as a result of what he then heard and observed. He had to do that to perform his arbitral function. Publishing an interim award in the terms of that published by Mr Fisher could not of itself have required that he be disqualified from determining the next issue between the parties, that of quantum.

The Club relied on two other grounds for setting aside the interim award.

The first was put as "partiality" and as "misconduct". A subpoena, or possibly (according to a submission) some sort of notice to produce was served on the
National Bank (by the builder) to produce documents. The Bank sent them to the
Arbitrator: he sent them unopened to the builder. I do not know what documents were required, what documents were produced, or what became of them. There was no attempt to prove any of these matters - all I had was assertions. I am asked, by prayer 3 of the Summons, to declare that the Arbitrator's forwarding those documents, whatever they were, to the party seeking their production demonstrates his "unsuitability" to have dealt with the dispute. I decline to make any such finding. Even if there were evidence as to the nature of those documents, the time to challenge the Arbitrator's actions was then, not after an unfavourable award.

Next, it was asserted that the interim award should be set aside because of error on the face of the award (the finding that a contract existed between the Club and the Builder), so to err it was submitted demonstrating misconduct within the meaning of [Section (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s42.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), which provides: "(1) Where - there has been misconduct on the part of an arbitrator or umpire, or an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted the proceedings ...........
 the Court may on the application of a party to the arbitration agreement set the award aside wholly or in part." 
The submission ignores [Section 38(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) which provides: "(1) Without prejudice to the right of appeal conferred by subsection (2) the Court shall not have jurisdiction to set aside or remit an award on the ground of error of fact or law on the face of the award." 
I should also record that an endeavour was made before me to have me consider the large amount of evidence tendered by the arbitrator to raise an argument that he came to the wrong conclusion. I record that I declined to do so.

I further record at this stage in my reasons that the argument apparently presented to the arbitrator and sought to be argued before me (I have recorded the argument earlier in these reasons) that no contract had been entered into between the Club and the builder for the refurbishment of the Club premises is utterly devoid of the slightest trace of merit. On the facts recorded by the
Arbitrator in his Interim Award no other conclusion on the existence of a contract between the parties than that which he reached was open to him.

I return now to the Summons.

It does not in terms seek an order for the removal of Norman George Fisher from his office as Arbitrator of the dispute between the Club and the Builder.
None the less I do order that he be removed from that office, such removal to take effect from the date of delivery of this judgment. If the parties have not agreed upon the identity of a new Arbitrator and by agreement appointed him (or her) within fourteen days of the date of this judgment either party may apply on two days' notice to the other for an order under [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s10.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/).

I decline to make declaration No 1. Seconding Mr Brincat's application may indicate a view about him that would prevent Mr Fisher's proceeding further with the arbitration: that is something different from having misconducted the arbitration proceedings, and from the "misconduct" referred to in [Section (1)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s44.html)
It is something done quite outside of and apart from the arbitration proceedings which, on general law principles, dictates that he should not proceed further with that arbitration.

I decline to make declaration No 2 for the same reasons. It is the fact that he did second the application without first having informed the parties and obtained the Club's consent to his doing so that requires his removal.

I decline to make declarations Nos 3 and 4.

I decline to make Order 5.

I decline to make order 7. The Arbitrator's award stands. His subsequent indiscreet seconding of Mr Brincat's nomination does not require, or entitle, me to set aside the interim award. Nor does any other attack on it. As I have already indicated I would view any different determination than the existence of a contract between the Club and the Builder as perverse.

I decline to make Order 8 for the same reason.

So far as the evidence discloses no payments have been made "in consequence of the interim award". All it did was to determine the existence of a contract. I decline to make Order 9.

I decline to make Order 10, or any order for costs at all against Norman
George Fisher. I repeat - he filed a submitting appearance. I add that I have no doubt at all that these proceedings have been brought for no other reason at all than a misguided attempt to avoid the inevitable result of the separate question of the existence of a contract for the refurbishment of the Club's premises, namely an award in favour of the Builder of a substantial amount.

I decline to make any order of the nature described in paragraph 11.

I turn now to the appropriate cost orders.

As against the first defendant the plaintiff has failed completely. Its application to set aside the interim award has been so utterly devoid of merit that in my opinion it should pay the builder's costs on an indemnity basis and
I so order.

I make no order for costs for or against the second defendant.

I stand the matter over to a directions hearing before me on 4 October 1996.
If by then the parties have agreed upon a new Arbitrator this action will have terminated. If they have not I will give directions designed to secure the appointment of a new Arbitrator.
 * * * 
