

In the matter of Hunter Bulk Materials Pty Ltd (subject to a deed of company arrangement) [2011] NSWSC 639 (24 June 2011) 
Last Updated: 27 June 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
In the matter of Hunter Bulk Materials Pty Ltd (subject to a deed of company arrangement)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): June 2011  
Decision Date: June 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Ward J  
Decision: 
Access granted to transcript/documents for examination  
Catchwords: 
CIVIL PROCEDURE - application to set aside or vary orders made in relation to examinations pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s597.html) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) -
CORPORATIONS - application for access to transcript of examinations and documents the subject of earlier orders restricting access thereto - HELD - examinations to be treated as if held in public - access granted to examination transcript and documents  
Legislation Cited: [Civil Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/)  [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth)  [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/)  
Cases Cited: 
Friedrich versus Herald and Weekly Times Ltd <case>; [(1990) VR 995] 
GPI Leisure Corp Ltd (rec & mgr apptd) versus ANI Corp Ltd <case> 
In the matter of re: Mypolonga Co-Operative Society; Re: River Equity Pty Ltd;
Du Bois versus Carter <case> 
Meteyard versus Love <case>; <case> 
Parbery Re Trio Capital Ltd <case> 
Re Botafogo Pty Ltd <case>; [[1990] VR 799] 
Re Normans Wines Ltd (Receivers and Managers appointed) (In Liq); Harvey v
Burfield <case>; [(2004) 88 SASR 541] 
Re Southern Equities Corporation Ltd (in liq) [(1998) 28 ACSR 159] 
Re Spedley Securities Ltd [(1990) 2 ACSR 266] 
Re: Eurostar Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) (Receivers and Managers Appointed) &
Ors <case>  
Texts Cited: 
Austin & Black's Annotations to the [Corporations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) 
Australian Corporation Law Principles and Practice 
Ford's Principles of Corporations Law 
Keenan, PJ, "Investigations by External Administrators" [(1995) 13 C&SLJ ] 
Maiden, S, "Tensions between the Public and Private Purposes of Examinations under [Pt .9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p5.9) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth)" [(2004) 12 Insolv LJ 28] 
McPherson's Law of Company Liquidation 
Parker, G, "Liquidator's Examinations" (1993) ABR 25  
Category: 
Procedural and other rulings  
Parties: 
Wambo Coal Terminal Pty Ltd (Applicant) 
Adam Shepard (in his capacity as deed administrator of Hunter Bulk Materials
Pty Ltd) (subject to a deed of company arrangement) (First Respondent) 
Laing O'Rourke (BMC) Pty Ltd (Second Respondent)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
Counsel 
M Dempsey SC and Ms JA Steele (Applicant) 
F P Hicks (Second Respondent)  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors 
Holding Redlich (Applicant) 
Brown Wright Stein (First Respondent) 
Mallesons Stephen Jaques (Second Respondent)  
File number(s): /257402  
Publication Restriction: 
Judgment 
HER HONOUR : On 20 May 2011 I published my reasons in relation to an application by Laing O'Rourke (BMC) Pty Limited ("BMC") and by two individuals (Mr Paul Ryan and Mr Peter Sheedy) who are or were at the relevant time employees of BMC, seeking to set aside orders obtained by the deed administrator of Hunter Bulk Materials Pty Limited for the production of documents and the examination of the individuals as part of the deed administrator's investigation into the examinable affairs of Hunter Bulk pursuant to [s 596B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).  
I refused to set aside the order for production served on BMC (though I made a direction limiting its scope) and I refused to set aside the examination summonses served on the two BMC employees (though I made directions for the holding of the examinations in private and as to the manner in which those examinations were to be transcribed, limiting access to the transcript of the examinations). As to the directions I made in relation to the conduct of the examinations, I made it clear that these were without prejudice to any application that might subsequently be made for access to the transcript of the examinations. Before me now is just such an application. (In the meantime, I understand that the examinations of each of Messrs Ryan and Sheedy have taken place in private in accordance with the directions I made.)  
Wambo Coal Terminal Pty Limited, by Further Amended Notice of Motion filed in Court on 20 June 2011, seeks orders enabling it to have access to copies of the transcripts of the examinations of, and documents provided to, Mr Ryan and Mr Sheedy. (The possibility of such an application was something of which BMC was no doubt aware at the time of the initial application, since the likely interest of Wambo in the examinations formed part of the basis on which BMC was resisting the holding of the examinations in the first place.)  
The application by Wambo for access to those materials is made on a number of bases: pursuant to [s 596F(l)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596f.html) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) and/or pursuant to the liberty I had effectively reserved in order 5 of the orders I made on BMC's initial application. Alternatively, Wambo seeks an order that orders 4 and 5 of the orders made on 13 May 2011 be set aside pursuant to [Rules 36.16(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s36.16.html), [36.16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s36.16.html)(1), 13.16(2)(b) and [36.16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s36.16.html)(3) of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) or in the inherent jurisdiction of the Court. Wambo had initially sought to bring an application in relation to the status of the examinations in the morning of 13 May 2011 - my orders not then having formally been entered (though they had been made in chambers and their substance had already been notified to the parties to BMC's application). Once appraised of the terms of the orders I had made, Wambo chose simply to file its application in court and proposed that argument on that application be deferred until after my reasons had been published.  
Background 
Much of the background to the present application is set out in my earlier reasons ([2011] NSWSC 467).  
In summary, Hunter Bulk is a construction company which went into administration in December 2005 and is now subject to a deed of company arrangement. BMC and Hunter Bulk were parties to a sub-contract agreement entered into in March 2005 for earthworks, drainage and roadwork construction to be carried out by Hunter Bulk in relation to the construction of the New Rail Spur from Mount Thorley to Wambo Coal Terminal. Those works, including earthworks for the construction of an embankment forming part of the rail spur, formed part of the works that BMC was required to perform under a separate contract with Wambo (the head contract) entered into in December 2004.  
As between Hunter Bulk and BMC, there was a dispute in 2005 as to the works that the former was required to carry out under its sub-contract with BMC and, after Hunter Bulk was placed into external administration in December 2005, BMC purported to invoke its rights under the contract with Hunter Bulk and assumed the carriage of the then remaining construction works under that contract. As between Wambo and BMC, there then arose a dispute as to the performance by BMC of its obligations under the head contract. That dispute relates (at least in part) to whether the earthworks complied with the relevant specifications and is now the subject of the Wambo proceedings (51727 of 2011).  
Of necessity, this outline of the background, and particularly of the nature of the disputes between the respective parties, is general in nature and is based on the respective parties' submissions. (I note this because, insofar as it is suggested in the submissions made on the present application by Mr Hicks, Counsel for BMC, that I have made factual findings as to the works under the Hunter Bulk subcontract, I did not intend that to be the case. I am not in a position to make (nor should I be taken to have done so) factual findings as to the underlying disputes between the parties.)  
As I understand it, the dispute between Hunter Bulk and BMC is as to whether BMC repudiated the subcontract with Hunter Bulk by assuming the carriage of the relevant construction works (a repudiation which Hunter Bulk in turn purported to accept as bringing to an end the contract), whereas the dispute between Wambo and BMC is focussed on whether the work performed under the head contract was compliant with specifications.  
It seems to be accepted by both parties that the matters the subject of the 2011 orders for production and examination obtained by BMC are of relevance to the litigation on foot between BMC and Wambo in relation to the Mount Thorley rail project. BMC made reference to this in the context of its application to set aside the production/examination orders (and there has been no submission made by BMC to the effect that access to the transcript/documents now sought by Wambo should not be permitted because they would be irrelevant to the issues in dispute between Wambo and BMC).  
I note that an order for production of documents had earlier been served on Wambo (since Wambo's application to set aside that order for production was relied on by the deed administrator as one of the reasons for the delay in progressing earlier orders for production/examination in relation to BMC or its employees). I do not know whether Wambo ultimately resisted the production of documents sought by the deed administrator but the fact that documents were sought from it highlights the apparent overlap between the respective claims. (The overlap between Wambo's dispute with BMC and the latter's dispute with Hunter Bulk is further illustrated by the fact that the one category of documents to which the April 2011 order for production by BMC was limited relates to minutes of project control group meetings between Wambo and BMC.)  
It is submitted by Senior Counsel for Wambo (Mr Dempsey SC) that Wambo has a legitimate interest in inspecting the transcript and the documents (relying on Re Spedley Securities Ltd [(1990) 2 ACSR 266] That interest is identified by reference to the position of Wambo as a party to litigation in which there are issues to which evidence in the examinations relates or could be relevant. BMC does not dispute that evidence in the examinations may be relevant to issues in the Wambo proceedings. However, it contends that the authorities on which Wambo relies establish only that it has standing to make the application and that the fact that it may have a sufficient or legitimate interest to make the application for access is not determinative of the merits of the application.  
As to the merits of the present application by Wambo, BMC contends that the relevant test is whether Wambo has a sufficient interest to warrant a reconsideration of the finding that there were special circumstances that made it desirable for the examination to be held in private and for the transcript to be kept confidential (and maintains that it does not). As to that, the finding that I made as to the existence of special circumstances sufficient to enliven the discretion to direct that the examination be held in private (and the balancing exercise carried out in that regard) was one that was made without the benefit of a focussed debate by a party (such as Wambo) asserting an interest in the public or other nature of the examination.  
The deed administrator (and I make no criticism of him in this regard) was understandably keen to press forward with the examinations (and his Counsel, Mr Lo Surdo, informed me that there was no objection on the deed administrator's part to the examination being held in private - in effect, to enable any prejudice of the kind to which BMC had adverted to be addressed). The focus of the debate before me was as to whether the deed administrator should be permitted to do so. There was no identification by BMC of (and certainly no debate as to) any specific forensic disadvantage that it would suffer as a result of the examinations of its employees being held in public (other than that Wambo might be able to hear the evidence so given and to obtain a copy of the transcript of the examinations on payment of the relevant fee. (Although there was reference to other prejudice that was likely to be suffered in respect of the delay, namely the likely deterioration of the quality of the witnesses' memory, that is not a matter that relates to the position as between Wambo and BMC since Wambo's witnesses would presumably suffer the same prejudice).  
The application was heard in the short amount of time then available for the hearing of such an application (before the commencement of another matter) and with the examinations fixed to commence the following day. I considered the matter over the luncheon adjournment during the course of that other contested matter and my associate advised the parties after court on that day of the orders that I intended to make.  
In the circumstances, where there was not a considered debate as to the identification of the particular forensic disadvantage asserted by BMC (or, as is now put by Mr Dempsey, as to the corresponding deprivation of a forensic advantage that a party in the position of Wambo might otherwise be able to enjoy in relation to the proposed examinations), it was my concern that any third party whose interests might be affected by those orders should be able to make an application for access to the transcripts. It was this that prompted the qualification I made to the confidentiality orders (expressly contemplating that there might be an application made for leave by a third party to have access to the examination transcripts).  
Therefore, it seems to me that (Wambo not having had an opportunity to contest the making of the privacy/confidentiality orders before they were made, as it would have sought to do had the timing of the application not been as it was), it cannot now be said that Wambo should be required to establish some "particular" circumstance to cause a reconsideration of the conclusion I had reached in its absence.  
The relevant question, on the present application, is whether I remain satisfied that there are special circumstances to restrict access to the examination transcripts/documents (or, perhaps more to the point on the alternative way in which the present application is put, whether, with the benefit of the submissions now put by Mr Dempsey, I am of the view that the earlier orders should not have been made and should now be set aside or varied).  
In Parbery Re Trio Capital Ltd  <case>, Barrett J noted that the court cannot order that an examination or any part of it be conducted in private unless it is satisfied that there are "special circumstances" by reason of which it is desirable that the examination be held in private and that a positive case of the desirability of examination in private must be established by reference to "special circumstances".  
In the present case, I reached the conclusion that there were such special circumstances having balanced the concerns expressed by BMC against the recognised public interest in the public nature of examinations under <case>. (I did note, however, that the case was not as compelling as that which has in the past arisen where an examinee is facing the disadvantage of prejudice to his or her position in forthcoming criminal proceedings.) In carrying out that balancing exercise I had regard to the fact that a party asserting a legitimate interest in access to the examination transcripts (such as Wambo) would not be precluded from raising this at a later time, at which point the question could be revisited (which gave me some comfort in making the orders that I did in the limited time then available to me).  
At [84], I noted that:  ... in other contexts it is also recognised that concerns may arise not simply because of the existence of proceedings commenced by the liquidator against the examinee and that there is an issue as to the appropriateness of the liquidator conducting an examination where that may give a forensic advantage to another party in other litigation. (In McPherson's Law of Company
Liquidation at [15.720] the issue is discussed in the context of when a person who is likely to be a party to (or a witness at the hearing of) legal proceedings that the liquidator or another person is either contemplating or has already commenced in relation to the affairs of the company in liquidation can be examined, the authors noting that "The obvious concern of parties who may be or are the subject of a liquidator's action is that the liquidator (or,
I might add, a third party) will be able to gain, through the use of an examination, significant forensic advantages in the conduct of contemplated or pending litigation."
I considered that the relevant interests to be balanced in this regard were "on the one hand, the interests of the public and the creditors to permit the collecting of all necessary information relating to the winding up of the relevant company and, on the other hand, that the proposed witness is accorded justice and the right to privacy" (citing, amongst others, Ford's Principles of Corporations Law at [27.170.1]; Australian Corporation Law Principles and Practice at [5.7B.0005]-[5.7B.0100]; McPherson's Law of Company Liquidation at Ch 15; G Parker, " Liquidator's Examinations" (1993) ABR 25; PJ Keenan, "Investigations by External Administrators" [(1995) 13 C&SLJ 368]  
Pausing there, it is perhaps fair to say that in considering the position of the proposed witnesses, I aligned the position of the employees with that of their employer, when considering the forensic disadvantage that BMC might suffer if its opponent was made privy to the evidence of its witnesses in advance of the time at which that would ordinarily occur in the litigious process. There is no suggestion that either Mr Ryan or Mr Sheedy is himself a party to the Wambo proceedings, a distinction that I think needs to be drawn when considering the forensic disadvantage of which BMC complains in the litigation to which it is party. Even apart from the fact that the Wambo proceedings are not in a criminal context, there does not seem to be any basis on which to conclude that the proposed examinees would personally suffer any prejudice if their evidence in the examinations were to be made available to Wambo (and hence available to Wambo to use in preparation for the hearing of its claim against BMC).  
At [85] I said:  
Here, the argument that there were special circumstances that should lead to the examination being held in private by reference to the other civil proceedings was less compelling than in Parbery . However, on balance it did not seem to me that the public interest in having examinations of this kind conducted in public (noting that the emphasis on the application of such principles in cases involving the examination of directors of a company will not necessarily have the same import where the examinee is an employee, having a lesser role in the public life of the company) was such as would necessarily require that a party in the position of BMC should be submitted to the forensic disadvantage of having its opponent in other civil proceedings made privy to the evidence of its witnesses in advance of the time at which that would ordinarily occur in that litigation. While in the context of criminal proceedings, such prejudice would be given considerable weight particularly having regard to the right to silence on the part of an accused, I accept that such considerations will have less weight in the civil context. Nevertheless, on balance, I formed the view that there were special circumstances sufficient to enliven the power to make a direction that the examinations be held in private.
Thus, it was that I considered that the appropriate balance should be struck between the interest of the creditors in having the deed administrator complete the examinations necessary to assess the prospects of a claim to the potential benefit of the creditors, and the concerns of BMC not to be placed in a position of forensic disadvantage (leaving open the ability of a third party such as Wambo to make an application for access to the transcript of the examinations).  
Now that more focus has been placed on the particular nature of the competing interests, is it the case that the restrictions on access should be lifted or varied?  
I turn first to the question as to the precise nature of the perceived forensic disadvantage which will be suffered by BMC if access to the examination transcripts/documents is granted.  
At [77] of my earlier reasons I noted the submission that had been made by Mr Hicks, which was that, in circumstances where (since the earlier orders, that were not pursued, were obtained) proceedings had been issued against BMC by Wambo in relation to matters the subject of the subcontract between BMC and Hunter Bulk, BMC would be prejudiced by the ability of Wambo to gain access to the transcripts of the examination on payment of a fee by reference to [s 597(14A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s597.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/). The forensic disadvantage was thus identified by reference to the forensic advantage that Wambo would so obtain over BMC. I understood this to be, in effect, a complaint that Wambo would obtain advance knowledge of the case on which BMC would rely in defending the claim made by Wambo.  (As a practical matter, I noted (at [78]) that in one sense it might be said that there is no relevant prejudice beyond that which would have been suffered had the examinations taken place back in 2006, at a time when I understood there had been no objection raised by BMC to the examination of Mr Ryan - on the premise that had the public examination of one or both of the employees taken place at that time then presumably Wambo could have obtained access to the transcript at that stage. It seems to me that this remains the case - unless there can be said to be a prejudice relating to the timing issue of that evidence only now becoming available and no such prejudice was suggested.)  
The fact that such knowledge could confer a forensic advantage on a party to other civil litigation in which the witness (or, as is the case here, his or her employer) is also a party seems to me to be implicitly recognised by the line of cases that have considered that the use of an examination as a "dress rehearsal" of cross-examination in an impending or contemplated trial may be an abuse of process. Other examples that have been given of situations where use of an examination summons may be said to be an attempt to obtain an impermissible "forensic advantage" in litigation include "the use of an examination summons to obtain de facto discovery where a discovery order had been refused in proceedings already on foot" (per Street J in Re Hugh J Roberts Pty Ltd (In liq)  <case> reference was made, in the context of what might amount to a reason to set aside an examination summons, to the situation where the "predominant purpose [is] of obtaining a forensic advantage not available from ordinary pre-trial procedures " (my emphasis).  
Therefore, to the extent that Wambo might gain an advantage by being made privy to evidence of at least some of BMC's employees in relation to the issues in dispute between Wambo and BMC, at a time in advance of the time at which this would ordinarily occur in the civil litigation process, it seems to me that there is a reasonable basis on which to conclude that BMC will face a forensic (if only temporal) disadvantage if the transcript of the examination proceedings is available to the public.  
Wambo makes a number of submissions in that regard.  
First, it is said that any prejudice arising from early disclosure of the evidence of BMC's witnesses would be met by simply deferring access until the time at which that might be expected in the ordinary course (either the time of discovery or the service of evidence). It is submitted by Mr Dempsey that the relevant orders go beyond providing protection against early disclosure as they preclude access "permanently and unconditionally" to Wambo, creditors and any other member of the public. To the extent that this submission does not take into account the carve-out built into the orders, I disagree with the characterisation of the orders so made. However, I do accept that, insofar as the forensic disadvantage is temporal in nature, it could readily be met by a variation of the orders that would permit Wambo at some later stage in the proceedings to have access to the transcript (though this was put very much as a 'rhetorical' or fall-back position by Mr Dempsey.)  
Secondly, it was submitted by Mr Dempsey that, in fact, the orders unintentionally bestow a forensic advantage upon BMC insofar as they permanently prevent disclosure of any admission made on oath by an officer or employee of BMC on matters relevant to the Wambo proceedings. It was submitted that it would not be in the interests of justice for the orders to mask (assuming that were to be the case) that the evidence of a witness at trial had departed in a material way from the prior sworn testimony of that witness given in the examination. (In other words, it seemed to be suggested that the operation of the orders would permit any inconsistency in evidence from coming to light or being tested in the subsequent litigation.) Again, the orders made would only "permanently" prevent such disclosure if no party with an interest in having access to the transcripts made such an application. More relevantly, perhaps, it seems to me rather a long bow to suggest (if this is what in fact was the thrust of the submission) that there is any reason to expect that an examinee (aware that an application might later be brought for access to the transcript or otherwise) might feel encouraged or able with impunity to present inconsistent testimony under oath or affirmation at a later date by reason of the fact that the initial examination was held in private and there was a restriction on access to the transcripts. The cases that have explored the public policy underlying the public nature of such examinations have not, as I read them, suggested that it encourages the giving of truthful and consistent evidence at the time of examination or later. That said, I accept that the inability to test any such inconsistency would be a forensic disadvantage to Wambo (and a corresponding, and I suspect unintended, advantage to BMC and its employees). Again, this disadvantage would be met by varying the confidentiality orders to give them a temporal operation only, such that the transcripts could be made available to Wambo before the hearing of its proceedings.  
Thirdly, it was said (by reference to the duty of a litigant under [s 56(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) only to put in issue matters which are genuinely in dispute), and having regard to the processes for discovery and service of evidence, that any consequence to Wambo of seeing part of BMC's evidence early is insignificant and not undesirable. I am told, in this regard, that the Wambo proceedings are at a very early stage (the parties at present not having yet completed the required dispute resolution procedures under the contract). In this regard, I asked Mr Hicks whether the dispute resolution procedures might not be facilitated by Wambo having access to the examination transcripts/documents and his response, in effect, was that this would be a one-way street (as Wambo would have no obligation to make its evidence known on the relevant matters). Pausing there, it might perhaps be thought that Wambo (being, as it clearly is, conscious of the obligations of a litigant under [s 56(3))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) could be expected to respond favourably to any suggestion that as part of the dispute resolution process it reciprocate with an outline of the evidence it expects to give in relation to matters the subject of the examinations of Messrs Ryan and Sheedy so that the parties can consider the resolution of the Wambo claim with an understanding of the ambit of the real dispute between them on such issues. Hence the concern raised by Mr Hicks would, I trust, be unfounded.  
Having regard to the above, and, in particular to the fact that there has been no prejudice identified to the position of the individual examinees and, in any event, access to the transcript will afford only a temporal advantage (at least in circumstances where the employees' evidence would be likely to come to light in due course in the Wambo proceedings), I consider that the forensic disadvantage to which BMC has adverted (and which in principle I accept has been shown to arise) is one to which less weight should be given than I had done when balancing the competing interests at the time I made the order that the examinations should be held in private.  
Further, I note that in Hong Kong Bank of Australia Ltd versus Murphy (1992) 28 NSWLR 512 at [519], in the context of an application to set aside an examination summons, Gleeson CJ emphasised that the possibility that a forensic advantage will be gained does not mean that a making of an order will not advance a purpose intended to be secured by the legislation and that, when seeking to set aside examination summons what is required is that there be an improper forensic advantage and that the purpose in question must be the predominant purpose. Here, there is no suggestion that the deed administrator would have obtained any forensic advantage (improper or otherwise) by the examinations being public. Nor can it be said that Wambo would improperly obtain an forensic advantage by having access to the examination transcripts/documents. There is no suggestion that the examinations have been conducted at Wambo's behest. The situation simply seems to be that it will obtain an unexpected benefit from the deed administrators' decision at this stage to pursue the examination process.  
Turning then to the public interest against which the forensic disadvantage to which BMC points must be tested, Mr Dempsey emphasises (and I accept) that the weight of authority is that it will only be in very rare circumstances that examinations of this kind should be held in public (and, I would add, those being where prejudice to the examinee would result therefrom or where there is a sound reason for an application by the examiner that they be held in private). Mr Dempsey submits that the circumstances of this case do not fall within the class of case in which "special circumstances" have been found to exist (referring to Parbery and to Kassem ) and a private examination has been considered appropriate. Thus it is submitted that the order that the examination be conducted in private therefore should not have been made in the present case. In hindsight, I agree.  
Mr Hicks submits, as a factor to be taken into account in this regard, that the Wambo proceedings do not relate to the company affairs of either Hunter Bulk or BMC but, rather, concern the private rights and obligations of the parties arising from the head contract. Therefore, it is said that the general public interest in the affairs of any company being assessed in public is not of any real significance in this case.  
True it is that I considered, in weighing the public interest in the examinations being conducted in public, that it was relevant to note that the examinations were not of the directors of the company (and hence that the rationale underlying the "public" nature of the examinations to which the Court had had regard in Friedrich was not as readily applicable in the present case). That said, it does not seem to be now contended that the examinations did not concern the examinable affairs of Hunter Bulk (having regard to the broad definition of "examinable affairs" as discussed in Meteyard versus Love <case>; [(2005) 65 NSWLR 36)] and the relevant question is whether, in the public interest, examinations as to those affairs should have been held in public (even though the examinees are not persons who have themselves taken on the corporate director's mantle).  
Mr Dempsey submits that to entertain a distinction along those lines would be to open the floodgates to an undesirable plethora of applications (in which one would need to assess the scope of the matters the subject of the examinations and their relevance to the public perception or role of company directors and officers). Whether that be a likely result or not, I consider that there is force to his submission that a departure from the reasoning underlying Spedley would have the potential to frustrate the conduct of examinations and the important policy goals of the examination procedure.  
At [81] I referred to the discussion in Austin & Black's Annotations to the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) as to the legislative recognition that a public examination is beneficial to the commercial and general community, and that the privilege of incorporation is given on terms that the company's affairs can be examined and any examination will ordinarily be held in public if the company fails, said to underlie the statutory presumption that an examination will be held in public. At [5.597], the authors went on to say that:  ... The court will not order that an examination proceed in private unless a question and answer or line of questioning would result in prejudice which outweighs that presumption: Friedrich versus Herald and Weekly Times Ltd <case>; [[1990] VR 995]; [(1989) 1 ACSR 277]; Jagelman v
Sheahan [(2002) 41 ACSR 487]; <case>; Re Pan Pharmaceuticals Ltd [(2003) 176 FLR 341]; <case>; Re Euro Star Pty Ltd (in liq)  <case>;
Re New Tel Ltd (in liq); Evans versus Wainter Pty Ltd [(2005) 145 FCR 176]; <case> at <case>.
In Friedrich versus Herald and Weekly Times Ltd <case>; [(1990) VR 995], at p 1003, the policy underlying the requirement that such examinations be held in public was considered in the context where serious criminal proceedings were pending. There, Kaye, Fullagar and Ormiston JJ said that:  
There can be little doubt, therefore, that an examination in public, in contrast to one in private, is seen as the norm under the present legislation.
One may venture some opinions as to why this is so. The legislature must have seen it to be desirable that, whenever an examination is ordered, it should be given as much publicity as the matter deserves. Since no dispute is resolved upon the hearing of an examination, the benefit must be seen in the general publication of the proceedings, whether by press, radio, television or by word of mouth. Not only might that lead to the possibility of further information being provided from other sources to the liquidator or other person in control of the company, but the risk that improper activities of company officers might thereby be spread abroad may have been thought as some form of deterrence to them: cf McPherson on Company Liquidation, 3rd ed, p 431. One may doubt that the more thick skinned of the company "sharks" of this world would be especially conscious of the risk of examination, but at least the possibility of public examination may be seen as part of the price paid for the privilege of incorporation and the right to transact business as a company, albeit that the price is usually paid by those who become directors or officers of that company. However, it is not for this court to query the policy of the statute, whatever views one may have as to the need for a public examination for the purposes of para (b) of subs(2).
In Re Southern Equities Corporation Ltd (in liq) [(1998) 28 ACSR 159] (relied upon by Mr Dempsey for the proposition that a party (other than the liquidator or other examiner) engaged in other litigation to which an examination may be relevant has a legitimate interest in inspecting the transcript of examinations even where those have been conducted in private), Debelle J said (at [163]) that:  
Examinations under [ss
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596a.html) and [596B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) of the Corporations Law are, of course, unlike the usual form of judicial proceedings. The differences have been identified on many occasions. It is sufficient to refer to the observations of this court in Emanuel versus Emanuel
Investments Pty Ltd [(1996) 21 ACSR 83] and, on appeal, [(1997) 191 LSJS 412.]
Notwithstanding that an examination is not a determination of rights and liabilities of adversaries but a function incidental to the winding up, the power to conduct examinations is an incident of the judicial power of winding up and has a judicial character: Gould versus Brown (1998) 72 ALJR 375 per Brennan
CJ and Toohey J at 389-90. ...
His Honour noted that the examination procedure conferred an advantage on the liquidator not possessed by other litigants but also subjected the liquidator to the disadvantage, in a tactical sense, that if he exercised that power then his opponent in litigation would learn the substance of the evidence which a witness might give concerning matters in dispute (referring to GPI Leisure Corp Ltd (rec & mgr apptd) versus ANI Corp Ltd [(1981) 6 ACSR 412] at [414]). His Honour went on to say (at [164] - [165]) that:  ... where the court is satisfied that a party has a legitimate interest in inspecting the transcript of an examination or a particular part of it, that party will be given leave to inspect the transcript: Spedley Securities Ltd (in liq) versus Bond Corp Holdings Ltd [(1990) 1 ACSR 726] at 741; Re
Spedley Securities Ltd, supra at 269; GPI Leisure Corp Ltd (rec & mgr apptd) versus ANI Corp Ltd, supra at 414-5. ...

Thus, a person who is a party to litigation with the liquidator or even a person who is engaged in litigation with a person other than a liquidator who can show that the evidence in the examination relates, or could be relevant, to the issues in the action is, generally speaking, entitled to inspect the transcript or the relevant portions of it. An instance where a person engaged in litigation with a person other than the liquidator has obtained the transcript of the examination is GPI Leisure Corp Ltd versus ANI Corp Ltd, supra.
In other words, a person who can satisfy the court that he has a legitimate interest may obtain the transcript of a public examination. In addition to the cases already cited: see also Re BPTC (in liq) [(1992) 7 ACSR 539]; Re
Botafogo Pty Ltd [(1992) 10 ACSR 31.] 
The above principles apply to examinations conducted in public. The fact that an examination is being conducted in private and is confidential does not necessarily mean that a person is disqualified from applying for a copy of the transcript of the examination or part of it. As Shepherdson J noted in Re
Country Stores Pty Ltd [[1988] 2 Qd R 149] at 155, a liquidation does not remain static and courts must be flexible enough to meet changes which occur. Thus, an examination which has been conducted in private can be converted into a public examination: Re Country Stores Pty Ltd, supra;
Re Lazar International Pty Ltd (in liq) <case>; [[1990] VR 799.] The fact that the examination was confidential will, of course, be a factor to be weighed with all other relevant issues. One of those issues will be whether the applicant has a legitimate interest in obtaining a copy of the transcript. But questions as to whether the applicant should be permitted to have access to the transcript of a confidential examination are different from the entitlement to make the application. In other words, the question of the entitlement to make the application should not be confused with the determination of the merits of the application. The questions whether confidentiality should be maintained and the persons against whom it ought to be maintained are matters to be worked out at a later stage. For example, a person ordered to attend for examination who seeks access to the affidavit sworn by the liquidator in support of the order for examination will be confronted with a long line of authority to the effect that the examinee is not entitled to access the affidavit: see eg, Re Gold Co [(1879) 12 Ch D ];
Re Hugh J Roberts Pty Ltd (in liq) [[1970] 2 NSWR 582]; Murphy v
FAI General Insurance Co Ltd [(1997) 24 ACSR 604]; cf Re
British & Commonwealth Holdings Plc (Nos 1 & 2) [[1992] Ch 342]; Re Moage Ltd (in liq) [(1997) 25 ACSR 53.]
Mr Hicks, as noted above, submits that this establishes only that a person who has a legitimate interest has standing to make the application for access and is a separate matter from the merits of an application for access. However, the recognition that there is a legitimate interest of such a party in making an application for access is predicated on there being a legitimate interest in having such access (the only question then being in a particular case as to whether access should be granted).  
In Spedley , Needham AJ dealt, inter alia, with an application by a party engaged in litigation with another party for access to the transcript of persons who had been the subject of examination by the liquidator of Spedley, on the basis that evidence in those examinations was relevant to the claim for damages in the proceedings to which it was a party. The liquidator opposed access being granted. Needham AJ, noting the different statutory regime in which examinations then took place from the procedure that had been in place under the 1961 Companies Act, said (at [269]):  
It seems to me that the court, in determining whether it should grant leave to any person to inspect the transcript of examinations under <case> of the Code, should satisfy itself that the person making the application has a legitimate interest in inspecting either that transcript or a particular part of that transcript. I have no doubt that, if a party to litigation can show that evidence given in those examinations relates to or could be relevant to a claim made by that party or by the opposing party in legal proceedings, prima facie that party or those parties should have leave to inspect that transcript or that portion of the transcript. (my emphasis)
In Re Botafogo Pty Ltd [(1992) 10 ACSR 31] (25 June 1998) where Lander J held that there could be any number of commercial or other reasons for examinations to take place in private (which reasons may arise from the peculiar position of the eligible applicant, the company, the proposed examinee or a third party) and submits that the only test is whether there are special circumstances which make a private examination desirable. There, his Honour said (at [10] - [11]):  
The provisions of s597(4) of the Corporations Law make it clear that ordinarily an examination of this kind would be held in public. It is only if a court considers that there are special circumstances which make it desirable that the examination be held in private that the examination is held other than in public.

An examination usually takes place in public because the power to order a person to submit to such an examination has been considered to be for the benefit of the general public, the benefit of those who invest in public and private companies and for those who enter into a commercial arrangement with public and private companies.

There will be circumstances (if they are special), however, where it will be appropriate to conduct the examinations in private. Those circumstances might attach to the proposed examinee or to the eligible applicant who is conducting the examination.

I identified the circumstances in which an eligible applicant might seek to have an examination conducted in private in Re Southern Equities Corporation
Limited (In Liq); Bond & Anor versus England [(1997) 25 ACSR 394] at 434.
...

There may be circumstances whereby the conduct of an examination in public might cause irremedial harm to a proposed examinee. In those circumstances it might be appropriate to conduct the examination which otherwise would be conducted in public, in private. (my emphasis) 
There could be any number of commercial or other reasons for examinations to take place in private. The reasons might be peculiar to the eligible applicant, the company, the proposed examinee or a third party. The only test is whether there are special circumstances which make a private examination desirable.

There may be special circumstances whereby an examination will commence in private but where those special circumstances cease to exist. If that is so, then the matter would thereafter proceed in public. It is only whilst the special circumstances exist that any examination should take in place in private. (my emphasis) 
In that case, his Honour went on to consider (and dismiss) a submission that (the examination having taken place in private) that no order could later be made for access by any party other than the administrator to the transcript (noting that the appellant claimed that he had been advised through counsel for the administrator that the examination was to take place in private and he had acted on that information to his detriment). No such application could be made in this case in any event since the orders made clear the potential for an application to be made and leave to be granted for access to the transcript of the examinations. Lander J said (at [13] - [15]):  
The appellant was not, in my opinion, entitled to assume that simply because his examination was to be held in private no other party would ever be entitled to access the transcript of that examination. The best he was entitled to assume was that, at the time of his examination, special circumstances existed for the examination to take place in private. He could not even assume that the whole of his examination would take place in private.
The best he could assume was that at the time that the examination commenced special circumstances existed for the examination to take place in private. If those special circumstances ceased to exist then he should have assumed that thereafter the examination would take place in public. That is what the Act says and that is the assumption he should have made.
 ...

In my opinion, the appellant had no right to assume that this transcript would only ever become available to the administrator. He should have assumed that any number of persons, including the present applicant, might seek to have access to the transcript.
 ...

In my opinion there is no doubt that the court does have power to convert a private examination into a public examination and does have a power to direct that evidence adduced and documents produced on that private examination be treated as though no order that the examination be held in private has been made : Re Country Stores Pty Ltd (In Liq) [(1988) 6 ACLC 376] 
Not only does a court have that power, in my opinion the court is obliged to exercise that power and require a private examination to continue in public if the special circumstances which gave rise to the initial order for the examination to be held in private have ceased to operate . (my emphasis) 
In Re Lazar International Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) <case>; [[1990] VR 799], Beach J considered an application by the liquidator (who had previously obtained an order for an examination to be conducted in private, due to the perceived risk of collusion between examinees and also to avoid forewarning to the examinees of facts and matters of which he was already appraised) for an order that the evidence adduced and documents produced on various such examinations be treated as if there were no order that the examinations be conducted in private and for an order that any future examinations of the persons referred to in that earlier order not be held in private. His Honour said:  
An issue not dissimilar to the present issue was considered by Shepherdson J.
in Re Country Stores Pty. Ltd. [(1988) 6 ACLC 376.] In that case his Honour was dealing with an appeal against the refusal of a master to vary an order that an examination be held in public by converting it to an examination in private. At p. 381 his Honour said: 
A liquidator's duties in a company winding up include requiring him to get in or protect assets of that company. He may apply, as was done in these present cases, for an order under s541. He may do this with a view to discovering and getting in assets. That order, if granted, will no doubt be based on the material before the court at the time the order is made. A liquidator's ongoing investigations may bring to light other matters, as has occurred in these present cases, which cause the liquidator to take the view that the examination should, at least in respect of one or more of the persons named in an existing order for a public examination, be held in private. A liquidator may well consider that those persons' evidence if held in private and away from the ears of other persons would assist the liquidator in future action to recover property for the benefit of the creditors.

The above are largely hypothetical matters but they illustrate that a liquidation does not remain static -- the knowledge and information available to liquidators may change from day to day and courts, in exercising the powers given by s541, must in my view be flexible enough to meet those changes. In my respectful view, the power given by s541(3) is a power which may be exercised from time to time in the one winding up and indeed of the same person or persons sought to be examined. I can see no warrant for construing s541(3) and s541(4) in the restricted way in which Master Weld has construed them. If the circumstances call for a variation of the original order by requiring that the public examination of the persons be converted wholly to a private examination or party to a private examination in the sense that one or more of the persons named in the earlier order are to be examined in private then such a variation should be made.
Beach J agreed with the observations of Stephenson J and held that the court did "have power to convert a private examination into a public examination and ... to direct that evidence adduced and documents produced on an examination conducted in private be treated as if there were no order that the examination be conducted in private".  
I note that in Re: Eurostar Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) (Receivers and Managers Appointed) & Ors  <case>, Campbell J (as his Honour then was) at [13] said:  
Part of the purpose of conducting examinations in public is that there is a public interest in all aspects of the circumstances which led to a corporate collapse being available to all those who might be interested. Incorporation is a privilege which is made available because there is seen to be public benefit in it, but there is a public interest in that privilege not being abused. The privilege of incorporation is given on terms that, if the company collapses, its affairs can be examined, and that examination will ordinarily be in public. In at least some instances, publicity of information given in examinations can cause information which was otherwise not available to be brought to the attention of those investigating the circumstances of the corporate collapse. There needs to be a good reason before full openness to public scrutiny of what is said in such examinations should be removed.
Having regard to the above (and to the unusual circumstances in which in Parbery the examinations were to be held in private), I consider that when closer attention is paid to the forensic disadvantage on which BMC relies for the continuation of the orders made on 13 June 2011, that the circumstances do not warrant orders of the kind that I then made. In those circumstances, it seems to me that the appropriate course (having regard to the terms of the orders and the fact that the examinations in question have now already been held, is to make orders in effect converting the examinations into public examinations and permitting access to the transcripts as if the examinations had been held in public and the transcript authenticated in accordance with <case>(13).  
As to the application for documents, Wambo seek access, as part of the records of the examination, to the documents shown to witnesses (relying on Eurostar (2003) at [23], and New Cap Reinsurance Corporation Holdings Limited  <case> at <case>). Mr Hicks did not direct any particular submissions to this aspect of the application.  
In New Cap, Santow J (as his Honour then was) considered the question of access to documents used in the course of a compulsory examination and said:  [1] Can and should a creditor (or someone claiming as such) of a company in liquidation be given access to the documents elicited from a liquidator's compulsory examination, when sought by that creditor to assist it in proceedings against the Company or, as here, associated defendants? Is there any difference between documents specifically put to an examinee and marked for identification and other documents obtained prior to or in the course of the examination? The examinees or their companies oppose access and seek return of all original documents and destruction of all copies. The liquidator, for his part, is not opposed to making the documents available, considering as he does that their use by the creditor in pursuing the litigation may be in the interests of the liquidation.
 ...
 [33] Thus a fair way of putting the matter is to conclude that the trend of expansion of the examination provisions starting in 1991 and expanded in 1993 comports with a legislative scheme that allows creditors access not only to the transcript but also to the documents produced pursuant to the examination if necessary with a Court direction to ensure no abuse. It would be incongruous that creditors are permitted to attend such examinations, in public unless ordered otherwise, able to hear the questions and answers put including any reference to documents produced, later be entitled as of right to a copy of the written record of the examination, yet be denied copies of the produced documents after the examination. Such access, if allowed, is not ordinarily antithetical to the legislative purpose or thereby an abuse of that process. The contrary is borne out by the legislative scheme and the prior legislative history of expansion of the examination process.
 ...
 [39] It is against that background that I now approach the specific provisions of the Corporations Law. I am satisfied that there are a number of sources of power available to the liquidator to do that which he does not oppose doing, namely to make available the documents which were utilised in the examination either by directly being marked for identification or as otherwise being produced for the examination. I see no sensible distinction being drawn between the two categories of document. The documents not marked for identification were still capable of informing the examination and influencing the questions asked. Indeed the liquidator's submissions appear to favour that access. Thus I would include in any access all documents produced, in the absence of any evidence from those opposing access that a document was produced which was entirely extraneous to any possible purpose of the original examination. (my emphasis)
It seems to me that the order for access to transcript should include access or inspection of the documents provided to each of Messrs Ryan and Sheedy and marked for identification in the course of the examinations as sought by BMC.  
Orders 
Accordingly, for the reasons set out above, I propose to make the following orders:  
Pursuant to [s
F(1)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596f.html) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth), I direct that the applicant be provided (on payment of the requisite fee or otherwise at its cost) with a copy of (or otherwise be permitted to inspect and take a copy of): the transcript taken of the examinations of Mr Ryan and Mr Sheedy on 13
May 2011 and on any later date; and the documents provided to each of Mr Ryan and Mr Sheedy and marked for identification in the course of their examinations.
I direct that the examinations of Mr Ryan and Mr Sheedy be treated as if they had been examinations held in public.
I vary order 5 of the orders made on 13 June 2011 such that there is no longer a restriction on access to, or requirement that it be kept confidential, the transcript of the examinations of Mr Ryan and Mr Sheedy.
Before finalising the above orders, I will give the parties an opportunity to make any submissions as to the form of those orders by notifying my Associate by 1 July 2011.  
I consider that the appropriate order would be for BMC to pay the costs of the application by Wambo but will hear submissions on this aspect of the matter if any party wishes to make such submissions (in which case they should notify my Associate by 1 July 2011, failing which I will make the order so foreshadowed).  * * * 
