

Anthony Magafas and Anor versus Peter Carantinos and Ors [2007] NSWSC 487 (15
May 2007) 
Last Updated: 16 May 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Anthony Magafas & Anor versus Peter Carantinos & Ors <case>  
JURISDICTION: Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2670/06  
HEARING DATE{S): 2/04/07, 4/04/07, 5/04/07, 11/04/07, 16/04/07 - 20/04/07, /04/06, 26/04/06  
JUDGMENT DATE: 15 May 2007  
PARTIES: 
Anthony Magafas (First Plaintiff) 
Pac Com Pty Limited (Second Plaintiff) 
Peter Carantinos (First Defendant) 
Fotini Carantinos (Second Defendant) 
Artesian Pty Limited (Third Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Einstein J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr T Alexis SC, Mr S Golledge (Plaintiffs) 
Mr CRC Newlinds SC, Mr A Bowen (Defendants)  
SOLICITORS: 
Rockliffs (Plaintiffs) 
Munro Lawyers (Defendants)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Leave to amend  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CASES CITED:  
DECISION: 
Leave granted.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
Einstein J  
Tuesday 15 May 2007  /06 Anthony Magafas & Anor versus Peter Carantinos & Others  
JUDGMENT - Reasons for leave to amend  
Application for leave to amend paragraph 9 (ii) of Amended Summons dated 28 November 2006  The application to amend was the subject of a decision notified to the parties with the reasons to follow at an appropriate time. The reasons are as now set out.  It is clear that when the statement of claim was filed on 22 June 2006 it claimed [paragraph 9] that to the extent that Mrs Carantinos obtained a legal interest as a result of the purchase of 43 Riverside Crescent with Mr
Carantinos, she was a volunteer in respect of that purchase and /or she took that interest with notice of the beneficial interest of the Pac Com partnership or joint-venture.  Somewhere along the line as between that original statement of claim and the propounding of the amended statement of claim, the reference to Mrs Carantinos taking an interest with notice of the beneficial interest of the Pac Com partnership or joint venture is now said to have been inadvertently altered to become that she took the interest with notice of the beneficial interest of
Pac Com only.  In this regard it is appropriate to refer to the definitions to be found in paragraph 1 of the initial statement of claim in relation to what was defined to be the partnership or joint-venture.  The reason advanced by senior counsel for the Magafas interests as to the reason for the late application to amend is that he had not understood that this was in issue and that the mistake was obvious when one compared the earlier and the later pleadings.  The Court determines applications for leave to amend in terms of the specifics of the occasion and the interests of justice. The arguments put forward by senior counsel for the Carantinos parties were of two dimensions:  i. the first raised issues said to make good the proposition that the contention sought to be raised within the amendment was out of Court as a matter of law: that is to say the proposition was that it was futile to pursue the amendment. One of those arguments for example contended that it was not possible for agency to be proven out of the mouth of the agent;  ii. The second concerned the Carantinos parties not having called Mrs
Carantinos in their case. Allied with this contention was the contention that
Mrs Carantinos' advanced stage of pregnancy may well make it difficult if not impossible for her to be called for some time.  In my view the arguments of the first character were insufficient in substance to warrant the Court refusing the leave to amend even at the late stage when the application came forward.  However the leave to amend was appropriate to be granted conditionally on the Carantinos parties being entitled, should they determine to elect this route, to call Mrs Carantinos as and when practicable in which regard the
Court would allow that evidence to be called when it could be called.  The decision was made in terms of the usual very great significance of prejudice or lack thereof to one or the other party depending as the application for leave to amend was granted or not granted. It was quite clear that in the circumstances, as long as the Carantinos parties would be able to call Mrs Carantinos, the principled the exercise of the discretion was to allow the amendment.  [Ultimately the defendants elected not to call Mrs Carantinos but to reopen their case to tender documents which were admitted into evidence without objection].  
LAST UPDATED: 15 May 2007 * * * 
