

Minet Australia Limited versus Gemrule Pty Ltd and Anor Matter No 4059/97 [1997] NSWSC 636 (11 December 1997) ` 
Minet Australia Limited versus Gemrule Pty Limited & Anor` /97 December 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - MINET AUSTRALIA LIMITED versus GEMRULE PTY LIMITED AND ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between the plaintiff, to which I will refer as Minet, and the first defendant, to which I will refer as Gemrule, over their involvement in the second defendant, to which I will refer as MAIB, which is a joint venture company in which Minet holds 49.5 per cent and Gemrule 50.5 per cent. 
Minet, Gemrule and others entered into an agreement on 2 August 1989 which can be called the original shareholders' agreement, which set out the rights, duties and obligations which would subsist between them as part of the joint venture. On 14 September 1994 those parties entered into a supplemental deed which varied the original deed and whose principal practical effect was to extend the joint venture up to the year 2000 unless certain events occurred.
With one exception, the provisions of the supplemental agreement do not bear on the present dispute.

Clause 2.1 of the original shareholders' agreement provided that the joint venture should continue for five and a half years from its commencement date or until "terminated pursuant to clause 20 hereof". The supplemental deed extended the term to eleven and a half years from the commencement date, but otherwise left in place cl 2.1.

Clause 20 is headed "Termination - Events of Default".

Various events are stipulated in cl 20, some of which would be breaches of promissory provisions of the original shareholders' agreement but some would not.

Clause 20.1.2(d) provided that one of those events should be if either Minet or Gemrule gets into the situation where a third party, who is a substantial competitor of MAIB, becomes entitled to hold actual or functional control of it. It is clear on the pleadings that in respect of Minet, this event occurred on about 17 May 1997. The event was not a matter which caused a breach of the contract.

This event triggered cl 20.5, which is as follows: "Subject to the provisions of clauses 20.2, 20.3 and 20.4, upon the occurrence of an Event of Default the non defaulting shareholder may terminate this
Agreement by written notice ("the Notice") to the defaulting shareholder. The shareholder serving the Notice ("the Non-Defaulting Party") shall be entitled, immediately upon the expiry of the Rectification Period if relevant, or otherwise within 2 days of service of the Notice, to serve an additional notice ("the Second Notice") requiring the other shareholder ("the Defaulting
Party") to sell its Shares to the Non-Defaulting Party at thirty five per centum (35%) of the Fair Market Value of the Company ("the Default Price") calculated in accordance with clause 22. Unless exercised, such right will expire after a period of thirty (30) days from the date it arose, and upon expiry the default shall be deemed to be waived by the Non-Defaulting Party." 
Gemrule served a document entitled "Notice of Default Under Clause 20.5
Shareholders' Agreement" on 19 May 1997, purported to withdraw it on 27 May and served a replacement notice on 28 May 1997. It just does not matter for present purposes which notice was operative. On 3 June Gemrule served on
Minet a document entitled "Second Notice Under Clause 20.5 Shareholders'
Agreement".

After the Second Notice, the mechanical provisions of the original shareholders' agreement were put into operation. Under cl 22 of the agreement, if the parties are unable to agree on a Fair Market Value of the Company within twenty-eight days of the Second Notice then there is to be an independent valuation from each of three chartered accountants. This process was put in place. The assessment of Fair Market Value of MAIB was made on about 27 August and over objection of Minet, Gemrule became registered in respect of a purported transfer of Minet's shares in MAIB on 10 September .

In these proceedings Minet claims declarations that the Second Notice was invalid, that the transfer of shares pursuant to the provisions of the original shareholders' agreement was not effective, an order that the register of members of MAIB be rectified and a declaration that Minet is deemed not to have covenanted in accordance with cl 20.8 of the shareholders' agreement. I will not set this out because it really does not assist in focusing on the real point in the case.

There is a cross-claim filed by the first defendant, but the trial of the cross-claim has been postponed until after the decision in the claim so that these reasons only deal with the plaintiff's claim. The matter has been able to be heard in half a day because there is virtually no factual dispute and both Mr Justin Gleeson and Mr Diethelm for the plaintiff Minet, and Mr Ryan for the first defendant Gemrule, were extremely helpful in furnishing fully reasoned outlines of submissions, as well as obviously being on top of the material in their concise and pertinent addresses.

The first question is the construction of cl 20.5. The first sentence permits the non-defaulting shareholder to terminate the agreement upon the occurrence of an event of default. The word "terminate" is one which is used throughout the document but it would seem to me clear that it does not mean that the whole agreement is terminated. It, at least, means that there is, as Mr Ryan puts it, a yellow card given by the non-defaulting shareholder to the other shareholder and, at the highest, means, as Mr Gleeson puts it, that there is a termination of the primary obligations and rights of the parties under the agreement and the triggering of secondary rights (see as to this distinction
Shevill versus Builders Licensing Board (1980) 2 BPR 9662 at 9671 per Mahoney
JA).

It seems to me as a matter of construction that Mr Gleeson's submission is correct. The word "terminate" in respect to a contract would normally be understood as putting an end to the contract. However, here, the word means to "terminate primary obligations" in the strict legal sense. The dominating idea behind cl 20.5 when read in conjunction with clause 2.1 is that the whole thrust of the contract, other than matters concerning winding up, is over between the parties. It is not quite a case of some conditional bringing to an end of those primary obligations. Mr Ryan points to 20.1.1, which indicates that there is a rectification period of thirty days after receipt of a written demand from a shareholder requiring the recipient to remedy the breach, but I do not really see how this impacts upon the wording of the first sentence of .5. Of course, in the instant case there was no breach, merely an event entitling a party to terminate the contract (see Shevill's case in the
High Court <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 620).] 
One then gets to the second sentence, which deals with what is called "the
Second Notice". There was no rectification period in the instant case so one goes straight to the words "or otherwise within 2 days of service of the
Notice". What does that mean? The literal meaning of "within" is a period beyond which it is impossible or impermissible for the act to take place, that is, it defines the outer limit of a period in which an act can take place. As
O'Bryan J, said in Reynolds versus Reynolds <case>; [[1941] VLR 249], 252, the word is "used to delimit a period `inside which' certain events may happen." See also P & M Productions Pty Ltd versus Elders
Leasing Ltd [[1992] 1 Qd R 264], 278.

In the present case, the Second Notice was not given before the expiration of two days from the First Notice.

The next matter to consider is whether the intention of the parties was that the two days were an exclusive period of time or whether the clause should be construed as meaning within two days of service of the notice or within a reasonable period after such two days.

I have posed that question slightly differently from the way in which it was dealt with in argument because I do not wish to become over-confused with what was referred to in argument as "the equitable rule". I will unpack that expression later.

Mr Ryan says that when one looks at the third sentence, with reference to a right expiring after a period of thirty days, one can see that the two day period can be expanded for up to thirty days before the right is to expire.
Accordingly, so long as the Second Notice is given within thirty days of 17
May, the various steps contemplated under the agreement can be fulfilled and on all the evidence a period of thirty days was not exceeded.

Thus one must go to see what this third sentence really means. It uses the words "such right". The right could be one of two rights, neither of which is described in cl 20.5 as a "right", namely the right to terminate or the right to acquire. Normally when one sees the word "such", one looks back to the last antecedent and, in this case, the last antecedent is the right to acquire. One then sees that the right referred to in the third sentence is a right which will expire after thirty days from the date it arose. When did the right arise if it is a right to acquire? Presumably at the time when the First Notice was given. So far that makes sense. However, there is then the subclause which says that upon expiry (of the right to acquire, if this construction is correct), the default is to be deemed to be waived. That would be a most extraordinary consequence. It would mean that, although the primary obligations under the contract have been determined by the First Notice, yet, because there has not been an acquisition through a Second Notice, the termination is to stand, but the default on which it is based is waived.

There is another way of construing it. That is that upon the expiry of the thirty day period, not only is the right to acquire lost but also the termination is nullified so that one goes back to taws. I think this construction was disowned by Mr Ryan. In any event, it is inconsistent with the finding that on the true construction of the first sentence there is an actual termination of the primary rights rather than a caution or a yellow card or conditional termination.

Accordingly, as the right in the third sentence cannot mean the right of acquisition, the other alternative, that it means the right to terminate, must be put forward as a real possibility, notwithstanding it is not the last antecedent to which "such" may affix. If one looks at it that way, one can see very little that gets in the way of a sensible construction.

On this construction, the third sentence makes commercial sense. Some of the defaults which are matters that can be availed of to put an end to the contract are technical defaults. Some, which may at first blush appear to be serious, might in practice be of no commercial significance. It may well be of importance to the parties that if an event occurs then either that event is used as a trigger to give a notice of termination within thirty days or not at all.

The next submission concerning "within two days" is that the word "within" means "after", so that it provides a cooling-off period. It is very seldom that the word "within" has the meaning of "after", which is not its ordinary meaning. The submission about a cooling-off period really dovetails with the submission about the yellow card which I have already rejected and, in any event, it seems to me that when one sees the word "within" in cl 20.1.1 where it obviously has its ordinary meaning, it is very difficult to say that it means something else in a succeeding subclause of cl 20.

The next question is whether the "within 2 days" is an expression which makes time of the essence. The construction of time clauses essentially involves working out what the parties may have intended. However, both in equity and at law, because of <case> of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) , one approaches this problem using various guidelines. One of these guidelines is that there is a presumption of non-essentiality, with the onus of proof being on a party who sets up essentiality, but one of the factors which swing the presumption the other way is where the contract is a commercial or mercantile contract.

There is, I think, little doubt about that proposition as a general statement of principle and it can be found in many of the authorities (see Hortico
Pty Limited versus Energy Equipment Co (Australia) Pty Limited [(1985) 1 NSWLR 545], 555 and Lindgren, Time in the Performance of Contracts nd ed (Butterworths, Sydney, 1982) [216]).

Although initially what was a "mercantile contract" appears to have been confined to contracts to buy and sell goods, the scope of that expression has expanded over time. Ordinarily, it now comprehends buying and selling of property whether that property is goods or not and also to contracts outside of sales, such as insurance. The cases are digested by Rath J in Lindsay v
Mahoney (1979) 1 BPR 9584, a decision which was affirmed by both the Court of Appeal and the High Court, though the present point was not examined in the appellate courts (see also the Hortico case to which I have earlier referred).

If any classification is to be made of the instant contract, it is a commercial contract and comes within the category of a mercantile contract. In such agreements ordinarily the Court assumes that parties have put in time limitations for a particular purpose and accordingly that that represents their intention. Accordingly, in my view, the two day period set out in cl .5 makes time an essential element.

It follows that unless some equitable rule applies giving relief, that there has not been an exercise of the right to acquire within the essential period and accordingly the plaintiff would be entitled to succeed.

One then moves to the second issue and that is whether any equitable rules as to time apply to cl 20.5. The phrase "any equitable rules as to time" is taken from Mr Ryan's submissions and I think that that is a good way of putting it.
This is because there are various possible equitable rules which can be invoked in appropriate cases.

I have already referred to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s13.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/). That section says that: "Stipulations in contracts, as to time or otherwise, which would not before the commencement of this Act have been deemed to be or to have become of the essence of such contracts in a court of equity, shall receive in all courts the same construction and effect as they would have heretofore received in such court." 
As is pointed out in Lindgren op cit at [223], one can only construe this as applying to promissory conditions because "although such a contingent condition is a `stipulation in a contract as to time', it is not one which would not have been deemed prior to the Act of the essence in a Court of
Equity". The equitable rule in its true sense is put in different ways by the authorities. Some such as Cotton LJ in Reuter, Hufelend & Co versus Sala & Co [(1879) 4 CPD 239] at 245 seem to address the matter as a problem of construction. However, most of the authorities say that construction of such stipulations was an identical process in both systems of jurisprudence but that different results came about because of equity's power to relieve. See particularly, Lennon versus Napper [(1802) 3 Sch & Lef 682] at 683-4, a decision of Lord Redesdale in Ireland which was adopted in the
English Court of Appeal in Chancery in Roberts versus Berry <case>; [(1853) 3 De GM & G 284]; [43 ER 112] and Lindgren at [215].

Viscount Haldane, when giving the decision of the Privy Council in Steedman v Drinkle [[1916] 1 AC 275], 279, put the matter very broadly, saying that in cases of specific performance, courts may make such a decree "in cases where justice requires it, even though literal terms of stipulations as to time have not been observed". An illustration is Gedye versus Montrose <case>; [(1858) 26 Beav 45]; [53 ER 813], where time was of the essence, with a lease to commence on 1
December. Specific performance with compensation was granted to the tenant even though the tenant could not take possession until the following 31
January, through the landlord's default.

Viscount Haldane then went on to say that Courts of Equity "never exercise this jurisdiction where the parties have expressly intimated in their agreement that it is not to apply by providing that time is to be of the essence of their bargain". That, with great respect, is too strict as was pointed out by Godfrey JA in his dissenting judgment in Union Eagle Limited v Golden Achievement Limited <case>; [[1996] 1 HKC 349.] The word "never" must be read as "hardly ever" because there are some instances where equity has in fact made such an order. One is Lee
Kenny versus Wong Kwok Yan <case>; [[1994] 2 HKC 309] and there are other cases where an option cannot be exercised in time because of some conduct on the part of the offeror and equity may well give relief (cf Bragg versus Alan [[1981] 1 NSWLR 668).] Again, where the non-compliance with the time limit is caused by accident outside the control of the person concerned and the other party does not suffer any quantifiable detriment, equity may relieve, see Kopper versus Dyer (1887) 59
Vermont 477; 59 American Reports 742 where the cases at that date are analysed. These last two examples really are just an illustration of equity's power to relieve against fraud or against accident.

The Union Eagle case went on to the Privy Council, reported as Union
Eagle Limited versus Golden Achievement Limited <case>; [[1997] AC .] The
Privy Council affirmed the Court of Appeal of Hong Kong and held that a contract for sale of a flat should be classed as a commercial contract of which time was of the essence. Thus a ten minute delay was too great for equity to give relief.

Mr Ryan agrees that if cl 20.5 is properly categorised as a true option then the equitable rule would not be applicable and he agrees with Mr Gleeson's proposition that this follows from the decision of United Dominions Trust
Limited versus Eagle Aircraft Services Limited [[1968] 1 WLR ] at
That may be slightly overstated in that the authorities I have referred to, and some of the 19th century textbooks, are not as definite as saying "would not", but use the expression "would hardly ever". Be that as it may, for present purposes one can assume that it is common ground that it is only in rare situations that equity will relieve against a person not complying with an essential time limit as to when to exercise an option.

One of the reasons for taking this view is that until the option has been exercised, the parties do not begin to be under the umbrella of the contractual regime, the contractual regime being virtually a private set of laws which they have set up by consent to cover their relationship.
Accordingly, where the parties are outside the contractual regime, one is rather reluctant to say that the Court can excuse non-performance of an essential time. A point to that effect is made by Westbury LC in Weston v
Collins [(1865) 12 LT (NS) 4] at 5. However, the point is, to a great degree, weakened by the fact that the principle that equity hardly ever relieves with respect to time re options applies, on the cases, where the option is in an existing lease. In such a situation, the parties are already under the umbrella of a contractual regime.

Both parties referred me to the decision of the English Court of Appeal in
Hare versus Nicoll [[1966] 2 QB 130.] Mr Gleeson said that that case was fairly close to the facts in the instant case. It classified the present sort of arrangement as a privilege and where a privilege is given in a commercial agreement, it is for the party on whom the privilege is conferred to comply strictly with the conditions stipulated with respect to its exercise.

Mr Ryan sought to distinguish it on the basis that that contract involved shares of a speculative nature and the rationale did not apply since the rights of Minet are protected by the valuation procedure.

Both counsel also referred me to the decision of Tadgell J in CRA Limited v
NZ Goldfields Investments <case>; [[1989] VR 873] where his Honour construed a clause in a joint venture agreement relating to a gold mining project in a way that most conveniently suited an ongoing joint venture agreement rather than dealing with the matter as some sort of contractual penalty. This led Mr Ryan to submit that the Court does not decide this sort of case on the basis of attaching labels such as "option", "conditional contract" or "right of termination" to contractual provisions and cited Beneficial Finance Corporation Limited versus Multiplex
Constructions Pty Limited [[1995] 36 NSWLR 510], 529. He urged me not to be misled by the tag "option" or even the tag "mercantile agreement".

However, the difficulty is that in order for equity to apply some rule to remove the case from the result that must follow from its construction, there has to be something which justifies the Court in so doing. Traditionally that something has been said to be an equity, which may be a matter of fraud, a matter of unconscionability or a matter of accident. In the instant case I cannot really see anything other than perhaps a faulty construction of the agreement or some unexplained delay which has brought about the problem for
Gemrule.

Mr Gleeson says it is worse than that because actually the contract involves a penalty. His client, he says, holds roughly 50 per cent of the shares and so could expect to receive 50 per cent of the value of the company. Clause 20.5, if it operates, means that he will only receive 35 per cent of the Fair Market
Value of the Company, a loss of some 30 per cent.

Whilst this appears to be a penalty, I am not too sure whether it is because, as Mr Ryan points out, at the time when the parties entered into the agreement, they did not know which of them would be selling at a discount of per cent. It was the same for both of them and it may be that the difference between 35 per cent and 50 per cent could be commercially explained one way or the other. I do not have to get into this area because it is sufficient to say that no relevant reason has been shown as to why this Court should make an order negativing what follows from the construction of the contract.

It follows that I should make orders 1, 2, 3 and 4 in the statement of claim.
It may be necessary to flesh those out a little to make them make sense when they are divorced from the averments in the statement of claim, but that can be done by short minutes being brought in if need be. The first defendant should pay the costs of the hearing of the claim.

It follows that the cross-claim should be dismissed, so that I make orders 1 to 4 in the statement of claim, dismiss the cross-claim, order the first defendant to pay the costs of the proceedings and give liberty to apply.

The exhibits should be retained.
 * * * 
