

Regina versus Egerton Matter No Cca 60689/96 [1997] NSWSC 299 (8 August 1997) 
Regina versus William John King Egerton /96 August 1997 
Smart, McInerney, Abadee JJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60689/96 
DELIVERED: Friday, 8 August 1997 
HEARING DATE: Friday, 8 August 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus William John King EGERTON 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART, McINERNEY, ABADEE JJ 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P J O'Donell 
Respondent: G E Smith 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: McDonnell Schroder 
Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: 
DIRECTOR TREATING COMPANY PROPERTY AS HIS OWN - S 173 
CRIMES ACT 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO. OF PAGES: 17 
REGINA versus William John EGERTON 
HEADNOTE 
A director used company property as his own by banking company moneys in his own personal accounts and causing it to be remitted to his personal accounts overseas contrary to <case>, Crimes Act 1980 .

As to the element of the offence, that these activities had to be carried out fraudulently, the judge told the jury that the Crown had to prove that the accused had acted dishonestly according to the current standards of ordinary, decent people. The judge followed R v. Glenister [2 NSWLR 597.] Further, he confirmed that the jury could only find the accused's actions were dishonest if the jury decided beyond reasonable doubt that the accused knew that they were dishonest.

The evidence of dishonesty was overwhelming.

HELD: 1. The directions given were adequate. 
The sentences were lenient, not excessive.

ORDERS 
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence.
Appeal against sentence dismissed.

REGINA versus William John EGERTON 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: William John King Egerton appeals against his conviction on five counts of, while being a director of a body corporate, applying for a purpose other than a purpose of the body corporate, property of the body corporate (s 173 of the Crimes Act). Two counts relate to misapplying cheques and three counts to misapplying cash. The total misapplied was of the order of $3 million. 
In 1991 the appellant was a director of Imperial Bottle Shops Pty Ltd which operated a bottle shop at Coffs Harbour and one at Lismore and a director of
Pambook Pty Ltd which operated a bottle shop at Tweed Heads. The other director of Imperial was Egerton's wife and the other director of Pambook was
David Daley.

Moneys were transferred from one company to another and thence into the appellant's personal accounts or from a company into a personal account. Cash belonging to the two companies and collected from the three bottle shops was deposited into his personal accounts at different banks. Ultimately, he transferred $448,645 to his personal account at Westpac in Vanuatu and $2,636,174 to his personal account at the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank. The losses sustained by unsecured creditors amounted to over $1 million. While there was debate at the hearing as to the cause of the losses, it being suggested by the appellant that the Commonwealth Bank and the brewery had acted precipitately, there appears to be little doubt that the appellant's seeming withdrawal from the companies, his departure for Hong Kong and the transfer of the moneys to Hong
Kong precipitated events including the intervention of the creditors and the appointment of a receiver who recovered large amounts. Until the actions of the appellant, the companies had been progressing satisfactorily.

The appellant was sentenced on each count to concurrent sentences comprising a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months. The appellant has applied for leave to appeal against the sentences on the ground that they were too severe.

The case has a number of sad and unusual features. Egerton had worked hard and effectively during his life, building up the businesses of two companies and other companies and then destroyed them during November/December 1991 by not ordering and paying for stock, applying funds of the companies to his own purposes and appearing to have walked out. In 1990 his marriage ran into trouble. Marriage difficulties continued in 1991 with proceedings in the
Family Law Court. He and his wife had separated. Some of that Court's orders made Egerton very angry.

For many years the appellant had run the businesses and supervised the staff with neither his wife nor Daley taking any active part in the conduct of the daily activities of the companies. In the latter part of 1991 Mrs Egerton sought to play a more active role in Imperial and in early November she and the appellant had a meeting with the manager of the Commonwealth Bank at Coffs
Harbour. It was agreed that she should be involved in the running of the shop at Coffs Harbour and that the appellant would be responsible for the running of the shops at
Lismore and Tweed Heads. The appellant contended that no agreement was reached at the meeting.

Mr and Mrs Egerton subsequently had a meeting with the company accountant, Mr
Pigani, in the latter half of November 1991. There it was agreed that Mrs
Egerton would take over the operation of the shop at Coffs Harbour.

It was further agreed that there should be a sale of the family home on the
Gold Coast. Mr Pigani was also to sign the company's cheques. This was to enable him to watch over the company's assets. The appellant contended that the purpose of the meeting was to try and resolve the Family Law proceedings between himself and his wife. Various matters were discussed and Mr Pigani was going to put something in writing for them to consider.

The appellant claimed that he was upset at the proposal that Pigani would sign company cheques as the appellant had always run the companies himself. The appellant asserted that no agreement was reached at the meeting with Pigani.

The Crown contended that the appellant had given the appearance of agreement and expressed agreement but had strung his wife and Pigani along so as to carry out the transfers of assets, the details of which are now set out.

The businesses were conducted in a fairly normal fashion until about October and operated effectively. Although there were substantial debts, the sales were high with a good cash flow. In October 1991 the appellant instructed the staff not to purchase any stock in November and that payments for stock were not to be made during December. Stock obtained in November had to be paid for in
December.

On 25 November 1991 the appellant drew a cheque on the Pambook account for $100,000 payable to the State Bank. In response to a question from Mr Skenner, the accounts clerk, the appellant stated that the money was going into a bank account to obtain better interest. Between 25 November and 6 December 1991 seven cheques totalling $750,000 were drawn by Egerton on Pambook and paid into an account in the appellant's name with the State Bank at Tweed Heads, such account having been opened by him on 25 November 1991. Six of the cheques were made payable to cash.

Further, between 9 and 20 December 1991, cheques totalling $580,000 drawn on
Pambook by Egerton and made payable either to ANZ or cash were paid into an account in the appellant's name at the ANZ Bank, Coolangatta.

Thus, between 25 November and 20 December 1991, $1,330,000 ($750,000 and $580,000) was transferred from Pambook into two accounts, each of which was in the appellant's name. These payments and transfers were the subject of the first count.

Between 29 November and 27 December 1991 cheques totalling $700,000 were drawn on the account of Imperial by the appellant and paid by him into the account of Pambook .

These were the subject of the second count and part of the moneys paid out by
Pambook into a personal account of the appellant.

In December 1991 the appellant instructed Ms Eckle, the manager of the Tweed
Heads liquor outlet of Pambook, to cease banking any cash received and to retain such cash and give it to him. Only cheques were to be banked. The appellant said that he was going to get a better rate of interest for the cash.

Between 12 and 28 December 1991 she gave the appellant the cash so retained being $1,024,099. These moneys were not banked in Pambook's account but deposited in the appellant's accounts at ANZ Coolangatta and Westpac, Bundall.
These matters were the subject of the third count.

In December 1991, the appellant instructed Mr D McCudden, the manager of the
Coffs Harbour outlet, to cease banking any cash received and to hold it for collection by himself or by a security officer acting for the appellant.

On 16 December 1991, $354,996 in cash was handed by McCudden to the security officer. McCudden had been told that there would be specials on some liquor lines. The specials which eventuated were very favourable. The proceeds of the specials helped to augment the cash available. The sum of $354,996 was deposited into a personal account of the appellant and not into the bank account of Imperial.
These matters were the subject of the fourth count.

During November 1991, Mr S Ferguson, the manager of the Lismore liquor outlet was directed by the appellant to instigate a substantial advertising campaign for specials. As a result a substantial amount of liquor was sold by this outlet producing a large cash flow.

Mr Ferguson was told by the appellant to bank the cheques but to withhold the cash for his collection. Between 16 and 28 December 1991 a total of $350,430 in cash was handed to the appellant or a security officer on his behalf. Part at least of that money was deposited into the personal account of the appellant. These matters are the subject of the fifth count.

On 19 December 1991 the appellant, in a telephone discussion with officers of
Westpac, Bundall, indicated that he wished to send money to Hong Kong and
Vanuatu. He had an account in Hong Kong but not in Vanuatu.

On 23 December 1991 the appellant requested and received a bank cheque for moneys paid into his personal account with the ANZ Bank, Coolangatta, namely, $998,645. On the same day the appellant requested and received a bank cheque for $753,039.04 from the State Bank, Tweed Heads, being moneys in his personal account. Later that day he attended at Westpac, Bundall, and deposited these cheques and about $448,665 in cash and procured Westpac to remit the cash that day by telegraphic transfer to his account at Westpac Vanuatu. After the cheques were cleared, the proceeds of $1,751,664 were remitted to his account with the
Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank, Hong Kong, on 24 December 1991.

On 24 December 1991 the appellant requested and received a bank cheque for $280,000 from the ANZ Bank, Coolangatta, being moneys in his personal account.
Later that day he attended at Westpac, Bundall, with that cheque and $215,265 in cash. The cash was sent that day to the credit of the appellant's account with the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank and the proceeds of the cheque after clearance were remitted to the same account on 27 December 1991.

On 27 December 1991 the appellant again attended at Westpac, Bundall, and caused cash and cheques to be remitted to his account in Hong Kong.

About 29 December 1991 about $108,230 in cash was deposited in the night safe of Westpac, Bundall and remitted to the appellant's account in Hong Kong on 30
December 1991.

As at 28 December 1991, the appellant had not told any of the managers of the bottle shops of his impending departure for Hong Kong nor that the business would not continue to operate as usual. When Ms Eckle went to his Tweeds
Head's office on 29 December 1991 she found that it had been stripped of his personal belongings and that a substantial sum of cash had gone. In his office at Grafton there was a letter of resignation as a director of the companies.
The appellant left for Hong Kong by plane that day.

The Commonwealth Bank appointed Mr M Brown, a partner of Coopers &
Lybrand, to investigate and advise. He advised that the companies were insolvent. A considerable amount of money was owed to the breweries and licensing fees were due to be paid in January. If these fees were not paid the businesses could not continue to operate. Mr Brown thought that there was no money to pay the breweries or the licensing fees.

The appellant returned from Hong Kong on 5 January 1992 and saw a newspaper article as to his three shops. He claimed that this was when he first became aware that there were problems with the companies.

The appellant claimed that after speaking to a solicitor and a barrister he had decided to go to Hong Kong and obtain the money which he had deposited in the bank there as he thought that he would then be in a position to negotiate with the receiver.

About 6am on 6 January 1992 the appellant booked an airline ticket for Hong
Kong, with an open return in the name of Thompson. The appellant said that he used the name Thompson because "I was just in a panic and it was the first thing that came to my head." The ticket was collected at 9am at which time the name of the passenger was changed to that of the appellant with the explanation that Thompson was a business associate whom the appellant had replaced. The appellant was detained by the Federal Police at Brisbane Airport later that day.

The appellant spent about one and a half days giving evidence with roughly half that time being spent in examination in chief and half in cross- examination. In parts of his cross-examination he was evasive and tried to avoid or gloss over what he had done. The appellant asserted: his relationship with the Commonwealth Bank had become strained in 1991 and he was deciding to leave that bank. He feared that it would not adequately allow him to operate the overdraft which was crucial to the business. The bank manager had told him that he would not pay cheques in excess of the overdraft limit. The roll-over commercial loan could go on indefinitely; 
He had used other banks in the past because their interest rates were better and he had again intended to use other banks to obtain better rates of interest. He could not recall if he had previously placed company money in accounts in his own name.

By late 1991 he had a close and convivial relationship with the breweries.
On a couple of occasions when he could not pay the breweries on a due date he and the breweries had resolved the problem by a suitable arrangement. The companies were the breweries biggest customer in country New South Wales and he was able to negotiate exceptional prices on certain products from time to time, if the brewery wished to promote a particular product. The breweries offered exceptional deals leading up to Christmas 1991 allowing him to offer low prices; 
The companies always kept full and accurate records of the cash received and included in the companies' accounts. The cash was not secreted away.

He confirmed that he had changed the banking arrangements and had given the staff the instructions mentioned as to the cash; 
He had moved funds as outlined in the Crown case. His actions were not dishonest. He always believed that he could deal with the company funds as he chose. He was responsible for running the companies, his wife and Daley having minimal involvement. It did not matter if he placed company money in his own name because "I was the company, the company was me, I was acting in the interests of the company"; 
He moved the funds because of the attitude of the Commonwealth Bank and because its interest rates were not as good as the other banks. A better interest rate was obtainable and the funds could be made available to pay any bills immediately; 
He deposited the money into accounts in his own name because it was the easiest way to invest the funds as he only needed his driver's licence and passport. To open a company account required a lot more documentation; 
He did not mention his trip to Hong Kong to his employees as he was only going to be away for a few days and it was none of their business. He removed his belongings from the Tweed Heads office to protect them from his wife who had previously smashed his belongings. He signed his resignation as a director on impulse; 
He did not intend to pay the brewery account at the end of December 1991 because the brewery owed him promotional moneys. Money was available to pay the licence fees in mid-January 1992 as they fell due; 
He put a viable proposal to the receiver on 3 February 1992 to keep the companies afloat, but the receiver was not interested.

On the proven facts the appellant was in a difficult position. The explanations for his precipitate conduct lacked conviction. The transfers of extensive assets into his own name, remitting them abroad, his resignation, his own departure and the context of the Family Law contests are eloquent and point to a speedy and skilful stripping of the assets of the companies and the building up of his own assets overseas.

The principal contest at the trial was whether the Crown had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had acted fraudulently.

The ground of appeal against conviction was that the trial judge erred in his direction to the jury on the issue of fraudulent intent.

The Judge explained to the jury that the essential ingredients of each charge were (1) an application of company property by a director of that company, (2) for any use or purpose other than the use or purpose of that company and (3) those activities being carried out fraudulently. The Judge expanded on each element. As to the ingredient that the appellant acted fraudulently, the Judge said (at page 15 of the summing-up): "The third essential ingredient the Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt is that the accused person acted fraudulently. Now, I give you this direction with respect to the meaning of the word 'fraudulently', bearing in mind, every time I use the word 'direction' I am informing you of what the law is and you must accept it. It is a simple enough direction, but it is very, very important.

The word 'fraudulently' used in the indictment is equivalent to the word 'dishonestly'. The word 'fraud' is equivalent to the word 'dishonest'. You are instructed that the Crown must prove that the accused acted dishonestly.

In considering this matter you apply the current standards of ordinary, decent people." 
The appellant contended that this direction was inadequate and erroneous in that it did not direct the jury's attention to the need for the Crown to prove the actual intent of the appellant but substituted an objective test. In his oral submissions counsel focused upon the last sentence quoted as indicating an objective test. That last sentence relates to the meaning of the word "fraudulently". In R versus Glenister [(1980) 2 NSWLR 597], the Court said: 
At 601G: "The third ingredient represents the mens rea and is wholly subjective." 
At 603B: "The third ingredient of the offence, viz the mens rea, constituted by the term fraudulently ..." 
At 604C: "... the course of judicial decision ... has assigned to the term 'fraudulently' a meaning interchangeable with `dishonestly'." 
At 605D-E: "... the element of mens rea constituted by the presence of the term 'fraudulently' in <case> was accurately described by Lee J in a recent judgment of Re Hyams and Public Accountants [Registration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ra164/) in the following terms: `The offence contained in <case> is one of a multitude of offences in which the doing of a particular act is charged as having been done `fraudulently'. Offences of this kind are found, not only in the Crimes Act, but in many other Acts. In such cases, the word `fraudulently' is intended to apply to the accused's state of mind, and has a meaning usually equivalent to `dishonestly' in relation to the particular thing done by the accused so far as it affects or may affect the person who is the `victim' of the `fraud'.' " 
At 607F-G: "We conclude that the mental element described as fraudulent in a charge under s 173 is equivalent to dishonesty. It will be sufficient if the trial judge instructs the jury that the Crown must prove that the accused acted dishonestly. It is unnecessary for him to go further and define dishonesty. It is enough if he informs the jury that, in deciding whether an application was or was not dishonest, they should apply the current standards of ordinary decent people: R versus Feely." 
The Judge's directions were taken from the joint judgment of this Court in
Glenister. To tell the jury that the Crown must prove that the accused acted dishonestly according to the current standards of ordinary decent people sufficiently stated the law.

The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary gives these meanings of dishonest. "4.
Of actions et cetera, not straightforward or honourable, underhand, now fraudulent, knavish. 5. Of persons, wanting in honesty, disposed to cheat or defraud, thievish." The word "dishonestly", when used in relation to a person and his actions, connotes a person who is intentionally acting in a reprehensible way often to secure benefits for himself at the expense of others.

The Judge did not stop here. After telling the jury that in considering this element they could look at the case overall, outlined the actions of the accused on which the Crown relied to prove that he had acted dishonestly. The
Judge also outlined the Crown's submissions. The Judge continued: "You have to consider whether the accused acted dishonestly during the periods alleged in each count in the indictment. To do this you can look at all the evidence of his conduct." 
The Judge summarised the appellant's case referring, amongst other things, to the emphasis placed on his asserted belief that he had the power to do what he did and, therefore, did not act dishonestly. A little later, the Judge said: "It was emphasised to you by Mr James, as is the case, if, on all the evidence, you find the accused's actions were dishonest, you can only do so if you decide beyond reasonable doubt that the accused knew they were dishonest." 
This last-mentioned direction underlines that the Crown must prove that the accused knew that his actions were dishonest.

The Judge summarised the matters on which the accused relied in support of his contention that the Crown had not proved that the accused knew that his actions were dishonest. The accused alleged that at all times he believed that he had the power to do what he did and that, even if his actions were irregular, they were honest mistakes.

At the conclusion of his Summing-Up the Crown asked the Judge to direct the jury that the primary duty of a company director is to protect the interests of the company and the interests of the creditors. The accused asked the Judge to direct the jury that even though that may be the duty, they "must consider that it is what the accused believed it to be". Those requests were made in the presence of the jury and the Judge gave directions immediately thereafter and these appear at pages 33 and 34 of the Summing-Up as follows: "The point of difference between the two counsel in the case is that Mr James has been contending to you that Mr Egerton had an honest belief that because the Memorandum and Articles say, as what was read to you by Mr James in his closing address and you have had identified before you, that he was empowered to do these things and that gave him an honest belief that he was doing nothing wrong.

He puts two things to you about that: One, the man had an honest belief and, two, alternatively, even if you are not sure about that, you would have a reasonable doubt that the Crown has proved dishonesty in the cases. But be quite clear about it, the fact that there are powers of the company to bank money or send money overseas or to establish accounts is what you might expect to be the regular powers that directors of companies are empowered with. The issue this case is about is the duties of the director to the company, the company being also referred to as the assets and creditors of the companies, and the key word being 'protection'. I say again, that is what this case is concerned about, but it is concerned about it from the point of view of honesty and dishonesty." 
No further direction was sought. From the whole of the Summing-Up the jury would have understood, and correctly so, that the Crown had to prove that the appellant had acted, and knew that he had acted, dishonestly.

The Judge went to some length to put the appellant's case fully to the jury and presented the issues to the jury in a helpful way. The Crown case was overwhelming and the evidence admitted of only one result.

I would reject this ground of appeal. The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

As to the appeal against sentence, the appellant does not contend that there was any error in either the findings of fact or the application of principle.

The appellant submitted as to the objective matters that the criminal enterprise was of short duration, lasting only about five weeks, that it was quite unsophisticated in that a clear money trail was left, all transactions were conducted in the name of the appellant and, most importantly, most of the moneys removed from the jurisdiction were recovered. In the case of the moneys transferred to Hong Kong, their return was facilitated by the appellant communicating his consent to the bank.

As to the subjective matters, the appellant submitted that he was a successful businessman aged fifty-four who had left school at fourteen years of age and built a successful business empire. He was a man of good character who committed these offences at a time when he suffered a depressive illness and, as a result of his actions, he was bankrupt.

It was contended that the sentences were manifestly excessive given the objective and subjective features and that periodic detention would have been an appropriate sentence.

I accept that the appellant was very upset and depressed, especially as a result of his matrimonial difficulties and the souring of the family relationship.

The appellant must have realised that the course on which he embarked was likely to destroy the businesses and leave his family and the unsecured creditors of the company lamenting. The appellant was obviously astute and capable. The unsecured creditors suffered substantial losses. No company director is entitled to deal with the assets of the company as if they were his own nor let his personal affairs and feelings intrude upon the management and disposition of the company's assets.

It is a sad thing to see a man of previous good character with much ability who has worked hard and successfully go to gaol.

Unfortunately, the scale of the dishonesty was large. In my opinion, the Judge imposed the most lenient sentence which the circumstances allowed.

Leave to appeal against sentence should be granted but the appeal dismissed.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence.
Appeal against sentence dismissed.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by the presiding judge, for the reasons he has given. 
ABADEE J: I also agree. 
SMART J: The orders will be as I have proposed. * * * 
