

Xu versus Liu and Ors Matter No 4884/97 [1998] NSWSC 703 (14 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 `HUMPHREY XU versus HELEN LIU & ORS` `4884/97` `14 December 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a notice of motion brought by the first to fifth defendants to disharge an injunction granted by Cohen J last Friday 11 December ex parte. 
The parties have been in combat in this Court and in the Federal Court for about two years. The principal parties, the plaintiff, a man, and the first defendant, a woman, were involved in both the business and an emotional relationship. The plaintiff is entitled to at least a ten percent share, it would seem, in the third, fourth or fifth defendant companies, though there is some doubt as to whether the fourth defendant company still exists.

The fifth defendant owns an office building at 43 Bridge Street, Hurstville, which it has contracted to sell to the Trust Corporation of Australia to be part of the assets of a property trust administered by Heine Australia. The purchase price is $24 million. Of that $24 million the Bank of China has a first mortgage, which will take about $14 million, and there will be left to the fifth defendant company approximately $9 million.

The plaintiff fears that on the spending habits of those who controlled the fifth defendant in the last year those moneys will be dissipated or, as Mr
Huntington of counsel for the plaintiff puts it, there is at least a possibility that those moneys will be dissipated.

The plaintiff filed a motion on 12 June 1998 seeking various orders, including an order that a Mr Brown be appointed receiver and manager of the third, fourth and fifth defendant companies. That motion came on before Simos J, who made various directions, but did not actually deal with this part of the motion. It was postponed until certain other matters were attended to and those arrangements included, so it would appear, that at least three days' notice would be given before the application to appoint a receiver would be brought back before the court.

That notice was given yesterday evening. There was an application that the notice of motion should be listed on Thursday, but in view of the state of the lists this week, in view of the delay, and other factors, I do not consider it sufficiently urgent to list this week, and it can be listed before me at 9.50 am on 3 February 1999 when I will be the Duty Judge. Any affidavit on behalf of the plaintiff is to be filed and served no later than 18 January 1999.

The sale of the office building is due for settlement this afternoon. Mr
Huntington points out that there is no evidence that time is of the essence, or that any notice to complete has been served, but this, with respect, is irrelevant because if there is a contractual date for completion and whether a notice to complete is given or not the contract still has to be performed according to its tenure or else the contracting party is liable for damages.

The argument opposing the orders which Cohen J made is a two pronged argument made by Mr Forster SC and Mr Climpson, who appeared for the first to fifth defendants. The first prong was that Cohen J was not given full and complete disclosure. The second prong was, even if there had been full and complete disclosure, on the material that is before the court today no injunction should be granted.

So far as the first prong is concerned, it is true that seven particular matters were disclosed to his Honour in a document filed in court before his
Honour on 11 December 1998, headed "Matters disclosed to Duty Judge". However, there were various other matters which cause concern. One is that the way in which the evidence was placed before his Honour may very well have given the impression that there had been a deliberate failure for a period of about six months not to supply the plaintiff with any meaningful details of the parties' transactions.

When one looks at all the comings and goings before the Registrar that, with respect, is not a completely accurate description. There is also the matter that it was not disclosed to Cohen J that one of the problems that the defendants' solicitors had with complying with subpoenas was that the plaintiff had told her Honour, Branson J, that he was relatively impecunious and the defendants' solicitors were reluctant to go to great expense and ferret out documents without some security. There was also non-disclosure of the correspondence between the plaintiff's solicitor and the Commonwealth
Bank, which tended to white-ant the defendants' application to refinance.

Furthermore, this was a case which had had opposing counsel in it for some months and, indeed, in the same week that the application was made before
Cohen J there had been disputed questions arising in which counsel had been involved. I have been told that is the reason why counsel for the other side were not advised that the application would be made. With respect, I do not consider it adequate. Where counsel are involved on the other side they must be notified if any application of a serious nature is to be made, and if the application is granted and material comes from the other side, which might have been material, then usually the injunction will be discharged without further inquiry.

However, in the instant case, if Cohen J had all the material that I have, I am quite sure he would not have made the order. The material shows that the property is to be sold, but even allowing for the odd $1.5 million excess spending by the first defendant on her credit cards, there are still ample funds. There is no real evidence that there is going to be absconding from the country or that the money will leave the jurisdiction. The highest it can be put really is that there is a possibility that this might happen, but that is not enough for this sort of order. There is also the problem with the relative worthlessness of the undertaking as to damages.

Mr Huntington then puts that there is a receivership application which might be thwarted if there is not some freeze on the assets. I have taken this into account, but the whole history seems to suggest that the plaintiff is nibbling away at the periphery of the problem, rather than trying to meet it head on.

There has already been ample time, even despite the directions that were made last June, to deal with the receivership once and for all. It can now be dealt with on 3 February 1999. I consider it is more likely than not that the discharge of the injunction will not affect the result.

Accordingly, I discharge the orders made by Cohen J as from 2.35 pm today. I order that the plaintiff pay the costs of today, and as I have already said, fix the motion of 12 June 1998, so far as concerns receivership, before me on February 1999 at 9.50 am, and direct that all affidavits which the plaintiff intends to use on that application be filed and served no later than 18
January 1999.

The documents produced by the Commonwealth Bank can be returned to the
Commonwealth Bank. The other exhibits may be returned to the party producing them.
 * * * 
