

Corlis Constructions P/L versus Csr Hebel Australia Ltd [1996] NSWSC 469 (4
October 1996) 
CORLIS CONSTRUCTIONS P/L versus CSR HEBEL AUSTRALIA LIMITED /96 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BAINTON J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 11 April 1996 Corlis Constructions Pty Limited ("Corlis") commenced proceedings in the Federal Court against CSR Hebel Australia Limited ("CSR Hebel"). Corlis was then in liquidation; it was a voluntary winding up pursuant to a special resolution of its members. The Liquidator is Michael Gregory Jones. He says, in his affidavit of 26 June 1996, that he was appointed Liquidator on 28 September 1992: in his report to creditors of 8 March 1993 he asserts he was appointed "by resolution of members and creditors passed on 9 September 1992". If he was, then the winding up commenced on 9 September 1992 (Corporations Law s.492).

In the proceedings to which I have referred Corlis asserts it was the recipient of a number of representations by CSR Hebel in January and February , each made in the course of trade or commerce and that in reliance on those representations it prepared schedules of rates for work which can be sufficiently described as being for the supply and erection of acoustic barriers called the Hebel Barrier System intended to be erected by Leighton
Interlink Pty Limited under its contract for the F5 Freeway. It asserts that in reliance on those representations it prepared schedules of rates for the installation of that barrier system and that its tendered schedule of rates was accepted in March 1991. The Statement of Claim further asserts it commenced work for that installation on or about 9 March 1991, that CSR Hebel entered into a contract with Leighton Interlink Pty Limited for the supply and erection of the Hebel Barrier System on 8 April 1991 and that the CSR
Hebel/Leighton Interlink contract was also a schedule of rates contract which required the barrier system to conform to a number of requirements which I need not specify. Para 20 of the Statement of Claim asserts "In or about late , CSR Hebel requested and required the Contractor (Corlis) to execute a written agreement dated 15 April 1991 ... and in reliance upon the representation referred to in paragraphs 5 and 7 hereof the Contractor executed the Contract". It claims payment in accordance with that contract.

The Statement of Claim further claims that certain of the representations on which it asserts Corlis relied were misrepresentations, made in breach of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and that it had a contractual entitlement to an additional $1,185,635, (para 33) or $1,051,003 (para 40). It had, by the commencement of the winding up been paid a total of $804,374.95, according to the Liquidator, who asserts, in his affidavit of 26 June 1996, that Corlis is entitled to an additional $122,935.17, on the information supplied to him. I do not know how, if at all, these various figures can be reconciled.

By its Notices of Motion of 8 May 1996 CSR Hebel sought the transfer of the proceedings to the Supreme Court of New South Wales (which order was made), an order for security for its costs, and a stay until such security be furnished.
It is that application with which this judgment deals.

To do so I need to record more of what has occurred.

First, the contract between CSR Hebel and Corlis dated 15 April 1991, in which
CSR Hebel is referred to as "the Supplier" and Corlis as "the Specialist
Supplier", recites:- "A. The Supplier is considering entering into a contract with Leighton Interlink ('the Principal') in the form annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'A' (including annexures thereto) (the 'Head Contract') for the supply and installation of certain autoclaved aerated concrete building products (and associated mortars, adhesives and accessories) manufactured by the Supplier, in the quantities specified in the Head Contract (the 'Materials') and all as more specifically set out in the Head Contract.
 
B. The Supplier does not have the experience or resources necessary to carry out the requirements of the Head Contract, other than those requirements which related solely to the supply of the Materials.
 
C. The Specialist Installer has the experience and resources necessary to carry out all of the requirements of the Head Contract, other than those requirements which relate solely to the supply of the Materials.
 
D. The Specialist Installer has encouraged the Supplier to enter into the Head Contract, however having regard to the foregoing, the Supplier will not enter into the Head Contract unless the Specialist Installer first enters into this Agreement." and provides:- "2. SPECIALIST INSTALLER HAS STUDIED HEAD CONTRACT AND IS DULY QUALIFIED .1 The Specialist Installer warrants to the Supplier that the Specialist Installer has carefully examined the Head Contract and is fully aware of all of the obligations imposed on the Supplier thereunder and of the consequences of any failure, in whole or in part, by the Supplier to perform such obligations.
 .2 The Specialist Installer warrants that it is duly qualified to perform all of the obligations imposed on it hereunder and that it holds all permits, licences and other consents or authorities necessary for such performance.
 . SPECIALIST INSTALLER TO PERFORM SUPPLIER'S OBLIGATIONS .1 The Specialist Installer hereby undertakes to the Supplier to perform, in the manner required by the Head Contract, each and every obligation of the Supplier under the Head Contract, other than: any obligation which relates solely to the supply of or quality of the Materials; or any obligation which of its nature could not be satisfied by any action which could reasonably be taken by the Specialist Installer; or .2 To the extent that the Head Contract may provide for any warranty to be given by the Supplier (other than any warranty relating solely to the supply of or quality of the Materials), the Specialist Installer hereby repeats such warranty, mutatis mutandis, to the Supplier.
 .3 To the extent that the Supplier may be required to provide any notice, certificate or other intimation to the principal pursuant to the Head Contract (other than a notice, certificate or other intimation relating solely to the Materials), the Specialist Installer undertakes to provide a notice, certificate or other intimation, in the form required by the Head Contract, to the Supplier within a reasonable time prior to the time by which the Supplier must provide same to the Principal.
 .4 To the extent that the Head Contract may contain any provision which may be construed not to be an obligation on the part of the Supplier, the Specialist Installer undertakes to ensure that: no act or omission on the part of the Specialist Installer could cause the Supplier to breach such provision or otherwise hinder the Supplier in the compliance with such provision; and it takes all reasonable steps to assist the Supplier to obtain the maximum benefit, if any, from any such provision at the earliest practical time.
 .............
 . PAYMENT BY SUPPLIER .1 (a) In consideration of the foregoing, the Supplier agrees to pay to the Specialist Installer the fixed sum of $ ('the Contract Sum'). Rates as specified in Annexure A. [Sic] 
The Contract Sum shall be paid to the Specialist Installer by payments made progressively during the progress of the Works, upon it making progress claims therefor.
 ..............
 . VARIATIONS .1 (a) The Supplier may direct the Specialist Installer to vary the Works, in particular, but without limitation, by executing any additional work; increasing, decreasing or omitting any work; altering the character or quality of any material or work; or altering the level, line, position or dimension of any work; but no variation shall vitiate this Agreement.
 
Any direction for variation of the Works shall be given by the Supplier to the Specialist Installer in writing and the Specialist Installer may not make any claim in respect of any variation to the Works if such variation is not the subject of a direction in writing by the Supplier.
 
The value of any variation shall be determined before the variation is effected, unless otherwise approved in writing by the Supplier before the variation is effected." 
There was no evidence before me that any variation was directed in writing (or at all) by CSR Hebel.

Payment under the contract was to be an amount per lineal metre installed (differing for different heights of barriers) and $50 per hole for excavation of rock, those rates to be inclusive of operations which appear to me to comprehend everything that would need to be done to perform the contract.

Secondly, twenty one invoices from Corlis to CSR Hebel are in evidence. They are the unpaid invoices referred to in para 33 of the Statement of Claim. The first, dated 28 May 1992 claims $68,404 for the cost of galvanising posts to the extent that it exceeds the cost of painting them. Obviously CSR Hebel did not agree that it was obliged to pay this amount or any part of it. The remaining invoices are all twenty of them dated 9 September 1992, the day of the special resolution effecting the voluntary winding up. Twenty one days notice at least is required for an effective special resolution (Corporations
Law s.253(1)(a)). Claims made in those circumstances require close scrutiny.

Thirdly, the Liquidator, at the time of swearing his affidavit of 26 June , had approximately $137,000 available to fund his costs of these proceedings, and to finalise his administration (including the s.533 Report to the Australian Securities Commission). His priority creditors are the
Australian Tax Office for $189,000, being deductions from employees' salaries on wages which were in 1992 payable in priority to all other debts (with presently irrelevant exceptions) pursuant to s.221P(2) of the Income Tax
Assessment Act, employees' claims in respect of "wages" as defined in s.9 of the Corporations Law, for $40,000, payable in priority to ordinary creditors pursuant to s.556(1)(e) of the Corporations Law and Mr Corlis who according to the Liquidator having paid off a secured creditor, is entitled by subrogation to his security in respect of $95,000. (I assume that the creditor had a floating charge or that the Liquidator realised the asset charged in a sum in excess of $95,000 - the evidence does not deal with this at all.) 
Fourthly, the Liquidator has requested an indemnity against any costs which he may be ordered to pay from the creditors. None is willing to give any such indemnity in respect of any part of any such costs. And Mr Corlis personally has no assets of any significant value which he could provided by way of costs, or which would make any indemnity from him of any value or utility.

What follows from the circumstances which I have thus far recorded is that the
Liquidator is proposing to use funds properly payable to the Commissioner for
Taxation on behalf of the Commonwealth which have been deducted from salary or wages to conduct litigation which if wholly successful will produce funds sufficient to discharge all the company's debts, but which if unsuccessful will almost certainly absorb the entirety of the available funds. Even if the litigation was entirely conducted without any charge to the Liquidator (a course which has not been suggested as likely or even possible) an order for costs against Corlis, should it be unsuccessful, would be of no utility to the defendant because its claim against that which, if anything, remained in the
Liquidator's account would be payable after the Commissioner for Taxation and the employees whose combined claims already exceed the funds remaining in the
Liquidator's hands by $92,000, at least, or by $187,000 if Mr Corlis' claim by subrogation is good.

Prima facie the entitlement to an order for security for costs (I add that I have been asked simply to consider at this stage whether or not any order should be made, leaving, if I were of the opinion that it should, the amount to be agreed by the parties, or if no such agreement eventuated, to be determined by the Court at a later stage) is plain.

Power to order security for costs in respect of proceedings in the Supreme
Court of New South Wales is conferred on this Court by s.1335 of the
Corporations Law "if it appears by credible testimony that there is reason to believe that the corporation will be unable to pay the costs of the defendant if successful in ... its defence". The Supreme Court has always, as part of its inherent jurisdiction, had power to do just that (Rajski versus Computer
Manufacture & Design Pty Limited [[1983] 2 NSWLR 122] at 125 (per 
Moffitt P). The existence of that power is reiterated in Pt 53 of the Rules.
See r 2(1)(e), the sub-rule applicable to the application. The Court's discretion as to the exercise of the power (given a finding of the facts which activates the power) is to secure justice between the parties.

What is relevant to securing justice between the parties, and its weight in particular circumstances, has been considered in many reported cases. Many of them are collected (and commented upon) in the notes to Rule 53 in Volume I of
Ritchie's Supreme Court Procedure.

Counsel for Corlis, recognising the problems to which I have adverted, sought to resist the making of an order for security on the basis that the plaintiff company's present impecuniosity had been brought about by the defendant's defaults so that the defendant should not be permitted to take advantage of its own wrongdoing.

That, he submitted, was held to be relevant, and sufficient to rebut the defendant's prima facie entitlement. For that submission he relied on MA
Productions Pty Limited versus Austorama Television Pty Limited [(1982) 1 ACLC (Needham] J), on Yandell Holdings Pty Limited versus Insurance Co of North
America [(1985) 3 ACLC 524 (Clarke] J) and on
Australian Quarry Holdings Pty Limited (In Liq) versus Dougherty & Ors [(1993) 11 ACLC 52 (Ormiston] J in the Supreme Court of Victoria).

I readily accept that if impecuniosity triggers a power, then the cause of that impecuniosity is relevant to whether or not the power should be exercised. Section 1335 of the Corporations Law provides that a court may require security. Part 53 rule 2(1) provides that this Court may order the giving of security. Such a power is not coupled with a duty to exercise it when the grounds conferring it have been found to exist so that the rule of construction applied by the House of Lords in Julius versus The Lord Bishop of
Oxford [(1880) 5 App Cas 214], that in those circumstances "may" means "must" is not applicable either to the Law or to the Rule.

The next step in the argument of Counsel for Corlis was that his client company's impecuniosity was caused or at least substantially contributed to by
CSR Hebel's failure to make payments due to it in a lively fashion. He asserted that CSR Hebel had received payments from Leighton Interlink of the description which Corlis was claiming from CSR Hebel: he asserted that Corlis was in difficulty in proving this because the documents were in CSR Hebel's possession (obviously they would be) and Corlis had been refused early discovery of them (an application for such discovery is pending). I am prepared for the purposes of the application with which I am now dealing to accept this as correct. None the less it does not bring into play the principle on which Counsel relies. The fundamental fallacy in the argument is that payment to CSR Hebel depends on its contract with Leighton Interlink: payment by SCR Hebel to Corlis depends on the contract between those two companies. I cannot infer that because Leighton Interlink paid CSR Hebel something due under the contract between them, that sum was due from CSR Hebel to Corlis, even if it related to the same work. To that difficulty there is added the provision in Clause 12.1(b) of the contract between CSR Hebel and
Corlis that Corlis is not entitled to payment in respect of any variation if not directed in writing by CSR Hebel. There was no evidence that if any were, they have not been paid for.

I should record at this stage of these reasons that Corlis in its Statement of
Claim relied on "unjust enrichment" as a cause of action, presumably to overcome the problem to which I have referred. This I have assumed to be a reliance on what was said on this question by the High Court in Pavey v
Matthews <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 221], particularly in the judgment of Deane J. I do not understand anything said in Pavey versus Matthews to apply to a claim for remuneration for work done by way of "variation", but not directed so to be done in writing, where the contract between the parties contains a provision such as Clause (1)(b) in the contract between CSR Hebel versus Corlis.

There is however a more fundamental reason which in my judgment requires a stay of these proceedings unless ample security for costs be furnished.

As I have earlier recorded the Liquidator of Corlis had approximately $137,000 from his realisations. He does not assert that he is likely to realise more otherwise than by this action. He probably now has a little less having I would assume paid his costs of this application. The entirety of this fund if the administration of the liquidation were to be finalised now, is payable to the Commissioner for Taxation. It is money to which the Commonwealth of
Australia is entitled.

Section 221P of the Income Tax Assessment Act, as it was at the time of the commencement of the winding up, relevantly provided:- "Where an employer makes a deduction for the purposes of this Division (Part VI Div 2 - Collection by Instalments of Tax on Persons other than Companies) or purporting to be for those purposes, from the salary or wages paid to an employee and refuses or fails to deal with the amount so deducted in the manner required by this Division ... he shall be liable, and where his property has become vested in, or where the control of his property has passed to, a trustee, the trustee shall be liable, to pay that amount to the Commissioner." 
Section 221P (now repealed) has been productive of a great deal of litigation, much of which is reviewed in Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation versus Chant (1991) ACTC 4734, but none of the prior difficulties reviewed in Chant threw any doubt on the obligation of a liquidator in the position of the liquidator of Corlis. He has, according to his affidavit of 26 June 1996 realised $219,509.40 up to 8 March 1993. He accordingly became, and remains, liable to pay to the Commissioner the group tax deduction of approximately $189,000. He has, he says, but $137,000 left. He is personally liable for the balance of $52,000. To take any step which would permit, and thereby, I would expect, encourage him to increase his personal liability would be wrong.

It is to my mind quite clear that this action must be stayed until security for the full amount of the defendant's likely costs has been provided in a manner satisfactory to the defendant, or to this Court, and I so order. It is implicit in what I have said that the Liquidator needs also to be put in funds to meet his own costs before he takes any further step in this litigation, but he must make his own decision on that.

Finally I need to deal with the costs of this application. The ordinary order would be that they be paid by Corlis Constructions Pty Limited. Such an order is of no utility to CSR Hebel - it will simple rank after a priority creditor who is entitled to the whole of the available funds. No basis on which I can make any useful order has occurred to me. I propose accordingly simply to order and I do order that the costs of CSR Hebel Australia Limited's application for security for costs be paid by Corlis Constructions Pty Limited recognising it will have no practical effect. However should CSR Hebel Pty
Limited desire to apply for any different or further costs order it may apply for such an order by Notice of Motion returnable before me on 4 October 1996.
 * * * 
