

Etri and Anor versus Eid and Anor Matter No Ca 40359/97 [1998] NSWSC 620 (1
December 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 December 1998 
WALID ETRI & ANOR versus AYMEN EID & ANOR 
CA 40359/97; DC 6935/95 December 1998 
Handley JA, Stein JA, Fitzgerald AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: District Court of New South Wales - Christie DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40359/97; DC 6935/95 
DELIVERED: 1 December 1998 
HEARING DATE: 19 November 1998 
PARTIES: Walid ETRI and Anor versus Aymen EID and Anor 
JUDGMENT OF: HANDLEY JA, STEIN JA, FITZGERALD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellants: C O'Connor QC/A Stone 
Respondent: W Baffsky 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellants: Windeyer Dibbs 
Respondent: L J Sharpe & Co 
CATCHWORDS: 
NEGLIGENCE - motor vehicle accident - whether respondent was a passenger - finding not glaringly improbable 
NEGLIGENCE - motor vehicle accident - liability of driver - inconsistencies in respondent's evidence - absence of evidence from appellant - judge entitled to draw inference from undisputed facts and circumstances - application of doctrine of res ipsa loquitur 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 11 
Walid ETRI and Anor versus Aymen EID and Anor 
The respondent was awarded damages for injuries received in a motor vehicle accident. At the time of the accident the respondent, who was 17 years old, gave inconsistent accounts concerning his presence in the vehicle when it overturned. At the hearing, the judge found that, despite the inherent conflicts in the respondent's evidence, it was impossible to believe that he was not in the vehicle. The respondent also gave inconsistent evidence as to how the accident occurred. The judge rejected part of the respondent's account and preferred the version of the accident contained in the police report to that of the respondent and found that the accident occurred as a result of the negligence of the driver (the appellant). He awarded damages to the respondent which included a sum of $1,045.00 for out-of-pocket expenses.

On appeal, it was submitted that the judge erred:
In finding that the respondent was a passenger in the vehicle at the time of the accident;
In finding that the appellant driver was negligent;
In the amount awarded for out-of-pocket expenses.

Held:
It cannot be said that the finding that the respondent was a passenger in the car was glaringly improbable or that the judge palpably misused his advantage.
In circumstances where the respondent gave inconsistent evidence and the appellant did not give evidence at all, it appears the judge inferred negligence from the undisputed facts and the police report.
The judge was entitled to rely on the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur and, whilst rejecting the respondent's version of precisely how the accident occurred, infer negligence on the part of the appellant driver.

Davis versus Bunn <case>; <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 493] applied
The judge was entitled, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to presume that the tendered evidence concerning the out-of-pocket expenses related to consultations concerning the accident.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs 
Walid ETRI & Anor versus Aymen EID & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Stein JA.

STEIN JA: The appellants, Walid Etri and the NRMA Insurance Limited, appeal a decision given by Christie DCJ on 5 June 1997. His Honour entered a verdict for the plaintiff (respondent), Aymen Eid, in the sum of $14,185 arising out of a motor vehicle accident which occurred on 16 January 1995. 
The issues raised in the appeal are threefold. First, it is argued that the finding of the trial judge that the plaintiff was a passenger in the motor vehicle at the time of the accident was in error. Second, the appellants challenge his Honour's award of $1,045.00 for out-of-pocket expenses. Last, it is submitted that the judge erred in finding that the first defendant was negligent. It is this latter ground which occupied the majority of the time of hearing of the appeal. It may be noted that the appellants do not contend that the appeal should be allowed on the ground of absence or inadequacy of reasons.

It is convenient to first consider the ground which alleges that his Honour was in error in finding that the plaintiff was a passenger in the motor vehicle driven by the first defendant at the time of the accident. It is submitted that the finding was glaringly improbable. His Honour dealt with the evidence on the issue, including its inherent conflicts. It is clear that the judge accepted the plaintiff's evidence that he was a passenger. To some extent it was corroborated by the evidence of the plaintiff's parents, as well as medical evidence. The defendant gave no evidence. The evidence of the ambulance officers was indirect and explicable on the basis that the plaintiff, then only 17 years old, did not want to be associated with the accident at the time. To do so might cause friction with his parents and potential difficulties with his friends, including the driver of the motor vehicle. His Honour posed the improbability of the plaintiff coming by sheer luck upon the accident and making up his mind to perpetrate an insurance fraud. Having so decided, the plaintiff then goes to the hospital, but discharges himself before being examined. Analyzing these circumstances led the judge to find that he was satisfied on the evidence that the plaintiff was a passenger.

In finding that the plaintiff was a passenger in the vehicle it cannot be said that the judge palpably misused his advantage, nor that the finding was glaringly improbable. On the contrary, to reject the plaintiff's evidence on this issue would lead to a wholly improbable scenario of the plaintiff inventing a false claim on the spur of the moment. Such a suggestion did not fit with the judge's remark that the young man was not particularly intelligent.

The issue of liability is more arguable. In giving reasons his Honour said: 
The defendant had also contended that even if the plaintiff was in the vehicle the manner in which the accident took place was not demonstrative of negligence in the driver Etri. This was put on the basis that the plaintiff had said that a car coming the other way driving crazy or something like that had forced Etri off the road. I simply say that I do not accept (along with quite a lot of other evidence of the plaintiff) I do not accept that that is precisely how the accident happened and I prefer the version contained in the police report that Etri moved off to the side of the road to make way for a passing car. He then appears to have lost control on the left hand side of the road in the gravel and finished up on the right hand side of the road against the gutter on his roof or on his side. Those matters as I find them are clearly demonstrative of negligence and of course the plaintiff need only show a scintilla of negligence in the driver. Even if I were to accept that some oncoming car caused Etri to leave the road (and I do not accept that) but even if I did in my view to leave an ordinary suburban street on the left hand side of the road, to lose control and then finish up on the right hand side of the road is demonstrative of negligence and I reject the defendant's submission in that regard. [AB 170-171] 
It would seem that the judge did not accept the plaintiff's evidence that a car was coming in the opposite direction `driving crazy' and had forced the first defendant off the road. The judge said he did not accept that that was precisely how the accident happened. He preferred the version in the police report on the accident.

The plaintiff's evidence was, to say the least, confused. His Honour obviously found it difficult to understand what he was saying about how the accident occurred since his evidence, on the issue, was full of inconsistencies. For example, he gave the story of another vehicle `driving crazy' in the same direction as the first defendant. Then he changed this to the vehicle coming fast in the opposite direction and forcing the first defendant to move to the left into the gravel where he lost control. The plaintiff also said that the reason the first defendant lost control of his vehicle was because he was going too fast and this is what caused the vehicle to roll over.

As I have said, the judge did not accept the plaintiff's version of the oncoming car `driving crazy' thus forcing the defendant off the road. His
Honour had the advantage of being able to observe the plaintiff giving his evidence and clearly accepted it in part and rejected it in part. Once he rejected the accuracy of the plaintiff's version of how the accident occurred, what was left? The driver (the first defendant) did not give evidence, nor did another young passenger (a Mr Cherkoivi). There were no other eye witnesses to the accident.

What is however common ground is that the defendant's motor vehicle was being driven along a reasonably wide straight suburban street (indeed there was evidence of a 200m length of straight road) when it moved to the left off the bitumen into the gravel shoulder. The car then went out of control and was propelled across the width of the road to come to rest against the gutter on the opposite side. In this manoeuvre, it turned over, either completely or partly.

The police report referred to by the judge stated: 
Vehicle 1 travelled south, moved into gravel to let vehicle pass and lost control - rolling onto side.

It appears to me that his Honour inferred negligence from the undisputed facts, which I have mentioned above, and the police report. It was also relevant that the first defendant driver did not give evidence (Jones v
Dunkel <case>; [(1958-1959) 101 CLR 298.]
Counsel for the respondent submits that these facts bespeak negligence and allow an inference to be drawn. This submission leads to a consideration of the principle of res ipsa loquitur and its applicability.

In Davis versus Bunn <case>; [(1936) 56 CLR 246] Evatt J examined the doctrine in the context of a motor vehicle case. He noted the following principles:
Application of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur does not alter the onus which always rests on the plaintiff.
At a given point in the trial, the res or circumstances may themselves be sufficient evidence from which negligence may reasonably be inferred.
If a non-suit is refused on the basis of the doctrine and the defendant does not call evidence, then the court is at liberty to find, by reason of the res, that the onus has been discharged. This was particularly so where the defendant alone had the opportunity of explaining the precise cause of the plaintiff's injury.

Evatt J said: 
It follows from what I have said above that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur should be regarded merely as an application of the general method of inferring one or more facts in issue from circumstances proved in evidence.
Even where such circumstances are extremely few, and often only because they are extremely few, an inference that an injury to the plaintiff has been caused by the negligence of someone for whom the defendant is responsible may properly be drawn. <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 493] the plaintiff had tendered evidence directed to proving the defendant guilty of a particular act of negligence. The plaintiff failed to establish this case. Was he then precluded from relying on the principle of res ipsa loquitur? The High Court said that he was not so precluded.

Windeyer J said: 
It is said, however, such an inference could not be drawn in this case because the plaintiff had sought to prove some particular acts and omissions in the handling of the goods by the defendant's servant and something in the condition of the premises as the actual cause of the accident. He had failed to establish these things. But if a happening, unexplained, speaks for itself, why is its voice stilled because the plaintiff sought to explain it but failed to do so? [at 497] 
Windeyer J continued that if the evidence did not establish to the satisfaction of the court what was the cause of the occurrence `which could speak for itself, then it can continue to do so, ...' 
Owen J stated: 
I would have no doubt at all that the answer is that the inference may be drawn and that it is not to the point to say that A offered evidence, which was not accepted, of some specific act of negligence on the part of B. In such circumstances it is as though that evidence had not been given and there is left the fact that A was injured by a happening which, in the ordinary course of events, would not have occurred if B had acted with reasonable care. A has made out a prima facie case and an inference that B was negligent may properly be drawn unless some satisfactory explanation of the happening is given which rebuts that inference. [at 502] 
Accordingly, the fact that the trial judge rejected the plaintiff's version of precisely how the accident occurred does not mean that the res may not be relied on.

Given the circumstances in which the accident occurred the inference of negligence is able to be drawn in the absence of any explanation by the defendant. In my opinion, the appeal on liability should be dismissed.

The issue of the out-of-pocket expenses remains. The plaintiff tendered a schedule of out-of-pocket expenses which listed attendances on two medical practitioners and receipts. Medico legal expenses were deducted leaving a balance of $1,045.00. The judge `presumed', in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that the list related to consultations concerning the accident. No cross-examination was directed to the plaintiff or his parents that any of the attendances were not so referable. On their face, the documents presented to the court related to the accident. In my opinion, the judge was entitled to make the presumption which he did.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

FITZGERALD AJA: I agree with Stein JA. 
It merits emphasis that there was no challenge by the appellants to the trial judge's rejection of the respondent's uncontroverted evidence in which he made admissions against his own interest, and no submission was made that the trial judge erred by giving inadequate reasons for his decision.
 * * * 
