

Coffs Harbour City Council versus M Kelly and Anor [1997] NSWSC 123 (10 April )

COFFS HARBOUR CITY COUNCIL versus M KELLY & ANOR 
COFFS HARBOUR CITY COUNCIL versus R TEASEL & ANOR 
COFFS HARBOUR CITY COUNCIL versus J WULF & ANOR /96, 14283/96, 14284/96 
Thursday 10 April 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
These are appeals by way of stated case from the decision of a magistrate which arise from the same factual background and raise the same issues. The respondents had sued the appellant Council in contract in the Local Court at
Coffs Harbour and obtained judgments in their favour. Annexed to the stated case are the transcript of the proceedings in the Local Court and the exhibits.

The Evidence.
 
In 1994 and 1995 the Coffs Harbour City Council was the authority responsible for raising the level of the Karangi dam outside the city of Coffs
Harbour. Prior to the work commencing the Council obtained an environmental impact statement which dealt, amongst other things, with the noise level likely to be experienced during construction by residents in the vicinity of the dam. The respondents all lived in that vicinity, their homes being at distances of between 800 and 1200 metres from the site, and were considered to be vulnerable to noise levels of up to 40 dB(A). The Council commissioned a report from H K Clarke & Associates Pty Limited, Noise Control and
Management Consultants, which found that the respondents and other residents in the 40 dB(A) area could alleviate the noise adequately by keeping external doors and windows closed, and recommended that air conditioning be installed in those homes to compensate for restricted ventilation. In respect of each of the homes listed in the report the Council resolved either to carry out, or to pay for, the work recommended.

The dealings between the Council and the various respondents were relevantly similar and I shall recount them by reference to the correspondence with Mr and Mrs Teasel.

By letter to the Teasels of 8 August 1994, the Council acknowledged that there might be "some impacts" upon their property during the course of construction and referred, among other things, to the effect of noise. On 22 September , having received the Clarke & Associates report, the Council wrote again to the Teasels informing them of the effect of the report and offering to provide air conditioning if the dam project were to proceed. They were invited to obtain quotations for the provision of air conditioning and to forward them to the Council for acceptance. Upon acceptance a cheque was to be forwarded to them to enable the work to be carried out. By letter of 21
October 1994, the Council informed them that the project was to proceed and confirmed the offer set out in the letter of 22 September.

Over the ensuing months the Teasels obtained quotations for air conditioning, and for modifications to their electricity supply necessary to cater for it.
These were submitted to the Council. The quotation for air conditioning relied upon in the proceedings in the Local Court was that of Faircloth &
Reynolds Pty Limited, in an amount of almost $19,000. Also claimed was the estimated cost of modifications of the power supply totalling more than $6,000. The Faircloth & Reynolds quotation was for the installation of air conditioning throughout the home, capable of lasting for between 7 and 15 years.

The dam project was estimated to take 12 months. In the course of construction certain measures were taken to minimise noise consistently with the provisions of the environmental impact statement, and work was carried out between 7.00 am and 5.00 pm on Monday to Friday and 7.00 am and 1.00 pm on Saturday.

On 14 February 1995, the Council wrote to the Teasels noting that they had not then responded to the Council's offer in its letter of 22 September referred to above. The letter went on to say that, if they wished to take up the
Council's offer, there was now "a changed arrangement" concerning quotations for air conditioning. Council had now decided that Carrington, Cronshaw,
Dickson-Smith Pty Limited, Consulting Engineers, would be engaged to determine what work was required and to assist in determining its fair value. That company supplied a report to the Council in relation to the Teasels' home, as a result of which the Council wrote to them on 15 March 1995 informing them that all that was required was the provision of a mobile air conditioning unit to be located in the dining area, and a ceiling fan in the loungeroom, at a total cost of a little under $2,000.

Proceedings in the Local Court.
 
By their statements of claim, amplified by particulars supplied, the respondents alleged that the Council had entered into contracts with them whereby it undertook to meet the cost of the provision of air conditioning for their premises, in consideration of their forbearing to sue it for nuisance resulting from excessive noise produced by the construction work. In each case they contended that the offer by the Council was to be found in the letters they had received to the effect of those forwarded to the Teasels on 22
September and 21 October 1994, in which they were invited to submit quotations for the provision of air conditioning. In each case they alleged that the breach of the contract arose from the Council's letter to the effect of that to the Teasels of 15 March 1995, undertaking to pay only the very much lesser amount assessed by the consulting engineers whom it had engaged.

The learned magistrate determined that there was a contract between the
Council and the respondents of the nature which they alleged, and that the air conditioning to be provided was that set out in the quotations upon which the respondents relied. Alternatively, his Worship found that the Council's original offer to pay for air conditioning as recommended by the Clarke &
Associates report amounted to a representation creating an estoppel in the respondents' favour.

The Stated Case.
 
Before me, the appellant Council contended, as it had in the Local Court, that there was no evidence of the contract alleged by the respondents and, in particular, of any consideration moving from them. As to estoppel by representation, the Council contended that the respondents were not entitled to rely upon it as it had not been pleaded and, in any event, the alleged representation was not clearly identified, nor was there any evidence that the respondents had acted to their detriment.

There was another issued raised as to the admissibility of certain evidence, with which I shall deal later in these reasons.

A Contract? 
The respondents acknowledged that their forbearance to sue was not expressed in any of the correspondence with the Council, but argued their case on the basis that the term should be implied. Reliance was placed upon the environmental impact statement itself, from which it was clear that the project could have adverse effects in a variety of ways upon residents in the area, and upon the fact that the respondents had written to the Council, either personally or through their solicitors, expressing their concerns about those affects, noise being only one of them. Accordingly, it was argued, it was open to his Worship to infer that the Council invited the respondents to obtain quotations for air conditioning, and the respondents accepted that invitation, with an eye to possible litigation. Counsel for the respondents referred to the remarks of Kirby P in Liquorland (Australia) Pty Limited versus G
Y G Holdings Pty Limited & Ors (C of A, unreported, 28 October 1994) at p , concerning the "flexibility and informality" of the common law of contract and the need for courts to "explore the facts surrounding the asserted agreement" to determine whether there was an enforceable contract and, if so, its terms.

For the Council, it was argued that the evidence as a whole did not admit of the implication of a forbearance to sue on the part of the respondents, so that there was no consideration and the Council's initial offer to meet the cost of air conditioning was gratuitous. In any event, it was submitted, the
Council offered no more than to meet the cost of such air conditioning as was reasonably required in the circumstances, and the quotations which the respondents were invited to obtain were expressed to be subject to the
Council's acceptance. There was no evidence that any of the quotations submitted was, in fact, accepted.

It does not appear to me that an offer by the respondents of forbearance to sue can reasonably be implied. Indeed, as counsel for the appellant pointed out, the correspondence between Mr and Mrs Kelly and the Council expressed an intention on their part not to abandon any right of action they might have had (see, in particular, the letter from their solicitors, Catherine McKimm &
Associates, of 19 December 1994). The inference of a forbearance to sue cannot fairly be drawn merely from the fact that the situation might have given rise to litigation, but that appears to have been the approach the learned magistrate took in his reasons (see the judgment at page 7). Although I heard argument upon the matter, I find it unnecessary to decide whether any action would in fact have lain against the Council.

Indeed, it appears from the transcript that counsel for the respondents in the
Local Court conceded that there was no evidence of forbearance to sue, and directed his submissions more to the question of estoppel. To that matter I now turn.
 
Estoppel by Representation.
 
The learned magistrate relied upon the exposition of estoppel by representation by Jordan CJ in Franklin versus Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Ltd <case>; [(1936) 36 SRNSW 76] at 82. Counsel took me to the various statements of principle relating to estoppel by the High Court in Waltons Stores (Interstate) Limited v Maher & Anor <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 387], and The Commonwealth of Australia versus Verwayen (1990) CLR 394. The difficulty faced by counsel for the respondents, however, is in the application of those principles to the facts of this case. That difficulty is exacerbated by the fact that estoppel was not pleaded in the
Local Court and no application was made to amend the pleadings to accommodate it. As counsel for the appellant pointed out, if the Council had been on notice in those proceedings of the manner in which estoppel was asserted, it might have called evidence on the issue.
 
Counsel for the appellant also submitted, in my view soundly, that the representation relied upon was never precisely identified. Indeed, at the conclusion of argument before me, it still had not been. In his final address to the learned magistrate, counsel for the respondents referred to their "genuine concerns" about the construction and submitted that they "had a most reasonable expectation that they had done a deal with a reputable local government body". He went on: "They went and put themselves out and obtained quotes, as they had been asked to do, and they were deflected from taking any other course of action as they may have proposed because of an expectation and (sic) performance by the council of its agreement." 
The argument appeared to have been directed more to the manner in which it was suggested the respondents had acted to their detriment, than to the terms of the representation said to have induced them to do so. Certainly, it does not appear to me that the initial dealings between the Council and the respondents could reasonably have led them to believe any more than that the Council was prepared to pay for air conditioning to cater for the restriction on ventilation necessitated by the work, that it would receive quotations for that purpose, and pay the amount of those quotations if it found them acceptable. His Worship's finding (at page 7 of the judgment) that the Council offered "to provide the air conditioning", without qualification, is not supported by the evidence.

Equally, I am persuaded by the submission of counsel for the appellant that there was no evidence upon which his Worship could find that the respondents, or any of them, had acted to their detriment. The fact that they obtained quotations could hardly amount to a detriment in the relevant sense. His
Worship (again at page 7 of the judgment) appears to have accepted the argument of counsel for the respondents that each of them had refrained from taking any other available action, but, again, there was simply no evidence of what that action might have been.
 "Similar Fact" Evidence.
 
Over objection, the learned magistrate admitted evidence of correspondence between the Council and the occupants of four other homes within the 40 dB(A) area. In each case the Council had invited the occupants to submit quotations for the air conditioning, which they had done considerably earlier than had the respondents. In each case the Council had approved a quotation for air conditioning of the entire house and had paid the amount involved.

According to the stated case, his Worship admitted the material "as evidence of similar fact" elucidating what the Council "meant by the offer of air conditioning to compensate for restriction of ventilation". As his Worship saw it, the correspondence demonstrated, among other things, that the residents concerned had obtained quotations for the reverse cycle air conditioning of the whole home, as had the respondents, and that the Council had in each case accepted the lowest quote and paid the amount sought promptly.
 
Whether this was similar fact evidence, as that expression is understood at common law, may be debatable, but before me counsel were prepared to treat it as such. The question whether it was embraced by [Pt .6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p3.6) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), dealing with evidence of tendency and coincidence, was touched upon in argument but not developed. If the evidence were relevant to an issue between the parties it was admissible, and it would not have to meet the stringent tests applied to the tender of similar fact evidence by the prosecution in criminal proceedings: Sheldon versus Sun Alliance Australia Ltd <case>; [(1989) 53 SASR 97] (and cf [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)). That said, inferences are not readily drawn about the course of dealings between parties to an action by an examination of the dealings between one of those parties and other people, strangers to that action, even though arising out of the same circumstances.

As I understand it, his Worship admitted the evidence as tending to show that the arrangement between the Council and the respondents was that the Council would accept and pay the lowest quotation submitted by them, as it had done with the residents of the other four homes. This was said to clarify the offer originally made by the Council to the respondents and, for the purpose of the argument based on estoppel, the representation by the Council upon which they were said to have relied.
 
Counsel for the appellant submitted, again I think soundly, that the evidence was inadmissible. The quotations submitted by the residents of the four homes concerned were for amounts significantly lower than those claimed by the respondents. More importantly, three of the homes involved were considerably closer to the dam than those of the respondents (between about and 500 metres), and there was evidence from the acoustic expert, Mr
Clarke, that the extent to which a home would need to be sealed and the level of air conditioning required as a result varied according to its proximity to the site (see page 60 of the transcript of 24 April 1996). True it is that one of those four homes was further from the site than any of the respondents' homes (1300 metres), but this is of no assistance in determining the admissibility of the evidence. As counsel for the respondent pointed out, there was no evidence of the topography of the area which might have borne upon the extent to which a particular home was subject to noise. Generally, the evidence fell short of establishing relevant similarities between the situations of the respondents on the one hand, and of the residents of the other four homes on the other, so as to afford it any probative value.

There is no doubt that the Council met the cost of air conditioning of the four homes concerned without the intervention of the consulting engineers, and for amounts considerably greater than those ultimately offered to the respondents. One can readily understand the respondents' sense of grievance as a result, but whether that sense of grievance is justified is quite another matter. Even if the evidence were admissible for the purposes for which it was tendered, it would have been of very little weight in all the circumstances. I am satisfied, however, that it ought not to have been admitted.

Conclusions.
 
Accordingly, I find that each of the appellant's challenges to the learned magistrate's findings and conduct of the proceedings has been made good. Given that the evidence does not establish an enforceable contract between the
Council and the respondents, and does not support estoppel by representation, the Council is entitled to have judgment entered for it in each of the actions. In the exercise of the wide power granted to this court by [s (1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s106.html) of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), I so order.

I shall hear the parties on the question of costs in this court and in the court below.
 * * * 
