

Tipa versus Jones [1996] NSWSC 362 (19 August 1996) 
TIPA V JONES /1996 
Monday 19 August, 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings are brought by the plaintiff for a declaration that she is the daughter of the late Grant Reginald Jackson. They are brought under <case> of the Children (Equality of Status) Act, 1976.

The proceedings were heard by me on 25 July, 1996. On the evidence there was no doubt that the substantive order should be made under the guidelines I set out in Re C [(1987) 8 NSWLR 234.] Indeed, although up to the morning of the hearing the attitude of the representative of the estate was that the plaintiff must prove her claim, when the evidence was presented, the representative did not challenge it. I should note that the mother of an ex-nuptial daughter whom the deceased had acknowledged in her birth certificate was the administrator of the estate. However, at the hearing a solicitor was, by consent, substituted as the representative of the estate in these proceedings. As the evidence also satisfies me, I will duly make the declaration sought and the necessary ancillary orders. There is no need, in the circumstances, to set out the facts in these reasons. Why I reserved my decision is to deal with the rather difficult question of how the costs of these proceedings should be borne.

The deceased, Grant Reginald Jackson has only a small estate. He had at least two, possibly three, ex- nuptial children, but no spouse. I am informed that any order for costs against the estate would have a significant effect on the amount available for distributon.

Costs are, of course, in the discretion of the court under <case> of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/).
That discretion is to be exercised pursuant to principle and not caprice. The principle on which orders for costs should be made in this sort of application has not been fully considered in the cases under the Act which have been the subject of reasoned judgments.

I considered the question in Cole versus Public Trustee 10 March 1988 unreported. I there said that normally people had to pay their own costs of this sort of application, but, if the defendant needlessly contested it, then, the plaintiff should bear his or her own costs of preparation, but the costs of the day in court should be paid by the unsuccessful defendant. This was in accordance with the practice in administration suits. An administration suit was the classic procedure for establishing a claim as next-of-kin before modern statutory short-cuts were introduced.

Daniell's Chancery Practice,7th ed (1901) p 1001 notes the practice as follows:- " ...the general rule is that, wherever it is necessary to come to the Court to establish a demand upon the property of persons deceased, the costs of such proceedings must be borne by the assets." 
The editors give authority for this proposition. The only strong case is
Hampson versus Brandwood [(1815) 1 Mad 381], 394; <case>; [56 ER 140](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=56%20ER%20140 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 145 in which Plumer, VC applied it though noting the matter was discretionary.

At 1002, Daniell points out that where the testator has occasioned the difficulty, the costs of the administration suit are to be paid out of the estate, Studholme versus Hodgson <case>; (1734) P Wms 303; [24 ER 1074], 1075.

At p 1003, he sets out the rule for establishing claims by next of kin. "Where next of kin...succeed in establishing their title under a judgment for the administration of the estate, it is usual for them to be allowed their costs; not their costs incurred out of doors in collecting information as to the pedigree of the party; not the costs of private inquiry; but the costs incurred in the Judge's chambers, and generally of proceedings in the action..." 
Daniell gives support for this statement from a series of authorities the principal cases being Shuttleworth versus Howarth <case>; [(1841) Cr & Ph 228] In the first of these Lord Lyndhurst, LC clearly lays down the rule after making enquiry of the Masters. The second was a case concerning the resumption of commons land, where the successful claimants were each allowed three guineas costs out of the resumption monies which had been paid into court. 
However, counsel made submissions as to costs that were far ranging. Mr F
Donohoe of counsel for the plaintiff said that his client had been successful and should get her costs out of the estate. Mr Cashion of counsel for the defendant said that his client had done considerable work in flushing out possible claimants and as a result of that work had given the plaintiff's mother sufficient details for the plaintiff to make a claim. Furthermore the claim had not been contested. Mr Cashion submitted that the plaintiff should pay some of his client's costs. He pointed out that, had the claim been made whilst the deceased was alive, costs would have been saved. As the plaintiff is now 22, there had been plenty of opportunity to make a claim.

In reply, Mr Donohoe pointed to evidence that the defendant had only informed him that there was to be no contest on the morning of the hearing.
Furthermore, the plaintiff had come to Sydney from her New Zealand home in to try and find her father, but had been unsuccessful. She claimed that her father's name was not in the telephone book. As Mr Cashion points out, the plaintiff could not have looked very hard because, as Exhibit DX01 shows, the deceased was entered in the white pages at that time. There was also debate as to whether the plaintiff should reimburse the estate for the detective work in finding the plaintiff or whether the plaintiff should be required to pay her own costs and also the costs of the defendant as a submitting party along the lines of the rule referred to in the old practice books as the "Two Guinea" (later "Three Guinea") rule.

It hardly needs stating that the defendant will almost certainly be indemnified out of the estate for any costs of these proceedings not paid by the plaintff. This indemnity flows, not out of any order I may make, but because of the relationship, see Adam versus Mullen Holland, J 15 December unreported, but noted in Ritchie's Supreme Court Practice [13024].

There are few modern authorities which deal with costs in this sort of case.
In Sanders versus Public Trustee 9 August, 1990 (unreported), Powell, J, after a contested hearing, made an order that the defendant's costs on the trustee basis and the plaintiff's costs on the common fund basis be paid out of the deceased's estate. It would not appear that the matter of costs was argued.

Dowsett, J had to consider costs under the corresponding Queensland legislation in Re Hollis [(1986) 10 Fam LR 630.] His
Honour took the view that, ordinarily, if the matter of paternity had to be sorted out as part of the administration of an estate, costs should come out of the estate, but, as the plaintiff in the case before him was guilty of gross delay, she should pay her own costs. With respect, I consider the first part of that proposition to run contrary to practice in NSW and England.
However, the actual ruling on costs in Re Hollis was obviously correct and the judge was sitting in Mt Isa and had not had the advantage of hearing counsel's submissions on the question of costs.

I have deeply considered all the above learning and submissions. It seems to me that I should adhere to the view I took in Cole's case which is based on the practice in administration suits. Thus the plaintiff should not in any event receive any part of the costs of investigation. As to her other costs, she is seeking an advantage from the court in having made a declaration of paternity and, should, as is the ordinary rule in such cases, pay her own costs. I have considered what Daniell says at pp 1002 and 1003, but I do not consider that this should outweigh what I have just said.

Accordingly I make Order 1 in the summons: I make no order as to costs.
 * * * 
