

Hutley versus Meigan and Ors [1996] NSWSC 636 (19 December 1996) 
HUTLEY versus MEIGAN & ORS /1996 December 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
Small Claims Tribunal: 
Nature of claims before: Singer versus Stabilising and Other Officers'
Remuneration Tribunal [(1986) 5 NSWLR 633]; Archcom
Pty Limited versus Consumer Claims Tribunal & Ors (Simpson J - 29 September - unreported) 
Assertion that there was a denial of natural justice in that there was a failure to grant an adequate adjournment to consider a cross-claim of which specific notice was not given until the second day of the hearing upheld: 
K & H Atkins Pty Limited versus Cunningham & Anor [[1981] 2 NSWLR ];
White & Ors versus Hall & Ors [[1983] ASC 55],247; reference by
Simpson J in Archcom to Hodgkinson versus Companies Auditors and Liquidators
Board [(1994) 50 FCR 504]; Ridge versus Baldwin <case>; [[1964] AC ]; Kioa v
West [(1985) 151 CLR 550]; Laws versus Australian Broadcasting Tribunal <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 70] and Bayram & Ors versus Chris Benton <case>; [(1994) 117 FLR 414] referred to.

Legislative Reform 
Failure of the Small Claims Tribunals Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder to provide for notice of cross-claims to be given: need for the
Legislature to consider providing for this.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The plaintiff, Mr Warren John Hutley, for whom Mr M.J. Heath of Counsel appeared, was, at all material times, a licensed builder. The first defendants, Mr Terence Patrick Meigan and his wife, Mrs Colleen Mary Meigan, for whom Mrs M.A. Gilmour of Counsel appeared, have been, at all material times, the owners of a residential property at 44 Queens Road, Connells Point.
Mr and Mrs Meigan were desirous of carrying out renovations to their home and they engaged Mr Alex Kalos, who was either a designer or an architect, to prepare plans and Mr Mark Elder, a builder, to carry out the work. Apparently because his work was not satisfactory they entered into a building contract with the plaintiff on 17 March 1995 to complete it. By at least August 1995 disputes had arisen as to the quality and completeness of the work being carried out by the plaintiff. These disputes led to a deterioration in relations between the plaintiff, on the one hand, and Mr and Mrs Meigan on the other.

By about 16 August 1995 the plaintiff alleged he was owed $15,995.15 being the balance of moneys payable under the contract. He conceded that certain work had not been completed and he estimated that the monetary amount necessary to complete it was about $3,000. In a letter he wrote on 13 December 1995 he said the amount was about $5,500, which he explained in evidence as being an over- statement because he wished to err, if he erred at all, in favour of Mr and
Mrs Meigan. I accept this explanation.

On 16 August 1995 the plaintiff was handed a two-page list of work, which Mr and Mrs Meigan contended had to be carried out to conclude the work under the contract. That list, including some hand written additions, comprised some forty four items.

On or about 12 September 1995 Mr and Mrs Meigan wrote to the plaintiff and referred to discussions and meetings with him and Mr Kalos on 16 August 1995 and to the fact that on that occasion it was brought to their attention that "there were numerous items either uncompleted or defective". The letter said, inter alia, that the plaintiff's lack of interest in rectifying the situation left Mr and Mrs Meigan "with no alternative but to withhold final payment" to him.

On 18 September 1995 the plaintiff's solicitors wrote to Mr and Mrs Meigan demanding payment of the balance.

On 27 September 1995 the plaintiff lodged a claim with the Consumer Claims
Tribunal, ("the Tribunal"), pursuant to the Consumer Claims Tribunals Act , ("the Act"). In the particulars he asserted an entitlement to the amount
I have mentioned as the balance owing.

A major complaint of Mr and Mrs Meigan was the entry of water into the premises. On 3 October 1995, or perhaps shortly thereafter, the plaintiff received from an entity, Flexible Membrane Coatings, a report about the entry of water after heavy rain on 25 September 1995. The report stated that the premises had suffered "moisture entry" in the areas identified, suggested reasons for the water entry and concluded:- "Our recommendation is that these joins and around door frames and balcony be sealed, even if the house if (sic) not to be painted for some time. 
It is further recommended that an inspection be carried out by the roof tiler of the flashing over the top of the tiles on the outer edge of the planter box to ensure that water cannot be driven into the eaves alongside the planters under storm conditions. This is possible and could allow for water entry around the perimeter of the lounge unless the plans call for an alternative method of waterproofing in this cavity to divert water to the outside." 
On 11 October 1995 the plaintiff wrote to Mr and Mrs Meigan referring to the report, stating that the cause of the water entry was not "in my contract", recommending that Mr and Mrs Meigan take certain action to have the property sealed, and requesting final payment.

On 9 October 1995 an architect retained by Mr and Mrs Meigan, Mr Ian Ward, prepared a report for the Building Services Corporation in which he outlined the history of the matter and, in paragraph 2, set out seventeen "findings" in relation to the premises. The report set forth defects, which Mr Ward considered existed, and was supplemented by photographs said to depict them.
It did not suggest what repair work was required or its cost. In paragraph 3 he set out certain conclusions. It was not in issue that this report was furnished to the plaintiff on or about 12 October 1995 nor, after that occurred, that the plaintiff did not return to inspect the premises with a view to ascertaining whether the findings made by Mr Ward were ones with which he agreed or disagreed. The plaintiff explained his reluctance to return to the premises by reference to the bad relationship between himself and Mrs
Meigan and, in this regard, I accept his evidence.

The Proceedings Before The Tribunal 
On 20 November 1995 the plaintiff's claim, which it was not in issue is a "consumer claim" within the meaning of the definition in the Act, came before a Tribunal Referee, Mr H. Laan. The plaintiff appeared on his own behalf as did Mr and Mrs Meigan accompanied by Mr Ward. The plaintiff conceded that it emerged at this hearing that Mr and Mrs Meigan intended to bring a claim, in the nature of a cross-claim, against him for his failure to carry out the work properly and to complete it. At that stage the claim for remedial work was neither specified nor quantified. He also agreed that he said to the Referee that certain work remained to be completed by him. I was told that the Tribunal's procedure does not provide for the giving of notice of a cross-claim. However that may be during the hearing on 20 November 1995 it became clear to the plaintiff that such a claim would be made and, as I have said, he had conceded to the Referee that some work was outstanding and, at least to himself, that the cost of carrying out that work was approximately $3,000.

During the hearing on this day a problem arose in that the Referee took the view that Mr Kalos and Mr Elder should be present and, in those circumstances, the Referee adjourned the proceedings to enable that to occur. In doing so he exercised his powers under s.20 of this Act. They were set down for a further hearing on 11 December 1995.

On that date the plaintiff, Mr Kalos, Mr Elder, Mr and Mrs Meigan and Mr Ward attended before the Referee. The plaintiff arranged for Mr David Andrew
McDonnell and Mr Kyriacos Kanaris, who were respectively a plumber and an electrician, to be present. He said the reason for this was that they had conducted work on the renovations on a sub-contracting basis for him and that they were present "in order to answer allegations previously made against me at the first hearing". This demonstrated that the plaintiff appreciated that such allegations had been made and would require to be answered.

The Referee explored firstly the position of Mr Kalos and Mr Elder. There are varying estimates of the time this took ranging between about forty five minutes and an hour and a half. It is not important, in my view, to determine the precise time. Suffice to say it took some time. Apparently the Referee satisfied himself that neither Mr Kalos nor Mr Elder had any involvement in the matter and, at that point, Mr Ward handed to the Referee a document dated December 1995, which was headed "Scott Schedule - Defects and Defects
Rectification Works". It contained four pages of defects listing forty seven in all and attributing to each a "probable cost" of carrying out the rectification work suggested by Mr Ward. It was not in issue that the plaintiff had not been provided with a copy of this document and, after it was handed to the Referee, he asked if he may have one and also he asked Mr Ward whether he had "photographic evidence to back this up". Mr Ward said he did not and there is no suggestion that he made reference to any of the photographs annexed to his October report as showing the problems to which reference was made.

In paragraph 16 of his affidavit of 5 March 1996 the plaintiff said that because of the number of items listed and quantum alleged and because he had not seen the list previously he requested an adjournment to review it. He deposed to the fact that the Referee said, and this was not challenged:- "I am not adjourning this matter again. It's been adjourned once and I want to settle the matter to-day. You'd better start reading this list and tell me which of these items are in dispute." 
The plaintiff deposed, and once again this was not in issue, that he replied:- "Well all of them are in dispute. I can't be expected to comment on this list when the first I have seen this is fifteen minutes ago. I need time to go over this to prepare a response." 
The plaintiff said that the Referee only allowed him a short break during the recess of about thirty minutes to review the list and that because he was "nervous and distressed at what was occurring" he attempted to telephone his solicitor, who was not available.

He said in paragraph 17 that he returned to the Tribunal hearing room and, in the time available during the recess to review the document, he "was simply unable to properly address the items raised without a visual inspection of the site and opportunity to engage an independent expert to also inspect the site and comment on my belief that some items on the document were architectural design faults and not the result of bad workmanship". I accept the plaintiff's evidence that confronted with the latest report he wished to take the steps to which he referred.

He said in his oral evidence that he requested an adjournment again, but this was refused and, thereafter, the matter proceeded. The plaintiff was cross- examined on his affidavit. It was suggested to him that he had ample opportunity to consider the matters raised in the report of 7 December 1995 because of the written complaints previously made and what had transpired at the hearing on 20 November 1995. He denied this. I accept his denial. The plaintiff impressed me as a truthful witness, who was prepared, when appropriate, to make concessions. However, on the critical point of his ability to deal with the report of 7 December 1995 on the extraordinarily short notice given to him he remained firm that he could not do so and I believe him.

The Referee made an award on 11 December 1995 in which he held that the amount owing to the plaintiff was $10,898.45. He said he was satisfied that the counter claim was "fair and reasonable and represents a realistic estimate of the cost to provide the remedial work". He did not allow the full amount of $28,585.38 but $25,000, which, so counsel informed me, was the maximum amount of his jurisdiction pursuant to s.32. It was thus accepted before me that the amount of $28,585.38 was reduced by the Referee because it exceeded "the prescribed amount". After setting off the amount owing by Mr and Mrs Meigan to the plaintiff he found that the plaintiff owed them $14,101.55, which he ordered him to pay within twenty one days from 11 December 1995. It is obvious that the report of 7 December 1995 played a crucial role in the decision.

On 13 December 1995 the plaintiff wrote to the Senior Registrar of the
Tribunal complaining that he had not been given an adequate opportunity to consider the new document prepared by Mr Ward and handed to him in the circumstances I have stated.

The plaintiff's case is, put quite simply, that he was denied natural justice in that he was not afforded an adjournment or an adequate adjournment to enable him to meet the case brought against him.

The Nature Of The Proceedings Before The Tribunal 
The Tribunal has been established to deal with small claims in a relatively informal and expeditious manner. As Hunt J said in Singer versus Statutory And
Other Offices Remuneration Tribunal [(1986) 5 NSWLR 633] at p.635:- "The Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1974 has set up a system for the speedy and inexpensive disposal of certain claims, limited in amount, arising out of contracts for the supply of goods or the provision of services by a person carrying on (or holding himself out as carrying on) the business of supplying such goods or providing such services. The Tribunal hearing such claims is constituted by a Referee, who need not have (and who in many cases does not have) legal qualifications." 
As Simpson J said in Archcom Pty Limited versus Consumer Claims Tribunal & Ors (29 September 1995 - unreported) at p.12, after referring to the remarks of Hunt J:- "Those remarks were made in the context of the predecessor of the Act, a 1974 Act by the same title, but they apply equally to the Act. Underpinning the Act is a policy of providing expeditious access to an inexpensive and informal process for the resolution of consumer disputes involving relatively small amounts of money. Speed and economy are to be accompanied and (it is hoped) often achieved, by informality." 
Her Honour noted that by s.21 parties must, with specified exceptions, represent themselves, and that there is manifest a clear intention to exclude legal formalities and technicalities, which tend to make "the traditional legal process somewhat cumbersome, slow moving and costly". Her Honour traced through the various sections whereby assistance is to be given by the Registry of the Tribunal to parties, and noted that the Tribunal is not bound by the rules or practice of evidence and, in certain circumstances, it may inform itself on any matter in such manner as it considers appropriate. Pursuant to s.29 the Tribunal is obliged to use its best endeavours to bring the parties to a settlement before making any order. She continued, at pp.13-14:- "The intention of the legislature, in creating these tribunals as a forum for the resolution of disputes involving relatively small amounts of money was the achievement of expeditious and inexpensive justice between the parties while maintaining a proper regard for, and protection of, the rights of the parties to the dispute. The difficulty, as I see it, lies in striking the correct balance between those two goals. Speedy and inexpensive solutions may be inimicable to the protection of rights. There is no necessary relationship between the factual or legal complexity and the quantum of a claim but legal rights and obligations remain at the heart of the tribunal's jurisdiction. Although a tribunal is enjoined to make such orders as will, in its opinion, be fair and equitable to all parties to the claim (s.31(1)), those orders must be grounded in legal liability." 
Her Honour thus stressed the need for "justice" and the "protection of rights".

It is important to note that there is no avenue of appeal against errors of fact or law, even most serious ones, or, as her Honour said, "egregious" ones, by the Tribunal. Section 12 provides that except as provided by sub-s.(2) a court of record has no jurisdiction to grant relief or remedy in respect of a consumer claim heard and determined or to be heard or determined by a tribunal in accordance with the Act "in respect of any ruling, order or other proceeding relating to such a claim".

In other words, subject to sub-s. (2), the determination of the Tribunal, which may be the decision of a person with no legal training and substantially affect the rights of parties, who, save in limited circumstances, have no legal assistance before the Tribunal, is final. Hence Simpson J's requirement to keep firmly in mind the need for "justice" and the "protection of rights".

Sub-section (2) provides:- "A court is not precluded from granting relief or a remedy of the kind referred to in sub-s. (1) if, in respect of a consumer claim: ...
 a tribunal has made an order under s.30 and the ground on which the relief or remedy is sought is that: ...
 in relation to the hearing or determination of the claim, a party to the claim has been denied natural justice." 
In dealing with natural justice in K & H Atkins Pty Limited versus Cunningham & Anor [[1981] 2 NSWLR 289] Rogers J said, at p.290:- "I think it is desirable that I should say at the outset that this Court is not and cannot be concerned with the merits of the dispute between the parties. That is a matter which the Parliament has committed to the tribunal. Nothing that I say is intended to suggest that I view as anything but highly desirable that small claims should be resolved informally and expeditiously before bodies such as the tribunal in question. Because it is the legislative intention that the task should be performed informally, without regard to the laws of evidence, without legal representation and, if possible, by conciliation, it is crucially important that all concerned should adhere scrupulously to such safeguards as have been embodied in the legislation." 
At p.294 his Honour said:- "It has been said that natural justice is nothing more than fairness writ large. Common ordinary fairness, in my view, requires that where a party is brought before a tribunal, the boundaries of whose jurisdiction and powers are extremely wide, and where the scope for error is so large, having regard to the absence of legal representation and the absence of constraints of the rules of evidence, fairness or natural justice cries out for strict adherence to such safeguards as the legislature has enshrined in the constituent Act. The protection which a party has - and this applies equally to claimants and respondents - is that which the legislature has built into the Act. It would be unfortunate if this Court were constrained to hold that a party could be deprived of such protection without any remedy. I do not think that is the position. To deny a party an opportunity which the legislature provided that he should have of obtaining a ruling and having a period within which to challenge its correctness is to deny basic principles of natural justice." 
In White & Ors versus Hall & Ors [[1983] ASC 55],247 Hunt J considered a refusal by a referee to grant an adjournment to allow a party to bring forward crucial evidence in admissible form. His Honour held that the evidence had been rejected correctly, but that there was no basis on which an adjournment to enable the evidence to be presented in admissible form could have been refused. He said, at p.56,250:- "Where the unreasonable refusal to grant an adjournment prevents a party from properly presenting his case, there is a denial of natural justice. There is an abundance of authority for that proposition." 
His Honour referred to certain cases and, at p.56,251, he said:- "The failure to state any reason for the refusal to adjourn goes only to strengthen the inference that the Referee exercised his discretion wrongly. The refusal to grant an adjournment to produce the evidence in admissible form was, in the circumstances, plainly unreasonable, and it denied the plaintiffs the opportunity properly to present their case. It thus amounted to a denial of natural justice in relation to the proceedings in the tribunal." 
In Archcom Simpson J referred to the decision of Drummond J in Hodgkinson versus Companies Auditors and Liquidators Board [(1994) 50 FCR 504], where his Honour said:- "If, in a case such as that to which I have referred (i.e. where the rules of natural justice apply), a tribunal realises or ought reasonably to realise that the respondent is labouring under a bona fide error as to the scope of the issues being investigated, then in my view there will be a want of natural justice if a tribunal proceeds with the hearing without clearly informing the respondent of his error and giving him such time as may reasonably be necessary to marshal his answering case to the charge actually before the tribunal. Whether the person is or is not legally represented is, of course, a very relevant matter for the tribunal to take into account when it has to form a view as to whether a person may be labouring under such an error." 
In the present case it was submitted on behalf of Mr and Mrs Meigan, correctly, that the plaintiff was aware that there was a complaint about the work he had carried out or failed to carry out and he had conceded as much to the Referee. His allegation of a denial of natural justice is that he was not presented with either the list of work, which it was asserted by Mr and Mrs Meigan had to be carried out, or the probable cost of carrying it out, until a period during the second day of the hearing and, having been presented with it, he was not afforded an opportunity to meet it. This was in the context, inter alia, of the report having been prepared by an expert, who was apparently independent of Mr and Mrs Meigan. The plaintiff made clear that he wished to be able to place himself in the same position. 
It is clear that the requirements of the rules of natural justice must be determined in the light of the particular circumstances of each matter:
Ridge versus Baldwin <case>; [[1964] AC ]; Kioa v
West [(1985) 151 CLR 550]; Laws versus Australian Broadcasting Tribunal <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 70] and Archcom. There is, if I may say so with respect, a very helpful consideration of the principles by Kearney J of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory in Bayram & Ors versus Chris Benton <case>; [(1994) 117 FLR 414.] The issue before his Honour was whether the appellants had been denied natural justice in that they had not been afforded a reasonable opportunity to present their case, in all the circumstances; and that this denial of natural justice meant that the tribunal's decision was wrong in law, or, alternatively, established that the conduct of the proceedings was unfair: p.417. His Honour referred to a number of cases and quoted extensively from the judgment of Brennan J in Kioa, noting his Honour's agreement with the passage from the judgment of Turner LJ in Russell versus Duke of Norfolk [[1949] 1 All ER 109] at 118, where his Lordship said:- "The requirements of natural justice must depend on the circumstances of the case, the nature of the enquiry, the rules under which the tribunal is acting, the subject matter that is being dealt with, and so forth. Accordingly, I do not derive much assistance from the definitions of natural justice which have been from time to time used, but, whatever standard is adopted, one essential is that the person concerned should have a reasonable opportunity of presenting his case." 
His Honour referred to the decision in Sullivan versus Department of Transport [(1978) 20 ALR 323] and quoted from a passage in the judgment of Deane J at p.343, where his Honour said:- "A refusal to grant an adjournment can constitute a failure to give a party to the proceedings the opportunity of adequately presenting his case. If the tribunal had, in the present matter, refused an application by the appellant for an adjournment to enable him to procure Dr Evans' attendance as a witness, that refusal may well have constituted such a failure. No such application for an adjournment was, however, made ... The absence of any application for an adjournment does not however, necessarily conclude the issue adversely to the appellant. The failure of a tribunal which is under a duty to act judicially to adjourn a matter may, conceivably, constitute a failure to allow a party the opportunity of properly presenting his case even though the party in question has not expressly sought an adjournment: see Priddle versus Fisher & Sons [[1968] 1 WLR 1478] .. In this regard, however, it is important to remember that the relevant duty of the tribunal is to ensure that the party is given a reasonable opportunity to present his case. Neither the Act nor the common law imposes upon the tribunal the impossible task of ensuring that a party takes the best advantage of the opportunity to which he is entitled." 
Kearney J said, at p.422:- "As to s.19(4)(b), the concept of unfairness in "the conduct of the proceeding" connotes a failure to comply with one or other of certain procedural requirements fundamental to the administration of justice, which fall under the general rubric 'of natural justice'. In homely terms, this requires that the parties be afforded 'a fair crack of the whip', as Lord Russell of Killowen put it in Fairmount Investments Limited versus Secretary of State for the Environment [[1976] 1 WLR 1255] at 1266. For present purposes they had to be afforded a right to present evidence relevant to establishing facts in dispute, and a full opportunity to disprove such facts by cross-examination. The former right comprises the right of a party to adduce evidence in support of his own case, and his right to controvert the evidence which is the basis of his opponent's case." 
No Requirement For A Cross-Claim 
I was pointed to the fact that the procedures of the Tribunal do not provide for a claimant before the Tribunal to be advised, at least prior to the commencement of the hearing, of any cross-claim. Mrs Gilmour submitted that in these circumstances a claimant must be prepared at the time of the hearing to meet a cross-claim. She submitted that in so far as this may lead to injustice because a party may not be aware of any cross-claim until the hearing commences and be forced, if there is a refusal to grant an adjournment or if the party does not know that he or she is entitled to an adjournment, to fight the matter on short notice, that does not arise in the present case because the plaintiff was aware, at all times, that there was a complaint about the work he had carried out and the probability that Mr and Mrs Meigan would be making a claim against him. Indeed, he had conceded that work was not completed and, at least to himself, that the amount of $3,000 should be set off against his claim.

It seems to me that provision should be made in the Act or the rules and regulations for the giving of notice of cross-claims prior to the hearing. The reasons are obvious. If a cross-claim is not brought forward until the hearing the Referee should, at least prima facie and in many cases, grant an adjournment to enable the party against whom it is brought to meet the claim.
If an adjournment is granted the time set aside by the Tribunal and the parties for the hearing, and the expense to which the parties have been put by attending before the Tribunal are wasted. The alternative is that if no adjournment is granted, and in this respect there seems to be an obligation on the Referee to advise the party subjected to the cross-claim of the rights to an adjournment, a situation similar to that which has arisen in the present case may well occur, with the delay and expense thereby involved.

I appreciate the philosophy behind the setting up of the Tribunal and, as with
Rogers J, I would not wish to suggest that it is not highly desirably that relatively small claims should be dealt with cheaply and expeditiously.
However, having regard to the financial positions of the parties likely to find themselves before the Tribunal the amounts may be relatively large. For example in the present case there was a finding against the plaintiff in the sum of $25,000 and it seems to me that this is an amount the plaintiff could ill afford to pay, if he is liable to pay it or to have it set off against moneys owing to him. Accordingly, the legislature has sought to protect the position of the parties and to ensure that justice is done by requiring adherence to the principles of natural justice.

The Facts Of The Present Case 
The plaintiff was presented during the second day of the hearing with a document which, for the first time, set out the remedial work it was being asserted should be done, as opposed to complaints about the work with which he had previously been furnished with lists, and the probable cost of carrying out that work. The costing was not worked out by reference to the amount of material needed and the cost thereof or the time likely to be taken and the cost thereof. It was simply stated to be the "probable cost". The document is dated 7 December 1995 and the reasonable inference is that it was prepared on that date. No explanation was or is given as to why it was not immediately furnished to the plaintiff to enable him to consider it. As I have said the complaints ranged over four pages and forty seven items and to each of the forty seven items was attributed a separate "probable cost". No attempt was made to relate the defects set out in this document to those referred to in the notices of 16 August 1995 and 9 October 1995. Bearing in mind that no reliance was placed on the photographs annexed to the latter report, when the plaintiff asked about photographs, the reasonable inference is that those photographs did not assist.

On behalf of Mr and Mrs Meigan it was submitted that the plaintiff had been aware, at least since 16 August 1995, that there was complaint about his failure to properly finish the job and, on that date, he had been presented with a list and a site meeting had been held with him and Mr Kalos. It was submitted that he was aware he would have to make some allowance against the amount he was claiming, which he conceded, and that having been provided with the lists of 16 August and 9 October 1995 there was an obligation upon him to return to the premises and make his own assessment of the work to be carried out. It was not in issue that he had not done so. It was nextly submitted that at the hearing on 20 November 1995 it was made clear that Mr and Mrs Meigan were pursuing a cross-claim. In these circumstances, so the submission ran, the obligation was upon the plaintiff to check at least the matters raised in the documents with which he had then been provided. It was submitted that he had failed to do so and that his inability to answer the claim propounded in the document dated 7 December 1995 and handed to him at the hearing on 11
December 1995 was totally his own fault, such that the Referee was entitled to refuse the adjournment.

I think it necessary to note, at the outset, that there was no suggestion in the evidence that the Referee refused the adjournment because the plaintiff had failed to avail himself of the opportunity to deal with the matters. I have stated the reason the Referee gave for refusing the adjournment and, in my view, it was a totally unreasonable basis because the first adjournment had been brought about by the Referee's adjourning the matter to enable Mr Kalos and Mr Elder to be present. It was not brought about by any act or omission on the part of the plaintiff. In so far as the Referee gave as a further reason that he wanted the matter "settled" on 11 December 1995 that was not a reason which considered the merits of the application. Accordingly, the Referee, in my opinion, failed to deal with the merits of the application or to consider the prejudice the plaintiff may suffer. The reasons advanced by the Referee show, in my opinion, that the discretion to grant or refuse an adjournment miscarried because he had regard to matters irrelevant to the question whether the adjournment should be granted.

As much as it is submitted against the plaintiff that he failed to avail himself of the opportunity from at least 16 August 1995 to consider the defects and to prepare himself to answer any complaint about them, so must be considered the failure on the part of Mr and Mrs Meigan, who had the advantage of an architect retained by them at least by 9 October 1995, to put forward the way in which it was asserted the defects were to be remedied and the cost thereof until 7 December 1995. I do not suggest that Mr Ward worked continually on the task, but the fact remains that notwithstanding that he observed problems so far as the house was concerned by 9 October 1995, he had not prepared a report as to how those problems should be rectified until 7
December 1995 and, even by that date, he was only able to give a probable cost of carrying out the repairs. This gives some insight into the problems, which confronted the plaintiff of seeking to meet the allegations made against him, for the first time on 11 December 1995. Further, even if the Referee had considered the impact of the previous notices it would have been immediately obvious that in the report of 9 October 1995 Mr Ward had only specified approximately seventeen defects whereas in the report of 7 December 1995 he particularised forty seven defects and, for the first time, sought to attribute a dollar figure to the cost of making good.

It must also be remembered that the Referee, of his own volition, had required the architect or designer and the previous builder to attend at the hearing on December 1995, as he thought their rights may be affected. Attention was directed firstly to which of those parties and the plaintiff were responsible and for what. In his letter of 13 December 1995 the plaintiff referred to the fact that at the hearing he had said that an important part of the work was not part of his contract with which the others agreed. However, this was not, so far as the decision discloses, referred to by the Referee. What it demonstrates, none-the-less, is that not only was attention being focussed on defects and incomplete work, but also who was responsible. This made it the more desirable, in my view, that the plaintiff should have been given a reasonable opportunity to consider the document of 7 December 1995 and respond to it.

It was submitted on behalf of Mr and Mrs Meigan that the plaintiff was a licensed builder and that, accordingly, he should have been in a position to meet the allegations made against him. I do not agree with this submission for several reasons. Firstly, the mere timing indicates the problems under which the plaintiff was labouring, which were exacerbated by the failure of the report of 7 December 1995 to match up the work to be done and specified therein with the work set out in the report of 9 October 1995 and the photographs annexed. Secondly, the plaintiff was not provided with any calculations, however basic, as to how the probable costs were calculated.
There was no evidence that when Mr Ward produced the document that he was asked to match it up with his previous report or to provide any basis on which the amounts were calculated, notwithstanding, as matters eventuated, that the
Referee accepted it. Thirdly, the plaintiff said, and this was not disputed, that he was in a distressed state by virtue of the change of events. I do not find this hard to understand and I accept his evidence as to this. Fourthly, the Referee must have appreciated the significance of the document and, indeed, his determination demonstrated this. Fifthly, as I have said, there was a very real issue, debate about which the Referee had stimulated originally, as to which party was liable. This was likely to raise in the plaintiff's mind another issue and to make the need for an adjournment the more pressing.

It was also submitted on behalf of Mr and Mrs Meigan that the Referee must have had in mind that he could not cure any prejudice brought about by an adjournment by an award of costs, because the Tribunal has no power to award costs. However, this assumes that the adjournment would have been granted in circumstances where, if a costs order could have been made, it would have been made in favour of Mr and Mrs Meigan. I do not see why this assumption should be made because the necessity for the adjournment was brought about solely, so far as I can see, by the very late service upon the plaintiff of the report of December 1995. In the circumstances if an adjournment was needed, as I believe it was, and if it had been possible to make an order for costs, the proper exercise of discretion may have demanded that Mr and Mrs Meigan pay the plaintiff's costs of the day. It is difficult to see how the discretion could have been exercised adversely to the plaintiff in the sense that such an order would be made against him.

In all the circumstances I am satisfied that the plaintiff was not afforded a reasonable opportunity to present his case in the sense of meeting the case which was brought against. The more the submission was made that Mr and Mrs
Meigan and Mr Ward were present at the hearing on 20 November 1995 and again on 11 December 1995, the more I am satisfied that the report of 7 December should have been made available to the plaintiff in advance of the hearing on 11 December 1995 or, if that were not done, there should have been an adjournment to enable him to meet it. To confront him with it during the hearing on that day and to allow him only approximately thirty minutes to consider it and to refuse him the opportunity to call an expert witness, whose evidence would probably not have been subject to the comment that it was in any way biased, constituted, in my opinion, a denial of natural justice sufficient to entitle the plaintiff to the relief he seeks.

In coming to that conclusion I must say that I have sympathy for Mr and Mrs
Meigan. They do not appear to have been consulted as to whether there should be an adjournment, nor to have been advised that if an adjournment was refused there was at least a possibility that an application may be made to this Court of the type which has now been made, with the delay which has been occasioned thereby. Had they been so advised they may well have taken the view that it was better to agree to a short adjournment to enable the plaintiff to meet the case brought against him and thus finalise the hearing before the Tribunal.
However there is no suggestion in the evidence that the Referee in any way advised them to this effect.

The Relief To Be Granted 
Mrs Gilmour submitted that it was necessary to determine whether the denial of natural justice arose from the way in which the application for the adjournment was dealt with or from the refusal of the application itself. She submitted that if the first matter constituted the problem then the matter should be sent back to the Referee for him to re-consider whether the application for an adjournment should be granted. As I understood the submissions on behalf of the plaintiff they did not go so much to the way in which the Referee dealt with hearing the application, but rather to the refusal to grant it. The denial of natural justice was that refusal and after the refusal occurred the proceedings were infected with that. In those circumstances it seems to me appropriate that I should make a declaration to that effect and, consequentially upon that, an order that the decision and orders of the Tribunal be quashed. The basis of my conclusion is not so much that the Referee did not allow the plaintiff to make the application, because it is clear that the plaintiff made an application on the very short basis which, in my view, was all that the circumstances necessitated, but rather that there was a failure to grant the adjournment in circumstances which, in my view, amounted to a very clear breach of natural justice.

Costs 
The plaintiff did not seek costs against the Tribunal, but he did seek costs against Mr and Mrs Meigan and as the plaintiff has been successful I consider he is entitled to recover those costs. Mrs Gilmour submitted that if I came to that conclusion I should grant Mr and Mrs Meigan a certificate pursuant to [s.13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s13.html) of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) as they have received legal assistance, as I understand it, pursuant to that provision.

Declarations and Orders
I declare that the plaintiff being a party to proceedings in the Consumer
Claims Tribunal file number BL195/94 was denied natural justice in that the presiding Referee refused to grant an adequate adjournment to enable the plaintiff the opportunity of adequately presenting his case in opposition to the claim made against him by the first defendants.
I order that the orders and/or decision of the Consumer Claims Tribunal in the said proceedings be quashed.
I order the first defendants pay the plaintiff's costs of these proceedings and that they be granted the appropriate certificate pursuant to [s.13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s13.html) of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) if they are otherwise entitled to it.
I order that the plaintiff's claim be returned to the Consumer Claims
Tribunal for determination in accordance with law.
I order that the exhibits be returned.

I do not propose to pass from this matter without repeating something to which
I have referred and making a further observation. I repeat that in my view the legislature should give consideration to providing in the relevant legislation or the rules and regulations thereunder that parties are put on adequate notice of the bringing of any cross or counter claim before a matter is heard.
Further, it seems to me that this is a matter which should so far as possible and having regard to the many other demands upon the time of the Tribunal, be heard as soon as the parties have had a reasonable opportunity to prepare for a hearing.
 * * * 
