

Nagatomi versus Hudson Matter No 2698/97 [1997] NSWSC 415 (18 September 1997) 
Nagatomi versus Hudson /97 September 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - NAGATOMI V HUDSON 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a stepson of the late Royce Gregory for provision out of his estate under the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/). The application was heard at the same time as the application of the plaintiff's mother, Akiko Gregory, which were proceedings 2493 of 1996. 
If the plaintiff is an eligible person, he must qualify as such under [s (1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s6.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), that is, that he is a person who was, at any particular time, wholly or partly dependent upon the deceased person and was, at that particular time or at any other time, a member of a household of which the deceased person was a member.

Mr Broun QC and Miss Cohen who appeared for the plaintiff, said that he was a member of the household of the deceased both when he was in Japan and when he was in Sydney. Mr Hallen for the defendants, on the other hand says that whilst it may be that the plaintiff was partly dependent on the deceased since the latter forwarded moneys to his bank account in order to assist in his support while he was looking for employment, the plaintiff and the deceased did not form a household because of lack of permanency.

The deceased died on 9 December 1995, aged 76, having been born on 13
September 1919. He was twice married and by his first marriage had two sons,
Peter and David, and his second marriage, which was childless, was to the plaintiff's mother on 21 January 1994.

The plaintiff was born on 20 April 1971. He lived in Japan with his mother and father until 1977, but for the next three years lived in Brazil where his father worked as a music teacher and saxophone player. His mother was at that time a schoolteacher. He returned to Japan and lived with his parents until when his mother was transferred to Singapore. His father stayed in Japan and his mother and father were divorced in 1990. The plaintiff graduated from the Yokohama International School and received his high school diploma in June and was then sent to the United States of America by his mother to attend the American International University. His mother was transferred to Sydney in , where she met the deceased. The plaintiff visited his mother and the deceased briefly during that time.

The plaintiff again came to Sydney in December 1991/January 1992. At this stage his mother was living in Unit 47, 171 Walker Street, North Sydney and the deceased was living in Unit 64 in the same building. He saw that, at that stage, his mother was not living with the deceased but that they saw each other every day. There were various other short visits to Sydney but the plaintiff was mainly in the United States.

The plaintiff returned to Japan in May 1993 and at that stage he could see that the deceased and his mother were living in his mother's flat at Yokohama.
The plaintiff tried to find work since May 1993, generally unsuccessfully. His mother was giving him money during this time and after his mother stopped working following her marriage to the deceased, he understood that the money she was giving him was coming from the deceased.

In October 1993, the plaintiff says he received a telephone call from the deceased asking for permission to marry his mother. The plaintiff says the deceased told him, "I will take care of you both forever if she leaves her job and marries me. You won't have to worry about anything anymore. Everything will be taken care of. I promise I will find you a decent job. There will be no worries about her leaving her job." 
The plaintiff's mother and the deceased married and they lived in the Yokohama flat where the plaintiff was also living, from January to April 1994. A sign was hung by the front door which bore the names of the deceased, the plaintiff and the plaintiff's mother. The parties ate together and generally did most of their social activities together.

In December 1994/January 1995, again in Japan, the parties all lived together in the flat in Yokohama.

The plaintiff had a job in Japan between September 1994 and May 1995, but he left it because he was not happy in the employment. He came to Australia in
April 1995 for a short time and lived in Unit 64, Century Plaza, where the deceased was living.

The plaintiff says he asked the deceased for permission to terminate his employment and he was told, "I do not want you to be unhappy. I shall send you money each month until you find a decent permanent job. I promise to look after you and your mother and I will keep that promise. I would not let you down." He says the deceased paid him 100,000 yen per month which he supplemented with casual work. The deceased also sent $A4,000 for the plaintiff to learn driving in Japan. This was the situation when the deceased died.

Mr Hallen says that the evidence clearly was that the times when the plaintiff stayed with the deceased were really holidays. Indeed, this was conceded (T36-7).

There have been judicial observations on the meaning of the word "household" over the last ten years. In Moloney versus Goodwin Needham, J - 1 August , unreported, the case involved a man and woman who lived in the same house as companions though had no sexual relationship. The question was whether the deceased was a member of the household or a boarder. Needham, J said, "It was said that a family type unit is a necessary ingredient in the concept of a household. I think this is to some degree a borderline case, and
I think the question of whether a household exists is perhaps a question of degree ... However, ... once the plaintiff commenced to look after the deceased in the manner in which he did, it could hardly be said that he was not a member of her household. He acted in supporting her at that time as a husband or brother, or son perhaps, would have done, and I think the care which he contributed to her well being certainly constituted him a member of her household." 
In an insurance case of Wawanesa Mutual Insurance Co versus Bell [(1957) 8
DLR (2d) 577], the facts were that the insured occupied a room in his brother's house where he paid room and board. Although he mingled freely with his brother's family, he enjoyed his own life and had no duties or responsibilities. He was staying with his brother only until he could afford to set up his own house and indeed, was engaged to be married. The Supreme
Court of Canada held that the insured was not of his brother's household,
Rand, J saying at 579, "The `household', in the broad sense of a family, is a collective group living in a home, acknowledging the authority of a head, the members of which, with few exceptions, are bound by marriage, blood, affinity or other bond, between whom there is an intimacy and by whom there is felt a concern with and an interest in the life of all that gives it a unity." He then said at 580, "The circle of those `in' is larger than those `of' a household." So, for instance, a live-in farm help is in the household but is not of the household: Calverley versus Gore District Mutual Fire Insurance Co [(1959) 18 DLR (2d) 598.]
I reviewed all these cases in Benney versus Jones 13 February 1990, unreported, where I held that two men living in the one house with a mutual interest in birds, with common friends but who lived separate lives were not both of the same household. An appeal from this decision was dismissed by the
Court of Appeal in [(1991) 23 NSWLR 559], though at 564 the Court of Appeal came to the opposite conclusion to which I had reached on the question of fact as to whether the parties were members of the same household though they did not discuss any of the authorities that I had mentioned.

The High Court in another connection, considered the word "household" in
Cormick versus Cormick <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 170], where at 178, Gibb, CJ said that "household" was "a wide word which would include any relative, friend or servant ordinarily living in the house." The High Court did not seem to take the distinction between in a household and of a household which has been taken in most of the cases under the present Act.

Mr Hallen relied on Gobbo J's decision in Kingsland versus McIndoe <case>; [[1989] VR 273.] Although in that case Gobbo, J examined many of the decisions on the word "household", the phrase which his Honour had to construe was "ordinarily a member of the household of that person" in the [Crimes (Family
Violence) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/cva1987219/) of
Victoria. The word "ordinarily" itself connoted some sense of continuity so the question was whether 39 weeks' residence was enough. The Judge held that the learned magistrate's decision that there was no household was, on the facts, unimpeachable. At 278 he said that a person living in a household should share some bond with other members of the household.

In Munro versus Lake McLelland, J 8 February 1991, unreported, his Honour said simply this, "The concept of membership of a household ... connotes a degree of continuity and permanency of mutual living arrangements". He held that a stepdaughter who had stayed with the deceased (and her mother) each weekend for several years prior to her mother's marriage to the deceased was not a member of the household. His Honour contrasted this with the situation where a person was absent from the home for some temporary or special purpose.

Finally, I dealt with the cases again in Markulin versus Drew 12 August 1993, unreported; see also Wagstaff versus Wagstaff Windeyer, J, 6 November 1991, unreported, and Light versus Anderson [1992] DFC 95-120, cases which show that a person can be a member of more than one household.

It does not seem to me that the plaintiff has satisfied the test laid down by
McLelland, J of demonstrating continuity and permanency of mutual living arrangements merely by showing that the deceased and his mother spent holidays at the Yokohama unit and/or that the plaintiff spent a holiday in Sydney. The evidence as to the nameplate outside the Yokohama flat brings the case closer to the borderline, but it does not seem to me sufficient even with the other matters to show that there was a household. It is not at all uncommon to find a professional person such as a barrister putting his or her nameplate on a set of chambers to which he or she has only a temporary connection, and whilst this is more uncommon with domestic living arrangements, it does not seem to me that it is enough to show that there was continuity of the bond of a familial household between the plaintiff and the deceased.

I have not overlooked the fact that the deceased provided the plaintiff with moneys whilst he was studying. He did this regularly. I also take into account that the provision of the moneys and the dependency caused by it does not have to coincide with the times when the parties were members of the household:
Valenta versus Valenta Powell, J, 19 June 1991, unreported. However, on the question of fact, the plaintiff fails to show that he was a member of the same household as the deceased at any time.

However, had the plaintiff surmounted the hurdle of establishing that he was in the same household as the deceased, he would have had another hurdle to surmount, and that was whether the circumstances show that there were factors warranting the making of the application (vide <case>). In Graziani v
Graziani Cohen, J, 20 February 1987, unreported, a case involving stepchildren, Cohen, J said, "It is necessary to look not only at the nature of the relationship, but the quality of it. The Court should consider the circumstances in which it arose and to some extent it must also look at the weight of the application which might lead to the finding that the plaintiff has been left without adequate provision for his or her proper maintenance, education or advancement in life. ... Where ... the plaintiff has established a position as a stepchild ... there would be a number of relevant matters in my opinion which the Court should consider in deciding whether factors exist.
These include the closeness of the relationship, that is whether it was one which might be properly described as parent and child, whether the plaintiff was brought up as a permanent member of the family, what was the age of the plaintiff when he or she became a member of that family, and the extent to which the plaintiff was supported by the deceased, whether it be financially, educationally or emotionally.
 "If a consideration of these matters leads the Court to the opinion that the plaintiff was brought up and treated as a child of the testator and if all of the other circumstances show that there may have been a moral duty on the part of that testator to provide for the plaintiff then there are factors which would warrant the making of the application. The presence of only some of these factors, or of others which have not been listed might also justify the
Court's coming to the same opinion." 
Tsivinsky versus Tsivinsky Court of Appeal, 5 December 1991, unreported, was a case involving grandchildren. Mahoney, JA indicated that in his view the factors warranting the making of an application were those which showed that there was a duty analogous to the duty owed to other dependants whom the community might consider should have been provided for in the testator's will. 
Mr Broun QC and Miss Cohen say that the factors warranting are that the widow supported the plaintiff and that the deceased as a condition of his marriage, took the responsibility for the plaintiff's upkeep, and that provision should be made to support the plaintiff to the end of his studies.

There is no doubt that the deceased did spend considerable moneys on the plaintiff's studies. Furthermore, the deceased provided for the plaintiff in a discretionary trust. Clause 6 of the deceased's will left the rest and residue of his estate which would exceed 11 million dollars, to trustees to provide for the deceased's immediate and remote family including the child of any spouse of the deceased so that the plaintiff is included.

Although the plaintiff does not appear in the memoranda of wishes which the deceased gave to his trustees, which are referred to in the judgment of
Gregory versus Hudson (No 2), the trustees have in fact made distributions to him in the sum of $17,200 for education and the purchase of a computer, as well as a further $2,380.40 for his air fare from Japan. The trustees have said that they intend to use the powers given to them to provide for the plaintiff's education.

Just what the plaintiff's education involves is not too clear. He has already completed a three year course at an American university and is currently attending the Williams Business College on a course leading to an Advanced
Diploma in Marketing/Management. He will finish that course in September 1997.
Thereafter he wishes to take yet another course, in Business Information
Systems at the University of New South Wales. This course would take four years. As the plaintiff is now 26, he will be 30 or 31 before he finishes all the courses that he hopes to take.

Are there, then, factors warranting the making of the application? 
Again, it is a borderline situation. The deceased did recognize that he was taking over the obligations of his second wife towards the plaintiff. However, even when a wealthy man agrees to look after his wife's son, it is hard to see how the deceased could be taken to be binding himself to pay for any university course or business college course that an able-bodied 23 year old would want to take. Although it must be very pleasant to be able to spend one's whole life just studying, the community generally does not consider that it is an obligation of parents to provide subsidies for stepsons continuing their education through to age 31, especially when there would not appear to be any better prospect of employment than there is at the moment. The short space of time in which the deceased was involved with the plaintiff and the fact that the deceased did provide, albeit in a discretionary way, for the plaintiff's education, and made him a beneficiary under the discretionary trust, seems to me to take away the factors that might otherwise have existed for the plaintiff to make an application under the Act.

In Gregory versus Hudson (No 2), I recognize that generally speaking, provision of a benefit under a discretionary trust is an illusory benefit.
However, I also recognize that this is not always so. In the instant case, the provision made for the plaintiff under the discretionary trust and the current attitude of the trustees, which I would have thought would continue at least four years into the future, which is the only period for which the plaintiff seeks to be provided, means that he has been left with proper provision in any event. Accordingly, even if I was of the view that the plaintiff had surmounted the barriers of showing he was of the household and showing that there were factors warranting the making of the application, the plaintiff's application would still fail on the merits.

In any event, even if the plaintiff did succeed, it would seem to me that the maximum order that he could obtain would be something like $60,000, being his university fees for four years at $13,000, and, say, $2,000 a year for books etc.

For these reasons, the plaintiff's application should be dismissed.

I will hear counsel as to costs because the matter was argued at the same time as the application of the widow and no additional costs were incurred. I would think that the proper order is that the defendants' costs on the indemnity basis should come out of the estate and the plaintiff should pay his own costs.
 * * * 
