

Australian Iron and Steel P/L versus D W Cheetham [1996] NSWSC 620 (17 December )

AUSTRALIAN IRON & STEEL PTY LIMITED versus DAVID WAYNE CHEETHAM /95; CC13583/94 
Tuesday 17 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
HANDLEY, SHELLER, BEAZLEY JJA 
CATCHWORDS: WORKERS' COMPENSATION - COMPENSABLE INJURIES - Employment risks - "Arising out of or in the course of employment" - Arising out of employment - Nature of work environment - psychiatric injury - Causal relationship between injury and employment - Test of causation 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
The respondent was a relief miner driver employed by the appellant at Appin Colliery. In January 1994, a miner working in similar conditions to the respondent in a neighbouring mine was killed by an outburst of gas. The fatal incident had a dramatic effect on the respondent, who had felt anxious about the gassy conditions in the mine since he commenced working there. In May 1994, the respondent ceased working due to stress and anxiety caused by fear of working underground in the mines. 
In the Compensation Court of NSW, Moroney ACCJ awarded the respondent weekly compensation. On appeal, the appellant submitted that the respondent's injury did not arise out of, nor was it sustained in the course of his employment.

HELD: 
Applying the common law test of causation to the facts of the case, the incident at the Westcliff colliery was too remote to establish the necessary causative link with the respondent's employment.

March versus E&MH Stramare Pty Ltd [(1991) 191 CLR 506] applied;
Zinc Corporation Ltd & Anor versus Scarce [(1995) 12 NSWCCR 566] followed.

The trial judge erred in finding, on the basis of medical evidence which was based on an inaccurate work history, that there was a causal connection between the respondent's actual work circumstances and his present medical condition. However, as there was evidence which could support a causal connection, the matter should be remitted to the Compensation Court for redetermination.
 
ORDERS 
The Court orders:
Appeal allowed.
Orders of Moroney ACCJ made on 25 August 1995 set aside.
Matter remitted to the Compensation Court for redetermination.
Respondent to pay the appellant's costs but to have a Certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Beazley JA.
 
SHELLER JA: I agree with Beazley JA.

BEAZLEY JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Moroney ACCJ of the Compensation Court of New South Wales. The principal issue on the appeal was whether the respondent's psychiatric injury arose out of or in the course of his employment. A subsidiary question also arose, namely, whether there was a basis, different from that found by his Honour, upon which the respondent was entitled to compensation. The issue as to causation arose principally because the history given to the medical experts was different from that which emerged at trial. There was no dispute that the respondent was suffering an injury.

Evidence given at trial 
The respondent was a coal miner employed at the appellant's Appin coal mine.
In 1994, he worked as a relief miner driver. He said the conditions in the mine were very gassy. This was confirmed by a Mr Dwyer, an inspector employed by the United Mine Workers Federation. The respondent said that he had worried about the gas from the time he commenced at Appin in 1985 although he did not complain to anyone or seek help. He had been involved in a couple of accidents in the mine but had always returned to the pit. He also said that often there were little fires in the pit which burned themselves out.

In his evidence in chief, the respondent said that he was in the bomb squad, whose task it was to work in conditions where there was a suspected build up of gas behind the coal face. The bomb squad was required to cut slowly into the coal face to permit the slow escape of the gas so as to minimise the risk of an outburst. An outburst was described as a release of uncontrolled gas and material from the wall face. It occurs where gas, which is an "inherent part of the coal" hits an impervious structure within a coal seam and cannot escape or "bleed off naturally" into the working environment. The force of an outburst can cause the ventilation in the mine to reverse, increasing the risk of asphyxiation. Miners working in outburst conditions wear a mask with an airhose. The respondent gave evidence that: "When they cut coal you've got to put a mask and all that on to go to the face and bolt up in case an outburst comes and if an outburst comes I honestly believe you are dead." 
On 25 January 1994, a fatality occurred at Westcliff Colliery about 5 kms from the Appin colliery, when the miner driver, who was working in outburst conditions, was killed. The respondent said that he understood that the
Westcliff incident was due to a gas outburst and that the conditions in that mine were similar to those at Appin. He said that the Westcliff incident seriously affected his ability to go underground and after that he "wanted out of the bomb squad". However, he was directed by his manager to "go to the rescue station and do more about bomb squad but I refused to go". He was then put "on the long wall" which involved work underground again in gassy conditions. When asked how he coped on the long wall he said that there was "heaps of gas down there" and "I couldn't take it any more"; "all the gas totally terrifies me, scares me". In May 1994, he went off work claiming stress. He saw his general practitioner, Dr Arvo Pearson and was referred to
Dr Dragutinovich, psychologist.

In cross examination, it emerged that the respondent was not a member of the bomb squad. Rather, like all miners who might potentially encounter outburst mining conditions, he was given outburst training. The training was not carried out in outburst conditions although some of the training was underground.

History given to medical witnesses 
Dr Dragutinovich obtained a history from the respondent that he "decompensated psychologically when a fellow miner at Westcliff Colliery. .
.died", and that he continued to do so when he had to work in the bomb squad.
Dr McGrath, consultant psychiatrist, also obtained a history that the respondent was "involved in a group called the "bomb squad" and that "matters took a dramatic turn" when the worker at the Westcliff colliery died whilst performing similar work to the respondent.

Dr McGrath was of the opinion that the respondent had major symptoms of anxiety and claustrophobia which appeared to be part of a post traumatic stress disorder. He considered that "the demand characteristics of the work in which he was recently employed are clearly connected with his symptoms and.
.may have a causal relationship". Dr Dragutinovich was of a similar opinion. He stated that the respondent's psychological condition was consistent with the history the respondent provided of working as a coal miner. He considered the head gear worn by outburst workers increased the respondent's feelings of claustrophobia and that his "phobic anxiety is specific to underground work. There is a conditioned aversive reaction to underground duties. It is not evident elsewhere unless triggered by stimuli which remind him of underground work".

Findings of Moroney ACCJ 
Moroney ACCJ noted that the evidence of Dr Dragutinovich and Dr McGrath seemed to be based "upon the history that the [respondent] actually did work in a bomb squad under outburst conditions". He also considered that "[t]he death at Westcliff. . .appear[s] to have been some sort of triggering thing".

Given the inaccurate history relating to work in the bomb squad, his Honour posed, as the question for his determination: ". . .if I allow for that situation; that is the doctor's opinions relate not to actual bomb squad work. . .do they apply to fear of bomb squad work. In other words, [d]oes the [respondent] have medical support for the proposition he is so afraid of working underground, that he cannot go underground and that this is a real psychiatric injury which results from. . .the nature and conditions of his employment of working underground?" 
His Honour concluded that the respondent had developed a condition as a result of working underground and of his fear of having to work underground in outburst conditions.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that the medical evidence supported a causal connection with the respondent's employment based on two matters: (i) the fact that the respondent was a member of the bomb squad; and (ii) the
Westcliff incident. As the evidence established that the respondent was not a member of the bomb squad, the Westcliff incident was left as the only causative link with the employment. He submitted that an incident which occurred outside the work place and which was unconnected with it, other than that it involved work in a coal mine which caused psychiatric injury, triggered by a reaction to that incident, did not establish the necessary causal link with the worker's employment.

An almost identical situation was the subject of the decision of this Court in
Zinc Corporation Ltd & Anor versus Scarce [(1995) 12 NSW CCR 566.] In that case, an accident at the mine at which the worker was employed, resulted in the death of two of the worker's friends. Clarke JA stated at 570 that the phrase "arising out of or in the course of the employment" pointed to a causal relationship between the employment and the injury: see Kavanagh v
Commonwealth <case>; [(1960) 103 CLR 547]; Tarry versus Warringah Shire Council [1974] 48 WCR 1 and
Davis versus Mobil Oil Australia Ltd [(1988) 12 NSWLR 10] at 13-14.
Applying the common law test of causation - namely the application of common sense to the facts of each case: see March versus E&MH Stramare Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506], his
Honour rejected any causal connection between the injury and the employment.
Meagher JA, with whom Powell JA agreed, considered, without elaboration, that the injury did not occur "in the course of" the employment "nor was there any physical link between the accident and the worker" - by which I understand his Honour to mean that the injury did not "arise out of the employment". Although neither Clarke JA nor Meagher JA expressly stated that the injury was too remote, it is implicit in their Honour's judgments that was the basis of the rejection of the necessary nexus between the injury and the employment.

Neither party referred the Court to this decision. It is a recent decision of this Court which directly bears on the outcome of the case and should be followed. Accordingly, the Westcliff incident was too remote to establish the necessary causative link with the employment.

Notwithstanding this, this case cannot be viewed in the simplistic way urged upon the Court by counsel for the appellant (by which I mean no disrespect to counsel, who isolated the issue in the case with clarity and recognised the very difficulty to which I now refer). The medical evidence certainly placed emphasis on the Westcliff incident and the bomb squad activities. The medical evidence also recognised that the mine was hazardous, and that the respondent had a specific fear of the gas, which on the evidence, had been building up over a period of time. A proper reading of the medical reports gives a picture of an accumulation of events as giving rise to his symptoms. This is clear from Dr McGrath's opinion that "the demand characteristics of the work in which he was recently employed are clearly connected with his symptoms and may have a causal relationship". Admittedly, those demand characteristics included, on the history given to Dr McGrath, work in the bomb squad. That history was wrong. However, the fact was that the respondent was required to do outburst training and it would seem was potentially at risk of working in outburst conditions.

In these circumstances, the real question in this case was not whether there was a sufficient causal connection between the employment and the Westcliff incident but whether there was sufficient medical evidence to prove the respondent's case, when the medical opinions were based on an inaccurate history. That is, in fact, the question which Moroney ACCJ posed and which he found in the respondent's favour. The difficulty in his Honour doing so is that it cannot be said for certain that either Dr Dragutinovich or Dr McGrath would have supported a causal connection between the respondent's actual work circumstances and his present medical condition. More importantly, the appellant's case proceeded on the basis that it could disprove the history in respect of the bomb squad. Thus whilst there was evidence to support the alternative case to which his Honour referred, that case specifically was not addressed in the medical reports. It was not open for his Honour, in those circumstances, to conclude as he did. It follows that the appeal should be allowed and the matter remitted to the Compensation Court for redetermination.
I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed.
Orders of Moroney ACCJ made on 25 August 1995 set aside.
Matter remitted to the Compensation Court for redetermination.
Respondent to pay the appellant's costs but to have a Certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.
 * * * 
