

State Bank of New South Wales Ltd versus Burke and Anor [1997] NSWSC 110 (4
April 1997) 
STATE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES LTD versus BURKE & ANOR /94 ED 5218/91 APRIL 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, COLE JA, GROVE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: EQUITY - THIRD PARTY SECURITY - UNCONSCIONABILITY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:DISMISSED 
EQUITY - THIRD PARTY SECURITY - UNCONSCIONABILITY - Bank advanced moneys on security of mortgage provided in 1987 by debtor's parents - debtor's financial position deteriorated - parents induced by debtor to sign documents in 1990 increasing principal sum secured under mortgage - parents misled as to true purpose of further advance - Bank relied upon debtor to arrange execution of documents and their explanation - On appeal the Bank submitted: (1) the facts as found by the trial judge did not support a finding of unconscionability; (2) the mortgage, on its proper construction, and regardless of the 1990 documents provided security for subsequent advances by the Bank to the debtor; (3) the trial judge's assessment of the financial position of the debtor was not justified by the evidence; and, (4) the Bank should be allowed interest on moneys owing on the original advance.

Held: (1) the trial judge rightly considered that the facts supported a finding of unconscionability; (2) the mortgage could not be used as security for subsequent advances; (3) the trial judge did not misdescribe the debtor's financial position; and, (4) appropriate equity was achieved by allowing the Bank to recover the sum owing on the original advance without interest after the date stipulated by the trial judge.
 
Commercial Bank of Australia versus Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447.] 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: This appeal is by the State Bank of New South Wales (the
Bank) against a judgment of Santow J of 17 October 1994, by which he limited to $151,901.65 the amount payable by the respondents to the appeal under a mortgage they had executed in favour of the Bank.

The respondents, Mr V. Burke and his wife Mrs H. Burke (the Burkes senior) were the parents of Mr R. Burke. On 20 March 1987 the Bank granted Mr R. Burke and his wife Mrs V.A. Burke (the Burkes junior), an interest only term loan of $150,000 for three years, on the security of a mortgage by the Burkes senior over their home at Sans Souci. The Bank's loan to Mr R Burke was to enable him to buy a 49% interest in a real estate business in which he worked. This mortgage is the only mortgage in this case, and I will simply call it "the mortgage" from now on. It included an "all moneys" clause.

Between March 1987 and March 1990 the financial position of the Burkes junior deteriorated. Further advances had been made to them by the Bank during this period. The term loan matured on 31 March 1990, and had to be repaid or re- negotiated. Despite having sold their home, the Burkes junior owed the Bank around $249,000. The Bank took the view that the mortgage secured only the term loan of $150,000, not further advances. Mr R. Burke needed money for immediate purposes. He had many discussions about this with Mr Wood the Senior
Manager at the branch of the Bank with which he dealt.

Eventually, the following conversation occurred: "Robert Burke: `Can I get some more cash if mum and dad agreed to extend their mortgage by $50,000.00 to cover the cheque account and $20,000.00 I need?' 
Malcolm Wood: `That is something you have got to talk to your parents about as the Bank cannot grant any further monies without their consent.' 
Robert Burke: `What do you mean there?' 
Malcolm Wood: `The mortgage document that your mum and dad granted for this loan only covers that $150,000.00 Term Loan and not this overdraft cheque account of $20,000.00-odd or any further monies to be granted unless your mum and dad specifically give the Bank authorisation in writing.' 
Robert Burke: `I will go and have a talk to mum and dad.' 
Malcolm Wood: `Make sure you explain everything to them.' 
Robert Burke: `I will, I'll go and see them.'" 
Later, on condition the Burkes senior agreed to the mortgage being security for $200,000, Mr Wood approved a loan by the Bank to the Burkes junior of $200,000. The documents the Bank wanted signed by the Burkes senior consisted of one called "Loan Details" and an attachment called "Terms and
Conditions". The first of these showed the Burkes junior as customer, the type of loan as a fixed interest rate term loan for $200,000 for three years, the purpose of which was consolidation of debts, and the security offered by the third party, "Existing first mortgage over land and dwelling ... Sans
Souci from VAS and HM Burke". In my view this form constituted an offer to the customer and to the third party. In one part it says "Offer Date /6/90". Beneath that occurs the sentence "I/We have read and clearly understand and accept the above Loan Details and the attached Terms and
Conditions". Beneath that were spaces for "Signature of Customer" and "Signature of Provider of Security". Clauses 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 21 of the attached Terms and Conditions were framed on the footing of the Loan
Details document being an offer capable of acceptance by the Customer and the
Provider of Security by their signatures.

In my opinion what these documents were proposing was that a new loan of $200,000 would be made to the Burkes junior and that the mortgage, until then securing the earlier loan of $150,000, would become security for the new loan of $200,000. The documents themselves do not make it clear whether the transaction was conditional upon the earlier loan of $150,000 being discharged, which would have had the result that the mortgage would be security only for the later loan of $200,000, or whether the earlier loan was to remain on foot and the mortgage to be security for both the earlier loan and a new loan of $200,000. The evidence shows that it was the intention of the Bank and Mr R. Burke that the former would be the case, That was what happened after the Burkes senior had signed the documents.

Santow J found that "the Bank in fact relied upon the son to arrange the execution of these documents and their explanation". He also found that Mr
Wood "entrusted the explanation of their purpose and of any other material matter to them as guarantors to the son, who had a keen interest in continuing the guarantee for his own benefit, as the Bank must have realised. Such a material matter would include the deteriorating financial position of the Burkes junior." 
Santow J further found that it was "clear beyond doubt that these were matters most material for the Burkes senior to be informed about if they were to agree to a further extension of their mortgage for an increased principal amount of $200,000. I am satisfied they were ignorant of that fact. Also that the Bank failed to take the steps which would disabuse them of that ignorance but rather left informing them to the person with the greatest interest in not doing so, namely their financially burdened son." 
Santow J found that Mr R. Burke approached his parents in late June 1990, at their home, to sign some papers which he said would enable him to borrow a further $200,000 from the Bank. After some hesitation by Mrs Burke senior, the
Burkes senior signed the papers. They were not given the opportunity to read them by Mr R. Burke, nor had they had any contact with the Bank. The only explanation they received was from their son who assured them: "It's not a mortgage, it's just a loan for two years". Mr R. Burke told them he needed the funds to purchase the other half of the real estate business. Santow J accepted that the Burkes senior did not know of the deterioration in their son's financial position or that the purpose of the loan was to consolidate business debts. Although he found that Mr Burke senior understood that one of the purposes of the loan was the "rollover" of the $150,000 loan, he also accepted that Mr Burke senior thought that another of the purposes of the loan was to buy out the remaining part of the real estate business. Mr Burke senior believed this was a valuable asset. Santow J also accepted that neither of the
Burkes senior would have signed the documents if they had known the true situation. Finally, he found that Mr Burke junior misled his parents into believing that one of the purposes of the loan was to buy out the remaining part of the real estate business in order to induce them to sign the documents.

Following the signing of the documents by the Burkes senior, the mortgage was relied on by the Bank as security for the further term loan of $200,000 which the Bank then made, from which the original term loan, $151,901.65, and an overdrawn cheque account, $29,000 were paid, and funds were provided to the
Burkes junior to meet ongoing living expenses.

At that stage, in my view, the substitution of the mortgage as security for the new loan was complete, the old loan was discharged, and the only operation of the mortgage was as security for the new loan.

Later the Burkes junior fell into arrears on their $200,000 loan. This led to the Bank, by letter dated 19 July 1991, writing to the Burkes senior demanding that they meet the arrears on the loan, failing which the Bank would commence legal action. It was only after receipt of this letter that the Burkes senior learned the real purpose and effect of the documents they had signed in June
Soon afterwards they commenced proceedings claiming orders and declarations seeking the setting aside of the 1987 mortgage and the 1990 transaction. Santow J recorded that the case for the Burkes senior was throughout that they did not claim the 1987 mortgage was, in the circumstances which prevailed at the time they entered into it, unconscionable, although, at the same time as they acknowledged themselves to be responsible for guaranteeing the original advance of $150,000, they denied responsibility for any additional amounts.

In their proceedings they attacked the 1990 transaction as unconscionable under general equitable principles, and upon other grounds, viz Contracts
Review Act 1980 and Fair Trading Act 1987, upon which Santow J found it unnecessary to decide. As to the 1987 mortgage, their principal claim was that it would be unconscionable for the Bank to rely on it as security for advances made to the Burkes junior on or after March 1990.

The Bank argued that even if the consent of the Burkes senior to the 1990 transaction were ineffectual, the further advance was in any event secured by the 1987 mortgage by reason of its all moneys clause, and that there was no basis for interfering with that mortgage.

Santow J came by alternative ways to the conclusion that he should limit the extent to which the Bank could rely on the mortgage as security for the entire debt of the Burkes junior.

The first way had two steps: (a) he construed the "all moneys" clause in the mortgage as not covering any such advances as were not the subject of an effective consent. His view was that at most consent had been given "to the rollover of $150,000"; (b) on the basis either of constructive notice or of agency he said the Bank was liable for the consequences of the son's wrongdoing in procuring, in the way in which he did, his parents' execution of purported consent to the 1990 transaction. On this approach he regarded the transaction as unconscionable, and would set it aside, leaving the 1987 mortgage on foot but securing only the original advance of $150,000.

The second way of arriving at the same result did not involve the construction of the "all moneys" clause. Santow J said that if he were wrong about that, and if as a matter of construction the clause applied to the indebtedness resulting from the 1990 transaction, his view as to unconscionable dealing would still be to deny the Bank the benefit of that security, to the extent that such denial was required to negate the effect of such unconscionable conduct.

He concluded that it was clear that the respondents concurred with the rollover of $150,000, the original advance; but, they did not concur in any additional amount being secured by the mortgage, unless it were for the purpose, represented to them by their son, of buying out the balance of the business, which of course it was not. Santow J did not think the respondents should have the windfall of being excused repayment altogether of the $150,000 loan, but he also thought it would be inequitable for their liability to exceed the amount owing at March 1987, $151,901.65. Nor did he think the Bank should be entitled to any interest on that sum, subject to payment being effected within 150 days so as to give the respondents adequate time to make the necessary arrangements. He made orders accordingly.

In its oral argument the Bank did not put submissions by reference to its final amended notice of grounds of appeal. It had subsequently filed written submissions and counsel relied on what appeared in the written submissions and on what he put to the court orally, making it clear that those were the only arguments the court was being asked to consider.

The arguments relied on by the Bank were: the facts of the case as found by
Santow J did not support a finding of unconscionability as explained in the leading case, Commercial Bank of Australia Limited versus Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447]; Mr Burke junior could not properly have been found to be the agent of the Bank in obtaining his parents' signatures to the two documents; in signing the two 1990 documents the parents were not entering into any new contract - their signature of the two documents amounted to no more than an acknowledgment of the existence of the mortgage as a security available to support further advances to the Burkes junior. If these submissions failed, it was contended that nothing had occurred which affected the validity of the mortgage which, on its proper construction, provided security for any subsequent advances by the Bank to the Burkes junior.

In connection with this last submission, it may be that if the "all moneys" clause in the mortgage were looked at entirely by itself, it would support the
Bank's construction argument. However, at the same time as they had signed the mortgage, the Burkes senior had signed another document put before them by the Bank, headed "Non-regulated loans, minimum statements to be made when guarantor/ third party are signing documents". There was no evidence of the origin of the terms "non-regulated loans" and "minimum statements". The [Credit Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/) defined regulated loans and prescribed a number of conditions to be fulfilled by parties making such loans. So far as I am aware, the [Credit Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/) did not in 1987 make any provision concerning non- regulated loans, nor was the court told of any other statutes making such provision.

At all events, the document so headed was addressed "Dear Sir/Madam" and continued: "You should understand:
This document ... is being taken in support of a loan to Robert William and Vicki-Ann Burke amounting to 150,000 plus interest and charges for the purpose of purchasing 49% interest in Parkis Holdings Pty Limited and purchase of additional rent roll.
The document allows the Bank to make further advances to Robert William
Burke and Vicki-Ann Burke.
If Robert William and Vicki-Ann Burke defaults, the Bank is able to call upon you for repayment and exercise its powers under the document which you signed.
You may take this document away and obtain independent advice about your obligations." 
There followed statements that the Burkes senior voluntarily executed the document and did not wish to ask any question. Below that were their signatures, witnessed by a Bank officer.

Paragraph 2 of the document might have finished with the words "for which you will be liable" but did not. Paragraph 3 of the document might have included after the word "repayment", the words "of the amount originally lent and any further advances", but did not. The omission of words to that effect seems to me to leave the document open to be read as telling the guarantor/third party that he and she will be liable to repay the amount originally lent plus interest and charges and no more. At the very least the document is ambiguous. It may well be that this document should be taken into account in the construction of the mortgage signed along with it. My tentative view is that there would then be reasonable grounds for reading down the "all moneys" clause in the way which the Bank apparently did itself.

However, I do not need to express a final opinion on this point, because it seems to me that the alternative basis upon which Santow J placed his conclusion is a sound one and it is not dependent upon the construction of the "all moneys clause".

Before explaining the basis on which I agree with Santow J on this view of the case, I will return to the arguments of the Bank earlier listed. The Bank submitted that before unconscionability of the Amadio type could be found it was necessary that the party claiming relief should show that that party had been in a position of special disadvantage, that this was known to the other party and that the other party took unconscientious advantage of the situation. It was submitted that these requirements were not fulfilled in the present case.

There is no doubt in my mind that the Burkes senior were in a position of special disadvantage; among other things, they had no knowledge of the true situation concerning their son and the conduct of the Bank and the son combined to keep them in the dark - note also the evidence of Mr Burke senior at AB 118Q; equally, it seems quite clear that the Bank wanted to improve its security position and left it to the son to persuade his parents to give, as the Bank believed, further security than the Bank already had. The Bank obtained what was, in fact, an unfair advantage. The only aspect reasonably open to argument is whether the Bank should be regarded as having had sufficient knowledge of that unfair advantage to make it a party to the unconscionability.

On this point Santow J analysed the relevant case law in some detail and came to the conclusion that "the principle of constructive notice should apply to any situation where the `surety reposes trust and confidence in the principal debtor in relation to his financial affairs' (Barclays Bank Pty Limited v
O'Brien <case>; [[1994] 1 AC 180] at 198) so long as the likelihood of that is or should be known to the creditor, in circumstances where the transaction of guarantee was not to the guarantor's advantage".

I agree with this. The cases justify a doctrine at least as wide as this (see amongst many other places Mason J in Amadio at 467) and possibly wider, although it is not necessary to consider the wider possibility in the present case.

This is because in my opinion Santow J rightly considered the facts he found fell within the principle as he stated it.

My opinion adverse to the appellant on this point disposes of the principal argument in the appeal; the conclusion seems to me to be dictated by the facts as found by Santow J.

As to the appellant's next argument, that in signing the 1990 documents the
Burkes senior were simply acknowledging the existence of a security already on foot and capable of extending to the proposed further advance, I do not think that there is any merit in it. I have earlier indicated my view of the way in which the documents should be understood. On the face of them they are in my view contractual. It is interesting to note that the Bank at the time was intending them to be contractual, because it did not consider that the mortgage, without more, could be used as security for the new loan.

In addition to stating my opinion that all the arguments against Santow J's conclusion of unconscionability fail, I think I should also indicate a further view of the case available on the facts found by him and not inconsistent with his own view, although it perhaps relies on additional considerations.

I have indicated earlier my opinion that upon the application by the Bank and the Burkes junior of the moneys available under the new loan to the Burkes junior to, inter alia, the discharging of the first $150,000 loan, the mortgage had no further operation in relation to that loan (there was nothing to relate to) and its only operation was as security for the new loan. The obtaining of the mortgage as security for that loan was vitiated by the unconscionability found by Santow J. That deprived the mortgage of any enforceability at all against the Burkes senior, unless the court felt it inequitable to discharge them completely from any obligation to the Bank. In
Amadio, the guarantors were freed from any obligation to the bank at all: see Deane J at 481. In the present case, the Burkes senior had made clear to the court at all times that they acknowledged themselves liable for the amount originally advanced of $150,000. Because of that, and because that would bring about, in light of the overall circumstances a result reflecting the risk they had deliberately undertaken in supporting their son's dealings with the Bank, it seems to me to be a properly equitable result that the Bank should be able to use the mortgage as security for that original advance. (The figure of $151,901.65 is the figure actually used by Santow J in his final order; no question has been raised about the difference between that and $150,000 in the appeal.) I would therefore not be disposed to interfere with Santow J's order in that respect.

I should mention two other arguments that were put to the court by the Bank.
One was a point that to my mind had no substance. At one stage in his reasons
Santow J said that at the time of the 1990 documents "that the position of the Burkes junior was, at best and to the knowledge of the Bank, financially parlous and at worst, virtually insolvent". He did not say whereabouts in what he called "this limited spectrum" the position of the Burkes junior should be placed. For the Bank it was submitted that the word "parlous" was not justified by the evidence. This was the only primary finding of fact by
Santow J challenged in the appeal. This court looked at all the evidence which counsel said justified his submission, and, in my opinion, that evidence demonstrates that what Santow J said was correct, particularly bearing in mind the meaning he was ascribing to "parlous" as being somewhat better than "virtually insolvent".

The last matter argued for the Bank was that the Bank should have been allowed interest on the $151,901.65, because, since the Burkes senior had undoubtedly owed that amount from at least the date of demand, they had had the benefit of the money and should account for that benefit by paying interest on it.

However, in view of the broad basis upon which I think this case is most satisfactorily explained, which I have already indicated, it seems to me that the result reached by Santow J was an equitable one and should not be disturbed.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

COLE JA: I agree with Priestley JA.

GROVE AJA: I agree with Priestley JA.
 * * * 
