

Bellevue Crescent Pty Ltd and Anor versus Marland Holdings Pty Ltd and 4 Ors (No 2) Matter No 1735/97 [1998] NSWSC 89 (31 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 `

BELLEVUE CRESCENT PTY LIMITED & ANOR` `v MARLAND HOLDINGS PTY LIMITED & 4 ORS (NO 2)` ` 1735/97` `31 March 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 13 February 1998 I gave reasons for judgment on a separate question arising out of the cross-claim filed in these proceedings by the Council of the City of Sydney. I answered that question favourably to the Council. That separate question had been ordered by Windeyer J on 29 October 1997 on a notice of motion by the Sydney City Council. His Honour ordered there be no order as to costs of that motion. 
There are four separate sets of proceedings concerning the problem of the title to the land described in my reasons for judgment of 13 February 1998.
Those four sets of proceedings were, by order of Windeyer J on 5 September , consolidated with the present proceedings with the plaintiff in these proceedings to be dominus litis.

As I said in my earlier judgment, the Council and solicitors who appeared at the hearing formed into two groups. Mr Coles QC led for the Sydney City
Council and he presented the argument which ultimately succeeded. Mr Armfield of counsel appeared for the plaintiff, Bellevue Crescent Pty Limited, and he supported Mr Coles QC's argument. The only other substantial argument was presented by Mr Southwick of counsel who appeared for the third and fourth defendants in these proceedings, namely Tomark Pty Limited and Mod and
Disposals Store Pty Limited. Miss Hole who appeared for Marland Holdings Pty
Limited made some helpful but neutral submissions, and Miss Needham who appeared for the Hospital Contributions Fund of Australia said very little, but what she did say was of great help.

The parties have given attention to the question of costs, which is a rather awkward one because of the way in which the suits were commenced by different parties, and by the fact that the only question which I have decided is the question raised by the cross-claim. The argument of the separate question is what I need to consider.

On that, the Council of the City of Sydney was successful and so, under the general rules, it should get its costs. The plaintiff supported the Council and the plaintiff provided the Council with some of the evidence upon which it relied, but it was not necessary for the plaintiff to have been separately represented at the hearing, though doubtless for the plaintiff's own protection it thought that it should be.

The costs of the material which the plaintiff provided to the Council should be part of the Council's costs, but there is no reason why the costs of appearance of the plaintiff on the separate question should not be borne by it personally.

So far as the defendants were concerned, the third and fourth defendants opposed the argument that was being put by the Council and failed.
Accordingly, they should pay the Council's costs of the separate question.

The next question is whether the other defendants should also be equally liable.

The present reasons are only dealing with the costs of the separate question because there are some problems about other aspects of the case. I cannot at this stage dispose of the whole proceedings. When the whole proceedings are disposed of, costs orders can be made which would either compensate or mulct the appropriate parties for or by costs.

So far as the argument on the separate question was concerned, Miss Needham in essence adopted what Mr Coles QC said. I cannot see why the third and fourth defendants should pay Miss Needham's costs. On the other hand, hers was more or less a submitting appearance and should be in the same position as the plaintiff. Miss Hole did put some submissions, but mainly on technical matters, and generally did not enter into the debate and I think her client should also pay its own costs.

Mr Armfield has pointed out to me that there was a notice of motion of 29
October 1997 on which orders needed to be made to have the separate question properly dealt with and that his client should get the costs of that.

I should make it clear that the general rule in this sort of application is that only one set of costs is usually allowed for the successful party, and one set of costs also needs to be paid by the unsuccessful party.

Accordingly, on the separate question I order that the costs of the plaintiff of the motion of 29 October 1997 be paid by the third and fourth defendants, but otherwise the plaintiff pay its own costs on the separate question; that the third and fourth defendants pay the costs of the Council of the argument on the separate question, and that the first and fifth defendants pay their own costs. I will then make orders 1 and 9 in the short minutes of order which
I have initialled. I reserve further consideration generally including further consideration as to costs. The exhibits should be retained for twenty-eight days and then released under the usual terms.

Mr Conway, solicitor for the third and fourth defendants, has reminded me that
I have not dealt with the argument that the case was one of public interest and that recent decisions including the decision of the High Court in
Oshlack versus Richmond River Council <case>; <case>; [(1996) 148 ALR 378)] have shown that it is a legitimate matter to take into account when making orders for costs that the proceedings were in the public interest. Certainly that decision does indicate that it is legitimate to displace the ordinary rule as to costs that the loser pays costs, the winner gets costs, because at least if the person commencing the proceedings did so to protect the public interest there was a reason for displacing the general rule.

I have considered that, but rejected it for these reasons. The first is that
Mr Conway's clients are not initiating parties, though they were the plaintiffs in two of the suits which had been consolidated with this suit.
Secondly, the real debate in these proceedings is the commercial use or value of either the land, or alternatively the block owned by the respective parties which adjoins the land. Thirdly, the questions as to the proprietorship of property raised in this case would only peripherally come within the public interest principle referred to by the High Court.

Additionally it might be said that principle is an exceptional rule which at least until the law develops further I would think is only to be applied by courts in the exceptional rather than the usual case. Accordingly that principle does not affect the result, but I am indebted to Mr Conway for reminding me that it was in the ring for consideration.
 * * * 
