

Regina versus Lam Matter No 70052/96 [1998] NSWSC 47 (20 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
REGINA versus VAN TY LAM /96 March 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
REMARKS ON SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: The prisoner, Van Ty Lam, was tried before me for the murder of
Loc Quang Laam at Bankstown on 18 January 1996. The jury found him guilty of manslaughter. The major issue in the trial was self defence which, clearly, the jury decided adversely to the prisoner. Manslaughter was left on the basis of provocation and unlawful and dangerous act.

It is unnecessary to recite the facts. On the occasion in question there was a violent incident involving the prisoner and the deceased, in the course of which the deceased sustained several knife wounds to his chest from which he died. There were wounds to other parts of his body consistent with the dynamic nature of the event. A brief statement of the findings of fact upon which I proceed to sentence is sufficient.

At the relevant time the prisoner and the deceased were living at a house in
Bankstown. The prisoner had formed an intimate relationship with a lady who gave evidence in the trial, Anh Le. On occasions the deceased made unwelcome advances to Anh Le and she told the prisoner about this. The prisoner had also been told by Anh Le and a man called Truong that the deceased had threatened to kill him, although there is no suggestion that the deceased had made any such threat to his face.

On the evening in question the prisoner confronted the deceased about the matter of Anh Le, with reference in particular to an incident involving her some nights earlier. I must say that I found the evidence about that incident difficult to understand, but I do not think that anything turns on it. I do not accept the prisoner's account of what happened thereafter without reservation, but I do accept that the deceased was aggressive, both verbally and physically. I am prepared to accept that it was the deceased who first tried to take up the knife but the prisoner managed to seize it before he could do so. Certainly, I am not satisfied that the prisoner armed himself with a knife for the purpose of an attack upon the deceased.

Thereafter the two men moved through the house to the back yard. No doubt the circumstances were dramatic and things happened very quickly. Some of the deceased's wounds may well have been the result of accidental contact with the knife through his own movements, whether defensive or aggressive. However, I am satisfied that others were the result of deliberate acts of stabbing by the prisoner. I cannot say how many, but certainly the major wound described by Dr
Duflou, which could alone have caused death, was one of them.

Although, as I have said, provocation was left to the jury, I am satisfied that the proper basis upon which to sentence the prisoner is that he killed by an unlawful and dangerous act. This was the view of counsel on both sides and
I am indebted to them for their succinct and common sense approach to this matter. It may be that, if I had sentenced the applicant on the basis that the killing was provoked, the result would not have been significantly different: cf Reg versus Isaacs [(1997) 41 NSWLR 374] at p 381.
However that may be, the prisoner stands for sentence for a killing which occurred spontaneously in the course of a violent incident not entirely of his own making, and without the intent to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm.

Pursuant to <case> of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), I have received victim impact statements from the deceased's wife, who was estranged from him at the time, his two daughters and his father. Those statements speak movingly of the continuing effects upon the extended family of the violent and untimely death of the deceased. The court extends to all of them its sympathy and hopes that the opportunity to express their feelings through those statements has helped them come to terms with their tragic loss. However, I do not consider it appropriate to have regard to those statements in determining what sentence should be passed: see <case> and Reg versus Previtera (Hunt CJ at
CL, unreported, 27 May 1997) at pp 16-19.

The prisoner is now 40 years old. Between 1987 and 1992 he has been convicted twice of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and once of common assault, on each occasion at Fairfield Local Court. On the first charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm he was placed on a two year bond. On the second (apparently committed after the expiration of that bond), he was ordered to perform 200 hours community service. On the charge of common assault he was fined. It is of some concern that he has prior convictions for violence, but I have no information about the circumstances of those offences, and the way in which they were dealt with suggests that they were not particularly serious.

There is brief information about the prisoner's background in reports of Dr S
K Law, psychiatrist, who saw him in 1991 on referral from his local doctor, and Dr Bruce Westmore, forensic psychiatrist, who saw him in 1996. It is a sad story. He was born and brought up in Vietnam but, when he was only three years old, his father was arrested and taken to Cambodia. His mother remarried not long thereafter, leaving him in the care of his maternal grandfather. At some stage he came to this country as a refugee. It seems that he has relatives here but there is no evidence before me of who they are or what the extent of his contact with them has been.

He had a limited education. There is no evidence about his employment prior to his arrest. From the reports of Dr Law and Dr Westmore, there appears to have been a fairly longstanding history of disturbed behaviour, suggestive of psychiatric illness. In 1991 Dr Law diagnosed schizophrenia and prescribed anit-psychotic medication. However, in 1996, Dr Westmore noted a history of some abnormal experiences but doubted that he was suffering from a mental illness. Certainly, it is not suggested that mental illness had any part to play in the tragic events of 18 January 1996.

On any view of it, this is a very sad case. There is no need to emphasise the tragedy of the premature and violent death of the unfortunate deceased. On the other hand, the prisoner himself is a pathetic figure who is deserving of some sympathy for his troubled background. I consider that his offence falls within the lower range of criminality embraced by the crime of manslaughter. Given his background and his prior conflict with the criminal law, there are special circumstances warranting a departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms. It would be in the community's interest that he have the opportunity to be at liberty on parole for a reasonably lengthy period. He has been in custody since his arrest on 19 January 1996 and the sentence I propose will commence on that date.

Van Ty LAM you are sentenced to penal servitude for five years, comprising a minimum term of three years to commence on 19 January 1996 and to expire on 18
January 1999, and an additional term of two years. You will be eligible for release on parole on 19 January 1999.
 * * * 
