

Director of Public Prosecutions versus Thomas James Allan No. 60225/95 Criminal
Law [1996] NSWSC 4 (8 January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(2), GROVE(3) AND ALLEN(1) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 1
November 1995 #DATE 1:11:1995 #ADD 8:1:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant    C A Davenport 
Solicitor for the Appellant 
S E O'Connor 
Counsel for the Respondent    G Niven 
Solicitors for the Respondent  Koops Martin
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
ALLEN J The Director of Public Prosecutions appeals to this Court pursuant to [section 5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against an order that proceedings in respect of counts 3 to 11 inclusive in an indictment preferred against the respondent be stayed until legal aid is granted to him for the trial of the charges the subject of those counts. I refer hereafter to the Director of
Public Prosecutions as "the Crown".
The respondent was the manager of a small company which conducted a roofing business. The company was the family company of a Mr and Mrs Wilton.
On 30 May 1991 the respondent was arrested and charged with 196 offences which were of the general character of misappropriation of money of the company or of the Wiltons and the making of false book entries to conceal what he had done. Many of the alleged offences related to quite small sums of money.
There were four days in all spent on the committal hearing and in the result, the prosecutor having abandoned most of the charges, the respondent was committed to trial on 8 April 1992 on the charges set out in the 11 counts in the indictment. The sums of money involved are: $3,000 on the first count; $3,515 on the second; $2,500 on the third; $400 on the fourth; $400 on the fifth; $1,670 on the sixth; $1,117.32 on the seventh; $900 on the eighth; $792.52 on the ninth; $300 on the tenth and $542.94 on the eleventh.
On 21 June 1993 he applied for legal aid for the trial. The application was refused and an appeal against the refusal was unsuccessful. The respondent moved for a stay of proceedings on the indictment until legal aid was given.
The motion came before Gibson DCJ. On 29 April 1994 his Honour recommended that legal aid be granted. He said: "I do not think any case such as this one, dealing with documents and that type of material, is one in which a person can properly present himself unless he has got certain qualifications in business, which I understand your client has not got".
He directed that a further application be made for legal aid and indicated that the motion could be re-listed if necessary.
The further application for legal aid was made in accordance with his
Honour's direction. Again it was refused. Again the respondent appealed. Again the appeal was unsuccessful. It was then renewed, supported by the text of the remarks of Gibson DCJ which by that time had become available. The application was rejected as incompetent.
The motion for a stay of proceedings was restored to the list and heard by
Flannery DCJ. His Honour had before him detailed affidavits as to the respondent's income and assets. The respondent gave oral evidence and was subjected to cross-examination. His Honour accepted that a trial on all eleven counts would take at least five days and that the financial situation of the respondent was such that he was "indigent" in respect of the cost of representation for a trial that length. He continued: "However, I do not think that he is indigent in respect of a two day trial. I recognise it will be difficult but I think not impossible."
In those circumstances, as his Honour found them to be, what he did was to order a separate trial on the first two counts. He pointed out that in such a trial offences in respect of $6,515 out of the total of $15,140.78 would be the subject of the criminal charges being separately tried. it is clear that his Honour envisaged that a trial on those two counts would conclude within two days. As to the remaining counts he stayed the proceedings upon them until legal aid was granted.
The respondent since has made a further application for legal aid, this time for the cost of legal representation on the hearing of this appeal. Again the Legal Aid Commission refused the application and an appeal against that refusal was dismissed.
The grounds of the appeal to this Court by the Crown are: 
His Honour failed to consider whether the respondent discharged the onus of showing both that he was unable to obtain representation from a source other than the Legal Aid Commission and that the absence of the legal representation had occurred without his fault.

His Honour erred in concluding that the material before him established that the respondent was indigent. 
The form of the order made by his Honour amounted to a permanent stay when, at most, a temporary stay was appropriate.
It is necessary to consider in greater detail the evidence which was before his Honour as to the respondent's financial position and as to what had been done by him or on his behalf to have legal representation for him at the trial. In consequence of the investigation which led to the preferring of the charges against him the respondent was dismissed from the employment of the company on 6 May 1991. He was unable to obtain further employment until 18
September of that year and, in consequence, had to borrow money from time to time. This included borrowing $3,165 in all from two friends, a Mr and Mrs
Dexter.
The employment which he had obtained in September and which he still retained was as a storeman. His ordinary earnings, after deduction of income tax, had increased slightly over the period of employment but were still only $359.66 per week. In addition, he worked what overtime was available. Over the two to three months period preceding the giving of evidence by him before
Flannery DCJ that had brought in, after tax, an additional $50 to $70 per week. There was no certainty, however, about what amount of overtime would continue to be available. The need for overtime at that level which the respondent had been working had arisen from the absence of another storeman because of illness.
The respondent's wife was working as a doctor's receptionist and earning $353 per week after tax. His daughter, aged about 21, was employed as an unqualified cook and contributed $30 per week for her board. His son, aged about 20, had just obtained an apprenticeship.
He was paying $20 per week for board. The total income available to the respondent, treating the whole of his wife's earnings as available and accepting continuance of the overtime earnings at $70 per week, after tax was $832.66 per week.
His Honour had before him evidence of the weekly expenses. He summarised them as consisting of: "Rent, part purchase on a vehicle, bank loan repayment, time-share holiday building repayment, telephone, electricity, credit account repayments, insurance, vehicle registration, fuel, reduction of repayment to solicitors for the committal, fees, food and housekeeping".
He found that putting to one side the income from overtime there was a slight shortfall between the income and the expenditure. His Honour did not take into account the $20 per week board which the son had just commenced to pay. He made no finding as to what amounts the respondent was likely to earn in the future for overtime.
The only assets were ordinary household furniture and personal effects, a
 model Falcon sedan, estimated to be worth $13,000, but on which $9,000 was still owed to Ford Credit and a time-share interest in a holiday block of units. That time-share interest had been a bad investment. It had been bought years earlier for $11,000 applying, for the down payment, a small legacy which the respondent's wife had received. Property values had collapsed. The unchallenged evidence was that about $9,000 was still owed for the purchase of that interest and that its market value was only $4,500. In the language of the current financial double-speak it was a negative asset.
His liabilities were substantial. Apart from his indebtedness to his solicitor, Mr Koops, and excluding what he owed on his car and on the purchase of the time-share interest, his liabilities exceeded $25,000. These included $16,500 owed to a bank which had proceeded to obtain judgment against him in respect of that indebtedness and the $3,165 owed to Mr and Mrs Dexter.
The respondent did attempt to reduce his living expenses. One step taken was to save on health insurance. He let that insurance lapse. The consequences were unfortunate. He was then diagnosed as having cataracts.
He had to wait an inordinate time for surgery to be performed under the public scheme.
It is argued for the Director of Public
Prosecutions that his Honour failed to examine whether the respondent could have improved his capacity to pay for legal representation for his trial by taking the following steps: sell some of his household furniture or effects; sell the time-share apartment for less than the price he was asking; obtain a further loan from his friends or financial institution; or sell his car using the proceeds to pay back the loan from Ford Credit and buy a cheaper car outright and then use the money which he was paying off the car to Ford Credit to fund regular payments towards legal representation.
Whilst it is true that his Honour did not descend to the detail suggested in the argument of the Crown, it is clear that he must have contemplated the respondent affecting a substantial rearrangement of his financial affairs in order to obtain the money necessary to pay for legal representation even for a two day trial. He recognised that even achieving that would be "difficult", although he did not consider that it was "impossible".
That it would be difficult is evident from a consideration in the course suggested by the Crown.
There was nothing to indicate that the household furniture and personal effects were more than modest.
As to the time-share investment, there was no evidence that he could sell that interest without first discharging what he still owed.
As to borrowing money, the position was that he had already borrowed from his friends money which he could not repay and that he was deeply in debt, for a man of his income, to financial institutions.
Selling the car might be considered a more promising means of raising money. His
Honour found that that vehicle, a 1988 Ford Falcon, was worth $13,000. His Honour so found. But there was no certainty that much could be obtained for it on a sale. He had bought the car three years earlier for $14,000. $9,000, in any event, was still owed on it to Ford Credit. His Honour did find that he needed a reliable car because he was employed at Sawtell and had to travel about 10 kilometres to and from his place of employment by car, there being no public transport. On the other hand, he was paying some $390 per month in payments to Ford Credit and it was possible that he could sell the car, pay out Ford Credit and have sufficient to buy a bottom of the range second hand vehicle. Whether that would give him the reliability of transport which he needed to maintain his job is a matter of some conjecture.
I now turn to the evidence as to what was done in respect of the respondent's legal representation.
He was represented at committal by his solicitor, Mr Koops. Mr Koops was diligent. He repeatedly pressed the Crown for particulars of the charges and this may well have had some effect as, by the time the committal hearing commenced, the Crown had reduced the charges from 196 to 14. In the meantime, however, all the 196 matters charged had to be considered by Mr Koops.
At the conclusion of the committal a lengthy and detailed no bill submission was made by Mr Koops. It failed but it is not suggested that it was not a proper representation.
So strapped was the position of the respondent in respect of the committal proceedings that he could not raise the $1,000 needed to get a copy of the transcript. That was solved by Mr Koops making a representation which resulted in the Magistrate making available to Mr Koops the magistrate's own copy. Mr Koops has not been paid anything like what properly was due to him.
He has been content to take payments as the respondent has been able to make them. The indebtedness remains, however, in excess, it would seem, of $10,000.
The argument for the Crown in substance is that not only had the respondent failed to establish that he could not pay for a trial but also that he had failed to establish inability to persuade members of the legal profession to appear for him free of charge. It must be recorded that the applications for the staying of the proceedings were made for the respondent by counsel appearing for him without charge. There was nothing put to either
Gibson DCJ or Flannery DCJ to suggest that it was at all realistic to assume that counsel would be prepared to appear without charge for him on a trial which would go at least five sitting days.
The contents of the no bill application were in evidence before Flannery
DCJ. Perusal of them shows that the defence to a trial on all eleven counts in the indictment would have involved detailed analysis of complicated financial arrangements, albeit ones not involving huge sums of money, as well as considerable evidence as to the past financial company transactions which, it would be argued, established that there were informal recognised practices, in keeping with what the respondent had done, which were not reflected in the formal bookkeeping. It was indicated that the respondent intended to give evidence at the trial. It is clear that his Honour's estimate of five sitting days for a trial on the eleven counts in the indictment was, if anything, conservative.
The approach adopted by the Crown is, in substance, that the respondent should have been treated by Flannery DCJ as one upon whom the onus lay of establishing that no matter what lawful steps he took he simply would be unable somehow to procure legal representation otherwise than by a grant of legal aid.
That approach is inconsistent with what was said in the joint judgment of
Brennan,
Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ who constituted the bench of the
High Court in Craig versus The State of South Australia decided on 24 October 1995.
Their Honour's said: "The decision of this Court in Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) CLR 292] established that, in a criminal case where an unrepresented accused is facing trial for serious offences, a trial judge has power to make an order staying the proceedings if, in the circumstances of the case, it appears that the accused would otherwise not receive a fair trial.
In the course of their joint judgment, Mason CJ and McHugh J made the following comments as reflecting their approach and that of the other majority Justices (at 315): '... we identify what the majority considers to be the approach which should be adopted by a trial judge who is faced with an application for an adjournment or a stay by an indigent accused charged with a serious offence who, through no fault on his or her part, is unable to obtain legal representation.
In that situation, in the absence of exceptional circumstances, the trial in such a case should be adjourned, postponed or stayed until legal representation is available.' 
The effect of those comments was to indicate circumstances in which a trial judge should grant an adjournment or stay until legal representation was available. The reference in them to an accused's inability to obtain legal representation being 'through no fault on his or her part' was not intended to indicate that every instance of misbehaviour, improvidence or other fault on the part of an accused which had contributed to his or her lack of representation must automatically preclude entitlement to a stay. In that regard, we agree with the view expressed by
Olsson J in the Full Court that: '...what was in contemplation was a test which focused on the reasonableness of the conduct of an accused in all the circumstances; and excluded situations in which it could fairly be said that the accused, by his gratuitous and unreasonable conduct, had been the author of his own misfortune'.

A fortiori, it was not intended to suggest that the power to grant a stay on the grounds of inability to obtain legal representation does not exist at all if there has been, as a matter of objective fact, contributing fault on the part of the accused."
Any "fault" on the part of the respondent, if it could be so described, in not importuning his friends for further advances, in not trying to persuade financial institutions to lend him more, in not selling his car and in not pleading for further services to be provided without charge by members of the legal profession falls far short of unreasonableness by him so that it can be said that by his gratuitous and unreasonable conduct he was the author of his own misfortune in facing a trial on the eleven counts in the indictment without legal representation.
The touchstone of the common law is reasonableness. That touchstone applies to what amounts to indigence in respect of the case of legal representation no less than it does to the concept of fault.
In my judgment, it was clearly open to Flannery
DCJ to find that in respect of the trial on all eleven counts the respondent was an indigent person.
There remains one matter to be considered. It is the Crown's argument that his Honour failed to appreciate or gave insufficient weight to the reality that legal aid never would be granted and that, accordingly, the practical effect of the stay order which he made was that the criminal proceedings on the remaining counts were stayed forever. The short answer to that argument is that it is a matter for the executive
Government of the
State, through the Legal Aid Commission or by other means, whether legal aid is given. If the Government chooses to give legal aid then the order made by
Flannery DCJ creates no impediment to the trial proceeding in respect of the remaining counts.
In Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 292] Deane J said (at 330, 331): "It must be stressed that the applicant does not argue that he had a directly enforceable common law 'right' to be provided with legal representation at public expense.
Clearly, he did not. The common law does not impose upon the government or any section or member of the community an enforceable duty to provide free legal advice or representation to anyone. What the common law requires is that, if the government sees fit to subject an accused person to a criminal trial, that trial must be a fair one.
Inevitably, compliance with the law's overriding requirement that a criminal trial be fair will involve some appropriation and expenditure of public funds: for example, the funds necessary to provide an impartial judge and jury; the funds necessary to provide minimum court facilities; the funds necessary to allow committal proceedings where such proceedings are necessary for a fair trial. On occasion, the appropriation and expenditure of such public funds will be directed towards the provision of information and assistance to the accused: for example, the funds necessary to enable adequate pre-trial particulars of the charge to be furnished to the accused; the funds necessary to provide an accused held in custody during a trial with adequate sustenance and with minimum facilities for consultation and communication; the funds necessary to provide interpreter services for an accused and an accused's witnesses who cannot speak the language ...
As Barton v. The
Queen (1980) 147 CLR, at pp 96, 103, 107, 109 establishes, the effect of the common law's insistence that a criminal trial be fair is that, if the funds and facilities necessary to enable a fair trial to take place are withheld, the courts are entitled and obliged to take steps to ensure that their processes are not abused to produce what our system of law regards as a grave miscarriage of justice, namely, the adjudgment and punishment of alleged criminal guilt otherwise than after a fair trial."
On the facts in Dietrich, Deane J was convinced that the trial which had taken place with the accused having been unrepresented had been what, in our system of justice, was an unfair trial. I have no doubt that if this trial were to proceed on the remaining nine weeks, with the respondent not being legally represented, it would be an unfair trial within the meaning of that concept in our system of law.
The foregoing reasons would indicate that the Crown appeal should be dismissed. There is, however, one matter of concern.
The form of his Honour's order was that the proceedings be stayed until legal aid was provided. That excludes the possibility that circumstances will arise in which the respondent could obtain legal representation, acting reasonably, without the provision for that purpose of legal aid funds. I would propose that the form of order be corrected in that respect but that otherwise the Crown appeal should be dismissed.
The orders which I propose are that the appeal be allowed, that the order made by his Honour be quashed and that in lieu thereof this Court order that the trial on counts 3 to 11 inclusive in the indictment be stayed until legal representation is available to the respondent for the trial on those counts.
JUDGE2
HUNT CJ at CL I agree with the orders proposed by Allen J, for the reasons which he has given. There is, however, one further matter which should be said.
The issue of an accused's indigence is not resolved by the mere application of the means test guidelines laid down by the Legal Aid
Commission. If someone falls outside those guidelines, he may nevertheless still be unable to obtain legal representation with the means reasonably available to him. The difficulties which the Commission undoubtedly has from a funding point of view - which are matters of public knowledge but about which evidence was in any event given before me in the case of Regina v
Ivan Robert
Marko Milat (11 August 1995, unreported) at 38-40 - make it clear that more and more persons seeking legal aid will necessarily be excluded by those guidelines: cf "Access to Justice - An Action Plan", R Sackville QC (1994), par 9.41.
That does not result in a trial without legal representation being any the less unfair.
The orders of the Court are as proposed by Allen J.
JUDGE3
GROVE J I agree with the orders proposed by Allen J, for the reasons which he has given.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/4.html  
