

Regina versus Kevin John Small [1998] NSWSC 1048 (12 November 1998) 
REGINA versus KEVIN JOHN SMALL /94 
TUESDAY 16 JULY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, SULLY J, ROLFE J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: I will ask Sully J to give the first judgment.

SULLY J: On 10 May 1993 Mr Kevin John Small, to whom I shall refer as "the appellant", was presented in the District Court upon an indictment charging him that on  December 1989 at Milperra he, being then in the company of others, had sexual intercourse with a named complainant knowing that she was not consenting thereto. This charge alleged a contravention of what was then section 61D(1B) of the Crimes Act.

To that charge the appellant pleaded that he was not guilty and he was put upon his trial accordingly. He was represented at the trial by experienced trial counsel.

The trial occupied four days and it culminated in the return by the jury of a verdict of guilty as charged. For reasons the detail of which need not now be gone into, the appellant did not stand for sentence until 15 September 1994.
He was in fact then convicted and sentenced to penal servitude for five and a half years, apportioned between a minimum term of two and a half years and an additional term of three years. The minimum term was dated to commence on 13
May 1993 and to expire on 12 November 1995, so that the appellant has by now served the entirety of that minimum term. The additional term was dated to commence on November 1995 and to expire on 12 November 1998.

The appellant, as it would seem, is at present in custody, bail refused, following upon his having pleaded guilty to a charge or charges of armed robbery, and his committal for sentence upon those pleas and to a date in the near future.

It would seem that because of those outstanding matters nothing has been done to give formal effect to the coming into operation, notionally on 13 November , of the three year additional term to which I have referred.

On 15 September 1994, when the appellant stood for sentence in the way that I have described, he was dealt with also in relation to another matter involving a contravention of section 112 of the Crimes Act. Nothing turns for present purposes upon that matter and no more need be said about it.

The notice of appeal as originally framed and filed notified an intention on the part of the appellant both to appeal against his conviction on the section
D charge and to seek leave to appeal against the sentence imposed upon him pursuant to his conviction upon that charge. At the hearing this afternoon the appellant has indicated, however, that he has no present wish to challenge the sentence but wishes to challenge the propriety of the conviction itself.

On 2 February 1996 the appellant caused to be transmitted to the court by facsimile a manuscript document in which he set out a number of submissions.
In my opinion, it is fair to understand that document as notifying a wish on the part of the appellant to challenge his conviction upon three grounds. They are as follows.
The incompetence of counsel appearing for him at trial.

This ground has to do with the decision of counsel at trial to have admitted into evidence details of the criminal antecedents of the appellant. The appellant contends that this direction was taken without proper prior consultation with and proper prior advice to him. The appellant contends that the way in which this matter was handled at the trial has entailed a miscarriage of justice and that he has thereby been found guilty of a crime of which he is in fact innocent.
The failure of counsel at trial to call in the defence case a particular medical practitioner who was, apparently, a specialist in the use of methadone.

The appellant contends that the failure to call this witness entailed that the jury never had before it in a proper form the defence contention that a person having the addiction to methadone of the appellant could not, in terms of his sexual capacity at the relevant time, have done what he was alleged to have done.
That the verdict of the jury is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Before dealing with the details of those present challenges to the conviction, it is necessary to attend to the relevant factual background. I take it for present purposes from the written submissions put in by the Crown, which seem to me to say accurately and succinctly all that needs to be said for present purposes. So far as concerns the Crown case made at trial against the appellant, it can be summarised as follows: "On 15 December 1989 the complainant ... aged seventeen years, attended East
Hills Hotel. She met a number of acquaintances there and consumed three alcoholic beverages. At approximately 9.30pm the complainant joined a table at which the appellant was seated with an acquaintance of his by the name of
Neville. She stayed with them until approximately 10.15pm, at which time she left the hotel and made a telephone call from a public telephone booth opposite the hotel. Later, the appellant and his acquaintance, Neville, gave the complainant and her two friends a lift to the Deepwater Motor Boat Club.
At the club, the complainant asked the appellant if she could drive his car as she had never driven a manual vehicle before. The appellant drove the complainant around the immediate vicinity with the complainant between his legs at the steering wheel.

Shortly after, the appellant drove to a secluded area. The complainant tried to get out of the car. Her attempts were thwarted by the appellant's companion
Neville, who told her to take her clothes off before slapping her across the face. Neville then pushed her into the back seat. There she found the appellant waiting. The appellant then forced himself upon her and engaged in penile intercourse for approximately ten minutes.

Immediately after the incident the complainant managed to get out of the vehicle and run some distance to a nearby home.

There she made complaint to a Mrs Black. Mrs Black noticed the right side of the complainant's face was red.

Soon after, the complainant spoke to police about the matter. She was then taken to Liverpool Hospital for examination. No semen was found on the swabs taken from the complainant.

The appellant was interviewed by police in relation to this matter on 8 March
During the interview the appellant could not recollect any details of the incident alleged by the complainant. The appellant was arrested and charged with this matter on 8 March 1990." 
A positive case was called at trial by the defence. The appellant himself gave evidence and was extensively cross-examined. Certain material, to which it will be necessary to refer presently in greater detail, was tendered in support of his case as thus made.

The structure of that case as made at trial can be summarised as follows: "The appellant did not deny meeting the complainant at the East Hills Hotel and later taking her and her friends to the Deepwater Club. He said that he had driven the complainant around in his car, at her request. He said she was between his legs at this time. The appellant said whilst finding a quiet place to teach the complainant to drive his acquaintance was fondling the complainant's breasts and vagina. He said the complainant objected to this in a light-hearted way. Later, the complainant was between the appellant's legs and he was fondling her. Similarly, she lightly objected to his advances. The appellant then stopped the car as both he and the complainant wanted to go to the toilet. The complainant attempted to go to the toilet but wet herself and was given a pair of the appellant's shorts to wear. The three got back into the car and drove to a local petrol station, during which time the complainant was seated alternatively in the lap of the appellant and his acquaintance
Neville.

Later the three bought some alcoholic beverages. As they drove along, Neville exposed the complainant's breasts and made a comment as to their alleged beauty. The three laughed about this.

The appellant then drove into a petrol station, where he purchased some food.
Upon returning to the car he found Neville holding a ten dollar note. Neville said he had just made the money by allowing a male passer-by to suck on the complainant's breasts. The appellant thought the complainant was laughing.

Later the three drove to a secluded place to smoke marijuana. The appellant said the smell made him sick, so he got out of the car, leaving the complainant and Neville alone in the car. The appellant lay on the ground a short distance from the car. He could hear the car radio and the complainant and Neville laughing. After a short time he heard one of the car doors slam shut. He went over to the car and noticed the complainant gone. He asked
Neville where she was and he said she had 'pissed off'. When he asked Neville for details, Neville replied, 'She's only a slut anyway'.

The appellant then made an unsuccessful attempt to find the complainant.

The appellant said that he had been incapable of performing sexual intercourse due to a methadone programme he had been on which disenabled him from gaining an erect penis." 
GROUND 1. ABOVE 
The relevant principles I take to be stated sufficiently for present purposes in the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL, speaking for a differently constituted Bench of this Court in R versus Ranko Ignjatic [(1993) 68 A Crim R 333.]
The relevant law is there stated as follows: "As a general rule, an accused person is bound by the way in which the trial is conducted on his behalf, regardless of whether his instructions were carried out, and a conviction will not be set aside because decisions by his legal representatives as to the conduct of the trial were made without or contrary to instructions or because those decisions involved errors of judgment or even negligence. Counsel have a wide discretion as to the manner in which proceedings are conducted. Neither disobedience of instructions nor even incompetence is sufficient of itself to attract appellate intervention. It is only when the error made was of such a nature in the circumstances of the case as to have led to a miscarriage of justice that this Court will interfere." (68 A Crim R at 336.) 
A little later these further observations are made: "The principles stated in that case are not, however, restricted to the case in which the incompetence of counsel has been flagrant.

The issue to be determined is whether the error made by counsel was of such a nature in the circumstances of the case as to have led to a miscarriage of justice. Not every error by counsel will have that consequence. It was made clear in Birks (at 685; 392) that such a miscarriage may result from some cause other than flagrant incompetence, and that it is both impossible and undesirable to attempt to define with precision the cases in which it will be held that a miscarriage has occurred." (68 A Crim R at 337.) 
Evidence of the antecedent criminal record of the appellant first emerged in the cross-examination by the appellant's counsel at trial of Detective
Sergeant Thompson, whose evidence in chief touched essentially upon an interview conducted by him with the appellant during the course of relevant police investigations. The appellant's counsel devoted practically the whole of his cross-examination of this witness to eliciting from the witness that the appellant had a long and varied antecedent criminal record and that he was indeed then serving "a lengthy term of imprisonment".

At first blush this might appear to have been a strange decision. I believe that it would be fair to say that the generally accepted stance of legal representatives in criminal trials before juries is that the better course is to suppress as completely as possible any reference to any antecedent criminal record of the particular accused. That said, it must always be acknowledged, however, that in everything to do with the conduct of criminal trials before juries, circumstances alter cases.

In the present particular case I have read carefully the cross-examination of
Detective Sergeant Thompson. The first thing that I would say about it is that it was comparatively brief and, as best can be judged after the event, was carefully focused.

The cross-examination directed attention to two matters in particular. The first was that the record, although very long and varied, did not show any history of sexual violence of the kind alleged at trial. The second was that the appellant did indeed have at the relevant time an apparent drug problem.

Subsequently, and while another police officer, Detective Senior Constable
Stirling, was giving evidence in chief, the Crown Prosecutor tendered a written statement of the appellant's antecedent criminal record. It was admitted without objection. The document spreads over four closely-typed pages. It comprehends some eighty-five separate offences spread over some five years. The offences range in seriousness from what might be regarded fairly as minor street offences to offences of armed robbery.

I think that it is fair to say that any reasonable person coming for the first time to such a document would be much more likely than not to form a very unfavourable general impression of the appellant. This makes it very important, in my opinion, to attend carefully to the way in which the learned trial Judge dealt with the record in his charge to the jury. I shall return to that aspect.

The appellant himself gave lengthy evidence at trial. He gave a full and seemingly clear account of what he was alleging to have been the course of relevant events. In that context his evidence made two particular points. The first was that he had remonstrated with his friend Neville, whom, alone, he blamed for the assault, telling Neville that, 'You don't do things like that.' (AB 211.) The appellant expanded this part of his evidence as follows: "Q. Did you inquire of Neville what had happened? 
A. Yeah.

Q. Did you get an answer from him? 
A. Yeah just don't worry about it mate. I said, 'Well you don't do that to people Neville' and - 
Q. Did he appear to you to be concerned about her? 
A. No, no. I was very angry at him for - for doing it. I don't know it's just me I don't do it to anybody, I don't - I don't believe it's right to do something like that.

Q. Well had Neville told you anything about what had happened while you were away? 
A. No, no, no.

Q. When you say you don't believe in doing anything like that, to what behaviour on whose part are you referring? 
A. Letting a girl go like that in the - in the dark. I mean to say anything could have happened, she could have got strangled, raped, belted, killed, you know anything.

Q. You say that you have a certain standard of attitude toward - 
A. Sure.

Q. Conduct toward females? 
A. Yeah.

Q. Do you have any female relations yourself? 
A. I beg your pardon? 
Q. Do you have any female relations yourself? 
A. Not at the moment I was married.

Q. Do you have any offspring? 
A. I've got five children altogether.

Q. Any of those children female? 
A. Three.

Q. How old are the female children of yours? 
A. Well there's three to the - there's three in the marriage but one's a de facto relationship, the eldest girl Belinda's now twenty and then there's
Rhiannon she is fourteen and Holly's five.

Q. Now at the time of this happening in December of 1989 were you in contact with your daughters or not? 
A. Yes I was.

Q. Frequent contact, occasional contact? 
A. I used to visit them every weekend.

Q. Do you have love and respect for your daughters? 
A. I do." (AB 212, 213.) 
The second point that was emphasised by the appellant's evidence in chief was that on the day in question he had ingested both a prescribed dosage of methadone and some fifty Physeptone tablets. The appellant gave the following evidence in that regard: "Q. What do you tell his Honour and the jury about any effect that you perceived that that drug usage that day had on your sexual inclination? 
A. Like I said before I just, sexually it's just impossible for me to get an erect penis on half that dosage but I suppose I was suicidal at the time, I just didn't care about myself, the way I was, or anything, that's why my mother's got to get me to brighten myself up. I go out and I - you know, I just didn't care about myself so, that was my way of entertaining myself I suppose.

Q. Are you still on methadone? 
A. Yes I am.

Q. You've been receiving methadone administered according to a strict protocol during the course of this trial? 
A. Yes I have.

Q. At this building? 
A. Yes.

Q. Between 1989 and the present time has there been any period when you ceased to take methadone? 
A. No there hasn't.

Q. What do you tell his Honour and the jury about the present effect of the drugs that are being administered to you on your sex drive? 
A. Same thing, it's just that I haven't got a sex drive any more, it's just something that I don't really care about." (AB 218.) 
This evidence of the appellant was bolstered by the unopposed admission into evidence of a certificate by 
Dr Matthew of the Prison Methadone Programme within the New South Wales
Correctional Health Service. Formal parts omitted, that certificate reads as follows: "Mr Kevin Small is currently on a methadone maintenance programme in the New
South Wales Prison system. Prior to this he was on a community programme.

Kevin states that on the date of the alleged sexual assault in 1989 he consumed his usual dose of 80 mgs and then subsequently injected up to fifty mg Physeptone tablets. If this were true it is scarcely credible that he would achieve or maintain an erection." (AB 443.) 
As to the evidence of the appellant's criminal record, the learned trial Judge charged the jury as follows: "I must say, members of the jury, that it is unusual for an accused person's criminal record to be introduced into evidence. The rule is that, unless an accused claims he is a person of good character, then the Crown cannot produce evidence to show he is a person of bad character. However, in this case counsel for the accused has deliberately introduced his client's past record.
As you can see it is extensive. What you make of that is a matter for you. I should make it clear though that you should not find him guilty of this offence simply because he is a man with a long criminal record. Indeed, that is the very reason why an accused's criminal record is not permitted to be introduced into the case by the prosecution because it might cause a jury to decide the question of his guilt because of his past. I gather it was introduced into this case by the accused to show that, although he has a number of convictions, he has none for sexual assault, so you would use his record as some sort of gauge of his character. A criminal he might be in some ways, but not a sexual assaulter. That is a matter for you.

You will recall his evidence on Tuesday that he does not commit sexual assaults and has female children of his own and he reprehends that sort of conduct.

I must again warn you that, although the accused has introduced his bad character into the case, you must not use his previous criminal convictions as a basis for finding him guilty of this offence. You will decide this case on the facts you find established by the Crown beyond a reasonable doubt.

Of course, you are entitled to take into account the evidence of the accused's previous criminal record when considering the question of his own credibility, but you are not entitled to find him guilty of this offence simply because he has convictions for other offences.

One of the matters referred to in relation to his previous record was an offence of obtaining a prohibited drug, Physeptone, illegally on 8 March 1990, and I gather that fact was elicited to demonstrate the dependence the accused said he had on drugs around that time." (AB 365, 366.) 
In my respectful opinion, these directions were correct in principle; and clear, fair and cogent in both substance and form.

Has the appellant, then, demonstrated that, in the events that happened at his trial as above summarised, there was, as he contends, a miscarriage of justice? 
In coming to grips with this question this Court must bear carefully in mind, in my opinion, that it has no way of recreating accurately, if indeed at all, the atmosphere of the trial. This consideration seems to me to add to what would be in any event the difficulty inherent in trying now to assess whether the tactics adopted at trial by the appellant's then counsel, unusual and unusually bold as in my opinion they undoubtedly were, not only failed to achieve their obviously intended result, but deprived the appellant of the fair chance of an acquittal, by depriving him in a real and fundamental sense of his undoubted right to a fair trial according to law.

For my own part, I have not been persuaded that there was such a fundamental miscarriage of justice as would warrant the intervention of this Court. It is possible, in my opinion, to see how counsel at trial might have come responsibly to the view that the central issue of the trial was going to come down to a question of the word of the appellant against the word of the complainant; that it was essential therefore to find some way of corroborating in material respects the version of events to be given at trial by the appellant; that there was no such available material, save only in the two respects that were in fact pursued at the trial; and that such pursuit of one of those two matters made the admission into evidence of the appellant's criminal record the lesser of two evils.

No doubt it is possible to argue reasonably - but of course with the benefit of hindsight, - that the tactics, as I have described them, miscarried; but that is not to entail, as of course, that the entire trial miscarried. The test in that regard is established by decisions to the effect of the passages earlier cited from the decision in Ignjatic. Doing my best to apply those principles fairly to the given facts of this case, I am of the opinion that ground one has not been established.

GROUND 2. ABOVE 
What I have earlier said in connection with ground 1 will serve to provide a relevant context for a relevant consideration of ground 2.

The Crown called at trial evidence from Dr Ian Spence. The substance of this evidence was summarised by the learned trial judge as follows in his Honour's charge to the jury: "Then Dr Ian Spence was called. He is a Professor at Sydney University and his interest is in psycho-active drugs, that is drugs that affect mental function.
You may recall that Dr Spence's evidence was rather technical but the summary of his opinions from his research and reading of articles on the subject seems to be this: in most people addicted to heroin or who are taking methadone or
Physeptone there is no available research to indicate that such people lose their capacity to indulge in normal sexual activity.

It does not affect a man's capacity to sustain erection or to gain ejaculation. There are some side effects which are common - nausea, dizziness and constipation - but this varies with individuals.

In cross-examination he said that if a man is suffering nausea, dizziness or constipation, he is unlikely to have the inclination to indulge in sexual activity and there are individual cases of complaints of sexual dysfunction but the data is inconclusive. He said that a daily dose of 580 milligrams of methadone is at the high end of doses of people on the methadone programme, but this would be normally administered to a person in a controlled programme and that would be given with the intent that it would be such a dose as would enable that person to lead his life normally." (AB 366, 367.) 
In my opinion, this was a very fair summary.

As earlier noted, there was tendered in the defence case the certificate of Dr
Matthew. I cannot find in the trial transcript any explanation for his not having been called to give oral evidence before the jury. No such explanation has been provided at the present hearing.

The appellant contends that evidence was available from, and ought to have been called from, a Dr McLeod. There is no evidence of why it is that Dr
McLeod was not called at trial; or of what he could and would have said had he been called, particularly having regard to the fact, as I have followed the oral submissions this afternoon of the appellant, that he, the appellant, had never been actually a patient under the treatment of Dr McLeod. This means, in my opinion, that there is no basis upon which this Court can say rationally that the failure to call Dr McLeod entailed the taking away from the appellant of a fair chance of acquittal based upon the acceptance by the jury of such evidence.

In my opinion, ground 2 has not been made out.

GROUND 3. ABOVE 
The present case at trial was very much one where the impression made upon the jury by, respectively, the complainant and the appellant was all important.

The jurors had the opportunity, which this Court has not had, of seeing and hearing for themselves each of the complainant and the appellant. The jury was able, as this Court is not, to judge the demeanour of the complainant and of the appellant.

The complainant was closely cross-examined by counsel. Counsel was permitted, over the objection of the Crown Prosecutor, to cross-examine her to suggest that she had behaved in a promiscuous and provocative manner. It was suggested to the complainant that she was motivated to accuse unjustly the appellant rather than the man Neville by the expectation that the conviction of the appellant would enhance her prospects of obtaining an amount of money as victim's compensation.

The complainant denied all of these various suggestions put by the cross- examiner. It does not seem to me from a reading of the relevant transcript that she was shaken in cross-examination in any way so fundamental to the inherent credibility of her version that no reasonable jury could have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the truth of that version.

The medical evidence called in the Crown case was not extensive, but it was such that the jury could reasonably have accepted it as establishing beyond reasonable doubt consistency of complaint by the complainant; a' condition of the skin of the complainant's face such as to be consistent with her history of Neville's having slapped her face in the course of trying to subdue her preparatory to her being assaulted by the appellant; and a condition of the complainant's genital area such as to be consistent with her version of penetration sufficient to amount in law to sexual intercourse; although it must be said that this aspect of the evidence did not exclude other possible explanations for that particular condition.

Here again, it was, in my opinion, very much a matter for the jury, who saw the doctor tested in cross-examination, to assess the weight of her evidence.
In my opinion, it is not possible for this Court to say more than that it was open to the jury to accept the evidence of the doctor, and, so accepting that evidence, to find in it some significant support for the version of events given by the complainant.

There was, as well, powerful evidence in the Crown case, of immediate contemporaneous complaint. The cross-examination of this witness was brief and it concentrated on having the witness acknowledge that the complainant had spoken of her principal assailant as having been forty years of age or thereabouts, a description more apt to describe the man Neville than the appellant.

In this regard it has to be borne carefully in mind that identity was not in issue at the trial, in the sense that it was freely conceded by the appellant's then counsel, quite early in the course of the trial, that the complainant was sufficiently well acquainted with the appellant as to have been capable of making a reliable identification of him.

The impression I have from the whole of the evidence to which I have been referring in summary form is that it constituted in its entirety a strong
Crown case and a Crown case that a reasonable jury could justifiably have found to have been established beyond reasonable doubt.

That is, in my opinion, more so the position when account is taken of the substance of the defence case.

The appellant gave extensive evidence on oath. He had no apparent difficulty in recalling the details of the events in question as he contended them to have occurred. He was closely cross-examined, and admitted to having told lies wholesale to the police by whom he was interviewed. His explanation for that conduct was that he had been scared of the police, and that he had not wished to say any more to them than he absolutely had to do, until he had been able to locate the man Neville and find out what had actually happened on the relevant night.

Counsel at trial sought, and the learned trial Judge gave as requested, directions as to these admitted lies. In my opinion, those directions were, essentially, both correct in substance and sufficient in form. I do not see any basis for saying that it was not open to the jury, who saw and heard the appellant, as this Court has not done, to disbelieve the reasons advanced by the appellant in explanation of his admitted lies. A jury who did so disbelieve the appellant on so important an aspect of his case might, in my opinion, have properly refused to accept him as to the balance of his version of relevant events.

In my opinion, a fair and independent assessment by this Court of the evidence at trial does not warrant a conclusion by this Court that the verdict of the jury was, in the requisite legal sense, either unsafe or unsatisfactory.

In my opinion, ground 3 has not been established.

CONCLUSIONS AND ORDERS 
For the whole of the foregoing reasons, I am of the opinion that the grounds of appeal argued by the appellant have not been made out. In my opinion, the proper order would be an order that the appeal against conviction be dismissed. I propose an order accordingly.

STUDDERT J: The application of the appellant for leave to appeal against sentence was not pursued. I agree with Sully J that the appeal against conviction should fail and I agree with the reasons expressed by his Honour for reaching that conclusion.

ROLFE J: I have listened with great care to all the submissions made and arguments presented by Mr Small, who appears in person before this Court, and I have given them my careful consideration.

Notwithstanding those matters, for the reasons given by Sully J, I consider that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

STUDDERT J: The order of the court will be that proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
