

Furber versus Royal NSW Canine Council Ltd and Anor Matter No 20416/98 [1998]
NSWSC 668 (22 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
HELEN MUNRO FURBER versus ROYAL NSW CANINE COUNCIL LTD & 
ANOR /98 December 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
KIRBY J: This is a matter with a long history. It is necessary to restate part of that history in order to understand the issue which is before the Court: 
History of the Canine Council.

In the late 1940's an unincorporated association was formed to encourage the breeding of purebred dogs. It became known as RAS Kennel Control. In 1989 it changed its name to the New South Wales Canine Council, and later (1993) to the Royal New South Wales Canine Council.

In 1989 the Council acquired a shelf company, Kennel Control of New South
Wales Pty Limited ("Kennel Control"). The shares in that company were held by nominees of the Council. The company had two functions. It was nominated by the Council as the lessee of the Council's premises at Erskine Park, and it employed staff. The secretary of Kennel Control, Ms Patricia Cooper, was also the secretary of the Canine Council.

In 1994 the Canine Council was incorporated. It is a company limited by guarantee, and known as Royal New South Wales Canine Council Limited (the first defendant) ("the Canine Council").

The Articles of Association permitted a fifteen member Board (cl 27(b)). It is said that there are approximately 15,000 members. The Directors are elected every three years. The Articles make the following provision in respect of the powers of the Board of Directors.
 "26. There shall be a Board of Directors which: shall have the entire control and management of the affairs of RNSWCC; may exercise all such functions as may be exercised by RNSWCC other than those functions that are required by these Articles to be exercised by a general meeting of members of RNSWCC; shall consider and approve an annual budget of income and expenditure for
RNSWCC; ..."
The Issue.

The plaintiff, Mrs Furber, was elected to the Canine Council as a Director in (at a time when it was an unincorporated association). She was re-elected in 1995, and again in August 1998. After her re-election in August 1998, another Director, Mrs Rafton (the second defendant), gave notice of a motion which she intended to move at the Annual General Meeting, scheduled for 7
October 1998. The motion was in these terms: "8. Mrs C Rafton 
Moves that, by Special Resolution, Helen Munro Furber be and is hereby removed as a Director of the company." 
On 6 October 1998, Mrs Furber sought an injunction from this Court, ex parte, to restrain the putting of that Motion to the Annual General Meeting. His
Honour, Greg James J, granted that injunction. The Annual General Meeting took place. However, the motion of Mrs Rafton was not put, in obedience to the terms of the injunction.

A further Directors' Meeting was held on 14 October 1998. Eight Directors (not including Mrs Rafton) asked the Board to convene a Special General Meeting, at which the following motion would be put: "That Mrs Helen Munro Furber be and is hereby removed as a Director of the company pursuant to section 227 of the Corporations Law." 
The Board so resolved. The Special General Meeting was fixed for 20 January
Mrs Furber seeks a further injunction to restrain the putting of the motion to remove her as a Director to the Special General Meeting.
The Background.

To understand why Mrs Rafton, and now a further eight Directors, should seek the removal of Mrs Furber from the Board of the Canine Council, and to understand the basis upon which Mrs Furber seeks an injunction, it is necessary to examine the relationship between Mrs Furber and the Board. That examination must be made by reference to documents. Neither the plaintiff, nor any Directors of the Canine Council, gave evidence. Mr Temby QC, appearing for the plaintiff, said from the Bar table that Mrs Furber was "not fit" to give evidence (T13). No medical evidence was tendered. Mr Purdon, a witness called by the plaintiff, said that Mrs Furber was "very sick" and "in a bad way" . The defendants', in their submissions, state that Mr Temby's mere assertion is not evidence. That, of course, is right. They invite, therefore, an adverse inference from the failure to call the plaintiff (Jones v
Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] at 308). However, if an adverse inference were drawn against the plaintiff, having failed properly to explain the absence of Mrs Furber as a witness, a similar inference could be drawn against the Canine Council. I would have expected to have heard from some, at least, of the Directors of the
Council. Such persons were, no doubt, in a position to give evidence relevant to the issues before me. In my view, the adverse inferences arising from the absence of Mrs Furber, on the one hand, and the Directors, on the other, cancel each other out. Both parties, for whatever reason, have chosen to conduct what is, substantially, a documentary case.
The Requests by Mrs Furber for Information.

Soon after incorporation, Board members were furnished with the following material (recorded in the Minutes of 10 May 1994).
 "The Board received the following brochures: * The Company Director's Survival Kit * ASC Locations & Services * Incorporation * Local ASC Representatives * On-Line Public Access * Registration * Statutory Obligations" 
Mrs Furber plainly took her duties as a Director seriously. The secretary of the Association, Ms Cooper, said this: (T12) "Q. You know, do you not, from things she has said orally or in writing that she takes her duties as a director seriously? 
A. Yes.

Q. You know, do you not, that she often talks about the discharge of her fiduciary responsibilities? 
A. Yes.

Q. You know, do you not, that she has often asserted a need to have access to both documents and information in order to discharge those responsibilities? 
A. Yes.

Q. You know, do you not, that from time to time the board have decided not to provide such information and such documents as she has sought? 
A. Yes.

Q. I suggest to you that over the years that has happened very often? 
A. Yes." 
The irritation of certain Board members with Mrs Furber is evident from the
Minutes of the Council. Mrs Furber was apparently in the habit of writing letters, either drawing attention to departures from proper practice, as she saw it, or seeking information on matters which came before the Board. The
Minutes of 11 May 1994, for example, discussed two such letters. In respect of
Mrs Furber's letter of 7 May 1994, the Minutes recorded the following: "The Manager stated that she takes exception to Mrs Furber's letter on the grounds that she, as the Manager, is the person responsible for publishing amendments to the Regulations and this letter infers that she has amended the
Regulations without the Board's knowledge." 
In respect of the other letter (9 May 1994), the Minutes state this: "The Manager stated, in relation to the section dealing with the Memorandum & Articles of Association, that she is responsible for printing the proposed Articles in The Canine Journal and, as such, takes exception to the fact that Mrs Furber has again inferred that the Manager changed the proposed
Articles without the knowledge of the Board of Directors and that she also be permitted to present a report in this regard at the next Meeting of the
Board." 
Mrs Furber also addressed a letter to another Director, Dr Zammit, which was tabled at the meeting. The Minutes included the following: "Lengthy discussion ensued in regard to the time wasted in discussing letters from Mrs Furber, the fact that she will not work with the Board as a team and ways to remedy this situation.
 It was RESOLVED on the motion of Mrs L Ellem/Mrs A Courtney that, in solving the problem with Mrs Furber's letters, that no one person or group of people meet with Mrs Furber and that it must be the entire Board.
 It was also RESOLVED on the motion of Mrs A Courtney/Mrs L Warren that the
Board hold a Meeting with Mrs Furber not to discuss what has happened previously, but to discuss working with the Board as a team. Dr Zammit to act as spokesperson and the only communication other Board Members are to have with Mrs Furber is in writing via the Spokesperson.
 It was further RESOLVED on the motion of Mrs L Warren/Mrs A Courtney that the Senior Vice Chairman act as Chairman for this Meeting.
 It was finally unanimously RESOLVED on the motion of Mr a Hunt/Mrs L Ellem that the next Meeting of the Board commence at 6.00 p.m., with the Special
Meeting with Mrs Furber to be held between 6.00 p.m. and 7.00 p.m. in camera.
(and that dinner be served at 5.00 p.m.)." 
Mrs Furber was not present at that meeting. She tendered her apologies beforehand. The Manager, Ms Cooper, wrote to her on 17 May 1994 in these terms: "At the abovenamed Meeting, Dr Zammit tabled a letter that he had received from you dated 4th May, 1994 and read his response to you.

Lengthy discussion ensued in regard to the time wasted in discussing letters from yourself and the fact that you will not work with the Board as a team and ways to remedy this situation." 
Ms Cooper then set out the resolution which had been passed.

It appears that Mrs Furber responded to that letter on 19 May 1994. Her response was not tendered. One gathers that she identified three matters as pre-conditions to such a meeting. The Minutes of 10 August 1994 included the following comment upon Mrs Furber's letter: "Letter dated 19.5.94 
Requesting that three matters be sorted out and that once these have been resolved she will be only too happy to attend a meeting as envisaged by the
Board." 
The matter was deferred because Mrs Furber was absent from that meeting. She was overseas, involved in dog judging. However, she made her presence felt.
The Board considered the many letters she had written. The Minutes of 10
August 1994 include the following: "The Board discussed the following letters received from Mrs Furber, dated 13, , 16, 17, 21, 22 and 24th May, 1994 incorporating the following requests/complaints: ..." 
A sample of the matters of concern to Mrs Furber emerges from the following extract of the Minutes of this meeting: "Letter dated 13.5.94 
Details of staff salaries, including fringe benefits and any requests for increase of salaries.

It was RESOLVED on the motion of Mr P Churchward/Mr A Hunt that this information not be provided due (to) the opening sentence of her letter, i.e.
the words `I have been asked for details of' which would indicate that the information she is requesting is not for her alone." 
Mrs Furber's letter of 16 May 1994 was also considered by the Board. The letter itself is not before the Court. However, the response the Board resolved to provide furnishes a sufficient indication of the matters of concern to Mrs Furber. The response included: "Mrs Furber to be advised that she may view the document regarding Mr W
Spilstead's unsecured loan at any time, however distribution would be contrary to the essence of the agreement with the benefactor.

A copy of the current insurance policies covering the Board of Directors will be forwarded to Mrs Furber.

No, members are not entitled to a refund of membership fees should they die or resign their membership mid year.

No, Directors do not have to sign approval of the Annual Financial Report, however they are bound by the group decision." 
The response continued: "a) The Board does not believe it is leaving themselves open to a `civil penalty provision' with regard to the Kennel Control Pty Ltd being a `related party of a public company'.
 b) The Board believes it has access to all of the appropriate records, both financial and managerial, and that through the professional staff it has access to the process of management and that it is conducting itself in all ways required by the Corporations Law and Articles of Association.
 c) The RNSWCC Directors would only be liable if they were proven to be negligent in their duties and the Board does not think this would be the case.
 d) This information was printed in the Notice of AGM document circularised with the September 1993 issue of The Canine Journal." 
One by one the letters were considered, including a formal complaint by Mrs
Furber against various officers of the Council. The Minutes included the following: "Letter dated 15.5.94 a) Complaint against the Executive and/or the Secretary b) Complaint against the Manager and/or the Directors c) Complaint against the Secretary and/or the Executive d) Complaint against the Directors and/or the Secretary 
It was RESOLVED on the motion of Mr A Hunt/Mrs L Warren that the formal complaints have been considered and are now closed." 
The Board also made the following resolution, which is directly relevant to the issue which is before the Court: "Letter dated 21.5.94 
Requesting substantiation of the accusation that she `...will not work with the Board as a team'.

It was RESOLVED on the motion of Mr S Wood/Mrs L Warren that Mrs Furber's denial be accepted." 
It is plain that, following the accusation that she would not work with the
Board, Mrs Furber remained unrepentant. The same Minutes (10 August 1994) include an outline of letters sent by Mrs Furber on 10 July 1994 and 14 July
Again, a sample of Mrs Furber's preoccupations emerges from the following extract: "Mrs H Furber - 10.7.94 & 14.7.94 
Lodging `Request for Information by a Member of the Board of Directors' Forms for the following: ) ...
 ) ...
 ) Request 
Itemised accounts from the solicitor Minter Ellison Morris Fletcher since the last AGM October 1993 to the present time.

Reason 
To safeguard the Directors from action from the A.S.C. for not being fully conversant and in agreement with the charges (p 12 of the `Survival Kit').
 ) Request 
Copies of all paid up policies, claims and correspondence regarding our
Insurances and written reasons for variations since October 1993.

Reason 
To abide by Rule 26, to Guide and Monitor the Management of the Company (as per Martin Bennett's document #2.12) and to avoid action against the Directors from the A.S.C. (page 23 `The Company Director's Survival Kit') should the
Secretary/Manager have withheld them from the Directors." 
The letter contained an additional five matters, relevant to different aspects of the Board's work, each identifying reasons for the requests which were made. Each request for information was deferred.

The Minutes (10 August 1994) also included a Notice of Motion by a Director,
Mr A Hunt, in these terms: "because of Mrs Furber's repeated threats to take legal action against the
Board, groups of Directors or individual Directors, the Board of Directors agrees that the RNSWCC will be responsible for all costs associated with any defence against actions brought by Mrs Furber against any Board Member or
Members, or RNSWCC employees." 
That item was also deferred.

Upon her return from overseas, Mrs Furber clearly examined the Minutes of the
Meeting of 10 August 1994 which she had missed. On 18 August 1994 she wrote a further letter. The letter was considered at the next Board Meeting on 14
September 1994. The Minutes of that Meeting included the following: "Mrs H Furber - 18.8.94 `Request for Information by a Member of the Board of Directors' Form for: 
Request 
As per Item 9.7 of this Agenda, Alan Hunt's motion concerning his allegation that she has made `repeated threats' against the Board, Directors, Staff etc, since being elected to the Management Committee/Board of Directors, that the
Secretary provide details of: a) Names of those to whom A Hunt is referring b) Dates and places of alleged incidents c) Transcript or copies of the alleged threats 
Reason 
That Alan Hunt does not risk the Board being made liable to action by the
A.S.C. under s232(2), s260, s1300, s1308 and s1309 of the Corporations Law." 
The request was deferred, as was the motion of Mr Hunt which gave rise to the request.

At about this time, Mrs Furber became concerned with aspects of the accounts of Kennel Control, prepared by the Council's auditors, Deloitte, Touche and
Tohmatsu ("Deloittes"). The accounts for the year ended 30 June 1993 included the following statement in respect of income tax.
 "No provision for income tax or income tax expense is necessary because of tax losses incurred by the company in prior years." 
The Minutes of Kennel Control of 9 June 1993 (which may not have come to the notice of Mrs Furber) included this statement: "It was RESOLVED that the Kennel Control of N.S.W. Pty Ltd request Deloitte
Touche Tohmatsu to apply for exemption from paying income tax from the
Australian Taxation Office." 
The accounts of Kennel Control for the following year (30 June 1994), however, identified the following matters under the heading "Statement of Significant
Accounting Policies": "(b) Income Tax 
The Kennel Control of NSW Pty Ltd is specifically exempted from income tax in accordance with section 23(g)(iii) of the [Income Tax Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/).

Employee Benefits 
Provision is made for long service leave and annual leave estimated to be payable to employees on the basis of statutory and contractual requirements.
The amounts provided have been apportioned between current and non-current, the current provision being the portion that is expected to be paid within the next twelve months." 
The accounts then set out the operating revenue and expenses of Kennel Control as follows: "2. OPERATING REVENUE 1994 1993 $ $ 
Management fee 583,152 509,427 
Interest 1,203 3,409 ,355 512,836
EXPENSES 
Expenses for the year include the following: 
Rental expense on operating leases 20,500 18,980 
Provision for long service leave 13,410 1,649 
Provision for annual leave 7,279 (5,196) 
Salary and Wages & On Costs 507,539 496,290 
Legal expenses -- 293 
Other expenses 623 820 
Management Fee 35,004 -- ,355 512,836 
The Minutes of the Finance Committee Meeting, which were circulated to
Directors, including Mrs Furber, included matters relevant to these accounts.
Mr Lombe, a member of the Committee, was present at that Meeting. He was a partner of Deloittes. The Minutes included the following resolutions: "4.2.2 In relation to the accounts of the Kennel Control of NSW Pty Ltd it was
RESOLVED that these accounts not be published however they will be consolidated into the RNSWCC accounts which is in accordance with conventional practice for controlled entities.
 .2.3 It was also resolved that the $35,000.00 deficit shown in the Kennel
Control of NSW Pty Ltd be classed as a management fee and be transferred to the RNSWCC accounts." 
On 30 September 1994, Mrs Furber wrote a further letter. It was extracted in the Board Minutes of 12 October 1994, and was in these terms (so far as is relevant): "Request ...
Documentation to support the $35,000 Management Fee for the Kennel Control (page 15) and explain where this debt is documented in previous balance sheets.
Show reasons why the sub-total of expenditure (page 14) reads $1,623,318 and not $1,654,387 - a variation of $31,069." 
The request was deferred.

Shortly before the Meeting, however, the Manager of the Council, Ms Cooper, had sought information from the Finance Manager, Mr South. In a memorandum to
Ms Cooper of 11 October 1994, Mr South responded as follows: "Item 2: The $35,000 management fee is a internal adjustment between the two entities to cover losses of previous years as shown in the KCC NSW Financial
Statements in prior years. The amount represents Long Service Leave and Annual
Leave owing to employees. These amounts were not able to be paid for in earlier years as the Kennel Control of NSW P/L had no tax exemption and therefore would have to had paid tax." 
The same memorandum, in responding to the third item, acknowledged that there had been an error. It said this: "Item 3: In preparing the Accounts for Publication there was a error. In "Expenditure Statement" under consolidated 1994 "Top Dog of the Year" should read $3.932 not "-". Also under "Management Fee" the amount should read "-" not $35,000." 
Mrs Furber's interest in the $35,000 Management Fee was to continue in the years that followed. It remained an issue in 1998, as I will shortly describe.

At the Meeting on 9 November 1994 some progress was made. The Minutes record that Mr A Hunt withdrew his motion which asserted repeated threats of legal action by Mrs Furber. Mrs Furber withdrew her request for particulars of the threats which she was said to have made. At the same Meeting the Board dealt with a number of Mrs Furber's letters, and her requests for information. Mrs
Furber withdrew some matters. She acknowledged in respect of others that she had been provided with the information. The Board, however, resolved to deny her request for information on some issues. She was, for instance, denied the following items: ) Request 
All solicitors letters to the RNSWCC Ltd since October 1993 not previously made available to the Board of Directors.

Reason 
To comply with a) Rule 26,b)#2.12 of Martin Bennett's document that Directors `must guide and monitor the management of the company.', c) page 12 of the
Company Directors Survival Kit and d) by withholding such information, the actions of the Secretary/Manager could result in an incorrect decision and action against the Directors by the A.S.C.

It was RESOLVED on the motion of Mrs L Ellem/Mrs P Davis that this request be denied." 
The Board also resolved to deny Mrs Furber access to the accounts of the solicitors, Minter Ellison Morris Fletcher, and copies of all insurance policies and claims.

The Minutes of 9 November 1994 also referred to Mrs Furber's request for documentation in respect of the Management Fee of $35,000, and other matters relating to the financial affairs of the Council. In respect of that matter, the Minutes included the following: "Mrs Furber acknowledged that this matter had previously been dealt with." 
It is difficult to interpret that Minute in the absence of an explanation from
Mrs Furber, or the directors. The evidence to which I will shortly refer makes it plain that Mrs Furber remained suspicious about the Management Fee. It was a prominent part of the need which she identified for access to the books of the Council and Kennel Control. It emerged that there were no documents in respect of the Management Fee, apart from a ledger entry, and the Finance
Committee resolution extracted above. I infer, on the limited information I have, that Mrs Furber was provided with the memorandum of Mr South of 11
October 1994 (above) (or its contents), which, at the Meeting of 9 November , she acknowledged. She was not, however, provided with the documents she had asked for, namely, "documents to support the $35,000 Management Fee".
Action in the Supreme Court 
Mrs Furber was re-elected in 1995. The Minutes of 1995/96 were not tendered. I infer from what followed that the same pattern of conduct continued on the part of Mrs Furber, and on the part of the Canine Council. Requests for documents and information were made by Mrs Furber, and refused from time to time by the Council. The solicitor for the Council, Mr Howie, of Minter
Ellison, advised the Board in respect of a number of these requests. According to Mrs Furber, he stated that, "If Mrs Furber is dissatisfied, she can apply to the Supreme Court for relief." (18 March 1996) (Exhibit 4, p25).

On 20 December 1996, Mrs Furber filed a Summons. The form of the Summons suggests that it was prepared by Mrs Furber personally. She sought access to certain documents, and declarations as to her rights as a director. An order was subsequently made that the matter proceed by way of Statement of Claim.

Mrs Furber then instructed solicitors. A Statement of Claim was filed on 14
April 1997. The Statement of Claim asserted that documents had been denied to the plaintiff, listing categories of such documents. They included the following, which were still prominent in the plaintiff's action before me: "(iv) On 10/6/1993 the plaintiff was denied information regarding the structure of Kennel Control.

By letter dated 22/8/94 from the defendant the plaintiff was advised of a refusal of access to information as to details of all the staff numbers including fringe benefits such as car, car expenses, private telephone bills, and requests for increases of salaries.

On or about 30/9/1994 the plaintiff was denied access to information of the defendant relating to a management fee for Kennel Control as reported in the 93/1994 annual report." 
I am, of course, not dealing with the issues raised by the Statement of Claim.
However, the defendants, without objection, have placed before me a commentary upon that claim. The commentary was prepared so that his Honour Greg James J might deal with the question of costs in that action. It included the following general comment by the defendants: "The bulk of the documents claimed by the plaintiff had already been provided to her by the defendant, in most cases well prior to the commencement of the litigation and for the remaining documents at about the time of the first hearing dates in May 1998." 
The commentary dealt with the categories of documents to which Mrs Furber had sought access, item by item. It appears that in the Supreme Court action the plaintiff, at first, abandoned item (iv), and then, at the hearing, revived her claim in respect of it (Exhibit 4, p57). In respect of item (xiv), it appears that some information was given in 1995, some in 1997, and some in .

Finally, in respect of the $35,000 Management Fee (item (xix)), the defendants' commentary characterised this item under the heading "Documents requested did not exist, hence could not be supplied." (Exhibit 4, p64).

The Supreme Court action came before Greg James J on 25 August 1998, and was settled. The Short Minutes agreed by the parties were in these terms: "Without admission and pursuant to the agreement of the parties, the Court declares that the plaintiff and her professional advisers (so long as the plaintiff is a director of the Defendant), upon each giving a confidentiality statement in the terms of the schedule below, may have access during business hours, upon reasonable notice to the documents (as defined by the [Evidence
Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)) of or held by RNSWCC and of or held by KCNSW, including but not limited to the financial records of both companies but with the exception of documents and material forming part of the evidence and deliberations of a current Committee of Inquiry." 
The issue of costs was referred to a mediator in the hope that the plaintiff and defendants could agree. Failing agreement, the parties were given leave to bring the issue back to Greg James J. The parties further agreed to publish in the Canine Journal, the orders made by the Court, and the judgment of Greg
James J.
The Events Following the Settlement 
Before describing the events immediately following the settlement, I should deal with one aspect which became relevant in the action before me.
Notwithstanding the resolution of Kennel Control on 9 June 1993, that it should request Deloittes to apply to the Australian Taxation Office for exemption from income tax (supra page 12), it appears that no exemption was sought. Nonetheless, the auditors, Deloittes, prepared taxation returns for the succeeding years upon the basis that Kennel Control, and the Council, were entitled to claim tax exemption.

It appears that in early 1998 it was proposed to transfer employees of Kennel
Control to the Canine Council. In the context of that proposal, the issue of taxation exemption again arose. A discussion took place between Mr South, the
Finance Manager of the Council, and Deloittes. The decision was taken, on 16
March 1998, to approach the Australian Taxation Office to confirm the taxation exemption status of the Canine Council, and to apply for an Exemption
Certificate in respect of Kennel Control. Deloittes wrote to the Council on 25
March 1998, in these terms: "Regardless of whether such an application is successful, Kennel Control will not have any income tax liability, as we understand that it merely incurs employee and lease expenses. We further understand that the Canine Council reimburses Kennel Control for these expenses so that Kennel control is in a nil income position. Therefore, in the absence of any need for a mark up on the costs, it would not matter from an income tax point of view whether Kennel
Control was exempt from tax or not." 
The Council sought advice from its solicitors in June 1998, upon the following, amongst other, issues: "1. whether KCNSW is current `tax exempt'; what KCNSW must do to get tax exempt status; whether KCNSW should take any action in relation to its past declarations as a tax exempt status; ..." 
The solicitors advised that the Articles required amendment to qualify for tax exemption. The assumption of entitlement to taxation exemption, underlying previous Income Tax returns was, therefore, invalid. However, the legal advice said this: "KCNSW should amend all its prior income tax returns to take into consideration that it is and was not a tax exempt body. However, it should be noted that where KCNSW has not previously had any taxable income, that the practical effect of such amendments will be that no tax should be outstanding and payable by KCNSW." 
The Articles were amended in August 1998 to conform with the requirements of the Australian Taxation Office for tax exemption. Ultimately, Deloittes lodged an application for a ruling by the Australian Taxation Office on 27 October
The application included these words: "Kennel Control receives a management fee from the RNSWCC from which it pays the rent and salaries. It also earns a small amount of interest income.
Substantially, any costs incurred by Kennel Control are aggregated and recharged to the RNSWCC." 
Some criticism was made of this document, in not drawing the Commissioner's attention to the change that had been made in the Articles. However, the questions posed for the Commissioner (item 7) all related to the current financial year, although the form which accompanied the submission did seek a ruling for the year 31 March 1995 onwards. I do not doubt that it would have been better to advise the Commissioner that there had been a change. However,
I do not accept that the information was deliberately withheld, or that it would have made a difference, for the reasons Deloittes outlined in their advice of 25 March 1998, extracted above.

Returning to the events following the settlement of 25 August 1998, Mrs Furber wrote to the Council on 1 September 1998 identifying 16 categories of document which she wished to inspect, including: "3. The books of the NSWCC and Kennel Control of NSW Pty Ltd which records the transfer of funds from the NSWCC to Kennel Control from the time of incorporation of the Kennel Control.
Minutes and documentation which record a relationship between the NSWCC and KCNSW from the time of incorporation of the Kennel Control of NSW.
Documentation concerning fringe benefits paid to persons on account of work performed for or partly for the RNSWCC from the time of incorporation of that company and records of disputes concerning wages/salaries and requests for increased salaries.
Books of account of RNSWCC and Kennel Control of NSW which record the financing of the Kennel Control from 1 March 1994.
The books of account of the Kennel Control, the RNSWCC and the NSWCC relating to the management fee of $35,000 referred to for example in 1993-1994 annual report of RNSWCC on page 15.
Original and current Licensing Agreement for the NSWCC and/or the NSWCC for the Bar in the Amenities Hall at the Canine Complex." 
Between 1 and 3 September 1994 Ms Cooper, the Manager, arranged for 44 archive boxes, and other files, to be retrieved from a sea container where they were stored. She also retrieved a further two boxes (and about five files). They were documents gathered by Mr South and related to items 3, 9, 10 and 11. Mrs
Furber came to the premises on 3 September 1998. She spent about five hours examining the material. She returned the next day, and spent a further two and a half hours. At the conclusion of the inspection, according to Ms Cooper, Mrs
Furber said this: "The only documents that I will want to look at again are those relating to
Kennel Control of NSW Pty Limited." 
Mrs Furber's version was somewhat different. On 24 September 1998 she wrote to
Ms Cooper in these terms: "Unless notified to the contrary, I trust it is in order to come to the RNSWCC to examine documentation on Monday morning next 28th September 1998, and possibly in the company of a qualified person. At our last meeting, we agreed that for the time being I would only be interested in looking at the Kennel
Control material and the Financial records." 
I believe it probable that on 4 September 1998, Mrs Furber indicated an interest in the financial records of Kennel Control, as she states in her letter of 24 September 1998. The investigation of item 11 would require such records, and it is plain from the hearing before me that that matter remained prominent in Mrs Furber's mind.

Mrs Furber attended the Council's premises on 28 September 1998 with two professional advisors. One was her solicitor, Mr Purdon. Mr Purdon is also an accountant, and an auditor. The other was Mr Mark Mealey. Mr Mealey is also an accountant, and a former investigator with the Corporate Affairs Commission.
Mr Purdon prepared an audit programme, identifying issues which he intended to pursue. According to Mr Purdon, the conversation with Ms Cooper was as follows: "They provided to us two boxes of documents an Ms Cooper said to us, `These are what Helen Furber asked for.' I said, `Are these all the books of Kennel
Control?' Ms Cooper said, `No, they are what Mrs Furber asked for.' I said, `We want to see all the books of Kennel Control.' Ms Cooper said, `We will need a letter from Mrs Furber.'" 
A letter asking for "all the books of Kennel Control of NSW Pty Limited" was immediately written and given to Ms Cooper.

Messrs Purdon and Mealey returned to the Council premises several days later on 1 October 1998. Mr South provided a number of documents relating to the $35,000 management fee. He produced his memorandum of 11 October 1993, extracted above. He also produced a computer sheet from the general ledger of
Kennel Control, which included the following: 
Purchase Module Debit Credit 
Ledger Module $ $ Sundry Receipts 30-Jun-94 3007 36 to pay out liability 35004.00 Management Fee 30-Jun-94 3006 36 to pay out liability 35004.00 
Mr Mealey questioned Mr South about these entries. When cross examined, Mr
Mealey said this: (T 45/46) "Q. What did you learn from looking at those two entries? 
A. That it was a debit and credit.

Q. For what? 
A. For nothing. It doesn't mean very much to me at all. I asked Mr South was it 3006 and 3007 which would usually lead me to the basic records invoice statement aide-memoir and his reply is in my affidavit, that they were just entries, numbers he needed to get into the machine. He needed some entries to put into the machine and it was 30th of the 7th.

Q. Did you gain any appreciation at all as to what that was telling the reader of this document about those entries? 
A. No.

Q. The words, `management fee' didn't convey any meaning to you at all? 
A. It had been bandied around but it wasn't a management fee at all. It described the annual accounts as some recoupment of salary and wage and costs of years and years ago and here it is a management fee." 
The defendants acknowledged that the computer records produced on this occasion were incomplete. Mr South later recreated the missing records by recourse to the back-up computer tapes, and other financial records stored in the company's sea container. That material became available on 22 October
The plaintiff's advisers also sought copies of the taxation returns and taxation records generally, including fringe benefits and correspondence with the Australian Taxation Office. That material was not produced. I believe it was reasonable for the plaintiff to expect that, having requested financial records, such material should have been available.

On the other hand, Mrs Furber, through her advisers, broadened her area of interest in the course of the investigation. Ms Cooper recounted the following conversation with Mrs Furber on 1 October 1998: "Furber: `I want to look at the bar accounts.' 
Cooper: `But you have already seen them.' 
Furber: `I want to look at them now.' 
Cooper: `The bar accounts were included in the archived material that Helen inspected in early September and they have all been put away. I am extremely busy preparing for the next Board of Directors' meeting and for the AGM. I haven't got time to search for them right now. I should be able to get them out for you tomorrow.'" 
A letter confirming that request was sent. The material was made available on October 1998. It was examined by Mr Mealey who made the following comment which, from the brief description of the system, appears to me to be justified: "As far as bar trading was concerned, I examined the records which were produced to us and found there to have been in my opinion a total lack of accountability for cash takings. A cash register had not been used, cash register tapes therefore not available nor other sufficient records to account for the receipt of cash from bar takings." 
There was a delay of two hours in making records available on 1 October 1998.
This was a matter of concern to Mrs Furber's professional advisers, since Mrs
Furber was paying their fees from her own pocket. Mr Purdon determined that, without unfettered access to all the books and records of Kennel Control, the inspection was a waste of time. He therefore did not attend on 2 October 1998.

Mr South, the Finance Manager, recounted the following conversation which he said took place with Mr Mealey in respect of the $35,000 management fee.
 "South: `Is there anything more that you need to see in relation to the June Kennel control financial statements?' 
Mealey: `I think the documents that you have given me will be sufficient but if anything further is required, I will contact you. Everything seems to be in order in relation to the $35,000 management fee and I don't think you'll hear any more about that.'" 
Mr Mealey denied having made that statement. Mr Mealey said that, at the completion of the inspection, he had not been given the cash books. Mr South was in the process of reconstructing them. Mr South, in a later affidavit, said this: "I refer to paragraph 7 of Mr Mealey's affidavit and, in particular, to his statement that the payments and receipts journal listings were never supplied to him. I agree that he did not see those listings on 2 October because I had not finishing (sic) checking them by the time that he left on that day.
However, I have now finished checking the listings and they are available for his inspection should he so require." 
In view of the incomplete documentation, and Mr Mealey's appreciation of the fact that Mr South was reconstructing that documentation, it seems unlikely, as a matter of probability, that Mr Mealey would have said the words attributed to him.
Annual General Meeting of 7 October 1998 
Mrs Furber was re-elected to the Council for a further three year term in early August 1998. On 7 August 1998 a director, Mrs Rafton (the second defendant), gave notice of a motion which she intended to move at the Annual
General Meeting on 7 October 1998, to remove Mrs Furber as a director. The
Secretary of the Council, Ms Cooper, then informed Mrs Furber, as required by s227(4) of the Corporations Law. Her letter of 11 August 1998 was in these terms: "There has been received in the office for inclusion in the agenda for the Annual General Meeting a notice of motion for a special resolution to the effect that you be removed as a director of the company.

Pursuant to Section 227(4) of the Corporations Law you are entitled to receive a copy of the notice. Accordingly, I enclose a copy of the letter dated 7
August 1998 from Mrs Rafton and a copy of item 4 from a letter dated 7 August from Minter Ellison suggesting appropriate wording for Mrs Rafton's motion (the balance of the letter dealt with other motions).

The entry in the agenda will read as follows: `Move by special resolution that Helen Munro Furber be and is hereby removed as a director of the company.' 
I draw your attention to Section 227(5) of the Corporations Law relating to representations by a director. If you wish to make representations in relation to the proposed resolution, please let us know no later than Tuesday, 18th
August 1998 so that Members can be advised in the Journal in which the 1998 annual general meeting notice is to be printed that these representations have been made.

If you wish to have your representations published in the Journal, they must be received no later than that date. If they are not published in the Journal, it will be necessary for a copy of the representations to be separately sent to Members." 
Mrs Rafton composed a leaflet which carried the following heading: `YOUR HELP IS NEEDED 
Please complete the enclosed proxy with your Name, M/ship NO & Address, vote `IN FAVOUR' to Motion 8 and return it in the reply paid envelope." (emphasis in the original) 
The leaflet is important. The plaintiff bases her claim for an injunction upon its terms. It was said to be false and misleading. It was also said that, in the circumstances that I will shortly describe, the Board was under a duty to correct the falsehoods which it was said to contain. The leaflet was in these terms: "For a Board of Directors to work effectively, particularly a large Board of members, there needs to be trust, cooperation and understanding between the
Board members.

Mrs Furber has been a director of the Company since incorporation in February
Three months after incorporation, Mrs Furber made clear the fact that she had sought legal advice about matters of concern to her.

The Board of Directors met on 11 May 1994, Mrs Furber was not in attendance and her apology was noted. The minutes include the following; `Lengthy discussion ensued in regard to the time wasted in discussing letters from Mrs Furber, the fact that she will not work with the Board as a team and ways to remedy this situation.' 
A meeting of the Board of Directors was held on 10 August 1994. Item 8.17 of the minutes records the giving of notice of intention to move the following resolution: `Because of Mrs Furber's repeated threats to take legal action against the
Board, groups of Directors or individual Directors, the Board of Directors agrees that the RNSWCC will be responsible for all costs associated with any defence against actions brought by Mrs Furber against any Board Member or
Members or RNSWCC employees.' 
There is of course nothing wrong with seeking legal advice but what members have to judge, in the light of what I am about to say, is whether or not repeated threats to do so by a director can fairly be judged as in the best interests of the Company.

Mrs Furber commenced legal action against the Canine Council in December 1996.
She is on record as saying that she did so pursuant to the advice and direction of RNSWCC's solicitor. Our solicitor has given Mrs Furber no such advice and no such direction. One might well ask, why then does she continue to assert something she knows to be wrong.

Did Mrs Furber have any options apart from suing the Canine Council? In my view she did, they included: * Asking the Board to obtain legal advice on her entitlements * Raising the issue at a general meeting * Resigning as a director 
Instead of doing any of these things, she sued.

Any director is entitled to access to documents, but you the members need to judge whether management time involved in allowing this to occur is time best occupied from the Canine Council's view. You need to judge whether or not you think management time should be taken up providing individual directors with things like: * All accounts associated with the Bar in the Amenities hall * Details of the caretaker's day book * Details of all staff records, including group certificates which contain the individuals tax file number * Minutes and records going back to 1992 * A list of all the members who voted in the recent election of directors to the Board 
To remove a director from a board is a serious matter. It is not a decision to be taken lightly. But I fear that if Mrs Furber remains on this Board, the infighting will get worse, the Board will be distracted by matters that should not concern it and ultimately the existing divisions within the board and the membership will reduce the authority of the Canine Council and could well destroy it. Given what has been built up over the last 50 years, you the members must decide if you are prepared to run that risk.

Christine Rafton" 
I will later consider whether the document was misleading, and whether the
Board was under a duty to correct what had been said.

The submissions for the defendants' assert that there was no evidence that the
Rafton memorandum, as they termed it, was circulated to all members, nor, indeed, evidence as to the breadth of its distribution. However, I infer that it was distributed widely, and probably to all members. Mrs Rafton purchased a copy of the members' register before its distribution, presumably to obtain the names and addresses of members (letter Council 3 November 1998). The terms of the memorandum are general. Members are enjoined to complete the enclosed proxy form, and vote in favour of the motion. One of the documents in Exhibit (p43), tendered by the Defendants, included the following statement in a letter of Mrs Furber (of 23 October 1998): "At the adjourned AGM meeting 14 October 98 - M/s Rafton announced to the members that she and she alone was responsible for her letter `Your Help is
Needed". She waved in the air a piece of paper she alleges was a receipt for the postage - no confirmation of this fact had been presented to the directors at the Board meeting earlier in the day. M/s Rafton made it quite plain that she stood separately in this matter.

You will realise that no Injunction was sought following the RNSWCC printing her Motion no. 8 in the Journal. It was only sought after her letter `Your
Help is Needed' was allegedly circulated to some 12,500 members." 
The second defendant, I infer, has possession of the postage receipt. The defendants have chosen not to tender that document. Ms Cooper, the Manager, is also a member of the Council. She received a copy of the leaflet. She expressed her belief that the memorandum had been circulated to all members (T ). It was also discussed by the Directors of the Council (T 9).

The September issue of The Canine Journal included the following item on page :
 "8. Mrs C Rafton 
Moves that, by Special Resolution, Helen Munro Furber be and is hereby removed as a director of the company.

In accordance with the Corporations Law as it relates to Directors, Mrs H
Furber was given the opportunity to make representations to Members concerning the above Notice of Motion. A copy of the representations appears on Page 38 of this Report." 
Mrs Furber's statement responding to Mrs Rafton's allegations appeared at page of the same Journal, as the motion indicated.

On 17 September 1998 the mediation between Mrs Furber and the Canine Council, on costs associated with the Supreme Court action, took place. No agreement was reached. On 29 September 1998, Mrs Furber wrote to the Board in these terms: "It is the opinion of many that Mrs Rafton's motion in attempting to remove me as a director may be seen as an ATTEMPT TO PERVERT THE COURSE OF JUSTICE in that if successful, it might cancel the Supreme Court's Order that I and qualified persons have the right to examine the books of the companies." (emphasis in original) 
On 6 October 1998, the eve of the Annual General Meeting, Mrs Furber made application to the Supreme Court for an injunction. The matter came before the
Duty Judge, Greg James J, in the morning. It was heard ex parte. His Honour gave a short judgment in which he said this: "I note from the articles and memorandum, Exhibit F to the affidavit of Mrs
Furber, that it is not necessary that the meeting conclude tomorrow night.
However, unless the question of the resolution being disposed of tomorrow night is otherwise avoided, then the balance of convenience would favour the urgent determination of this matter." 
The matter was adjourned until 2.00 pm to enable the defendants to be notified. In granting relief to the plaintiff thereafter, his Honour said this, referring to the Rafton memorandum: "In my view, having heard counsel for the plaintiff and being aware of the existence of the settlement, it is arguable that in a number of respects the document is false and misleading. There can be little doubt that the material being put to the members in that case is material capable of swaying their decision. There is no time now to do anything that might enable the plaintiff to be able to put to the various members to whom this material has gone that might not be minded otherwise to attend the meeting, such material as would enable her case effectively to be put. She has the right to address the meeting. That is a right that is likely to be of little utility in relation to those who have already been given their proxies." 
An Order was made in these terms: "THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Until further order of the court, an injunction be granted restraining the putting forward of the motion to remove the plaintiff as director of the Royal
NSW Canine Council Ltd at the Annual General Meeting of the Royal NSW Canine
Council Ltd to be held on 7 October 1998." 
The Annual General Meeting was duly held on 7 October 1998. The motion of Mrs
Rafton was not put to the meeting in view of the injunction.

On 9 October 1998 Mrs Furber again wrote to the Board. She referred to the events of 28 September and 1 and 2 October 1998, and the attempts of her advisers to view all the books of Kennel Control and "taxation details". She sent a further letter repeating her request on 13 October 1998, stating the following: "I have been instructed to state that ALL THE BOOKS OF THE KENNEL CONTROL ARE
REQUIRED BY THE AUDITORS. This will include financial records of livestock,
Marketplace, Ferndale Constructions, rotunda expenses, taxation records to name a few. If these registered corporation auditors are frustrated, then I will not be responsible if they choose to lodge a Contempt of Court against the RNSWCC." (emphasis in original) 
The Board of the Canine Council met the following day, 14 October 1998. A motion to suspend standing orders was passed. The Minutes then record that the following motion was read by the Secretary: "'14.10.98 
We the undersigned request that the Board of Directors resolve to convene a
Special General Meeting to consider, and if thought fit, pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
That Mrs Helen Munro Furber be and is hereby removed as a Director of the
Company pursuant to Section 227 of Corporations Law.

Signed: 
Mrs A Courtney 
Mr B Daley 
Mrs C Davies 
Mrs P Davis 
Mrs L Ellem 
Mr H Gent 
Mrs C Roberts 
Mr W Stacey' 
The Board noted that Mrs C Rafton abstained from signing the letter." 
The Board resolved to convene a Special General Meeting to consider the motion. Mrs Furber and four other Directors apparently walked out of the meeting before the vote was taken. The Secretary of the Council, Ms Cooper, wrote to Mrs Furber on 16 October 1998 in these terms: "As you know, on 14 October 1998, the Board of Directors resolved to convene a special general meeting to consider, and if thought fit, pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: `That Mrs Helen Munro Furber be and is hereby removed as a director of the company pursuant to Section 227 of the Corporations Law.' 
I enclose a copy of the request to the Board signed by eight (8) directors. I attempted to give you a copy of this notice following completion of the Annual
General Meeting on 14 October 1998, but you had left the meeting room before I was able to do so." 
The Board fixed upon 20 January 1999 as the date of the Special General
Meeting. On 22 October 1998 the November issue of the Canine Journal was sent to the printers for publication. It was distributed to members in early
November 1998. Within the Canine Journal there was a leaflet which was stapled to the publication. It was designed in such a way that it could be separated from the publication, and no doubt carried by members to dog shows. It was known as the Canine Gazette. It was a calender of events and results. Within the Gazette (p 3) there was a statement, described as a paid advertisement, by
Mrs Christina Rafton. It was in these terms: "Statement by Mrs Christina Rafton 
In September 1998 I authorised publication of a document headed `YOUR HELP IS
NEEDED'. That document asked members to vote in favour of motion number 8 on the agenda for the recent annual general meeting (to the effect that Mrs
Furber be removed as a director of RNSWCC).

It has been alleged in court, on behalf of Mrs Furber, that publication of the document amounted to a contempt of court and that the document is misleading in certain respects.

It was not my intention, in authorising publication of the document, to take any step that might be regarded as a contempt of court or to make any misleading statement.

I wish to make it clear that I do not criticise Mrs Furber for starting legal action against RNSWCC. Any person is entitled to seek relief in the courts if they believe their right have been infringed.

Given the allegations concerning my document, I think it would be inappropriate for me to proceed with motion number 8 and I do not intend to do so. Further, to the extent that the document in question is capable of suggesting a criticism of Mrs Furber for commencing legal action against
RNSWCC, that suggestion is withdrawn.

Although I do not accept that the document is misleading, I withdraw the statements made in it and ask members to disregard them." 
On page 14 of the Gazette, and occupying a full page, was a Notice of Special
General Meeting. The Notice was in these terms: "NOTICE 
OF 
SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING 
The Board of Directors has called a Special General Meeting.

The purpose of the meeting is to consider and if thought fit pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution.
 `That Mrs Helen Munro Furber be and is hereby removed as a director of the company pursuant to section 227 of the Corporations Law.' 
The Special General Meeting will be held on Wednesday 20th January, 1999 commencing at 7.30 pm in the Amenities Building, The Bill Spilstead Complex for Canine Affairs, 44 Luddenham Rd, Erskine park 2759.

PROXY VOTING Proxy appointment forms follow this notice. Completed proxy appointment forms must be lodged with The Secretary, RNSWCC Ltd., .... No later than 4.30 pm on Tuesday 19th January, 1999." (emphasis in the original) 
Opposite the Notice, and also occupying a full page, was a further document carrying the heading: 
SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING 
APPOINTMENT OF PROXY 
A proxy form was then provided. At the foot of the form the same directions were given as appeared in the Notice of Special General Meeting. The proxies could be sent to the Secretary of the Council at any time up to 4.30 pm the day before the proposed meeting.

A further proxy form appeared on the next page of the Gazette. The Canine
Journal is sent to many households where there is more than one member (for instance, husband and wife). The Board decided, in the context of the Annual
General Meeting of 7 October 1998 (and a similar resolution then proposed by
Mrs Christina Rafton), to include proxy forms in the Gazette. The Board took a similar course in the context of the Special General Meeting fixed for 20
January 1999. Proxy forms had not been included in the Gazette before 1998. In the past, members who wished to vote by proxy were required to contact the office in order to obtain the proxy form. Before the Annual General Meeting of
October 1998, the Council used to received "a couple of hundred" proxy forms.
The Council received "a thousand odd proxies" prior to the Annual General
Meeting of 7 October 1998. That number may, in part, reflect the subject matter of the motion, about which members may have had strong feelings. It cannot be doubted, however, that the inclusion of the proxy forms in the
Gazette, adjacent to the Notice of Special General Meeting, has made is significantly easier for members to cast a proxy vote, as Ms Cooper acknowledged. In the triennial elections for directors, less than six hundred votes were enough to be elected to the Board (Exhibit B). Given the number of proxies received by the Council before the Annual General Meeting on 7 October (over one thousand), proxy votes may effect whether the motion for Mrs
Furber's removal is, or is not, passed.

Mrs Furber wrote to the Secretary on 29 October 1998 protesting about the publication of the company's Minutes of 14 October 1998, containing the notice of motion. She said this: "As per company policy, you have (a) failed to notify me of the date of the proposed Special General Meeting, and (b) the final date for me to present my deposition for inclusion of the motion item 10.3.2." 
Ms Cooper responded the next day, 30 October 1998, in these terms: "The Executive Committee has resolved that the special general meeting will be held on Wednesday, 20 January 1999 commencing at 7.30 pm in the Amenities
Building.

I draw your attention to section 227(5) of the Corporations Law relating to representations by a director. If you wish to make representations in relation to the proposed resolution, you should provide them to me no later that (sic) November 1998 so that they can be published in the December 1998 issue of
The Canine Gazette.

If your representations are not published in the December 1998 issue of The
Canine Gazette, they can be published in the January 1999 issue of The Canine
Gazette, but that means that members will not be informed of them until shortly prior to the special general meeting. Alternatively, if your representations are not published in the December 1998 or January 1999 issues of The Canine Gazette, it will be necessary for a copy of the representations to be separately sent to member, if you wish members to receive a copy of them." 
Ms Cooper added: "Please note your representations should be factually accurate. For example, item B in your letter dated 29 October is inaccurate. As you know, Mrs Rafton did not move her motion at the annual general meeting. I am advised that it would have been unlawful for her to do so, given the injunction." 
Meanwhile, the Secretary of the Council and Mrs Furber continued to correspond on the subject of Mrs Furber being given access to the documents of the
Council and Kennel Control. On 3 November 1998 Ms Cooper wrote to Mrs Furber listing various documents which were available for inspection. Ms Cooper said, and I accept, that she intended to make everything available to Mrs Furber that she wanted. Mrs Furber wrote to Ms Cooper on 8 November 1998, and again on 9 November 1998. In the second of these letters she said this: "As you are no doubt aware, Messrs Mealey and Purdon are experienced in their field of corporate investigations. The financial records are applicable to
BOTH the Kennel Contol of NSW Pty Ltd and the RNSWCC Ltd. I have been advised that neither gentlemen intend to return to the Amenities Hall, Canine
Complex, 44 Luddenham Rd., Erskine Park, until you give an assurance that the records for both companies will be available on their request - NOT several weeks later." (emphasis in original) 
On 12 November 1998 Ms Cooper again wrote to Mrs Furber, patiently responding to each paragraph of her letter of 8 November 1998. In respect of the letter of 9 November 1998, Ms Cooper said this: "I now refer to your letter dated 9 November which, I assume, is a response to my letter of 3 November. The material listed in my letter dated 3 November is available for you to inspect at a mutually convenient time." 
I was impressed by Ms Cooper. I accept that she intended to make everything available to Mrs Furber and her advisers that they required (if the Council had such documents). However, her letter of 12 November 1998 did not respond, in terms, to the letter of Mrs Furber of 9 November 1998. She did not specifically affirm that all material which had been sought could be inspected. The last paragraph of her letter of 12 November 1998 is elliptical.
It does not quite convey that message. In the result, the documents were not inspected after 12 November 1998, and before the matter proceeded before me (on 26 November 1998).
A Director's Right to Inspect Documents 
I will return to the Special General Meeting shortly. I have described the background to the Special General Meeting. What conclusion should be drawn from these events? 
First, Mrs Furber, as a Company Director, was required to exercise a reasonable degree of care and diligence in the discharge of her duties (s232(4) Corporations Law). To discharge that responsibility, she was entitled to have access to the company's documents. It ought not to have been necessary for her to advance reasons justifying each request for such documents. I do not suggest that the company imposed the requirement of providing reasons. The provision of reasons may have been self imposed by Mrs Furber. However, in circumstances where access to documents was not routinely provided, it was reasonable for Mrs Furber to assume that she was required to advance reasons for her every request. Secondly, the Board, as Ms Cooper acknowledged, was divided into factions (T 12). Mrs Furber did not belong to the dominant faction. To permit the Board to control, by majority, what documents may be seen, and hence what aspects of management may be investigated by a director, in the discharge of his or her duties, is, I believe, wrong in principle. Each member of the Board, whatever his or her faction, should have been entitled to pursue any aspect of management of interest or concern. Indeed, the strength of the Board is in its diversity. Different members may individually pursue matters of interest or concern. There are many examples, in the reported cases, of problems which arise through a failure by directors to take a sufficient interest in aspects of management, where scrutiny and investigation was called for. Mrs Furber may not have been open to criticism (as having failed to exercise reasonable care and diligence) had she failed to investigate each matter which she chose to examine. However, she was entitled to pursue such matters if she had the interest and energy to do so. This Court should be slow to condemn a director for what may be regarded by some as an excess of zeal.

Two things may be said in opposition to the many requests of Mrs Furber for information and documents. First, that it was an unwelcome distraction from the Council's primary focus which was purebred dogs. It may be said that an unreasonable amount of time was spent by the Board on matters of interest to
Mrs Furber. Secondly, that the staff resources of the Board were diverted into dealing with, and satisfying, Mrs Furber's many requests for information, when they might have been better employed.

However, it is difficult to understand why the requests of Mrs Furber for information and documents needed to be dealt with at Board level. In my view,
Mrs Furber ought to have been given free access to the files and records of the Council, and its related body, Kennel Control. Having been given such access, and the opportunity to investigate informally, with occasional assistance from staff members, matters need only have come to the Board where
Mrs Furber perceived a problem which she felt obliged to draw to the attention of the Board. Satisfying Mrs Furber's requests took so much time because she was denied documents which ought to have been made freely available. Her letters were allowed to accumulate in an atmosphere of secrecy instead of transparency. Predictably, that made Mrs Furber suspicious, perhaps unduly suspicious, that there may be wrongdoing which was being covered up.

It should also be understood that the right of Mrs Furber to investigate aspects of management of interest or concern to her is not dependent upon her being able to show (once finally given access to such documents) that something was amiss. Mrs Furber, for instance, was entitled to question the management fee of $35,000 which appeared in the accounts of Kennel Control in
That fee was imperfectly explained in the accompanying notes. It was a large amount, and unusual.

A number of matters, as it happens, emerged from the inspection of documents undertaken by Mrs Furber, or on her behalf. First, the documentation in respect of the $35,000 management fee was less than one would have expected.
The amount was said to relate to the statutory leave entitlements of employees of Kennel Control. Yet there was no document (apart from the general wage book) which identified the employees, their entitlements, and the way in which the sum of $35,000 had been calculated.

Secondly, Kennel Control resolved in 1993 to seek from the Australian Taxation
Office, taxation exemption, with the assistance of Deloittes. That matter was overlooked until 1998. It was an aspect of management of interest to Mrs
Furber. Had Mrs Furber been given access to the material earlier, it appears to me likely that the matter would have been dealt with sooner.

Thirdly, Mr South (in 1994) examined one of the issues raised by Mrs Furber in order to respond to her request for information. He discovered an error, as he acknowledged in his memorandum of 11 October 1994 (supra p 14). There are plainly benefits in directors questioning the work of management, however conscientious management may be.

Finally, the system employed at the bar at the Council's premises was, no doubt, capable of improvement.

None of these matters is of great moment. I accept that there is no evidence of any cover-up of wrongdoing by the Council. However, Mrs Furber, in my view, was entitled freely to examine the working documents of the Council and Kennel
Control, so that she might satisfy herself that the company was being properly managed, and its finances properly administered.

I accept that some directors, perhaps used to other Boards, may have regarded
Mrs Furber's need to examine so many issues as unusual, and tiresome. It certainly is unusual for a director to write as many letters as Mrs Furber.
She wrote, for instance, seven letters in less than two weeks (13 May 1994 to May 1994 (supra p 7)). Her letters were not always diplomatic, and it may be said that she was prone to complaint. Nonetheless, she was entitled to question what was going on, and to have access to material in order to resolve questions in her own mind. That access was repeatedly denied her. That refusal generated yet more correspondence, and more ill will. It appears to have fuelled Mrs Furber's suspicions, and added to the resentment against her harboured by some members of the Board.
The Application for an Injunction 
The plaintiff identified three bases upon which an injunction should be granted: * First, it was said that the leaflet distributed by Mrs Rafton, in support of her motion, was seriously misleading in a number of respects. The directors knew of the memorandum. They either recognised that it was misleading, or ought to have done so. They had, according to the plaintiff, an obligation to correct those aspects which were misleading. Yet they failed to do so. The problem cannot now be cured, since proxies were solicited in early November 1998. The meeting, therefore, should be restrained. * Secondly, the proposed removal of Mrs Furber violates the requirements of s227(12) of the Corporations Law in respect of the removal of a director of a public company. * Thirdly, Mrs Furber was, pursuant to the settlement of the Supreme Court action on 25 August 1998, finally given access to the documents of the Canine Council, and Kennel Control. Her attempt to examine those documents have been frustrated by the Council. The court would not, in these circumstances, tolerate the removal of the plaintiff before she had completed her inspection of such documents. 
There is a fourth matter. It was raised with the parties during the final day of submissions. Section 227(3), (3A), (4) and (5) contemplate a sequence, and a degree of synchronisation between steps in that sequence. In the context of proxy votes, which may be cast at any time following the notice of the Special
General Meeting in early November 1998, there is an issue as to whether the requirements of these sections have been observed.

I will consider each issue in turn.
Was the Rafton Memorandum Misleading? 
The plaintiff contended that the Rafton memorandum was misleading in three respects: * First, that the memorandum included an extract from the Minutes of 11 May 1994. The extract asserted, or suggested, that the Board had wasted time discussing letters from Mrs Furber, and that she would not work with the Board as a team. The memorandum did not include, however, the companion Minute of 11 August 1998 where the Board accepted Mrs Furber's denial that she would not work as a team. * Secondly, the memorandum included the text of Mr Hunt's motion that Mrs Furber had made repeated threats of legal action against the Board and its directors. It failed to include the sequel, namely that the motion was withdrawn on 9 November 1994. * Thirdly, the memorandum referred to the Supreme Court action taken by Mrs Furber against the Board. It omitted to disclose, however, that the Board had consented to an order that Mrs Furber should have access to the documents which the Board had repeatedly denied her. 
In determining whether a document which has been circulated to members is misleading, a number of matters are relevant. What is the audience which is likely to read the memorandum? Here, the membership of the Canine Council is made up of dog breeders, and dog owners. They may be assumed to be a broad cross section of the community, some sophisticated, some not (cf Fraser v
NRMA Holdings Ltd [(1995) 55 FCR 452] at 467). It is appropriate, as well, to acknowledge that not every word of the document is likely to be read. Wootten J said this in Re Marra Developments Ltd [(1974-76) 1 ACLR 470] at 479: "The pace of life generally and, and the pace of business life in particular, has increased enormously in the last eighty-seven years, yet as long ago as that we can already find Bowen LJ, with the concurrence of Fry LJ, endorsing the point made by Chitty J: `the extreme importance that these notices should be so plain that those who run may read' (Alexander versus Simpson [(1889) 43 Ch
D 139] at p 149)." 
Although speaking of a commercial document, addressed to shareholders, the test was stated by Young J in Devereaux Holdings Pty Ltd versus Pelsart
Resources NL (No 2) ((1985) [9 ACLR 956)] in these terms (referring to the fiduciary duty of directors not to mislead shareholders) at p 958: "In considering this equitable rule one does not adopt the legalistic approach of a 19th century examiner of titles searching for a base fee nor does one approach the question in what counsel aptly described as a nitpicking way, but one asks what effect will the information provided have on the ordinary shareholder who scans or reads the document quickly, not as a lawyer, but as an ordinary man or woman in commerce or as an ordinary investor. One asks, viewed in such a way, will the information fully and fairly inform and instruct the shareholder about the matter upon which he or she will have to vote?" 
Kearney J in Killen versus Marra Developments Ltd [(1979) ACLD 608] expressed the principle in these words: "A further obligation requires the information to be propounded for the consideration of shareholders in terms enabling the man in the street `on the run' to absorb and understand the substance of what it is the shareholders are being called upon to determine at the meeting." 
It is convenient to deal with the first and second matters together. The memorandum, in each case, was said to be misleading because it told only half the story. It included the allegations, but failed to include the acceptance by the Board of the denial, in one case, and the withdrawal of the motion containing the allegation, in the other.

The defendants endeavoured to meet these arguments in various ways. They examined the text of each motion, and suggested that the meaning was unclear.
The adverse imputation suggested by the plaintiff, therefore, did not arise.
Moreover, the motions obviously related to a much earlier period in time. They said this: "16. In any event, how could the mere mention of a note in the Minutes of a
Meeting held 4-1/2 years previously be material in the mind of a rational, reasonable and moderately well informed member who was considering whether or not Mrs Furber should be removed in October 1998?" 
I am not persuaded. In each case I believe the meaning of the motion is plain enough. I believe the Rafton memorandum is misleading in respect of both the first and second matters. Mrs Rafton was a director of the Board. No doubt many members would recognise her name as that of a director. The text of the memorandum, moreover, is clearly a commentary by someone who is a Board member. It is the observation of a person on the inside. It would have been open to Mrs Rafton to say that, in her opinion, Mrs Furber would not work as a team member, and to provide illustrations. However, she did not do so. She called in aid a Board Minute. The Minute suggested that the Board, or at least, a number of its members, held the view that Mrs Furber would not work with the Board as a team. Mrs Rafton plainly thought that the 1994 Minute was relevant to her 1998 motion. She wanted to suggest, and the reader would understand, that the problem which she was identifying was one of long standing.

The extract of the motion by Mr Hunt (concerning repeated threats of legal action) was included in the context of a legal action which Mrs Furber had, in fact, commenced in the Supreme Court. If Mrs Rafton had witnessed (or had knowledge) of repeated threats by Mrs Furber of legal action, she could have said so. However, instead she quoted from the Minutes. It was plain from the
Minutes, however, that Mrs Furber challenged the accuracy of the assertion that she had made repeated threats. She sought particulars. The motion was then withdrawn. In the circumstances, it was, I believe, misleading to refer to the motion, and not to its withdrawal. Again, it is plain from Mrs Rafton's memorandum that she was suggesting that the repeated threats of legal action had contemporary relevance. In a one page memorandum, it was a matter which was given some prominence.

The third aspect in respect of which it is said the memorandum was misleading is less clear. It is true that Mrs Rafton did not refer to the outcome of the
Supreme Court proceedings. However, the memorandum appeared to assume, on the part of a reader, knowledge of that outcome. That was not an unreasonable assumption. It was a term of the settlement of 25 August 1998, that the order of the Supreme Court permitting Mrs Furber and her advisers access to the records of the Canine Council and Kennel Control, should be published in the
Canine Journal, together with the judgment of Greg James J, without comment.
Moreover, the action in the Supreme Court was complex. The mere statement of the order made by this Court may do less than justice to the Council's position. The comment by Young J in Devereaux Holdings versus Pelsart Resources (No 2) (supra) at 959 is apposite: "... it seems to me that in a complex matter such as the present it is virtually impossible by a circular to tell the shareholders the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth and still have a commercially informative document. The more one steers clear of the Scylla of the whole truth the more one veers towards the Charybdis of confusion." 
In the circumstances, I believe the memorandum was not misleading in the third respect alleged.
Was the Board Obliged to Inform Members? 
Having found that aspects of the Rafton memorandum were misleading, was the
Board obliged to act? What relevance does the Rafton memorandum have in the context of the Special General Meeting scheduled for 20 January 1999? Mrs
Rafton gave notice of her motion to remove Mrs Furber on 7 August 1998. The motion appeared in the September 1998 issue of the Canine Journal, together with Mrs Furber's response. The injunction of 6 October 1998 prevented the motion being put. Mrs Rafton, in the Canine Journal, published in November , advised members that she did not intend to proceed further with her motion. She withdrew the statements in the Rafton memorandum, and asked members to disregard them.

The defendants, in these circumstances, responded to the supposed connection between the Rafton memorandum and the Special General Meeting in a number of ways. First, they asserted it was entirely irrelevant to the issues before the
Special General Meeting. Secondly, they said that, insofar as the memorandum included statements which may have been misleading, Mrs Furber had now responded to those statements, and her response had been circulated. Thirdly, that, in any event, there is no obligation on the part of the Board to correct a pamphlet circulated by a member.

I do not accept, however, that the Rafton memorandum is irrelevant to the motion which is to go before the Special General Meeting. The motion proposed by Mrs Rafton, and that proposed by the Board, are, in substance, the same.
There are differences, but they are slight. There is also the proximity in time. The membership was told of Mrs Rafton's motion in the September 1998 issue of the Canine Journal. In the November issue they were told of the new motion, this time proposed by the Board, and to be determined by a Special
General Meeting. I do not accept that the paid advertisement by Mrs Rafton necessarily erased, completely, the misleading statements which had been made.
Some members, no doubt, saw Mrs Rafton's memorandum, but not her paid advertisement. There may be others who saw both, but were left wondering about
Mrs Rafton's motivation in placing the advertisement. Specifically, some may have inferred that the motion had been withdrawn because of the accusations of contempt, and the assertion that aspects of the memorandum were misleading.
Others may have inferred that Mrs Rafton had withdrawn because the Board had taken up the same issue, and was clearly in a better position to prosecute that issue than an individual member. Nowhere does Mrs Rafton acknowledge that she was wrong. Indeed, she asserted that her memorandum was not misleading. If the memorandum was not misleading, why should members disregard it when they came to consider the same issue in the motion put forward by the Board itself (whatever Mrs Rafton may say)? 
There can be no doubt that the Board was well aware of Mrs Furber's complaints about the Rafton memorandum. The complaints were identified before his Honour,
Greg James J, when the injunction was sought. Although initially the matter proceeded ex parte, the defendants were represented in the afternoon of 6
October 1998 when his Honour said that it was "arguable that in a number of respects the document was false and misleading" (supra p 31). On 21 October Mrs Furber's solicitor wrote to the Council stating: "The memorandum was signed by Christine Rafton a member of the Litigation
Committee. In the memorandum she relied (on) information recorded in minutes of board meetings. These meetings took place at times when she was not a member of the board. The assertions she relied upon were withdrawn." 
Mrs Rafton, of course, acknowledged that allegations had been made that the document she published was misleading.

Mrs Rafton was identified as the person proposing the motion in September 1998 (supra p 3). However, the notice to members of the Special General Meeting does not, in terms, identify who proposed the resolution to remove Mrs Furber.
The notice is set out above (pp 34/35). The form of the notice suggests that it was the Board itself putting forward the motion. The submission of the
Defendants appears to acknowledge that that was so. They state the following: "The current Motion is a Motion to be put forward at a Special General Meeting convened by the directors pursuant to a resolution of the Board of Directors validly and properly made. The nature of the exercise is entirely different; the identity of the propounder of the Motion is entirely different; the `Rafton flyer' (ex D) has been withdrawn."
An Explanation by the Board to Shareholders 
Was there a duty, on the part of the Board, to provide information for the guidance of members? 
In Peel versus London and North Western Railway Company [[1907] 1 Ch 5], Vaughan
Williams LJ said this: (at 13/14) "Have the directors of the company the right to take steps that there shall be a full attendance of shareholders at the next meeting? I say it is there positive duty, if they think that there is a serious attack being made upon their policy which is likely to jeopardise the interest of the company in the future, to take care that there is a meeting at which there shall be a full attendance of shareholders. I cannot doubt myself but that, if it is their duty to take care that there are plenty of shareholders present at the meeting, it is also their duty to take care that there are a sufficient number of shareholders put into a position to vote for those who personally are unable to attend the meeting. It is not denied that it is right, under those circumstances to spend the funds of the company in printing proxy papers.
There can be no doubt that it is also their duty to take care that a sufficient statement of the facts which will have to be considered by the shareholders at the coming meeting is also placed before the shareholders." 
Fletcher Moulton and Buckley LJJ agreed. Buckley LJ expressed the point in the following way: (at 21) "The point here decided is that directors bona fide acting in the interests of the corporation, and not to serve their own interests, are entitled and bound to inform and guide the corporations in matters affecting the corporate interests, and any expenses reasonably incurred in so doing may be borne out of the funds of the company." 
Kearney J in Killen versus Marra Developments Ltd identified the Board's duty in these terms: (at 608) "The relevant duty with respect to directors informing shareholders of the business of meetings has been put in a variety of ways, but can be summarised in the terms that the directors seeking passage of a resolution at a meeting of shareholders should provide shareholders with sufficient information concerning the business to be brought forward at the meeting. The shareholders must be enabled to have an understanding and form a judgment upon such business." 
The Federal Court (Black CJ, Von Doussa and Cooper JJ) in Fraser versus NRMA
Holdings Ltd said this: (at 466) "The fiduciary duty is a duty to provide such material information as will fully and fairly inform members of what is to be considered at the meeting and for which their proxy may be sought. The information is to be such as will enable members to judge for themselves whether to attend the meeting and vote for or against the proposal or whether to leave the matter to be determined by the majority attending and voting at the meeting." 
The defendants deny that they were under a duty to say anything. The Articles simply required notice of "the nature of the business to be transacted" (Article 62(a)). That notice had been given. The submission added (p 11): "The starting point for a proper consideration of this submission is the proposition that neither the Board of Directors nor any individual directors are ordinarily obliged to offer an opinion as to the way in which members should vote upon resolutions put to them in General Meetings, nor are they obliged to state the reasons for such an opinion. In practice, the offering of such an opinion and the provision of reasons are often undertaken. It may be that, in cases of complexity in cases involving transactions in respect of which the approval of the shareholders meeting in General Meeting is both sought and required, the directors have an obligation to speak and to speak fully and frankly. Most of the authorities dealing with the obligations of directors in this regard are authorities which concern transactions of this character, and which often concern matters which could legitimately be regarded a matters in which the directors themselves have a particular personal interest. Such circumstances clearly enliven the directors' fiduciary duty owed to the particular company." 
I believe that the directors were obliged, in the circumstances, to provide information to fully and fairly inform members of the motion which they were being asked to consider. First, the matter was complex. It had a long history.
It was complicated by the Rafton memorandum, and its withdrawal. I do not believe the Board was necessarily obliged to correct the statements in the
Rafton memorandum which were misleading. Had the company issued its own circular (which was full and fair), that would have been enough. However, they chose to say nothing. I do not believe that that was an option in the circumstances. Given that the Rafton memorandum was misleading, and that they were on notice of that fact, and given its subject matter and its relevance (whatever Mrs Rafton may say) to the same subject which was to be considered by the Special General Meeting, and given the proximity in time, the Board, in my view, had two courses open to it. It could either correct those statements, or render the Rafton memorandum irrelevant by its own statement (which was full and fair).

Secondly, some motions may be self explanatory. They do not call for comment or elaboration by the Board. The motion to be put to the Special General
Meeting, in my view, cannot be so characterised. It did not, as part of the motion, identify (as it might) the alleged faults or misdemeanours of Mrs
Furber. How, on the basis of the motion as framed, was a member to make up his or her mind as to whether to cast a proxy vote (and if so, which way) or to attend the meeting? Mr Foster SC (for the Council) asserted that members had no right to information from the Board. I disagree. If directors believed it was in the interest of the company as a whole that Mrs Furber should be removed, in circumstances where the motion was not self explanatory, they had a duty to state their reasons for the guidance of members.

Thirdly, in the absence of an explanation from the Board (which was full and fair), those seeking to make up their mind might have been misled by the text of the notice of meeting. The text is set out at pages 34/35 above. At the meeting where the Board framed the motion, Mrs Rafton abstained, and Mrs
Furber and four other directors did not vote, choosing rather to leave the meeting. Mr Foster SC submitted that the Board had been careful, in framing the notice, not to take a position. Rather, it sought to remain neutral, leaving the issue to the membership, precisely because the Board was divided.
However, I believe the notice is capable of being read as a proposal put forward by the Board as a whole (apart from Mrs Furber). Indeed, I believe most people would read it in that way. Alternatively, at the very least, the notice is ambiguous, and capable of that construction. It needed to be made clear to members that the Board, as such, was not sponsoring the motion.

Fourthly, there is a further matter which reinforces the view that I have formed, though I acknowledge that it is less clear cut. A director who is the subject of a motion for his or her removal, is given the right, under s227(5) of the Corporations Law, and under the Articles of the company (cl 43), to make representations to the membership once made aware of the motion for removal. The representations are a means of affording the director, as a matter of fairness, an opportunity to defend himself or herself. That opportunity will only be meaningful if the director is apprised of the basis upon which it is said to be in the interests of the company that he or she should be removed. The director will otherwise be boxing at shadows. Is there a need, therefore, to inform the director of the basis upon which it is said to be in the interests of the company as a whole that he or she should be removed? Can one import notions of natural justice into s227, by virtue of the right given to a director to make representations, which are then circulated to the membership? Mr Foster SC (for the Council) rejects any such construction. The Act makes no such provision. For my part, I believe this aspect is a further facet of the directors' duty to inform the membership. The membership should be placed in the position where it makes the right decision in the interests of the company, whether it be the removal of the director, or his/her survival. To make the right decision, the membership needs information which (at reasonable length) puts the case for each point of view. If, as I believe, there is an obligation upon those proposing the motion to inform the membership (in circumstances where the motion is not self explanatory), their doing so will, at the same time, serve to inform the director. The director is then able to respond to the matters which the members ought to consider before casting their vote. The membership, by this means, will be in a position to make an informed choice between competing arguments. The requirements of natural justice to the director will, incidentally, also have been satisfied.
Here Mrs Rafton stated why she believed Mrs Furber should be removed. The
Board has not done likewise. It would be too late, and unfair, simply to state those reasons for the first time at the meeting itself. By that time proxy votes will have been cast.

I, therefore, believe that the first ground upon which the injunction was sought has been made out. Since the notice of meeting placed no limitation upon the time at which proxy votes may be cast (save, that they must be lodged by 4.30 pm the day before the meeting), the problem cannot now be cured. In my view, the process for Mrs Furber's removal must begin afresh.

I should deal with the remaining issues, since they bear upon the way in which that process should be conducted, were it undertaken again.
The Requirements of Section 227(12) 
Section 227(12) of the Corporations Law is in these terms: "[Resolution of other directors] A director of a public company shall not be removed by, or be required to vacate his or her office because of, any resolution, request or notice of the directors or any of them notwithstanding anything in the articles or any agreement." 
The Canine Council of New South Wales Limited is obviously a public company, as the defendants acknowledge. The defendants, however, in their submissions, say this: (page 2) "8. The whole purpose of sub-section (12) is to take away from the Board of
Directors the power to remove one of the members of the Board (by their own resolution) and to repose it most firmly in the hands of the members." 
It is the concept of "shareholder democracy" (Ford, Principles of Company
Law, vol 1 (p 7167, para 7.230)). Here, were the motion carried, Mrs Furber would have been removed by the members, not by a resolution or request of the
Board.

However, the plaintiff fixes upon the word "notice" in s227(12). It is said on
Mrs Furbers behalf that, were she removed, it would be because of a notice (that is to say, notice of a motion) by the directors. The defendants responded with the following submission: (p 1, para 5) "The removal having been effected by the members, it is irrelevant that procedurally the meeting was convened by the directors." 
The definition of "notice" in Pt 1, div 1 of the Corporations Law is unhelpful. Section 227(12) deals with a variety of ways in which directors may seek, themselves, to remove another director. Here the motion by the directors is not, in my view, a "notice" for the purposes of s227(12). The motion will be considered by members, as required by the sub-section.

There is a further issue. There is a distinction between an ordinary resolution, and a special resolution. Part 1, div 2 (the definition section) defines "resolution" as "A resolution other than a special resolution". A "special resolution" is defined as having the meaning given by s253 of the
Corporations Law. That section requires certain notice of the resolution, and that it be passed "by a majority of at least three-quarters of such persons who vote at the meeting ... or by proxy". The motion by Mrs Rafton was for a special resolution. The motion by the Board was for an ordinary resolution.

The Articles make the following provisions in respect to the removal of
Directors: "42. Subject to the Corporations Law, any Director may only be removed from the office of Director before the expiration of the Director's term of office by special resolution of the members in general meeting and another person may be appointed (in accordance with the procedure in Article 29) to hold office until the expiration of the term of office of the Director so removed.
Where a Director to whom a proposed resolution referred to in Article 42 relates makes representations in writing to the Secretary or Chairman of
RNSWCC, the Director may require the representations to be read out at the meeting at which the resolution is considered." 
However, the Corporations Law contemplates an ordinary resolution. Section (1) is in these terms: "[Resolution of public company] A public company may, by resolution, remove a director before the end of the director's period of office, notwithstanding anything in its articles or in any agreement between it and the director." 
Special notice is required (s227(3)), but not a special resolution.

Section 227(11) is relevant. It makes the following provision: "[Compensation or damages] Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section: ...
 derogates from any power to remove a director that may exist apart from this section." 
In Link Agricultural Pty Limited versus Shanahan [(1998) 16 ACLR 1462], the
Supreme Court of Victoria reached the following view (quoting from the headnote): "3. Section 227 of the Law and Article 95 of Pivot's articles created concurrent and alternative procedures under which Pivot could remove a director and appoint another in his place. Article 95 required a special resolution; sec 227 did not. The members had a choice whether to proceed under sec 227 or under article 95. The members had decided to proceed under sec 227, so the requirements of Article 95 were not relevant. The trial Judge was correct in deciding that the appointment and removal resolutions were brought under sec 227, and in exercise of the company's inherent power, and did not require a special resolution." 
The notice for the Special General Meeting made it plain that the motion was proposed pursuant to s277 Corporations Law. Accordingly, it was appropriate that it should be an ordinary resolution. It seems to me, therefore, that there is no substance in the second basis upon which Mrs Furber sought an injunction.
The Curtailment of the Right to Inspect 
The third basis upon which the plaintiff sought an injunction was accurately and succinctly restated by the defendants in their submission in response.
They said this: (page 5) "The submission was - 
Access to the books and records of the first defendant and of Kennel
Control had been frustrated by officers of the first defendant since 25
August, 1998 and continued to be so frustrated and that the process of inspection was, as at the date of the trial, incomplete, that state of affairs having been brought about by the actions of officers of the first defendant; and 
Any attempt to remove the plaintiff as a director of the first defendant `would not be tolerated' by the Court whilstever such incomplete inspection obtained." 
Not all documents had been inspected when the matter came before me on 26
November 1998, although a number had been examined, including matters which had long been identified by Mrs Furber as items of interest (for instance, the $35,000 management fee, etc).

There are certain documents which have yet to be examined. Ms Cooper says, and
I accept, that they are available for examination. I have no evidence before me as to what remains, or how long it would take. I do not believe it reasonable that Mrs Furber should undertake a complete audit of the company's affairs (together with her professional advisers) over five years. I am not prepared to assume that whatever documents remain to be inspected will take longer than the time which is available. I, therefore, reject the third ground.
Compliance with Section 227(5) 
The evidence having concluded, the parties lodged written submissions. They then spoke briefly to their submissions. Having considered the submissions, I raised with Mr Foster SC (appearing for the Canine Council) certain issues that occurred to me, arising from the terms of s227. These were not issues raised by the plaintiff. The defendants maintained, therefore, that they were not matters which should be dealt with by me. With the possible exception of one matter, however, they were issues which arose under the Statute from the evidence which was before me. The possible exception concerned the phrase "as soon as practicable" appearing in s227(4), which may raise factual issues not explored in the evidence.

I have, as stated, already reached the view, on other grounds, that an injunction should issue to prevent the motion being put to the planned Special
General Meeting. The process for the removal of Mrs Furber should begin afresh, and be conducted according to law. The observations I now make are made in the hope that they will be of some assistance to those who have the responsibility of ensuring that the Statute is observed.

Section 227 contains a group of provisions dealing with the procedure to be followed when there is a motion for the removal of a director before the end of a director's period of office. The provisions are these: "227(3) [Special notice] Special notice is required of: a resolution to remove a director under this section; or a resolution to appoint a person in place of a director so removed at the meeting at which the director is removed.
 (3A) [When notice must be given] Notice of the intention to move the resolution must be given to the company at least 2 months before the meeting is to be held. However, if the company calls a meeting after the notice of intention is given under this subsection, the meeting may pass the resolution even though the meeting is held less than 2 months after the notice of intention is given.
 (4) [Copy of notice by director] As soon as practicable after receiving notice of an intended resolution to remove a director under this section, the company shall send a copy of the notice to the director concerned, and the director (whether or not a member of the company) is entitled to be heard on the resolution at the meeting.
 (5) [Representations by director] Where notice is given in accordance with subsection (3) and the director concerned makes with respect to the notice written representations to the company (not exceeding a reasonable length) and requests that the representations be notified to members of the company, the company shall, unless the representations are received by it too late for it to do so: state, in any notice of the resolution given to members of the company, that the representations have been made; and send a copy of the representations to every member of the company to whom notice of the meeting has been or is sent." (6) [Late representations] If a copy of the representations is not so sent because they were received too late or because of the company's default, the director may, without prejudice to any right to be heard orally, require that the representations be read out at the meeting." 
Here, on 14 October 1998, the Board resolved to do two things: * First, to convene a Special General Meeting (pursuant to cl 61(a) of the Articles). * Secondly, it gave notice of an intention to move a resolution for the removal of Mrs Furber (pursuant to s227 of the Corporations Law). 
The company, in these circumstances, was obliged to fix a date for the Special
General Meeting. It was required to do so be reference to the obligations imposed by s227. In selecting a suitable date, s227(3), (3A) and (5) were relevant. The company needed to allow sufficient time to permit the requirements of these sections to be met. Two months would need to elapse between the notice of intention to move the resolution (14 October 1998) and the meeting (s227(3A)). Consideration needed to be given to the time necessary to accomplish the other steps contemplated by s227, namely special notice (s227(3)), informing the director (s227(4)), and, assuming the director wished to make representations, incorporating in the notice of the resolution, reference to those representations (s227(5)(a)), and well as distributing a copy of the representations (s227(5)(b)).

Having fixed upon a date for the meeting, the sequence contemplated by s227 was as follows: * First, the receipt by the company of a resolution to remove a director. * Secondly, as soon as practicable after receiving notice of the intended resolution, the company shall send a copy of the notice to the director concerned (s227(4)). * Thirdly, although there is no express obligation, the company is obliged to apprise the director of his right to make representations (s227(5)). Further, if that right is to be worth anything, the director must be afforded a reasonable time to do so. * Fourthly, the director then has the opportunity under s227(5) of doing two things: 
Providing written representations (not exceeding a reasonable length) with respect to the notice, and 
Requesting that the representations be notified to members.
 * Fifthly, the company is obliged to issue a notice which shall (subject to a proviso which I will deal with): 
State in the notice that the representations have been made (s227(5)(a)).

Send a copy of the representations to members of the company to whom the notice is sent (s227(5)(b).

The obligation of the company to state in the notice of resolution to members that representations have been made, and to provide those representations, is subject to the following provision (in s227(5)): "... unless the representations are received by it too late for it to do so." 
That proviso, however, appears to contemplate tardiness on the part of the director in furnishing representations, the director having been notified. One cannot sensibly refer to the representations as being received too late, when they have not yet been solicited, and a deadline imposed.

However, s227(6) carries a side-note "Late Representations". It contemplates fault on the part of the director (using the same phrase "because they were received too late"), or the company ("the company's default"). The director may, in such circumstances, and without prejudice to his right to be heard orally, require the representations to be read out to the meeting. That section deals with the director's rights, or one aspect of them. It does not deal with the company's obligations. It may be thought not even to deal exhaustively with the director's rights. Reading the statement to the meeting will be no substitute for its distribution to members in circumstances where there has been fault on the part of the company, proxies are permitted, and there is a large proxy vote. Also s227(6), it will be noticed, only deals with the distribution of representations by the director. It is not directed to the content of the notice which the company should provide under s227(5)(a).

Here, when Mrs Rafton notified her intention to move a motion for the removal of Mrs Furber on 7 August 1998, Ms Cooper acted to inform Mrs Furber on 11
August 1998. Mrs Furber prepared her representations before the deadline of 18
August 1998 (supra p 27). Members were notified by the Canine Journal as contemplated by the Articles (cl 62(b)(i)). The notification, as required by s227(5)(a), included a reference to the representations of Mrs Furber. The representations appeared in the same Journal, as required by s227(5)(b). The members, therefore, had Mrs Furber's response from the moment they were able to cast their proxy vote, if that is what they intended to do.

In respect of the motion, which is to go before the Special General Meeting, the position is somewhat different. The resolution to remove Mrs Furber was notified on 14 October 1998. One gathers that the date of the Special General
Meeting was not fixed immediately. Ms Cooper wrote to Mrs Furber on 16 October , enclosing a copy of the resolution. No reference was made to representations under s227(5), nor the date of the Special General Meeting. On October 1998, the notice of Special General Meeting (and accompanying proxy forms) was sent to the printers in Queensland for the preparation of the
Canine Journal. The Canine Journal was then published in early November 1998.
By this means the members were notified (as permitted by the Articles, cl (b)(i)). The notice made no reference to representations by Mrs Furber (cf s227(5)(a)). It was not accompanied by representations from Mrs Furber (cf s227(5)(b)).

Mrs Furber wrote to Ms Cooper on 29 November 1998, protesting that she had not been told of the date of the meeting, nor the deadline for the provision of representations by her. Ms Cooper responded the next day (30 November 1998), outlining Mrs Furber's rights under s227(5) to make representations, and identifying a deadline. Mrs Furber thereafter submitted those representations within the deadline, and they were published in the December issue of the
Canine Journal. Proxies, in the meantime (that is, since November 1998), were available to members to complete.

It is evident from that description that there were a number of possible departures from the sequence contemplated by s227 of the Corporations Law.

ORDER 
I make the following orders:
An injunction is granted restraining the putting forward of the motion to remove the plaintiff as a director of the Royal New South Wales Canine Council
Limited at the Special General Meeting to be held on 20 January 1999.
That the first defendant should pay the plaintiff's costs.
That the plaintiff's claim against the second defendant is dismissed.
That the plaintiff should pay the second defendant's costs.
 * * * 
