

D P Kirk Pty Ltd versus Ampol Petroleum Pty Ltd Matter No 1129/98 [1998] NSWSC (30 January 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 March 1998 `

D P KIRK PTY LTD versus AMPOL PETROLEUM PTY LTD` ` 1129/98` `30 January 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings which are ancillary to proceedings between the same parties in the Commercial Division, which in these reasons I will call "the main proceedings". In the main proceedings, as in these, D P Kirk Pty Ltd ("Kirk") was the plaintiff and Ampol Petroleum Pty Ltd ("Ampol") the defendant. 
The main proceedings in the Commercial Division were made the subject of an order that certain questions be decided as separate issues. The trial of the separate issues was to be heard before Hunter J in July 1997. Shortly before that hearing there was a disagreement between the junior counsel retained for each side as to what exactly was involved in the trial of the separate issues.
Because of that difference of opinion, the parties and their senior counsel agreed that it would be appropriate to ask Hunter J to adjourn the trial of the separate issues. Counsel attended before Hunter J, first in chambers and later in open court and his Honour adjourned the hearing.

The basis of the dispute in the main proceedings was a contract which Kirk had to transport fuel produced by Ampol or by another oil company, Caltex, with whom Ampol had, in one sense or other, amalgamated. The contract was originally made between Kirk and Caltex to commence from 1 May 1991 and to terminate on 30 April 1997 with a provision for it to continue on with either party to give thirty days written notice of termination. There was correspondence between the parties, as a result of which there was what has been described as the stand-still agreement, essentially preserving the status quo under the 1991 contract. The stand-still agreement was to expire on 1
August 1997.

When the trial of the separate issues was postponed, it was obviously necessary to reconsider that stand-still agreement. The parties did so and came to a variation through their counsel. That variation was noted in the transcript before Hunter J on 16 July 1997 as follows: "STITT: There is one matter before your Honour proceeds. Might it be noted that my learned friend and I agree, subject to the Court approving this application for an adjournment today, that the interim agreement which is currently in operation between the parties be extended pending the determination? 
HIS HONOUR: That can be noted ..." 
It is accepted on all sides that that was an accurate note of the variation agreement.

The trial of the separate issue came on before Bainton J and was heard on 27, , 29 and 30 October 1997, and his Honour gave a written judgment on 19
December 1997, that is on the last day of term last year. The separate questions were re-cast during the hearing as often happens and the re-cast questions were answered favourably to Ampol.

At the separate hearing in the main proceedings Mr R R Stitt QC and Mr N
Perram appeared for Kirk and Mr J N West QC and Mr M J Steele appeared for
Ampol. It would seem Mr Stitt QC had gone overseas about 18 December 1997 and that Mr West QC was away from chambers from the end of term.

On 24 December 1997 there was a telephone call made by Mr Perram to Mr West
QC. The former was in chambers. The latter was at home. There is a conflict as to what was said. Mr Perram said that as far as he can remember he said to Mr
West QC: "John, it is Nye Perram. I am terribly sorry to disturb you on Christmas Eve but Bainton's delivered judgment in the Kirk matter. You won. The reason I called is because there is a rumour running around that the agreement between
Stitt and yourself compelled Ampol to continue to use Kirks until any appeal and Ampol are now threatening to cease to use Kirks. I've got the transcript from before Hunter." 
Mr Perram then said he read Mr West QC the relevant part of the transcript and said, "It really begs the question, doesn't it?" Mr West QC then said: "It does not cover the period up to an appeal. That was never my understanding. My people were unhappy about extending back in July at all.
They simply would never tolerate it being further extended. My clear understanding is that it was only up to Bainton J's determination of the question." 
The barristers then discussed the possibility of a successful appeal, and Mr
Perram said he could not get hold of Mr Stitt QC, but wished Mr West QC the compliments of the season.

I should say that Mr Perram, Mr West QC and Mr Stitt QC all gave evidence on affidavit, which they confirmed in Court and were then cross-examined. It is quite clear that all three men are of the highest integrity and were endeavouring to give the Court their very best recollection. It is also clear that not all of the three can be completely correct in his recollection. I have known all three counsel in one way or another for some time, as has each other judge in this Division, and all of them have appeared before me. It was necessary for some judge to hear the case and I am the most senior judge of the Division in Sydney this week. Further, as I have been on the Bench over twelve years, I am as remote from personal relationship problems as any other member of the Bench. I have not in fact found any difficulty in conducting the hearing.

The only matter of demeanour that really affected their evidence was the impact that one's practice tends to have on the way one gives evidence. Mr
Stitt QC, who is experienced in common law and defamation matters, tended to give his evidence in a more aggressive way than the commercial lawyer, Mr West
QC, or the equity junior, Mr Perram. But I did not really find that those matters assisted me in finding one way or the other who had the best recollection in the main.

I do, however, think that Mr Perram's version of what happened on 24 December is more likely to be correct. Not only because of the careful way in which he gave evidence, but also because he was the only one who was actually in chambers with the relevant documents directing his mind to all the problems.
It is far more likely that he would be correct than one of the silk, who was on holidays. However, in the end, I do not think that finding makes much difference to the result.

Passing on to Mr West QC's evidence, he denies that Mr Perram ever read any part of the transcript to him. I think that probably it slipped his mind.
However, the mere fact that Mr Perram read the relevant part of the transcript to Mr West QC on Christmas Eve is not sufficient to affix Mr West QC with knowledge of the transcript on 7 January 1998 when the next conversation took place.

The evidence is that Mr Stitt QC rang Mr West QC's home at about 9.15am Sydney time and was told by Mrs West that Mr West QC was out walking the dog and would be home shortly. Mr Stitt QC then rang back about 10am Sydney time on
Wednesday 7 January, and there is no doubt that the barristers had a conversation. As I said, Mr West QC denied that Mr Perram ever read the transcript to him and Mr West QC took what was being said to him by Mr Stitt
QC at its face value when it was said.

According to Mr West QC, Mr Stitt QC said that he did not know that Bainton J was handing down his decision on 19 December 1997, but he had a fax copy and it was clear that Mr West QC's client had won. He then said: "I am ringing you for two reasons: first, to say to you that I have instructions to seek special leave to appeal. I now have definitely received those instructions. And second, to confirm my understanding of the agreement which we made and which is recorded in the transcript in front of Hunter J that the status quo should be maintained pending the determination of the question. The transcript uses the words final determination." 
Mr West QC said he did not have the transcript at home.

Mr Stitt QC said: "I understand that. It does. In my view, given that we have lost that must embrace the appeal to get a final determination." 
Mr West QC and Mr Stitt QC then agreed that leave to appeal would be necessary. Mr West QC then referred to the conversation with Mr Perram, who had asked to Mr West QC's recollection whether the status quo agreement was restricted to the separate question or extended to all other issues in the main proceedings. Mr West QC recollected telling Mr Perram it only applied to the separate question. Mr Stitt QC said that he agreed with that, but that in effect, Mr Stitt QC used the same words he used in the witness box this morning namely Bainton J's decision was really only an interim determination and the final determination would be made in the Court of Appeal. Conversation then went on to matters of the proposed appeal and what might need to be established, and Mr Stitt QC then said: "We need to know where we stand about maintaining the status quo pending the outcome of an appeal. If you and I are not agreed about the meaning of the status quo agreement, then I will have to swear an affidavit setting out what happened." 
Mr West QC said: "You do not have to do that. I agree with you that the agreement covers your attempt to appeal. Until that has been determined nothing further should happen." 
Mr Stitt QC said: "Thank you John, I appreciate your confirming my view." 
Mr West QC replied: "That's alright. If there is any problem and I am asked about it, I will give advice in conformity with our conversation." 
Mr Stitt QC's version is in many respects the same, in many respects different. He told Mr West QC that he was ringing about the judgment in Kirk and Ampol and said that as Ampol has now given notice of termination, "That's why we need to know where we stand about maintaining the status quo pending the outcome of the appeal. If you and I don't agree about maintaining the position pending the outcome of the appeal then we will have to move the
Court for an order." 
Mr West QC is alleged to have said: "You don't have to do that. I agree with you that until the appeal has been determined nothing further should happen." 
Mr Stitt QC then said: "Thank you John, I appreciate you confirming that to me. It would have been very difficult if I had had to try and sort it out from over here." 
Mr West QC was then alleged to have said: "That's all right. If anyone should ask me that's what I'll tell them." 
I think it is important to analyse what the real problem is in this case and the first step in doing that is to try to work out the significance of what was said between Mr Stitt QC and Mr West QC on 7 January.

In the exchanges between Bench and Bar during final addresses, Mr Burbidge QC, who appeared with Mr Sirtes, for Kirk, made it clear that he was not asserting that the conversations of 7 January 1998 were being put forward as the making of a contract or the variation of a contract. It was put on the basis that Mr
West QC had been the agent for making the original variation agreement of July , and it was open for Mr West QC to admit what that agreement meant so far as his client was concerned. Alternatively there were estoppels which brought about the same result.

The position of Mr West QC on the evidence before me was that he was retained by Ampol only to argue the separate questions. He was not briefed on the whole of the main proceedings. His brief finished either with the conclusion of the argument on 30 October 1997 or perhaps on the handing down of the judgment on December 1997. Although it is customary when an appeal is being considered for counsel who was in the trial to speak about the case and to try and broker some acceptable interim arrangement pending an appeal, I am not at all sure that counsel's authority to bind the client still exists at that period. I need not go into that any further because it is not asserted that Mr West QC was making a contract.

So far as the proposition that Mr West QC was an agent making an admission about a contract that he had earlier made, I would not have thought that at common law that admission, after the brief had been terminated, would have been an admission that would bind the principal. Bowstead &
Reynolds On Agency, sixteenth edition, Sweet and Maxwell, London pages 525 and following (Article 96) make it clear that it is only in a limited number of situations that an admission of an agent other than at the time when the agent is actually doing the deal is to be binding on the principal. Most of the cases are, of course, cases of fact but the learned authors say, at page 525, "Authority to make admissions regarding past transactions will rarely be inferred", and various cases are cited, the most recent being Prinses Juliana [[1936] P 139.] I think that does represent the law. I have not found any case, nor has any been cited to me, where the mere fact that the former agent, who now purports to make an admission, was the agent that actually entered into the contract, is in any special situation.

There was some argument as to whether [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s87.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) alters the position. I do not consider that it does. The section is designed to deal with a statement made by an employee or the like who was an agent at the time the representation was made. It does not make admissible a statement made after the agency ceased as to what was in the agent's contemplation at some past date.

There was exchange between counsel and myself as to whether in any event it was appropriate to look at conduct after the making of the variation agreement on 16 July 1997 to construe the contract. There are various decisions of both
NSW and Victorian Courts of Appeal as well as utterances of single judges and various decisions of the High Court, which do not all speak with the same voice. I believe that the position that has been reached is that one can look at subsequent conduct for limited purposes, such as if the subjective intention of the parties happens to be relevant, one can look at the subsequent conduct in order to see the subjective intention, but often the subjective intention of the parties, when they made the contract, will have no relevance at all.

Again, there are odd cases which do not fall into any category, such as the situation where it was unclear whether the contract was for five thousand picture frames or ten thousand picture frames and the conduct of the purchaser in buying ten thousand pictures to fit into a frame was held to be evidence that one could look at to see what the original contract was. See Wrigley v
Cornelius [44 NE 406] (1896) (Ill).

But those cases do not seem to really assist in the instant case, and there was very little really that happened on 7 January 1998 that deals with the essential question of what was the true construction of the contract made in
July 1997 varying the stand-still agreement. Both in his affidavit and quite voluntarily in evidence before me, Mr Stitt QC repeatedly used the word "confirm". He kept saying that he was seeking that Mr West QC confirm the position. Cross-examination illustrated that by using the word "confirm" Mr
Stitt QC was not seeking any new agreement. He was seeking that something already binding the parties be reaffirmed.

I was very much tempted to ask Mr Stitt QC what the word "confirm" meant, but
I restrained myself. I made an observation which defendant's counsel did not take up, doubtless for very good reasons of his own, that the word "confirm" is one of those words which can have a variety of meanings. Often the word means something which is revived, such as in a will case if someone says, "I confirm my will", that means he re-publishes it. See Re Champion [[1893] 1
Ch 101.]
Sometimes "confirm" means to give life to something that previously never had life, such as a confirmatory conveyance, which actually does properly what an ineffective conveyance had attempted to do earlier. See Morgan versus Gronnow [(1881) LR 16 Eq 1.] Often "confirm" means merely verify, so that when minutes of a previous meeting are confirmed, all that is really meant is that the meeting considers that they express a true record of what happened before, not that something new is done. See for instance The Queen versus York Corp <case>; [(1853) 1 El & Bl 588] and
Toole versus Flexihire Pty Ltd [(1991) 6 ACSR 455] at 462.

It can have other meanings as well. Accordingly, merely insisting that you want someone to confirm something is really not, with respect, taking the matter very much further. Essentially, what Mr Stitt QC was doing was asking
Mr West QC to agree that Mr Stitt QC's assessment of the meaning of the contract of July 1997 was the same as his. What good that would have done, in a legal sense, is unclear because unless the point was overlooked Mr West QC had no authority, at that stage, to make any agreement binding on his client or on his former client.

However, when one looks at the conversation in a commercial sense or in a professional sense, it is very understandable. There were two QCs, who were formerly in a case; a practical problem had come about as a judgment had been given on the last day of term, and a notice of termination had been given two days before Christmas. One QC was overseas; the other one was on holidays, and as between them it was very sensible that everything be delayed until the holiday period had passed. Not only because of the barristers, but also it would appear that at least some of the solicitors were away and, although there is no evidence on this one way or the other, it is possible that some of the clients or their directors would be away also.

The fact that Mr West QC indicated to Mr Stitt QC that he thought that nothing should happen until the application for leave to appeal was dealt with would have been of practical use. But that this was not an agreement, it was rather a professional exchange of views, seems to be quite apparent from the words that both Mr Stitt QC and Mr West QC say at the very end, that Mr West QC said, "If anyone should ask me, that is what I'll tell them". In other words counsel expected that Mr West QC would be briefed to deal with any problems such as have arisen, and when he was, that was the advice he would give.
However, the view of Mr West QC was influenced by the fact that he was of the view that the transcript before Hunter J had used the words "final determination" and not merely "determination", without the adjective "final".

Mr Stitt QC said in evidence that he was not arguing the matter with Mr West
QC, but in his evidence before me he said that what he was putting to Mr West
QC was that the determination of Bainton J was just an interim determination.
The final determination was to be made by an appellate court, and obviously determination meant the determination by the ultimate court. So that the situation between the judgment of Bainton J and the disposal by the Court of
Appeal was covered by the agreement. Whether Mr Stitt QC was the source of Mr
West QC's belief that the transcript said "final determination" or how otherwise he got that impression does not really matter.

It seems to me, having read the whole of the evidence, that Mr West QC was of that view. The confirmation that he gave to Mr Stitt QC was linked in with that understanding. It does not seem to me to matter that had he remembered what Mr Perram had said earlier that the word "determination" was used rather than "final determination" and that the argument that a Supreme Court Judge's determination is always an interim determination was quite contrary to the way in which the cases deal with such determinations, is really beside the point.

Accordingly, I cannot find anything in what was said on 7 January 1998 which influences the way in which I should approach the question of construction of what was the agreement of July 1997, which is recorded in the transcript. In his opening address Mr Burbidge QC said that his client accepted that the words used between counsel were limited to an extension of the stand-still agreement pending determination of the separate issues and did not assert that the word "final" was used. But, whilst ordinarily it would be hard to argue that determination should be construed otherwise than as determination at first instance, in the present case there were factors which showed that what the parties had intended by the word "determination" meant determination at the appellate stage, if that situation were reached.

The background circumstances showed that this was so because the point that was argued for four days before Bainton J was a small part of the main proceedings, and it was plain to everyone that the importance of the point to the plaintiff was such that the plaintiff would seek to exhaust its rights on that issue.

Mr Burbidge QC then went on to add a second point, that by the conduct of
Ampol and its counsel that had been confirmed. I have already dealt with that second point. So far as the first point is concerned, Mr McAlary QC, who appeared with Mr Pembroke SC for Ampol, said that actually the circumstances in which the agreement was reached showed that the ordinary meaning of "determination" was reinforced. This is because when one saw that there had been an interim agreement to expire on 1 August 1997 on the basis that the preliminary issue would be tried on 16 July 1997 or thereabouts and then it appeared that that hearing could not take place and that the determination of the separate proceedings would not occur until after 1 August, it was necessary to adjust that 1 August date. There was no necessity, however, to deal with anything else other than the determination by the first instance judge of those separate proceedings.

Furthermore, they submitted that the construction which was pressed on me by
Mr Burbidge QC and Mr Sirtes was, in one sense, an ambulatory one. Did the stand-still agreement come to an end on 19 December 1997, and was it then revived at some stage between 24 December 1997 and 7 January 1998 when the final decision to make application to the Court of Appeal was made or perhaps even on 16 January 1998 when the notice of motion for leave was filed? It would be rather extraordinary to have the stand-still agreement come to an end, lie in limbo for a time and then be revived.

I consider that these submissions are correct and that when one has an agreement not to do anything pending determination that that ordinarily means pending the determination at first instance and that, in all the circumstances of the instant case, that is what the word means in this case.

It follows that the summons, which I gave leave to amend today and although the formal document has not yet been filed, which I will call the amended summons, must fail. So that the suit must be dismissed.

The cross claim was filed on 29 January 1998 seeking a declaration that the notice of termination issued by Ampol on 23 December 1997 is valid and enforceable. Mr McAlary QC put that that was really the mirror image of what needed to be decided in the suit. However, I do not, with respect, think that is so. If any declaration were to be made it would be a declaration not that the notice was valid, because one does not make declarations along the way, but only of the ultimate issue. See Trans Realty Pty Ltd versus Grbac [[1975] 1
NSWLR 170.] If any declaration were to be made it would need to be that the original contract or its variation had ceased to be binding. That matter, however, is really one which is encompassed in the main proceedings.

I think I should just strike out the cross claim and make it clear that I am not making any determination of the issues that are raised in it but that it is not something that should be dealt with in this suit. Accordingly, proceedings dismissed with costs: cross claim is struck out. The exhibits may be returned on the usual basis.
 * * * 
