

Water Administration Ministerial Corp versus Puntoriero Matter No Ca 40367/96 [1997] NSWSC 574 (21 November 1997) 
Water Administration Ministerial Corporation versus F & T Puntoriero 
CA 40367/96; SC 400059/93 November 1997 
Mason P, Meagher JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Supreme Court, Grove J and Jury 
FILE NO/S: CA 40367/96; SC 400059/93 
DELIVERED: 21 November 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 27-29 May 1997 
PARTIES:WATER ADMINISTRATION MINISTERIAL CORPORATION versus F & T PUNTORIERO 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, MEAGHER JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P M Donohoe QC & B Green 
Respondents: J M Foord QC & J A Darvall 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Paul Percival 
Respondents: Denniston & Day 
CATCHWORDS: 
Negligence - statutory authority -interpretation of statutory immunity -whether particular act causing damage was within statutory immunity 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 51 
WATER ADMINISTRATION MINISTERIAL CORPORATION v

F & T PUNTORIERO 
The respondents were farming potatoes in south western New South Wales. In
October 1992 the respondents drew water from the irrigation system operated by the appellant statutory authority. The plaintiffs suffered damage to their crops which was identified as being caused by the herbicide atrazine. The plaintiff made a claim in negligence and a jury awarded damages of $1.8 million. The appellant challenged the finding of negligence on the basis that: it was protected by a statutory immunity.
it was under no duty to take any action which would have prevented the damage to the respondent.
there was no reliance by the respondent.
the terms of the lease to the respondent excluded damages claims.
the respondents have not established causation.

Held (by Mason P and Stein JA; Meagher JA dissenting) 
The appellant was protected by the statutory immunity in <case> Water
Administration Act 1986 . The act causing damage was a function of the authority and covered by the immunity.

Board of Fire Commissioners versus Ardouin <case>; [(1962-1963) 109 CLR 105] at .

Little versus Commonwealth <case>; <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 466] at 471.

Attrill versus Richmond River Shire Council [(1995) 38 NSWLR 545] at 554.

Minister for Youth and Community Services versus Health and Research Employee's
Association of Australia  <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424] discussed.

ORDERS 
Appeal allowed with costs, the verdict and judgment set aside and a verdict for the defendant substituted.

If so entitled, the respondents to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) .

WATER ADMINISTRATION MINISTERIAL CORPORATION v

F & T PUNTORIERO 
JUDGMENT 
MASON: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgments of Meagher JA and Stein JA. Consideration of their differing views has caused me to hesitate before committing to a position in this difficult and significant case. 
I have concluded that the appeal should be upheld on the ground that s19 of the Water Administration Act 1986 ("the Act") confers statutory immunity on the appellant ("The Water Corporation") with respect to the conduct for which it was sued.

I note the discussion by Stein JA about duty of care. I prefer to express no view on this matter. It involves issues of general and specific reliance[1] and, in a proper case it would require one to address the question whether any duty of care was negated because the damage flowed from a "policy" decision as distinct from an "operational" one.[2] I hasten to add that there appears to be no evidence in the present case that the damage flowed from a decision of the former kind.

As stated, I prefer to base my decision on the scope of s19. I agree with what
Stein JA has written, adding the following comments: 
Care needs to be exercised lest the manner of characterising the Water
Corporation's statutory functions is used, without more, to answer the question of the scope of immunity. If one started from the premise that the
Water Corporation's essential function is to carry out its powers without negligence, then the immunity would have no application if negligence is found. At the opposite extreme, if one premised that the Corporation's functions were to do all and anything with reference to water, then the immunity would have virtually universal scope subject only to bad faith.
Either approach involves circularity of reasoning.

How then to approach the issue in a principled way? Obviously the words of the immunity need to be construed in their context, and with the strictness that befits a provision that derogates from what (ex hypothesi) is a good common law cause of action.[3] It also needs acknowledgment that a provision such as s19 is designed to cover some situations where the official body's conduct needs protection. As Dixon J expressed it in Little v
Commonwealth:[4] "Such enactments have always been construed as giving protection, not where the provisions of the statute have been followed, for then protection would be unnecessary, but where an illegality has been committed by a person honestly acting in the supposed course of the duties or authorities arising from the enactment." 
But to acknowledge these points is to come to the start of the problem, not its solution.

A recent historical survey of the underpinnings of the New South Wales water allocation system[5] notes that: "It was hardly surprising that a system of private riparian rights which served a well-settled and relatively abundantly water resourced country like rural England, was inadequate when it came to regulating the increasing water needs of a developing and expanding rural economy in the vast, relatively dry expanses of inland New South Wales." 
The imperatives of water resource management, particularly in relation to large traversing river systems in areas of low intermittent rainfall, saw the
New South Wales Parliament substantially abandon the riparian rights system in
In its place was put a regime based on administrative disposition.
Rights to the use, flow and control of water in rivers and lakes were vested in the Crown, subject to certain limitations. Some riparian rights were recognised under the Water Rights Act 1896, but they were otherwise severely curtailed.[6] The 1896 legislation introduced a licensing system which continues to this day. Through a series of consolidations, the Water Rights
Act 1896 became the [Water Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wa191283/), which remains in force although it has been amended over the intervening years, and has been supplemented by the Water Administration Act 1986 and the [Irrigation
Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/).

Section 7 of the [Water
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wa191283/) allows a limited exercise of private irrigation and domestic extraction without intervention by the Water Corporation. But, subject to limited statutory exceptions, the Water Corporation maintains administrative control over inland waters through its discretion to issue licences and permits for the allocation and use of water.[7] The statutory licensing system controls the pumps, equipment and channels used.

Section 12(1) of the Water Administration Act vests (with presently irrelevant exceptions) in the Water Corporation: "the rights to the use and flow, and to the control, of: the water in rivers and lakes, the water conserved by any works, water occurring naturally on the surface of the ground, and sub-surface water ..." 
Similar provisions have appeared in the statute law since last century, both in New South Wales and other States. This right to the control of the inland waters of the State is conferred in aid of the statutory objects stated in s4 which are: "(a) to ensure that the water and related resources of the State are allocated and used in ways which are consistent with environmental requirements and provide the maximum long-term benefit for the State and for
Australia, and to provide water and related resources to meet the needs of water users in a commercial manner consistent with the overall water management policies of the Government." 
Such over-arching power of control, for water-use and environmental purposes, clearly involves the power to make decisions balancing the rights of one group of stakeholders over another. This will involve decision-making as to doing and not doing a wide range of activities. Fiscal, operational, equity and environmental factors will inevitably tug in opposite directions.

I emphasise these matters to indicate why I find unhelpful the characterisation of the Water Corporation's breaches in terms of failure to do certain acts. The distinction between acts of commission and acts of omission (cf the much criticised distinction between misfeasance and nonfeasance) forms a significant part of the respondent's submissions as accepted by Meagher JA.
It would probably be possible to characterise practically any activity of the appellant in positive or negative terms. The scope of the immunity cannot turn upon which side of the same coin faces the decision-maker.

The system of canals and channels through which water was delivered to the respondents' land forms part of the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Scheme. This is a complex engineering project commenced early this century, now covering 182,000 hectares. Water flowing down the Murrumbidgee River is diverted at the
Berembed Weir into the main canal which runs for 155 kilometres through the
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area. There are 2,350 kilometres of channels which convey the water from the Main Canal to farm boundaries. With minor exceptions, water flows to each farm boundary by gravitation. Flows and levels are controlled by regulating structures allowing water to be supplied to each farm and measured through Dethridge outlets. Each outlet is fitted with a
Dethridge wheel with a simple revolution counter attached. The wheel passes a known quantity of water as it revolves and the amount of water delivered to each farm can be readily calculated. Water distribution is controlled by
Channel Attendants or bailiffs, who receive farmers' orders for water. The attendants or bailiffs then schedule deliveries and adjust flows in the various channels according to demand.

The rates of diversion from Berembed Weir (and the release upstream from
Burrinjuck and Blowering Reservoirs) are arranged to provide the irrigators' anticipated requirements with a minimum of waste. This is a complicated task, as water must be ordered for release from the headwater storages about seven days in advance of being required on the farms.

Those parts of s11 of the Water Administration Act which are set out in the judgment of Stein JA[8] indicate the scope of the appellant's functions.
And they anticipate the detailed regime of administrative control over inland waters which has been the central policy of the legislation since 1896. The detailed provisions of the Act and its related Acts (such as the [Irrigation
Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/)) spell out those powers. In the present case the respondents' access to water depended on licences administered by staff of the Water Corporation, including a water bailiff to whom written application was necessary before water could be drawn from the channels.

The Water Corporation's functions are not confined to those expressly stated in the Water Administration Act. As s(11)(1)(b) of that Act makes plain, they extend to functions conferred or imposed by or under other enactments. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/s12.html) of the [Irrigation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/) placed the Water Corporation under a duty "each year, at the times and in the quantities fixed by it, [to] supply water in pursuance of water rights which are attached to the land of any occupier".

Prior to the passing of the Irrigation Corporations Act 1994, the Water
Corporation (and its earlier manifestations - each representing the Crown) exercised extensive statutory powers to construct works and administer water rights over irrigation areas proclaimed under [s6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/s6.html) of the [Irrigation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/). The torts sued upon in the present proceedings occurred in 1992.

The Cudgel Channel and the Main Canal upstream from it were artificial works constructed to allow irrigation. Access to water in the Channel involved the exercise of rights closely regulated by the [Irrigation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/), which itself (in [s8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/s8.html) gave to the Water Corporation "control of any irrigation area and any works within or used in connection with any such area". The unauthorised taking or using of water from the Scheme is an offence.[9] 
Like Stein JA, I would emphasise the language of the statutory immunity and compare its scope with the more general language used in cases which were cited in support of canons of construction going beyond the requirement to construe immunities of this nature with the strictness befitting provisions derogating from common law rights. In contrast to the provisions discussed in
Board of Fire Commissioners of New South Wales versus Ardouin[10] (which spoke of immunity for damage caused in the bona fide exercise of powers conferred by the relevant Act), s19(1) of the Water Administration Act focusses upon loss or damage suffered "as a consequence of" the exercise of a function of the Water Corporation including "exercise of a power ... to release water from any ... works". The damage suffered in this case fairly answers that description notwithstanding that it may be possible to put additional labels on it.

The statutory immunity considered in Ardouin[11] removed liability "for any damage caused in the bona fide exercise of" the powers conferred by the Fire Brigades Act. Driving a fire engine upon a public highway was held to be not such a power. Dixon CJ described such a function as being "of an ordinary character involving no invasion of private rights and requiring no special authority".[12] Kitto J stated that the protection was "intended only in respect of damage caused in doing things actually within the direct authorization of the Act or the by-laws".[13] Windeyer J spelt out the corollary: "any citizen may go to a fire ... No special power is needed to enable members of a fire brigade to drive a fire engine upon a highway to the place of a fire."[14] In the present case the release of waters from the
Cudgel Channel was the direct cause of the respondent's damage (ex hypothesi); that release was one of the activities regulated closely and through the statutory licensing schemes; and (most importantly) it is an event singled out in s19 itself as worthy of exclusion of liability.

To use the language of Kitto J in Ardouin,[15] the release of water from the Cudgell Channel into the respondents' land was "an act which, if it had not been negligent, would have been the very thing, or an integral part or step in the very thing, which the provisions of the Act other than [s19] gave power in the circumstances to do, as distinguished from an act which was really incidental to, or done by the way in the course of, the exercise of a power." 
Nothing in Ardouin suggests the proposition that a statutory power ceases to be such for the purposes of an immunity merely because it is improperly used. The passage just quoted from the judgment of Kitto J states the contrary. Indeed, Board of Fire Commissioners versus Rowland[16] was rescued from overruling by the majority of the High Court on the very basis that the decision could be understood as involving the negligent use of a special statutory power to enter theatres.[17] 
It also needs to be borne in mind that special statutory powers falling within the scope of an immunity may be exercised even though other powers are not themselves resorted to (perhaps due to carelessness). Nevertheless, the immunity may be available in such circumstances. Thus, in R & W Vincent
Pty Ltd versus Board of Fire Commissioners of New South Wales,[18] s46 of the
Fire Brigades Act 1986 protected a decision that it was safe to leave the scene of a fire because the fire had been apparently extinguished. It follows that it is no answer to the Water Corporation's reliance upon s19 in relation to the supposedly careless exercise of its power to release water to point to other powers and duties to protect water from pollution.

For these reasons I would uphold the appeal. In confining myself to the immunity issue I am not to be taken to express a view for or against the appellant on the other issues that were ventilated in the appeal.

WATER ADMINISTRATION MINISTERIAL CORPORATION v 
F & T PUNTORIERO 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal from the verdict of a jury, presided over by Grove J, in which the respondents, the Puntorieros, were awarded damages in respect of the loss of their potato crop in 1992. 
Facts 
The Puntorieros were lessees of a property in Cudgel, taking possession in
July 1992. The property had its own dam, which was full in October 1992, being the time the respondents began to irrigate their potato crop. The dam was fed by water from the Cudgel Channel and would be filled and emptied a number of times during irrigation. On 10 and 17 October 1992, the Puntorieros irrigated, feeding the dam with water from the Cudgel Channel. They noticed damage to their crop in early November 1992.

In November 1991 other properties in the area had suffered crop damage: the
Parr-Ainsworth property drew on water from the Cudgel Channel; the Donaldson property drew on water from Lateral 240, a nearby channel. Both channels are fed from the Main Canal which runs for some 155 kilometres through the
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area. The Puntoriero farm was about 2 kilometres upstream from the Parr-Ainsworth property on the Cudgel Channel. That is, water flows down the Main Canal feeding Lateral 240 (and the Donaldson property) and then the Cudgel Channel, first the Puntoriero property and then the Parr-Ainsworth property. The respondents contended that the crop damage to all of these properties was caused by a phytotoxic substance, which probably included the herbicide atrazine. It was contended that the toxins were present both in Lateral 240 and the Cudgel in November 1991 and that caused the damage to the Donaldson and Parr-Ainsworth properties, respectively. Somehow, it was alleged, the toxic substance in the Cudgel fell to the bed of the channel and lay dormant there until October 1992 when the respondents drew from the
Cudgel, causing damage to their own crop.

Mr Hutchins, an agriculturalist consultant and agronomist, investigated the damage to the Donaldson property on 22 and 23 November 1991. He formed the opinion that the damage must have been caused by a herbicide, most probably atrazine. Mr Hutchins also visited the Parr-Ainsworth property on 23 November and concluded that whatever caused damage on the Donaldson property was also responsible for the damage to the Parr-Ainsworth crop. The Donaldson property was supplied with water from Lateral 240; the Parr-Ainsworth property from the Cudgel Channel. When Mr Hutchins investigated the Puntoriero property almost a year later, he formed the opinion that it was the same toxic substance that caused the damage there.

Evidence was given by Mr Chant who, over the relevant period, was the district manager employed by the Department of Land & Water Conservation. Evidence was also given by various other employees of the appellant. The general thrust of that evidence was that the Department was aware, in November 1991, of the allegations of poisoning to both the Donaldson and the Parr-Ainsworth properties. The Department was making investigations and carrying out tests, including tests of the water in Lateral 240. No tests were taken of the water or soil in the Cudgel Channel, even though the Department must have been aware, or should have been aware, that there was probably toxic substances in both channels. The evidence of these employees also showed a recognition of the general reliance by members of the local community on the appellant in carrying out these sorts of functions.

It is not difficult to see that it would be likely that, had (and this is not the case) the Puntoriero property also drawn on water from the Cudgel at the same time as the Donaldson and Parr-Ainsworth properties, it might have suffered damage from the same phytotoxic substance being carried through the water. It is more difficult to see, however, that such damage could be caused almost one year later.

The Puntorieros' case at trial was that the appellant was negligent in failing to warn, failing to test the Cudgel Channel, failing to clear the Channel and failing to drain the Channel. The jury returned a verdict for the Puntorieros and made the following findings of fact (derived from specific questions put to, and answered by, the jury): i the damage to the Puntorieros crop was caused by a phytotoxic substance applied to it with the water from the Cudgel Channel when the crop was irrigated in October 1992; ii between November 1991 and 10 October 1992 it was foreseeable to the appellant that the respondents' crop could be damaged by the application of contaminants in the irrigation water of the Cudgel Channel; iii The appellant failed to exercise reasonable care: by failing to test the water supply for chemicals likely to damage crops; by failing to warn the Puntorieros that the water was contaminated; by failing to take any steps to clear the water supply of contaminants which the appellant knew or ought to have known were in the Cudgel Channel; and by permitting and/or allowing the contaminants to remain in the Cudgel
Channel.

Grounds of Appeal 
The appellant appeals from the decision on the following grounds: i The trial judge should not have dismissed the appellant's applications for judgment, those applications being brought on the following grounds: that the appellant was immune from liability by virtue of <case> of the
Water Administration Act 1986; that the appellant's liability was excepted by the special condition attached to the grant of the farm; and that the appellant was not under a duty to the respondent to do any of the matters that the respondent alleged it negligently omitted to do.
 ii A verdict for the respondent was not open, or was perverse, on the evidence of causation.
 iii The quantum of the verdict was not open, or was perverse, on the evidence.

Duty, Breach and Immunity 
I have had the benefit of reading a draft of the judgment of Stein JA in which he concludes that <case> of the Water Administration Act operates to bar the respondents' claim. I cannot reach the same conclusion. Section 19(1) provides: 
Except to the extent that an Act conferring or imposing functions on the
Ministerial Corporation otherwise provides, an action does not lie against the
Ministerial Corporation with respect to loss or damage suffered as a consequence of the exercise of a function of the Ministerial Corporation, including the exercise of a power: to use works to impound or control water, or to release water from any such works.

A provision exempting or limiting liability in respect of the exercise of a statutory function is to be construed narrowly against the interests of the relevant authority: Board of Fire Commissioners versus Ardouin <case>; [(1961) 109 CLR 105] at 116. The appellant contends that the immunity afforded by s 19(1) extends to the circumstances of this case. It is necessary to identify whether there was a duty of care and what was found to constitute a breach of that duty in order to determine whether <case> affords immunity. The second issue, whether the breach was causative of the damage suffered, is irrelevant for the purpose of determining whether there was a duty of care and a breach of that duty in respect of which <case> affords immunity.

The Ministerial Corporation is vested with certain powers, functions and duties. It is under a duty to supply irrigation water by virtue of <case> [Irrigation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/) .
Section 12(1) of the Water Administration Act 1986 ("the Act") provides that the right to the use, flow and control of the irrigation water is vested in the Ministerial Corporation. Section 12(3) sets out various discretionary powers relating to the right conferred by subsection (1) or of any other function. Those discretionary powers include taking such measures as the
Ministerial Corporation sees fit for, inter alia: the conservation, replenishment and supply of water; the beneficial use of water; the protection of water from pollution and the improvement of its quality; preventing any unauthorised interference with the flow or availability of water; environmental protection.

The respondents contended that, after the damage occurred to the Donaldson and
Parr-Ainsworth properties in November 1991, the appellant was placed in some different relationship with the respondents, than the relationship previously between them. The foundation of this proposition is that the Ministerial
Corporation became aware of allegations that some toxic substance had entered certain channels over which it had control. It is clear that the Department was aware that a toxic substance may have entered the Cudgel Channel. The evidence of Mr Chant and of others paints a clear picture that the community of farmers in the area relied on the performance of the services of the
Department. The damage caused to the Donaldson and Parr-Ainsworth crops was devastating and the foreseeability of similar damage being suffered by others must have been obvious. In these circumstances, it is not difficult to see the relationship of proximity that arose around the time of the damage to the two crops between the 20 odd farmers who drew on water from the Cudgel and the
Department in which exclusive power and control of the channels resided.

A little more need perhaps be said on the issue of reliance. The respondent led no evidence that there was actual reliance; but there was sufficient evidence to draw the inference that the class of persons of which the respondents were members generally relied upon the Department. A statute setting up a public authority prescribes certain functions and arms it with certain powers so as to achieve certain objects in the public interest. The situation is described by Mason J in The Council of the Shire of Sutherland v
Heyman <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424] at 457-8, in the following way: 
In framing such a statute it is inconvenient to describe the intended activities of the authority in terms of a series of positive duties. It is preferable to describe those activities as functions or powers so that the authority is free to make policy-making decisions and discretionary judgments with a view to attaining the statutory objects. Decisions and judgments of this kind will be involved as a preliminary to exercising, or declining to exercise, a power and, subsequently, in determining how it is to be exercised.
Viewed in this light statutory powers are not in general mere powers which an authority has an option to exercise or not according to its unfettered choice.
They are powers conferred for the purpose of attaining the statutory objects, sometimes generating a public expectation having regard to the purpose for which they are granted that they will be exercised. There is, accordingly, no reason why a public authority should not be subject to a common law duty of care in appropriate circumstances in relation to performing, or failing to perform, its functions, except in so far as its policy-making and. perhaps, its discretionary decisions are concerned.

The objects of the Act are set out in <case>: 
The objects of this Act are: to ensure that the water and related resources of the State are allocated and used in ways which are consistent with environmental requirements and provide the maximum long-term benefit for the State and for Australia, and to provide water and related resources to meet the needs of water users in a commercial manner consistent with the overall water management policies of the Government.

The functions and powers provided for in <case> and <case> effectively vest in the appellant exclusive duty to achieve these objects. That the class of persons, being the users of the water, place some reliance on the proper exercise of the duties is obvious. That, on its own, does not necessarily give rise to reliance that is sufficient to attract the requisite degree of proximity.
However, as in this case, if an authority knows or ought to know that a person in the class of persons of which the respondent/plaintiff is a member rely on it to prevent danger of a specific type and the authority is made aware of the existence of that danger and the authority is, in a practical sense, the only party able to prevent damage arising from that danger, then the reliance is reasonable and attracts the conclusion that there exists between the respondent and the appellant sufficient proximity to give rise to a duty of care. An analogous situation arose in Flynn versus The Commonwealth of Australia in which Miles CJ found the existence of a duty of care primarily on the basis that the defendant had been informed by a police officer of the danger of a particular median strip.

Once it is established that there existed a duty of care, then a failure to take reasonable care will constitute a breach of that duty, whether that failure takes the form of a careless act or a failure to act when there should have been action: The Council of the Shire of Sutherland versus Heyman <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424.] It is sometimes, but erroneously, suggested that Heyman is authority for the proposition that an authority with a discretion to exercise a power will not be liable in negligence for failure to exercise that power.
That suggestion is clearly dispelled in the passage of Mason J quoted above.
The jury made findings that the appellant breached its duty of care by: failing to test the water supply for chemicals likely to damage crops; failing to warn the Puntorieros that the water was contaminated; failing to take any steps to clear the water supply of contaminants which the appellant knew or ought to have known were in the Cudgel Channel; and by permitting and/or allowing the contaminants to remain in the Cudgel
Channel.

Counsel for the appellant has not suggested that there was no evidence to support the jury's findings and those findings must stand. It is trite to point out that all of the breaches are essentially breaches constituted by a failure to take appropriate measures once an unusual and potentially devastating danger was brought to the appellant's attention. For example, it would have been an easy exercise for the Department to issue a warning, in late November 1991, to the 20 odd farmers informing them of the probable contamination and investigations. The absence of any warning was an omission which was unreasonable given the knowledge of the appellant, the severity of the possible consequences which would flow from the failure to warn, the position of responsibility that the appellant held in relation to the farmers in the area and the reliance that was obviously placed on the appellant.
Whether that failure to warn was causative of the respondents' damage is a completely separate question.

Similarly, the failure to test or take any measures to remove the toxic substance from the Cudgel when it knew of the allegations of poisoning was unreasonable. Such testing would not have been a huge drain on departmental resources. However, nothing in what I have said can be seen to place any obligation on the appellant, in the absence of knowledge that some toxic substance had been dumped, actively and continuously to make investigations and carry out tests in case a third party malefactor might have somewhere dumped a toxic substance.

The question is whether those breaches fall within the immunity provided by s
That section speaks of "loss or damage suffered as a consequence of the exercise of a function... [or] power". What we have here, most clearly in relation to the failure to warn, is a distinct case of no exercise of function or power. Similarly, the failure to remove the toxic substance from the water is a failure to exercise the function or power to achieve the object of providing water "to meet the needs of the water users". It is true that the functions or powers are said to be discretionary, but as Mason J pointed out in Heyman, they are really a convenient method of imposing certain duties to achieve certain objects. It might be suggested that the failure to act is subsumed in the notion of what the authority is doing in exercise of its power and functions and attracts immunity in that sense. I doubt that was the intended meaning: it would only be in extraordinary cases that a duty could arise requiring some positive action by the appellant. That proposition is supported by the dichotomy commonly drawn between malfeasance and nonfeasance.
Malfeasance occurs where the positive actions of the authority cause or contribute to the damage suffered by a plaintiff. In this situation it is more common for a statutory authority to come under a duty of care. Nonfeasance describes the situation in which the damage suffered by a plaintiff was not caused or contributed to by the positive actions of the authority. It is only possible for the authority's failure to act in a situation of nonfeasance to constitute a breach if somehow a duty of care had arisen and that can only occur in extraordinary circumstances. In other words, it is probable that the legislature saw fit to grant immunity in the situation where the authority acted as opposed to situations in which the authority completely failed to act in circumstances where it owed a duty of care. And that is what the words of s say.

It seems settled that, to use the words of Kitto J in Board of Fire
Commissioners versus Ardouin <case>; [(1961) 109 CLR 105] at 177, "the immunity attaches in respect of damage resulting from an act which, if it had not been negligent would have been the very thing or an integral part of the very thing which the provisions of the Act... gave power in circumstances to do, as distinguished from an act which was merely incidental to, or done by the way in the course of, the exercise of a power".
The Act gave power, amongst other things, to control water, take measures to protect or improve the quality of water and release water. I do not see how the failure to warn of a potentially devastating danger can be seen as an act which forms an integral part of the very thing which the Act gave power to do.
True it is that the release of water is the very thing which the Act gave power to do. But is that what the jury found had the consequence of causing the respondents damage? Only in a sense. The potato farmers may never have used the water had they been warned that it may have been contaminated.
Similarly, the failure to make any attempt to test and remove toxins can hardly be seen to be an integral act in the exercise of a power. In Ardouin, if the fire engine had not even bothered to attend the fire, could that have been regarded as an "exercise of power conferred by the Act" attracting immunity? I think not.

Immunity in the Grant 
The appellant also argued it was immune by virtue of a special condition attaching to the grant of the Puntorieros' farm. The special condition attached by virtue of <case>(c) of the Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
The special condition relied upon appears in the NSW Government Gazette No.
, dated 15 December 1978, and is in the following terms: 
Neither the Crown nor the Water Resources Commission (hereinafter called "the
Commission") shall be liable to the holder for the time being of the holding or to any person at any time having any estate or interest therein for any damage sustained to the holding, or to any property thereon by subsidence, flood, storm or seepage, soakage, reflux, presence, overflow or oversupply of water however caused or arising and in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing subsidence, flood, storm or seepage, soakage, reflux, presence, overflow or oversupply of water which may now or from time to time, or at any time hereafter in any manner whatsoever be caused by or arise out of the construction, maintenance, non-maintenance, alteration and use of and addition to any works constructed or to be constructed under the
Barren Jack Dam and Murrumbidgee Canals Construction Act, 1906, the
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Act, 1910, the Irrigation Act 1912-1971, or the
Blowering Dam Act, 1951-1963; or under any present or future Statute...

It seems quite clear that the words of that special condition could not possibly have been intended to grant immunity in respect of damage caused by toxins in the water. The words were meant to apply to damage caused by flooding and a whole lot of words were used to describe flooding.

Causation 
That the appellant owed a duty of care and breached that duty and was not immune from the consequences does not, however, mean that the breach of duty caused the damage to the respondent.

The damage to the Puntorieros' potatoes did not occur until almost a year after damage was sustained to the Donaldson and Parr-Ainsworth properties. Mr
Puntoriero's evidence was to the effect that the dam was already full when he began to irrigate in October 1992. Mr Hutchin's theory was that, at about the same time as damage was caused to the Donaldson and Parr-Ainsworth properties, the dam on the Puntoriero property was filled, but not used until the irrigation in 1992. Thus, on this theory, the toxic substance lay around the bottom of the dam from that time in about November 1991 until October 1992 when the suction pipe into the bottom of the dam withdrew the water for spraying, through a Central Pivot Irrigator ("CPI"), onto the crop. The sucking from the bottom of the dam, combined with the inflow of water from the
Cudgel, caused the toxic substance to be sprayed over the crop with the water.
This theory was not relied upon by the respondent and the case put to the jury was that the toxic substance somehow lay in the Cudgel Channel until the irrigation process stirred it from its dormant status into the dam from where it was pumped over the potatoes. Indeed, the specific questions put to the jury indicate that this was the case they were called upon to decide and their answer, paraphrased earlier in these reasons, indicates that they accepted this theory.

The respondent asserts, however, that there was no evidence to allow a finding of causation or that the finding on causation was perverse. It was undisputed that the evidence was sufficient to allow findings on the following: i a phytotoxic substance was present in the Cudgel Channel and Lateral 240 in late 1991; ii a phytotoxic substance caused damage to the Donaldson, Parr-Ainsworth and
Puntoriero crops; iii the appearance of the damage to the various crops was identical and could have been caused by the same herbicide or mix of herbicides which included atrazine; iv atrazine is heavier and only partly soluble in water; v 14 million of litres of water per day flowed down the Cudgel Channel between
November 1991 and May 1992.

The appellant argues that there was no proper evidence, however, as to the following findings which would have had to be made to show causation: i that a sufficient quantity of the herbicide somehow fell to the bed of the
Cudgel to rest there for nearly one year without being dissolved or being dissolved only to the extent that the quantity remaining could cause the damage actually caused; ii that the herbicide could remain toxic for that long; iii that the process of irrigation (or something else) somehow could cause the toxic substance to rise from the bed of the Cudgel and flow into the
Puntoriero dam; iv that once the toxic substance was in the dam it could remain in suspension and be sprayed by the Central Pivot Irrigator onto the potatoes.

It was argued that all of these matters had to be proved by expert evidence, because they were not matters within the realm of common experience. For this proposition the appellant relied on the High Court's decision in Tubemakers of Australia Ltd versus Fernandez <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 538] at 569: 
I think that upon a question of fact of a medical or scientific description a court can only say that the burden of proof has not been discharged where, upon the evidence, it appears that the present state of knowledge does not admit of an affirmative answer and that competent and trustworthy expert opinion regards an affirmative answer as lacking justification, either as a probable inference or as an accepted hypothesis.

In Tubemakers, Mason J said (at 724-5): 
The statement of Dixon J in Forst's Case to which I have referred...
emphasises the restrictions upon a court's power to hold that a plaintiff has not discharged the burden of proof. According to this statement, before a court is justified in so holding it must appear not only that the present state of knowledge does not admit of an affirmative answer, but that competent and trustworthy expert opinion regards an affirmative answer as lacking justification, at least as a probable inference.

That case did not involve a total absence of expert evidence, but rather inadequate expert evidence (which, in practical terms, amounted to no expert evidence) called on behalf of the successful plaintiff. The majority held that the jury was entitled to infer a causal connection having regard to the little bit of expert evidence given and the sequence of events which actually occurred. What the majority then said was that an appellate court, if it were to overrule the decision of the tribunal of fact (and this is especially so where the tribunal of fact is constituted by a jury, which does not provide reasons), had to be satisfied of two things: that the state of knowledge did not admit of the particular finding and that expert opinion has contradicted the finding as one which was not justified. The case does not say that evidence of a sequence of events from which inferences can be drawn must be supported by appropriate expert evidence, even where the inferences to be drawn are not matters within common knowledge or experience. The case simply says that if such a conclusion is drawn where expert evidence would have been desirable, an appellate court is not to intervene unless there is no expert evidence in support of the conclusion and provided there is reliable expert evidence to the effect that the conclusion drawn from the sequence of events was unjustifiable. That is clearly not what we are dealing with here.

The respondent led evidence in support of its theory of causation from people who were not necessarily experts in the particular field about which they were expressing opinions. The appellant could have objected to such evidence. But once the evidence is before the tribunal of fact, it could hardly be said that the appellant can come to an appellate court and raise the objection there.
Once the evidence was before the jury and not objected to it was possible for the appellant to lead expert evidence to show that the sequence of events and opinions did not justify the conclusions sought by the plaintiff.

Accordingly, the simple question that has to be asked in this case is whether the sequence of events and the evidence which was available entitled the jury to reach the conclusion on causation that it was required to reach to find for the potato farmers. The test for causation is a little elusive. But it is often said to be a question of common sense. Unfortunately, common sense is not something that seems to be standard and two people applying common sense to a set of given facts can reach opposite conclusions. A nice example is the case of Alexander versus Cambridge Credit Corporation Ltd (in receivership) [(1987) 9 NSWLR 310.] In that case, Glass JA applied the test in "a common sense way" and found causation proved. McHugh JA applied the test "in a practical common sense way" and found causation not proved. When the issue of causation is decided from a sequence of events, inferences must be drawn. Whether or not the inferences drawn deteriorate into mere speculation is a question of common sense. In this case, the jury had the peculiar advantage of hearing the various pieces of evidence and being able to form opinions and draw inferences from them depending on the credibility and weight to be attributed to the various witnesses. A witness may have given evidence on his opinion of causation (even though perhaps not strictly entitled because of his field of expertise) in a credible, coherent, logical and reasoned fashion. In this way the jury might have said to itself: "this witness is very impressive; his theory on causation seems to make a lot of sense". Accordingly, at least where the tribunal of fact is constituted by a jury, its findings on causation can only be overruled by an appellate court in the most extraordinary circumstances. It is not sufficient for appellate judges to say that, having read all the evidence before the jury, they would not have found, as a matter of common sense, that causation was established. Something much more than that is needed: there needs to be a total lack of evidence as to causation as a whole or a lack of evidence allowing an inference to be drawn, which inference was a vital link in the causal chain. This will be very difficult to show where a sequence of events allows inferences to be drawn and the verdict is given without reasons as occurs in a jury trial.

There was either direct evidence or sufficient evidence from which inferences could be drawn to make all of the findings listed above, given the peculiar advantage enjoyed by the jury. The most difficult inference to draw was that the toxic substance present in the Cudgel in 1991 could remain in place with huge amounts of water flowing over it until 1992. Expert evidence on the point would have been useful. But the following evidence was available: i Mr Chant gave evidence that he was notified of the suspected poisoning of crop on the Donaldson property on 23 November 1991. On that day, after being notified, he telephoned Mr Dunn, the Channel Superintendent, who was responsible for the water supply to the various properties.
 ii Mr Ainsworth gave evidence that he met with employees of the appellant (including Mr Dunn, Mr Kelly and Mr Day), at Mr Donaldson's property on 23
November 1991, and that tests were also carried out on his property.
 iii Tests of the water of Lateral 240 were carried out, but not of the Cudgel
Channel.
 iv Mr Hutchins gave evidence of his opinion that the damage to the various crops was all the same and caused by the same toxic substance, probably atrazine.
 v Mr Kelly, the laboratory manager of one of the Department's laboratories, gave evidence that the solubility of atrazine is very small or, more specifically, that it is "slightly [soluble], depending on the temperatures".
Mr Hood, an agricultural consultant biologist, gave evidence to the same effect and that atrazine was heavier than water. Mr Kelly gave evidence that atrazine can remain in soil, retaining full potency, for many years.
 vi Evidence was led that the tests to the water of Lateral 240 were only of the surface water.
 viii Mr Hutchins expressed the following opinion: "the only logical conclusion that can be drawn is: that the potato crop was damaged by some herbicide or herbicides, that is taken up by both the roots and through the leaves; that the herbicide was applied through the CPI; that the only way the herbicide could get into the CPI is through contamination of the water and or sediments in the dam from which the water was pumped; that in view of the symptoms on the paspalum on the channel bank of Cudgel Canal the water that supplied the dam was on the balance of probabilities the source of the contamination; the most probable herbicide involved was from the triazine group of herbicides of which atrazine is the most common or a triazine combined with some other herbicide or herbicides." 
The combination of the evidence that the toxic substance was heavier than water and only partly soluble, that the type of damage which occurred in 1991 was the same as that which occurred in 1992, that the substance could remain potent for years at least in soil, together with all the other pieces of evidence, allow the inference to be drawn that the substance might remain on a river bed for almost a year before being stirred by the process of irrigation and flowing into the dam feeding the CPI. I would note that this is the sort of case where a fully reasoned decision would have been desirable. This does not happen in a jury trial. In the absence of reasons (and given that they are not required) it is difficult to say that the conclusion on causation was reached as a result of speculation.

The final issue of causation is that the jury had to be satisfied that the breaches of the appellant caused the damage. That is, there had to be evidence from which the inference could be drawn that, had the appellant discharged its duty of care, the damage could have been avoided. There had to be evidence of causation linking any one of the breaches with the damage suffered.

From late November 1991 a number of tests were carried out in Lateral 240 as a result of the damage to the Donaldson property. At the same time damage was suffered on that property, the appellant was made aware of damage to the Parr-
Ainsworth property, fed by the Cudgel Channel. No tests were carried out in the Cudgel Channel and, accordingly, no attempts at removal of contaminants were undertaken. It is a perfectly proper inference that had thorough tests been undertaken and the contaminants been removed then damage would not have been suffered by the Puntorieros. The issue of whether had a warning been given, it would have prevented the damage to the Puntorieros is more problematic but, given the foregoing, need not be dealt with.

Quantum 
The final ground of appeal was that the jury's award of damages was not open on the evidence or was perverse. Mr Hutchins gave evidence for the respondent on quantum and his calculations led him to a total figure of approximately $2,600,000.00. The appellant's expert, Mr Brown, reached a figure of $900,000.00. The jury reached a verdict almost exactly half way between the two sets of calculations. The award was clearly open on the evidence and not perverse in any relevant sense.

I would propose the appeal be dismissed with costs.

WATER ADMINISTRATION MINISTERIAL CORPORATION v

F & T PUNTORIERO 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: This case is an appeal from an award of damages to the respondents (the Puntorieros) for the loss of their potato crop in 1992, as well as subsequent damage. At the trial in Griffith in June 1996, a jury awarded the respondents damages of over $1.8 million which, with interest, amounted to a judgment for just over $2 million. 
The respondents entered into a lease over a property at Cudgel in south-west of New South Wales in July 1992. Their dam was full when they commenced to irrigate their crop in October 1992, but they also drew on water from the
Cudgel Channel on 10 and 17 October 1992. The respondents noticed damage to the crop in early November 1992. The respondents' argument at the trial, which was accepted by the jury, was that the crop had been damaged by a phytotoxic substance, the herbicide Atrazine, present in the irrigation waters of the
Cudgel Channel supplied by the appellant Water Administration Ministerial
Corporation previously known as the Water Resources Commission. The Cudgel
Channel forms part of the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area (MIA) which comprises an area of 182,000 ha and 2,350 kms of channels. Its waters flow from the
Snowy Mountains, through the Burrinjuck and Blowering dams and the Berembed
Weir to a main canal. The main canal runs for 155 kilometres through the MIA, branching off into a number of smaller channels including the Cudgel Channel which passes the Puntoriero property, and Lateral 240.

In November 1991 the Parr/Ainsworth property, which also drew on the Cudgel
Channel, and the Donaldson property which drew on a nearby channel, Lateral , had suffered crop damage. The respondents contend that the toxic substance had remained dormant in the Cudgel since that time until October when they drew water from it. The appellant was informed of the damage to the Donaldson and Parr-Ainsworth properties and took water and soil samples from both properties in November-December 1991.

The respondents contend that Atrazine, which is partly soluble and heavier than water, lay in the bottom of the Cudgel. When the respondents commenced pumping water from the Channel in October 1992 the substance was stirred from the bottom and sprayed on their crop causing damage. They contend that the appellant should have taken steps following the damage at the Parr/Ainsworth and Donaldson properties, and were negligent in failing to do so in several respects- by failing to test the waters of the Cudgel Channel for chemicals, failing to warn the respondents that the water was contaminated, failing to clear the water of contaminants and allowing the contaminants to remain in the waters by failing to drain the channel. The jury was satisfied that all these grounds had been made out.

The appellant is a statutory corporation established by the Water
Administration Act 1986 (the Act) to control and supply irrigation water throughout the State. The appellant's submissions on appeal may be summarised as follows: 
Its actions are protected from claims of negligence by <case> (1) of the
Act.

If <case> does not apply to acts of omission, the appellant was not under any duty to act, accordingly its failure to act was not negligent.

Even if the appellant was under a duty to act, the respondents have not proven reliance on the appellant's failure to act.

The terms of the grant of the subject land, in the NSW Government Gazette of 15 December 1978, exclude claims for damage in relation to the property.

The respondents have not established causation: the respondents have not established that the failure of the crop was caused by the application of contaminated waters because some of the crop failed but adjacent areas did not; and the respondents have not established how the contaminated waters came to lie in the Channel for almost a year, and then be sprayed onto the crop and retain sufficient potency to cause the damage alleged.

THE STATUTORY IMMUNITY IN S 19(1) 
It is convenient to deal with the construction of <case> of Act because, if the appellant succeeds in its argument on this issue, the appeal will succeed and it is unnecessary to deal with the other issues raised.

The interpretation of the immunity may be undertaken on the assumption that the Corporation owed a duty of care to the respondents, although it is not self-evident that any duty of care would apply to the step which caused the damage.

Section 19(1) is in the following terms: 
Except to the extent that an Act conferring or imposing functions on the
Ministerial Corporation otherwise provides, an action does not lie against the
Ministerial Corporation with respect to loss or damage suffered as a consequence of the exercise of a function of the Ministerial Corporation, including the exercise of a power: to use works to impound or control water, or to release water from any such works.

THE APPELLANT'S ARGUMENT FOR A WIDE IMMUNITY 
The appellant submits that the exemption should be given a broad construction on the plain meaning of its terms. Counsel for the appellant asserts that there is no reason to narrow the ordinary meaning of the words in view of the `apparent purpose of the provision derived from the words used or the structure and obvious intention of the section' (per Attrill versus Richmond River
Shire Council [(1995) 38 NSWLR 545] at 554).
The Corporation has functions across the State and, in contrast to the quality standards imposed on authorities responsible for the supply of drinking water, the legislature has granted the Corporation a free rein to determine and undertake its activities. It is submitted that the act which caused damage to the respondents was covered by the immunity because it was, in the words of
Kitto J in Board of Fire Commissioners versus Ardouin <case>; [(1962-1963) 109 CLR 105] at , `the very thing' which the Act gave power to do, and to which the immunity was directed.

RESPONDENTS' ARGUMENT FOR A NARROW IMMUNITY 
The respondents submit that the statutory exemption should be given a narrow construction because it `derogates from the ordinary rights of individuals' (per Mason CJ, Deane, Toohey, Gaudron JJ in Australian National Airlines
Commission versus Newman <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 466] at 471) and should `not be construed to authorize an interference with common law rights without compensation without unambiguous and compelling language', per Barwick CJ (in dissent) in Benning versus Wong <case>; [(1969) 122 CLR 249] at 256.

The provision conferring immunity refers to activities undertaken in `the exercise of a function'. The respondents contend that this refers to positive acts, whereas they maintain that the Corporation was negligent through omissions. As adverted to earlier, the respondents' particulars of negligence allege a number of omissions by the Corporation - failure to warn, failure to test, and failure to clear or drain the Cudgel Channel. The respondents assert that the immunity should not be interpreted to include omissions without express words.

Neither, the respondents assert, should the court infer that a right of action for negligence is excluded by <case> in the absence of express words. The respondents submit that the immunity was directed to protecting the
Corporation from liability for flooding because the risks of flooding and water shortage are well known and the reference in the provision to the
Corporation's functions of impounding, controlling or releasing water relate to the quantity of water, rather than its quality.

THE STATUTORY SCHEME 
The functions of the Ministerial Corporation (the Corporation) established by the Act are set out in <case>. The section empowers the Corporation, inter alia, to: construct and maintain works or buildings, ...
 evaluate present and future requirements for water in the State, ...
 provide assistance to mitigate the effects of flood, drought, fire or other emergency or hardship, including the assistance with funds, personnel or equipment, or by the operation of works, develop and manage water catchment areas as sources of water supplies and co-ordinate: development schemes for water catchment areas, and the management of water catchment areas, ...

Section 12 sets out the Corporation's powers in relation to the control of water. It provides: 
The right to the use and flow, and to the control, of: the water in rivers and lakes, the water conserved by any works, water occurring naturally on the surface of the ground, and sub-surface water, is vested in the Ministerial Corporation except to the extent that is otherwise provided by this Act or to the extent that the right is divested by the exercise of a function of the Ministerial Corporation.

The right conferred by subsection (1) prevails over any authority conferred by or under another Act, including a later Act than this Act.

In the exercise of the right conferred by subsection (1) or of any other function, the Ministerial Corporation may take such measures as the 
Ministerial Corporation thinks fit for: the conservation, replenishment and supply of water, the equitable distribution of water, the beneficial use of water, the protection of water from pollution and the improvement of its quality, preventing any unauthorised interference with the flow or availability of water, preventing any unauthorised obstruction of a river or any change of its course, preventing the unauthorised erection or use of works, flood control and mitigation, or environmental protection.

The Ministerial Corporation may, for any reason, release water impounded by any works under its control.

No action or proceeding may be brought: to compel the Ministerial Corporation to supply water, or to recover any penalty or damages from the Ministerial 
Corporation in respect of a failure to supply water.

THE HISTORY OF SECTION 19 
Sections 19(1) and (2) were included in the Act when it was enacted in 1986.
The second reading speech makes no reference to, nor reason for, the provision. Apparently, the provision has no predecessor, notwithstanding that irrigation has been the subject of statutory control since the Water
Resources Act 1896 . The appellant has opined that the provision was included in response to the decision of the High Court in July 1995 in
Sutherland SC versus Heyman <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424.] In Heyman's case the High Court found that the council was not liable for damage arising from its failure to exercise a statutory discretion. Gibbs CJ and Wilson J came to that conclusion on the basis that the council had not acted negligently in exercising the discretion; Mason,
Brennan and Deane JJ, on the basis that the council owed no duty to the plaintiff, who had not relied on the council. It is cited as authority for the proposition that an authority with a discretion whether to exercise a power will not be liable for the non-exercise of that power, although their Honours confirmed that a public authority may be liable for a negligent failure to consider whether to exercise a power.

Heyman's case concerned the interpretation of the Local Government Act 1919 and whether the local government authority was liable in negligence to the purchasers of a building for damage caused by structural defects which the authority had the power to inspect. Mason J (as he then was) said that the statute `has as its object the prevention of mitigation of loss or damage of that kind' (at 456).

By contrast, the express objects of the Water Administration Act 1986 are: to ensure that the water and related resources of the State are allocated and used in ways which are consistent with environmental requirements and provide the maximum long-term benefit for the State and for Australia, and to provide water and related resources to meet the needs of water users in a
 commercial manner consistent with the overall water management policies of the Government.

These statutory objects indicate (in part) that the Act is intended to establish a system for water allocation and provision on a commercial basis.
Neither the objects of the Act, nor its substantive provisions, indicate that its purpose was to protect farmers from impure water which might cause damage.
The harm which the Act might be interpreted as being intended to prevent relates to the quantity of water supplied, and <case> of the Act expressly states that no action may be brought for failure to supply water.

Accordingly, it cannot be said that the prevention of harm to farmers from impurities in the water was an exclusive duty of the Corporation, such that the degree of proximity necessary to give rise to a duty of care is established.

It seems to me that in Heyman Mason J reserved the question of whether a public authority would be liable for the performance or non performance of functions which involve discretionary decisions of the authority. At 457-8 he said: 
There is, accordingly, no reason why a public authority should not be subject to a common law duty of care in appropriate circumstances in relation to performing, or failing to perform, its functions except in so far as its policy-making and perhaps, its discretionary decisions are concerned.
(emphasis added) 
In Ardouin, the High Court interpreted the statute under which the Fire
Brigade operated. A fire brigade vehicle travelling to a fire in what was alleged to be a negligent manner had collided with, and caused damage to, a motor cyclist. The Board of Fire Commissioners claimed that the statute provided the fire brigade with an immunity from suit. Section 46 of the relevant statute provided an immunity `for any damage caused in the bona fide exercise of such powers [conferred by the Act or by-laws]'. Kitto J, construing the clause, said at 117: immunity attaches in respect only of damage resulting from an act which, if it had not been negligent, would have been the very thing, or an integral part of or step in the very thing, which the provisions of the Act other than [the section granting the immunity] or the by-laws gave power in the circumstances to do, as distinct from an act which was merely incidental to, or done by the way in the course of, the exercise of a power.(emphasis added) 
The appellant contends that the provision is broader than the clause interpreted by the High Court in Ardouin (`damage caused in' the exercise of a power); <case> exempts damage suffered `as a consequence of' the exercise of a power. The appellant also distinguishes the acts giving rise to damage in this case as being acts which the Corporation can do only because of the authority of the Act, from Ardouin, where it was not necessary to rely on the authority of the statute to perform the act which caused the damage (driving a motor vehicle). In the words of Ardouin, the Corporation asserts that the act causing the damage was the very thing which the Act gave power to do.

In Ardouin, Taylor J also addressed the issue of whether the exemption included negligence (which was not expressly stated in the clause). He stated: in the case of such acts no question of liability could arise in the absence of negligence. If, therefore, the section is to have any operation in such cases it must be taken to extend to damage resulting from the negligent performance of such acts. (at 124-5) 
Taylor J found that although the immunity included the negligent performance of acts which were comprehended by the immunity, it did not include the acts [driving to the scene of a fire] which had given rise to the damage.

I have had the benefit of reading the draft judgment of Meagher JA. In arriving at the opposite conclusion to mine his Honour contrasts the result in
Ardouin with the scenario of a fire engine not going to the scene of the fire at all. In those circumstances, he argues, there would be a clear basis for a finding of negligence because the fire brigade would have negligently failed to exercise its function of attending and controlling fires.

In my view that analogy is not appropriate. Failure by the fire brigade to attend a fire would be akin to the Water Administration Corporation failing to supply water at all, and the Corporation is expressly protected by <case> from suits arising from failure to supply water.

Accordingly, in my opinion, the issue of the quality of the water supplied by the Corporation is a matter within its discretion and is not the raison d'etre of the Corporation. The obiter in Heyman does not require the conclusion that non exercise of the discretion amounted to negligence.

As a result, failure by the Corporation to exercise its powers which would have allowed it to do those acts, was not negligent. Accordingly, it is not necessary to decide whether the immunity extends to omissions. However, if it was necessary to decide whether the immunity extends to omissions as well as commissions, I would hold that it does so extend, because the functions of the
Corporation include the exercise of the discretion granted by <case>.

Newman was relied on by the respondents for the proposition that a limitation provision, because it abrogates the ordinary rights of individuals, should be strictly construed (at 471). This is undoubtedly so. In Newman it was held that the acts alleged to be negligent were not within the terms of the exclusionary provision, so any discussion of the correct interpretation of the scope of the exclusionary provision was obiter.

Turning to the words of the exclusion clause in the instant case, it may be seen that s19(1) is cast in wide terms: `an action does not lie', and refers expressly to the act which is alleged to have here been performed negligently - `to release water'. The provision is drafted without any words of limitation. For example, in contrast to <case>, it does not contain a requirement to act in good faith (although no absence of good faith is alleged). In my opinion, the appellant had no statutory obligation to supply unpolluted water for irrigation. Accordingly, notwithstanding the need for a jealous interpretation of the statutory immunity (per Ardouin at 177.1) and applying a strict construction (per Newman at 471.5) the court is cautioned against applying a judicial gloss to narrow the provision unless it is conformable to the apparent purpose of the provision (Attrill per Kirby at .3). In my view, the purpose of the provision does not warrant any such narrowing.

GIVING EFFECT TO THE EXCLUSION 
The issues which arise for determination are first, whether the release by the
Corporation of water which, it appears, contained a quantity of atrazine (apparently dumped by a third party malefactor), falls within the expression in <case>, `the exercise of a function, including the exercise of a power to impound.. control ..or ..release water'; and second, did the exemption from liability extend to the negligent performance of those functions? 
Was the supply of water to the respondents `the very thing' the Act gave the
Corporation the power to do? This question involves a determination of whether the damage suffered by the respondents as a consequence of the Corporation's power to control water or release it from the Cudgel channel was the `very thing' that the Act gave it power to do, or alternatively, was merely incidental to those powers.

If, when releasing water to the respondents from the channel, the appellant was carrying out the essential step, the `very thing' which <case> authorised the Corporation to do, then <case> exempts the Corporation from liability to the respondents for the consequences.

The Corporation operates the irrigation system in the exercise of its power under s12(1)(b) of the Act to control the water conserved in the `works'. If it was not otherwise clear that the power to control water included the power to release water, s12(4) expressly states that it does. The
Corporation could not operate the system without the statutory authority of the Act.

As I have already pointed out, <case> exempts the corporation from liability for failing to supply water. The respondents suggest that <case>, by analogy, is directed to liability for flooding and inundation of properties by the
Corporation's water supply. There is nothing in the terms of the section or the context of the Act to suggest that it should be so confined. It is not relevant for the purposes of construction of the section, but I point out parenthetically that liability to the respondents for flooding was apparently excluded in the grant of the subject farm NIP267.

The joint judgment of Mason CJ, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ in Newman, (interpreting Ardouin and Hudson versus Venderheld <case>; [(1968) 118 CLR 171]) prescribes that to determine whether the exclusionary provision applies, one must look at the specific act which gave rise to the damage, rather than the general functions and operations of the statutory body (Newman at 474).

Accordingly, it is necessary first to characterise the act by the Corporation which caused the respondents' damage. That act was the release of water from the Channel which caused damage to the respondents' crops due to the contaminants it contained. It was not the failure to warn, failure to test or the other omissions relied on by the respondents.

The appellant Corporation was under a duty to supply irrigation water (s12 [Irrigation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/) ), but it is not expressly stated that the water must be uncontaminated. Nothing in the Water Administration Act 1951 indicates the quality of water which must be supplied; to the contrary, among the discretions vested in the Corporation under <case> are subsections (d), `the protection of water from pollution and the improvement of its quality', and (i) `environmental protection'. Clearly the Act envisaged that the water for which the Corporation has responsibility may be less than pure, after travelling in open channels for many hundreds of kilometres. This is not a case like Barnes versus Irwell Valley Water Board [[1939] 1 KB 21], where the public authority was found to have breached its duty of care in relation to drinking water.

The respondents maintain that while the Act authorises the control or release of water, it was the release of toxins which caused the damage to its crops, and that act was not covered by the immunity. They submit that <case> does not exempt the Corporation for liability for the supply of contaminated water.
The respondents urge the Court to find that the exemption applies to acts of the Corporation involving the control or release of unpolluted water (or at least water suitable for irrigation) and that the impurities in the water took the actions outside of the protected functions.

However, the Act does not oblige the Corporation to ensure that any water it supplies is pure and free from contamination. Nor in my view did the presence of the impurity change the substance from being essentially water (albeit polluted water) such that it is not an authorised function within the terms of sections 19 and 12 of the Act. It follows that I find that the Corporation was acting intra vires when it supplied the water to the respondents.

The `very thing' which the Act gave power to do was supply water. Supplying water is what the Corporation did, albeit polluted water, and in so doing it was protected by <case>. I concur with Meagher JA that issuing warnings, testing waters and clearing the channel, although acts which the Corporation would have been entitled to do, are not acts which are `integral to the very thing the Act gave power to do'.

In Minister for Youth and Community Services versus Health and Research Employee's
Association of Australia, [(1987) 10 NSWLR 543], Kirby P (as he then was) stated that: 
If the body involved might otherwise lawfully do that which was impugned, the statutory provisions may not apply. Only if the sole basis for the conduct attacked was the statutory authority would the exclusion apply to protect that authority: cf Board of Fire Commissioners versus Ardouin (1961) 109 CLR; Hudson v Venderheld <case>; <case>; [(1987) 61 ALJR 205] at 208; <case>; [70
ALR 275.] (at 549) 
In that case, the Minister was seeking to use the exemption to avoid review (under a different statute from that which contained the exemption) of a contract with the respondent. Kirby P noted that there was substantial authority that a Minister did not require the authorisation of a statute to enter into a contract. Accordingly, the statute was not the `sole basis' for the conduct and he held that the exemption did not apply.

Similarly, in Ardouin, the fire brigade did not need the authority of the
Act to do the act which caused the damage - driving on a public road.
Therefore, the act did not meet the test enunciated by Kitto J of the act being `the very thing' the statute gave power to do.

In the present case, the supply of the water by the Corporation (albeit contaminated water) was the very thing that the Corporation was empowered (and formed) to do. The supply of water by the Corporation to the respondents was its function under the Act and could not have been done by the Corporation without the authority of the Act. It seems very difficult to accept the contention that the supply of water for irrigation of the respondents' property was something merely incidental to the Corporation's powers. Rather, it would appear to be the `very thing' itself.

As to the issue of whether the immunity should be interpreted to impliedly exempt negligence, the judgment of Taylor J in Ardouin indicates that negligence will be necessarily included within the scope of an exemption if liability would only arise were the powers exercised negligently. The case does not exclude the conclusion that an immunity may extend to negligence in other circumstances. It is a matter of interpretation in each case. In my opinion, it follows from the conclusion that the actions which allegedly gave rise to the damage were the very thing which the statute authorised the appellant to do, that the exclusion of liability in <case> extends to the negligent performance of that activity. To find otherwise would defeat the `apparent purpose' of the provision.

Read in the context of the Corporation's broad discretion under s12(3) to determine what steps should be taken regarding pollution and environmental protection, I am of the opinion that s19(1) protects the Corporation from liability for negligence in the circumstances of this case. It follows that I conclude that <case> of the Act operates as a bar to the respondents' claim.

Apart from my conclusion that the statutory immunity in <case> applies to the conduct of the Corporation which caused the damage in this instance, in my view the respondents' case lacks evidence of the chain of causation between the herbicide being deposited in the channel some time before November 1991 (by an unknown third party malefactor) and the damage to the respondents' crop almost 12 months later in November 1992. While the respondents have put forward a hypothesis as to how the substance may have remained dormant (and toxic) in the channel bed and been stirred up and applied to their crop, in my opinion the evidence does not amount to proof on the balance of probabilities of how the damage to their crop was occasioned. It remains no more than a hypothesis unsupported by evidence.

Although it does not affect my ultimate conclusion, for the record I register my agreement with Meagher JA that the immunity contained in the lease granted to the respondents would not apply to damage occasioned by contaminants in the water supplied by the Corporation.

Accordingly, in my opinion, the appeal should be allowed and it is unnecessary to address the remaining grounds of appeal. I would propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed with costs, the verdict and judgment set aside and a verdict for the defendant substituted.
If so entitled, the respondents to have a certificate under the [Suitors
Fund Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) .
 <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424] at 438, 444, 468-9, 500; X (Minors) versus Bedfordshire CC <case>; [[1995] 2 AC 633]; Bienke versus Minister for Primary Industries and Energy [(1996) 63 FCR 567] at 590-6.
 <case>; <case>; [(1947) 75 CLR 94] AT 108.
 [5] Bond and Farrier, "Transferable Water Allocations - Property Right or
Shimmering Mirage?" [(1996) EPLJ 213] at p213. I have drawn on this article in what follows.
See also Wilcher, "Water Reserve Management in New South Wales and the
Murray and Darling: Law and Policy", [(1995) EPLJ 200.] [6] See generally Hanson versus Grassy Gully Gold Mining Co (1900) 21 NSWLR ; Grant Pastoral Co Pty Ltd versus Thorpes Ltd [(1954) 54 SR ]; Beaudesert Shire Council versus Smith <case>; [(1966) 120 CLR 145] at 151; Van Son versus Forestry Commission of New South
Wales [(1995) 86 LGERA 108.] The
History of the 1896 legislation and the expressed intent of the legislators are discussed by Clark & Renard, "The Riparian Doctrine and Australian
Legislation" [[1970] MelbULawRw ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/MelbULawRw/1970/13.html "View Case" ); [(1970) 7 MULR 475.] [7] See generally Elders Rural Finance Ltd versus Westpac Banking
Corporation, Supreme Court, Bryson J, unreported, 6 March 1989; Noble v
Department of Land and Water Conservation, Court of Appeal, unreported, 19
February 1997.
 [8] Section 11(4)(a), (g), (n) and (o).
 [9] [Irrigation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/), [s17A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ia1912131/s17a.html) <case>; [(1961) 109 CLR 105] (hereafter referred to as Ardouin).
 [11] Fire Brigades Act 1909 , s46.
 [12] At 110.
 [13] At 117. See also per Taylor J at 124.
 [14] At 127.
 [15] At 117.
 [16] [[1960] SR 322.] [17] See Ardouin at 110, 125, 128. Cf Kitto J at 116. See also Little v The Commonwealth supra).
 [18] [[1977] 1 NSWLR 15.] * * * 
