

Ivymere Pty Ltd (Receiver and Manager Appointed) versus Cooloombla Pty Ltd (No ) Matter No 3315/97 [1997] NSWSC 349 (29 August 1997) ` 
Ivymere Pty Ltd (Receiver & Manager Appointed)` `v Cooloombla Pty Ltd (No 4)` `3315/97` `29 August 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 IVYMERE PTY LTD (RECEIVER & MANAGER APPOINTED) versus COOLOOMBLA PTY LTD (NO 4) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for stay of the orders that I made on 25 August 1997 in what is essentially a contest between a first mortgagee and a second mortgagee of property at Camden. The property appears to have a value of approximately $1.7M. The first mortgagee claims a debt of $3.52M increasing at the rate of a thousand dollars a day. The second mortgagee's debt is, I think, about $350,000 and, as things now appear, it will be very lucky to receive anything. The second mortgagee is in possession pursuant to a writ of possession and has commenced a marketing strategy. In the meantime, it is in possession by itself and its Alsatian dogs and is keeping the property relatively secure. 
The decision that I made last Monday was made after exercising my discretion to allow the case to be reopened and to substitute plaintiffs. The second mortgagee wishes to challenge the exercise of the discretion in the Court of
Appeal. That is its right. However, apart from one possible argument, even if it succeeds in that matter, the second plaintiff can just issue new proceedings for possession which would appear to be proceedings which must succeed.

It is useful to note that in the proposed notice of appeal there is no challenge made to the ultimate order if the discretionary orders stand. Mr
Mendel for the second mortgagee says, as to this, that he and his solicitor have not yet had access to the transcript of the reasons for judgment and may need to amend the appeal. I asked Mr Mendel what was the ground on which he attacked, and he very skilfully made a speech which did not answer the question. I can only assume that there is no attack on the principal decision and, indeed, it would be very difficult for a second mortgagee in possession to defend its possession against the first mortgagee seeking possession.

Accordingly, the appeal is merely, to my mind, a technical one. The court has a duty to allow people to pursue their rights of appeal and not to make appeals nugatory. However, an applicant for a stay must usually demonstrate something more than the need to preserve its rights: Advanced Building
Systems Pty Ltd versus Ramset Fasteners (Aust) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 814.] The court also has a duty not to allow procedural matters to interfere with the ultimate justice of the cause between the parties.

I had in mind, at one stage, granting a stay so that there could be a fortnight's period for the Court of Appeal to consider whether it would expedite the appeal and grant a further stay. That stay would only have been upon conditions. I first thought that one condition should be that the second mortgagee pay to the first mortgagee a sum of money each week which, in due course, could be deducted against the verdict for mesne profits. There was some discussion between counsel and myself as to the appropriate amount of mesne profits and how they might be calculated, but I do not wish to delve into that matter.

The mortgage between the mortgagor and the first mortgagee I am told, produces a thousand dollars a day by way of interest. Even if one took a 7 per cent return on the value of the property of $1.7M, one would get a figure of $326 a day. However, the real damage is probably the amount that the first mortgagee has lost through its sale being postponed and it may not be referrable to either of those figures or, on the other hand, it might be.

There is difficulty because there is no evidence of the solvency of the second mortgagee. It would appear at present that its second mortgage is worthless.
There is no evidence of any other assets which it has in order to be able to pay any mesne profits and, indeed, a notice to produce was issued at about 7 pm on Wednesday 27 August 1997 requiring production of the latest balance sheet. This was not complied with and I ruled that it did not have to be complied with because it was not issued with the appropriate five days' notice. But the fact that the second mortgagee did not volunteer any such evidence and also declined to comply with the notice to produce is an indication that it probably is not of sound financial strength.

In the end, I thought that for a short period of time, the amount of money was relatively so insignificant in regard to the total amount owing that I should not further proceed with the imposition of such a condition. I then thought that the conditions should be: that the second mortgagee would cooperate with the first mortgagee so that the latter could prepare its marketing strategy including having all reasonable access to the property; that the second mortgagee would pay all rates and charges in connection with the property during the period of the stay; and (a matter that was volunteered by Mr Mendel) that if the Court of Appeal refused expedition then the second mortgagee would give up possession to the first mortgagee on 2 September 1997.

Mr Robinson of counsel for the first mortgagee, opposed those conditions, though Mr Mendel would have accepted them. However, Mr Robinson says that, as a matter of law and proper exercise of discretion, no reason has been shown in this case why there should be any stay at all.

It is certainly true that whilst the court has to preserve rights of appeal, it is also under a duty not to allow the mere fact of the filing of an appeal to hold up the legitimate rights of the parties. In view of the fact that there is no attack on the principal judgment and no-one can really see one at the moment, the appeal, to my mind, is a mere technicality and does not justify even a short stay.

However, as I cannot see any great prejudice in allowing the second mortgagee, if it wishes to test this matter, a breathing space of a few days to enable it to seek a stay before a Judge of Appeal, I will vary order 15 made on Monday August 1997, by providing that the writ not be executed before 3 September .

In addition to the orders that I made the other day, I order that there be no execution on the writ of possession before Wednesday 3 September 1997 provided that a notice of appeal is filed today and to make plain what should already be plain, that the defendant pay the second plaintiff's costs of today.
 * * * 
