

Regina versus Greer Matter Nos 60786/92 [1998] NSWSC 1008 (25 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 May 1998 
REGINA versus GEORGE STEPHEN GREER /92; 60785/93 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Smart J, Dowd J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Mr Justice Smart to give the first judgment. 
SMART J: George Stephen Greer has lodged two applications for extensions of time and two appeals against conviction and sought leave to appeal against the severity of his sentences. 
The first appeal is against his conviction, consequent upon his pleas of guilty, of four counts involving the supply of prohibited drugs during July and August 1987. On 20 November 1992 Kinchington DCJ sentenced him on each count to a concurrent sentence comprising a minimum term of four years and an additional term of two years.

The background was as follows: On 16 October 1989 at Gosford District Court,
Hosking DCJ sentenced the appellant to four years imprisonment with a non- parole period of three years to date from 9 September 1989 for supplying a prohibited drug. It seems that during the trial the appellant had discharged his legal representative and conducted the balance of that trial himself.

On 7 October 1992, after a jury trial, the appellant was sentenced by
Kinchington DCJ on two counts of supplying a prohibited drug to a minimum term of two years to commence on 9 September 1992 and expire on 8 September 1994, and an additional term of two years. An appeal against that conviction was dismissed by this Court on 19 August 1996.

On 9 October 1992 another trial of the appellant was listed before Kinchington
DCJ. Discussions took place during the morning between the Crown and counsel for the appellant and the appellant and his legal advisers. The appellant's counsel was experienced. The jury panel was sent away until 2pm.

Upon resumption, the Crown Prosecutor indicated that the DPP would not proceed with the indictment containing the twenty-three counts of break, enter and steal and the alternative counts of receiving, but would proceed with an indictment containing counts of supplying heroin and cocaine arising out of incidents leading up to the accused's arrest on 27 August 1987.

Counsel for the appellant did not object to this course but sought and was granted an adjournment to obtain instructions. Upon resuming the Judge noted that the Crown did not wish to proceed at that stage with the trial for the alleged break enter and steal offences and that its present intention was to "no bill" those matters. The trial upon those charges was stood out of the list.

The appellant was arraigned on six drug charges. He pleaded guilty to two charges of supplying heroin, one charge of deemed supply of heroin and one charge of deemed supply of cocaine. The appellant pleaded not guilty to one charge of agreement to supply heroin and one charge of deemed supply of heroin.

The Crown stated that the Crown intended to "no bill" the two charges to which the appellant had pleaded not guilty. The sentence hearing was adjourned to 16
October 1992. On that day the Crown tendered its materials, being a statement of facts, statements of witnesses, two analysts' certificates, audio and video tapes, antecedent report and some brief oral evidence. The Judge was also requested to take into account two charges of goods in custody shown on a Form .

The Judge then heard the appellant's case which comprised the tendering and admission of some reports. The appellant was remanded in custody for sentence on 23 October 1992. On that day fresh counsel appeared for the appellant and sought to withdraw his pleas of guilty. That application was listed for hearing on 30 October 1992. On that occasion the appellant gave evidence.

The Judge held that he could not act upon the appellant's evidence in any way as he was satisfied that his pleas of guilty were entered with full knowledge of all the facts giving rise to each of the charges and were made intentionally. The Judge also held that the appellant's attempt to alter his pleas had been made to avoid being sentenced and not because of any mistake or because the integrity of the pleas was affected in any way.

The Judge found that the appellant fully understood the nature and effect of his pleas and that he was in receipt of competent legal advice. The Judge was not satisfied that the application was based on any belief by the appellant that he was not guilty of any of the four charges. All these findings were well open to the Judge and any other findings would have been unexpected.

On 20 November 1992 Kinchington DCJ, after giving substantial reasons, sentenced the appellant. During those reasons the Judge expressed the view that the Crown case in respect of each of the offences was an extremely strong one. The Judge stated that the knowledge and understanding he had gained of the appellant led to the view that the appellant had trouble in facing up to the reality of his situation.

The Judge applied the principle of totality and in particular had regard to the applicant having been in gaol since 9 September 1987 and the three groups of offences in the period 1987 to 1989. By making the sentences imposed on 20
November 1992 date from 9 September 1992, the Judge, because of the sentences imposed on 7 October 1992, effectively sentenced the appellant to a further two years. The Judge did not take into account the Form 2 charges and stood the receiving and break, enter and steal charges into the call-over on 27
November 1992.

The appellant was released on parole in September 1996.

The appeal does not appear to have any prospects of success either on sentence or on conviction.

The second appeal involves an application for an extension of time and an appeal against the decision of Herron DCJ on 27 August 1993, convicting the appellant, consequent upon a plea of guilty, to twenty-three counts of receiving (being counts alternative to twenty-three counts of break, enter and steal).

On sentence the Judge took into account two goods in custody charges. The
Crown told the Judge that it would be happy if any sentence imposed on the appellant was made concurrent with the sentence which he was currently serving. The Judge sentenced the appellant to a fixed term of twelve months commencing on 27 August 1993 and ending on 26 August 1994.

These charges were listed for trial on 23 August 1993 before Ford DCJ. On 20
August 1993 the Legal Aid Commission advised the appellant that his legal aid had been terminated. That led to some discussion involving the appellant, a senior solicitor from the Legal Aid Commission, the Crown Prosecutor and Ford
DCJ.

An adjournment was granted to enable the appellant and the Legal Aid
Commission to have some discussions relating, amongst other things, to whether the appellant wanted to undertake a sentence indication hearing before another judge. Following those discussions, the appellant indicated that he was prepared to participate in a sentence indication hearing before Herron DCJ.
That took place on 23 August 1993. However, the appellant did not accept the indication.

The matter was adjourned to 27 August 1993. On Wednesday, 25 August 1993 the appellant conferred with his solicitor. The appellant told his solicitor that
Ford DCJ had already taken a hard line with him on Monday. Put accurately, the
Judge, while endeavouring to be fair to the appellant, had shown commendable firmness.

The solicitor recommended that the appellant plead guilty and seek to have the matter listed before Herron DCJ. Prior to Court on 27 August 1993, the appellant conferred with his solicitor and counsel. Counsel explained to the appellant that if he proceeded to conduct his own defence to the receiving charges his prospects of acquittal were slim. The appellant claimed that he felt he was being placed under pressure to plead guilty and that he really had no choice. The Judge agreed to stand the matter in the list while inquiries were made.

According to Mr Greer, a little later counsel told him that he should not worry about a few property items in the police lists over which there was a dispute. They could be his downfall and he could end up with years in custody.
This was practical and realistic advice. It was also sensible for the appellant's legal advisers to let him know that he was starting to try everybody's patience. He wanted the impossible.

The Court reassembled and the appellant pleaded guilty to twenty-three counts of receiving. The Crown tendered its materials comprising a Statement of Facts and a number of statements as well as Form 2. Counsel indicated two small matters in the facts sheet which were not agreed. Counsel addressed on penalty. Ford DCJ was thinking of taking a different course from that earlier indicated by Herron DCJ. Ford DCJ then decided to adjourn the matter so the parties could take up the matter with Herron DCJ. This was done.

Herron DCJ proceeded on the basis that the appellant had pleaded guilty. He decided that he should pass sentence upon the terms which he indicted on
Monday 23 August 1993.

The appellant seeks to resile from his pleas of guilty which he claims were made under duress. It is apparent that the appellant faced two alternative courses, either plead not guilty, stand trial, where he may be unrepresented, and run a substantial risk of a substantial sentence which may not be made concurrent, or plead guilty and receive a concurrent and lenient sentence.

From the materials in this second matter and his experience before Kinchington
DCJ it is apparent that the appellant knew exactly where he stood and what he was doing. He did not wish to risk further years in custody.

Ford DCJ treated the appellant very leniently and favourably in allowing the matter to be re-listed before Herron DCJ. The sentence imposed by Herron DCJ was both lenient and kindly.

This appeal enjoys no real prospect of success. This is another example of the appellant not being able, upon reflection, to deal with the realities of his situation. The sentence has long since been served.

The appeal against the decision of Kinchington DCJ was lodged on 10 December and that against the decision of Herron DCJ on 29 October 1993. Matter No of 1992, being the 1992 appeal, was the subject of directions and a solemn warning from this Court on 4 November 1993. Mr Greer was told that he had to comply with the directions of this Court and that he could not control the progress of his appeals. That appeal again came before the Court on 13
December 1993.

Since December 1993 Mr Greer has made a number of unsuccessful applications for legal aid.

Subsequently he instructed a solicitor and thereafter another solicitor. From the materials before this Court, it appears that the second solicitor, who was
Miss White, has declined to continue to act for Mr Greer due to non-payment of her fees.

The appellant last appeared at Court on 11 August 1997.

He either sent messages or forwarded certificates indicating an inability to attend on three later occasions.

By letter dated 10 December 1997 he was notified of the proposal to list the appeals for hearing at the call-over on 15 December 1997. By letter dated 31
December 1997 he was notified of the hearing date and the time-table for filing written submissions. When that time-table was not complied with he was notified by letter dated 3 March 1998 of the need to show cause why the appeal should not be dismissed for want of prosecution.

At the commencement of the hearing of the application today, Mr Greer handed up his affidavit sworn 25 March 1998. In that affidavit Mr Greer has detailed the difficulties he experienced in gaol, the difficulties he has subsequently experienced and he has dealt with the health conditions from which he has suffered.

The general thrust of the affidavit of Mr Greer is that he left the matter in the hands of a solicitor, that he was not competent to handle the matter himself and that the solicitor has done relatively little.

One of the matters that has featured in his affidavits and indeed in the correspondence has been Mr Greer's attempt to obtain documents from the
Director of Public Prosecutions. However, in the materials filed on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions and in submissions before this Court, the
DPP has made it plain that it has supplied all the documents it has to Mr
Greer and that it does not have any further documents. Taking into account the whole of the circumstances, it appears that some of the documents, to put it kindly, are of questionable and little relevance.

The appellant has to explain away pleas of guilty after he had considerable opportunity to reflect on his position, had received competent legal advice and desired to avoid lengthy custodial terms. He achieved the objective of avoiding lengthy custodial terms.

Since the lodging of his appeals there has been inordinate and unreasonable delay in the prosecution of the appeals. The merits appear to be non-existent or, at best, flimsy. It is time that these matters were finalised and in my view each appeal should be summarily dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree. 
DOWD J: I also agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Justice Smart. * * * 
