

Re Madden [1996] NSWSC 106 (7 May 1996) 
RE MADDEN /96 
Tuesday 7 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Martin Madden, is the administrator of two companies, Hood Computers Pty Ltd and Atimine Pty Ltd. In each case he became the administrator on 8 March 1996. The first meeting of creditors for each company was duly held on 14 March 1996. 
There have been difficulties in convening the second meeting which meeting is required under <case> of the Corporations Law. The plaintiff seeks an extension of time for convening the second meeting.

In recent months there has been a series of applications made to extend the time under Part 5.3A of the Corporations Law in respect of various corporations. I think that the position has now been reached that the Court will give paramount weight to the policy of the legislature that the period of administration during which the company is protected from attacks by external creditors is to be kept as short as possible. It is not a reason to extend the period merely because the administrator says he has difficulties or because he or she could do with more time and that if an extension for time is asked for, there should be some proper evidence by which the Court can gauge that objectively there is need for the short period contemplated by the legislature to be extended; see Re Levi, Young, J, 4 April 1996, as yet unreported.

However, <case> of the Corporations Law does give to the Court a very wide power to superintend the operation of the administration of each company and to tailor-make the course the administration should take for each company, at least within limits. Where there is an administrator truly independent from the directors and the administrator bona fide and after due consideration makes a decision as to what is best for creditors, the Court is far more likely to give its blessing than it would in a situation where there is some suggestion that it is the directors or officers of the corporation who are delaying matters to avoid the day of decision by the creditors. There may be cases, and indeed, the present may be one of them, where, in the interests of the creditors generally the Court may think that it is proper to extend the period, even though there is little actual justification for doing so. This may be the case where an independent administrator has made a miscalculation or other bona fide mistake. The Court will make an order even if there is insufficient evidence of a good reason for extending the period for convening the second meeting.

There are problems in the instant case which I am about to relate. However, when the matter came before me on 4 April 1996, I made an order extending the convening period up to and including 18 April 1996 because if the administrator had made a mistake, it was a bona fide mistake. If he had not made a mistake then it was appropriate to extend the convening period in the circumstances of the case. Thus I should immediately make the order and reserve consideration of my reasons. I reserved consideration of my reasons mainly because the problem that has occurred in the instant case may well occur in others, and it is probably useful to the legal and accounting professions to have a fully reasoned judgment on the subject rather than an "off the cuff" attempt at construction.

Section 439A(5) sets out the period for convening the second meeting which it calls "the convening period". That expression is defined as - "(a) if the administration begins on a day that is in December, or is less than days before Good Friday - the period of 28 days beginning on that day; or otherwise - the period of 21 days beginning on the day when the administration begins." 
Good Friday in 1996 was celebrated on Friday 5 April 1996. The day when the application was made before me was Maundy Thursday, 4 April 1996. The administration commenced on Friday 8 March 1996. If the administration began less than 28 days before 5 April 1996, then the administrator had 28 days to convene the meeting. If, on the other hand, 8 March was "not less than 28 days before Good Friday" then he only had 21 days and the period had already expired by Maundy Thursday.

Mr Oakes SC, for the administrator, put that the 28 day period applied.
Essentially his approach was as follows:- 
A. One excludes from the calculation Good Friday.

B. One then counts back 28 days.

C. There is a problem as to whether you stop at the 27th day or the 28th day.

D. It is to be noted that the legislature has not used the word "within" nor the expression "not less than".

E. Therefore, the legislature was not counting in terms of clear days.

F. Therefore, the act can be done on the 28th day.

Section 105 of the Corporations Law deals with calculation of time. Subsection which, in its present form, came into effect by Act 110 of 1990, provides that: "Where, for any purpose, this Law: prohibits, permits or requires the doing of an act or thing within, or by or before the end of; or otherwise prescribes allows or provides for; a period of time before or after a particular day, act or event, the period shall be calculated without counting that day, or the day of that act or event, as the case may be." 
In Watson versus Uniframes Ltd <case>; [(1994) 55 FCR 556], Davies, J considered <case> in the course of deciding when the counting of the convening period should begin. In that case, the administrator was appointed on 17 December 1993. The meetings were convened on January 1994. Davies, J pointed to the fact that <case> of the Law uses the expression "28 days beginning on that day" so that <case> was of no assistance. However, his Honour said at p 560, "By the use of the words `from', `after' or `before', the full period of the number of days specified is allowed. For example, the period of `5 business days after' and `5 business days before' appearing in <case> and (3) obviously pick up <case>. So does the reference in <case>(a) to `28 days before Good Friday'." Accordingly, one does not count Good Friday and proposition A of Mr Oakes SC is established.

Is 8 March to 4 April a period of "less than 28 days before Good Friday"? 
The administration began on Friday 8 March. If one counts 8 March, and I cannot see any escape from counting 8 March because that is when the administration began, 4 April is the 28th day of the period which commences on March. Mr Oakes SC has referred me to various decided cases and I have found additional ones myself, some of which I will proceed to discuss, but none of them are of direct assistance on the present problem. "Less than" is often read as "not exceeding"; see for instance Garby versus Harris <case>; [(1852) 7 Ex 591]; [155 ER 1084.] That, however, is not always the meaning that the words have.
For instance, if one is talking of an estate less than a fee simple, one obviously does not mean an estate not exceeding a fee simple, but rather a fee tail, a life estate, a tenancy for years or at will: Swift versus Vermont Mutual
Fire Insurance Co [18 Vt 305], 313 (Vermont) (1846). Whilst the word "less" does not appear to have been the subject of judicial interpretation, there is some authority that where a statute uses the words "not less than 14 days", what is meant is clear days; see for instance Downes versus Freshney <case>; [[1928] VLR 64.] See also Olive Hill (City) versus Howard [273 SW (2d) ]
(Kentucky Court of Appeals). However, the dictionary meaning of the word "less" is quite clear. It means something which is smaller in size, amount or degree from the thing specified. My uninstructed view is that the th day of a period of 28 days is not something less than 28 days because it is 28 days. However, Mr Oakes SC has urged on me that anything less than 28 full days is less than 28 days. I find this unattractive and note that in
Watson's case at p 559, Davies, J made it quite clear that it would not be proper to split days when dealing with Part 5.3A of the Law.

Mr Oakes SC also provided some material dealing with allied concepts such as "before" and "within". He referred to the words of Griffiths, CJ in
Armstrong versus Great Southern Goldmining Co NL <case>; [(1911) 12 CLR 382], 388, that "when you talk of doing a thing within a period of a certain number of days, it is quite clear that the end of the last day is the futherest limit. It is impossible to say that a thing required to be done within seven days is done within seven days if done on the eighth day, and it is impossible to make any alteration of the limit by adding the word `clear'."
Mr Oakes SC argues that the full 28 days must be allowed. I can understand this submission but I am not convinced that the analogy is close enough.

Turning to the word "before", in Ward versus Walters [22 NW 844] (1885) (Wis), the Court had to consider whether a notice first posted on 16 April 1878 was posted 28 days before a sale on 16 April 1878. The Court said at p 846, "In the absence of any statutory provision governing the computation of time, the authorities are uniform that where an act is required to be done a certain number of days or weeks before a certain other day upon which another act is to be done, the day upon which the first act is to be done must be excluded from the computation, and the whole number of days or weeks must intervene before the day fixed for the doing of the second act." There is then a citation of a series of English and American decisions, the most useful of which is Zouch v Empsey [(1821) 4 B & Ald 522] I do not find any assistance from the Ward decision because in the instant case one has got to focus on the day the administration commenced and there is no warrant for excluding that day. Again, In re Miller's Estate [139
NW 17] (1912) (Mich) is of little assistance. In that case the statute required service of a citation on an alleged incompetent person 14 days before the time fixed for hearing the application. The Court thought that the day of hearing should be included and the day of service excluded so that a citation is properly served on the fourth day of a month for hearing on the 17th.

In Stella versus Graham-Paige Motors Corp [132 F Supp 100] (1959) (SDNY), the
US District Court had to interpret the phrase "within a period of less than six months". The Court approved counsel's argument which was in the following form: "Graham-Paige construes the words `period of less than six months' to mean a period the first and last days of which each include the 24 hours from midnight to midnight, and the last day of which is the second day prior to the date corresponding numerically to that of the first day of the period in the sixth succeeding month. For example, the period from and including January 1st to and including June 29th would be a `period of less than six months' but the period to and including 
June 30th would be a period of exactly six months." 
In my view, that decision reinforces the view that I have taken as a matter of semantics. The Stella case has, according to the report of Colonial
Realty Corp versus MacWilliams [381 F Supp 26] (1974) (SDNY) been applied consistently since its decision and adopted by the major US textbooks.

Mr Oakes SC referred also to National Mutual Insurance Co versus Concrete
Sealants Inc, an unreported decision of the Court of Appeals of Ohio decided on 29 September 1988. In that case the Court had to consider the words "within days after service of this request". The Court said, "In our view, that language is ambiguous with respect to whether a response on the 28th day would be timely. The language might plausibly mean not more than 28 days, and it might plausibly mean not more than 27 days ... We hold that the Insurer's request for admissions should be construed as having specified a response period of 28 days or less." Again, I think this is a "within" case which does not really assist resolution of the present problem.

Mr Oakes SC has kindly supplied me with a photostat of the relevant part (pp -860) of Volume 86 of the Corpus Juris Secundum dealing with "Time". He has highlighted various passages which I have carefully read. The
American position is that "The general rule is that the time within which an act is to be done is to be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, that is, the day on which the act is to be done" (CJS 849) and that "such words as `before', ... may be used in an inclusive sense, and frequently indicate a coming or passing into a day, as well as the arrival at it, and it has been said that ordinarily and usually they are inclusive in meaning, and will be so construed unless it be shown by the context or otherwise that the contrary is intended." (CJS 854-5). Whilst acknowledging that this generally states the law, it seems to me that the actual phrase used in <case> does not permit this interpretation.

Mr Oakes SC then put that the view to which I had tentatively come makes no commercial sense. Normally I would hesitate to proceed after such a submission. In the instant case, the section is not meant to make commercial sense. It merely draws a line between two situations and the conception is that Australians in the Christmas and Easter periods tend not to devote themselves to their work. Whichever way one looks at the exception in s
A(5) dealing with Good Friday, one gets an odd result. For instance, dealing with 1996, if the administration commenced on 7 March it would be quite clear that the 21 day period applied and that accordingly the convening period would expire about 28 March. However, if the administration started on March it would again be quite clear that 28 days would be allowed, so that one would come up to something like 6 April. The artificial line has been drawn by the legislature. The only problem is that it is rather difficult to discern what the legislature meant when there are exactly 28 days before Good
Friday as at the date the administration commences. In my view 28 days is not "less than 28 days", so that the 21 day period applies.

On this view, the administration came to an end about 29 March. Can this
Court, despite the termination, extend the convening period? 
Watson's case is authority that this cannot be done. Mr Oakes SC pointed to the fact that Davies, J in Watson's case was not directed to <case> of the Law. He also correctly submitted that it now appears clear that <case> is of wide application; see my decision in Cawthorn versus Keira Constructions Pty Ltd [(1994) 33 NSWLR 607] 
In my view, <case> is wide enough to permit the Court in an appropriate case to disregard the fact that the administration may have ceased because of a mistake made in the process of carrying out the steps under Part 5.3A and to extend the period for convening a meeting as if the administration was still in effect. I believe that Re Greg Sewell Forgings Pty Ltd [(1995) 13 ACLC ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2013%20ACLC%201172 "View LawCiteRecord" ) is harmonious with this approach. Normally, if such an order were made, the
Court would, as was the case in the Double V case and in Re Taylor [(1995) 13 ACLC 313], make the order subject to a condition reserving leave to any person claiming to be interested to vary the order. However, as my order in the instant case was made before the Easter break, and there was to be a reconvened creditors' meeting in the week after Easter Monday, the commercial chances of someone being detrimentally affected does not appear to me to warrant the making of the order subject to a condition.

Accordingly, even though I have rejected Mr Oakes SC's primary submission, I still consider this is a proper case for making the order sought.
 * * * 
