

S C Tours Pty Ltd versus Singer Matter No 2305/97 [1997] NSWSC 541 (4 November )
 
S C Tours Pty Ltd versus Singer /97 November 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /1997 - S C TOURS PTY LTD V SINGER 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings basically concern a dispute between two former friends and business associates in the bus industry, Mr Sampson and Mr Singer. One of the issues in the proceedings, which are fixed for hearing before me on 17-20 November 1997, is whether Mr Sampson signed a letter which bears date 13 October 1995 addressed to Lorell Love of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs. 
Mr Sampson has filed an affidavit in which he swears that he has no recollection of signing such a letter. Mr Motbey, who appears for Mr Singer and associated interests, says that Mr Singer's evidence will be that he saw
Mr Sampson sign the letter.

Mr Motbey wishes to administer the following interrogatory, "Do you say that the signature on the letter dated 13 October 1995 purporting to be from Sampsons Travel to Lorell Love...is not your signature?" 
Mr Foster, SC, who appears for Mr Sampson and associated interests, objects to the proposed interrogatory on the basis that it is of no utility as Mr Sampson has already given on oath his best version of the incident. Mr Motbey submits that the interrogatory is of utility as, he says, often a person who signs many documents has no recollection of affixing his or her signature to a particular document, but can well recognize the signature when it is shown to him or her.

The basic measuring rod for interrogatories is whether they are necessary and will save time or costs at the trial.

Traditionally, the principal objection to interrogatories directed to documents is that they are unnecessary as the affidavit of documents on discovery and the automatic proof rule re documents discovered, makes interrogatories unnecessary. That rule does not provide an answer in the present case.

The textbooks show that ordinarily it is appropriate to interrogate as to whether a party signed or despatched a letter. The cases relied on for this proposition are Dalrymple versus Leslie [(1881) 8 QBD 5]; Lyell v
Kennedy  <case>; [[1917] SALR 286.] None of these cases go to the central issue now in dispute, but they assist to the extent that they assume such an interrogatory is proper.

There is a rule in the law of interrogatories that it is impermissible to ask whether a party says or alleges something to be the case; see eg Booth v
Attenborough [(1900) 21 ALT 205.] In that case the interrogatory was, in paraphrase, "Look at the books of account. Do you allege that any of the entries are erroneous, and, if so, which?" Holroyd,
J held that the interrogatory was bad as not asking about a fact. However the mere fact that the word "says" or "alleges" is used in an interrogatory does not necessarily nullify it: Burke versus McEacharn <case>; [(1900) 25 VLR 657.] I note that, in the instant case, no objection is taken to the form of the interrogatory.

To my mind, if Mr Sampson was ordered to say one way or the other whether he recognized that the signature on the letter was his signature, time at the trial could be saved. This is obviously so if Mr Sampson answered that, whilst having no memory of signing the letter, he recognized the signature as his. If he answered that he did not recognize the signature as his, or denied he signed the letter, then it would be clear now, rather than at the trial, that the authenticity of the letter was in issue. Of course it may be that the answer will be of no benefit. This is, however, no reason for declining to order the interrogatory to be answered.

Although phrased in terms of "Do you say", the interrogatory is seeking an answer to a matter of fact, namely the signing of the letter, rather than ascertaining the way in which Mr Sampson puts his case.

For the above reasons, I direct that interrogatory should be answered. Thus, I now make order 3 in Short Minutes of Order "B" which I initialled earlier today.
 * * * 
