

Regina versus Andrew Stenovich [1996] NSWSC 574 (27 November 1996) 
REGINA versus Andrew STENOVICH /96 
Wednesday 27 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, McINERNEY J, IRELAND J 
SENTENCING - PARITY 
The appellant was a courier who brought 390 grams of pure cocaine into Australia from the USA. He pleaded guilty. A co-offender was sentenced to imprisonment for seven years with a non-parole period of four years six months. The appellant's case was in one respect worse than the co-offender. The appellant was sentenced to nine years with a non-parole period of six years - HELD - The disparity in sentences was too great and the appellant should be re-sentenced to eight years with a non-parole period of five years.

O R D E R S Leave to appeal granted.
 Appeal allowed.
 Sentence quashed.
 Appellant re-sentenced as above.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed by Saunders DCJ in May this year. The applicant, an American national aged twenty-four years, pleaded guilty to a charge that on 8 October 1995 he imported into Australia prohibited imports in the form of cocaine being not less than the trafficable quantity. The maximum penalty for that offence was imprisonment for twenty-five years.

Saunders DCJ sentenced the applicant to imprisonment involving a head sentence of nine years and a non-parole period of six years.

There are two grounds of appeal sought to be relied upon. The first is that the sentence was manifestly excessive. The second is that his Honour paid insufficient regard to the consideration of parity, bearing in mind a significantly lesser sentence that had been imposed by Hosking DCJ in the
District Court upon a person who, it was said, was for all practical purposes a co-offender.

The facts may be summarised as follows. At about eight o'clock on the morning of 8 October 1995 the applicant arrived in Australia aboard a Qantas flight from the west coast of the United States of America. He was searched by
Customs. He was found to have on his person five wrapped packages strapped to his body with bandages and held together by bicycle shorts under a pair of jeans. The total gross weight of the contents of the packages was 1.3 kilograms. Upon analysis the packages were found to contain cocaine and the quantity of pure cocaine involved was 390 grams.

The appellant, upon discovery, extended a degree of cooperation with the authorities which was described by the learned sentencing judge as minimal.

The person earlier referred to as being for all practical purposes a co- offender was an American national named Daniel Bauer who arrived on a flight from the west coast of the United States of America on the following day. He was carrying cocaine in almost identical circumstances. He was a man aged twenty-five years. The quantity of cocaine he was carrying was 1157 grams of pure cocaine. The modus operandi of the two men was virtually identical and they had a common supplier on whose behalf they were acting as couriers.

I accept the submission made by senior counsel for the appellant that for all relevant purposes the two men should be treated as co-offenders. It would be remarkable if the circumstance of their travelling on different aeroplanes rather than on the same aeroplane made any material difference in that connection.

The man Bauer was sentenced by Hosking DCJ to imprisonment involving a head term of seven years and a non-parole term of four and a half years. Hosking
DCJ described the amount of cooperation that Bauer extended to the authorities as minimal.

There was one material difference between the position of the appellant and the position of Bauer: the evidence showed that the appellant had on an earlier occasion made a visit to Australia in the nature of a reconnaissance expedition. The argument has been put upon the assumption that on that occasion he travelled without any cocaine on his person. Senior counsel for the appellant accepts that the reconnaissance expedition was, to some extent, an aggravating feature of the appellant's case which was not present in the case of Bauer. Subject to that qualification the position of the two prisoners appears to be indistinguishable for all practical purposes.

Saunders DCJ had before him the facts in relation to the man Bauer and the remarks on sentence of Hosking DCJ.

The Court has been referred to a number of cases dealing with the range of penalties that have been imposed in relation to couriers carrying heroin or cocaine. We have been referred, for example, to the decisions in R versus Doan,
Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported, 27 September 1996; R versus Ferrer-Esis [(1991) 55 ACrimR 231]; R versus Kogelbauer [(1993) 65 ACrimR 359.] 
It is not necessary to examine the detail of the penalties imposed in those cases. Saunders DCJ also had before him information as to penalties in other cases, in particular R versus Moreno, Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported, 4
November 1994, in which a courier who pleaded guilty to importing 340 grams of cocaine received a head sentence of ten years with a non-parole period of six years; and R versus Jelks, Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported, 1 December 1995 in which a courier pleaded guilty to importing 404 grams of pure cocaine and received a sentence involving a head term of eight years and six months and a non-parole period of five years.

There is room for legitimate disagreement as to whether the penalty imposed in the present case on the applicant, leaving out of account what happened to
Bauer, was right at the top of the range of sentences imposed in cases of this kind, or marginally above it. I find it unnecessary to resolve that question because I am of the view that the argument of the appellant in relation to the second ground of appeal relied upon, ie the question of parity, has been made good.

In my view, subject to the difference in relation to the reconnaissance expedition, the cases of the appellant and Bauer are not relevantly different and the appellant was entitled to have Bauer treated as for practical purposes a co-offender. I therefore propose that the sentence imposed upon the appellant should be reduced, but not to that imposed on Bauer because I think a margin of difference should be allowed to take account of the aggravating circumstances of the appellant's case. What I intend to propose is that the appellant should be re-sentenced, the sentence involving a head sentence of eight years and a non-parole period of five years.

The orders that I would propose are as follows. The appeal should be allowed, the sentence imposed by Saunders DCJ should be quashed. In lieu thereof the appellant will be sentenced to a term of imprisonment involving a head sentence of eight years to commence on 8 October 1995, which was the commencing date of Saunders DCJ's sentence, and a non-parole period of five years. The date on which the appellant will be eligible to be released to parole therefore will be 7 October in the year 2000.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice and for the reasons he has advanced.

IRELAND J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: Mr Stenovich, I am required to explain to you the effect of that sentence. I doubt that it requires much explanation. You have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of eight years from 8 October 1995. You will be eligible to be released to parole on 7 October in the year 2000. If, following your release to parole during the term of the balance of the sentence you re-offend you are liable to be sent back to prison to continue serving your sentence. Is there anything else I need to explain? 
IERACE: No your Honour.
 * * * 
