

McBean versus Taylor [1997] NSWSC 74 (7 March 1997) 
McBean versus Taylor 
CW500075/96 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff claims to have suffered personal injury in a motor vehicle accident that took place on 18 February 1996. In or about March 1996, she made a claim under the Motor Accidents Act, 1988 (the Act).

She commenced proceedings in respect of that claim by filing a Statement of
Claim on 12 November 1996. A Defence was filed on 13 January 1997. The filed document bears the endorsement "FILED OUT OF TIME".

On 13 January 1997, the defendant filed a Notice of Motion. It sought the striking out of the Statement of Claim by reason of alleged breaches of sections 48 and 50A of the Act.

In support of the application, the defendant relies on an affidavit sworn by
Mr Chadwick (a solicitor employed by the solicitors for the defendant). In opposition to the application, the plaintiff relies on an affidavit sworn by
Mr Flynn (a partner in the firm of solicitors acting for the plaintiff). These two affidavits comprise the entirety of the material placed before the Court.

It is not necessary to refer to all of the material disclosed by the affidavits. I shall mention some of it (including those matters that were specifically referred to by Counsel). I should add that a copy of the Claim itself is not in evidence.

By letter dated 30 April 1996, the solicitors for the plaintiff forwarded to the insurer (MMI) certain documentation. The letter also conveyed additional information. This information included the following:- "We advise that our client is aged 17 years of age at the time of her accident was a student enrolled in Year 12 at Mudgee High School.

Accordingly there is no immediate claim for economic loss however our client will be claiming damages for loss of earning capacity on the basis that she has had to postpone her Year 12 studies for one (1) year and accordingly her entry into the workforce will be delayed one year.

We would anticipate that there will also be a further claim for loss of earning capacity as a result of the residual disability that she will undoubtedly be left with." 
By letter dated 13 May 1996, the insurer made a request for particulars. The particulars sought thereby included the following:- "f. If there is a claim for loss of earning capacity please provide: i) when did your client last work prior to the accident? ii) for whom (full name and address) did your client last work? iii) in what capacity did your client last work? iv) in that position what was your client's net weekly wage? v) identify all other employers (full name and address) for whom your client worked in the three years up to the time your client last worked, and the periods of employment with each? vi) please provide copies of your client's income tax returns and group certificates for the three years up to the time your client last worked, and of any tax return which has been lodged since.
 vii) upon what, if any, other facts and/or circumstances does your client rely in support of the claim for loss of earning capacity, viii) please provide particulars of all employment your client has had since the accident, ix) how is the claim quantified?" 
By letter dated 31 May 1996, a reply was made to the request for particulars.
The reply included the following:- "f In relation to economic loss, we advise we refer you to the comments made on second page of our letter of 30 April 1996.

Again when our client's injuries stabilise then a more definite prognosis can be made, we will submit further details in relation to her anticipated claim for economic loss." 
Prior to the commencement of proceedings, there was no further communication between the plaintiff and the insurer concerning the matter of particulars.
The proceedings were brought in November 1996 upon the elapsing of the relevant period of six months. Paragraph 11 of the Statement of Claim provided certain "Particulars of Economic Loss".

By letter dated 23 December 1996, the solicitors for the defendant made a detailed request for further and better particulars (it extends over some seven pages).

By letter dated 15 January 1997, the plaintiff responded to that request. The response contained, inter alia, the following:- "ECONOMIC LOSS -19 The plaintiff claim for economic loss at this stage is as per that outlined in the Statement of Claim.

You will see from the Statement of Claim that at the time of her accident, the plaintiff was a student at Mudgee High School. Accordingly, no tax returns,
Group Certificates etc can be provided.

The plaintiff's claim for future economic loss will become clearer during
At this stage, we can indicate that our client completed an 18 week
Nanny's Course at Mudgee TAFE owing to the fact that she was unable to return to school. She completed that course and is hopeful of obtaining employment as a Nanny, however serious doubts are currently present as to her capacity to perform this work on a full-time basis by virtue of her orthopaedic injuries.

The plaintiff has been unable to return to school and is contemplating completing her Higher School Certificate in 1998 if she is unable to find gainful employment in the interim period.

As indicated above, further details will be supplied when available." 
The defendant is the party moving for relief under each of sections 48 and
A. These are provisions which fall within Division 3 (Duties of Co- operation) of Part 5 (Claims and Court Proceedings to Enforce Claims) of the
Act. I should add that these provisions might be said to involve some overlapping and it is far from clear why Parliament should have inserted two such separate provisions in the Act. Section 50A was added by the 1995 amendments to the Act. On behalf of the defendant, it is accepted that the defendant bears the onus of satisfying the Court that he is entitled to the relief sought.

The provisions of Division 3 contain expressed objects and are intended to serve the purpose of enabling the performance of statutory functions. These provisions must be construed in the context of the other provisions of the
Act. It is sufficient merely to make brief reference to some of them. There are provisions which impose time limitations. There are provisions which reflect a policy to otherwise discourage delay.

I shall first turn to the application made pursuant to section 48 (Duty of claimant to co-operate with other party). Section 48 is in the following terms:-  (1) The object of this section is to maximise communication between the parties so that sound and timely information is available and disputes are minimised.

A claimant must co-operate fully in respect of the claim with the person against whom the claim is made and the person's insurer for the purpose of giving the person and the insurer sufficient information: to be satisfied as to the validity of the claim and, in particular, to assess whether the claim or any part of the claim may be fraudulent; and to be able to make an early assessment of liability; and to be able to make an informed offer of settlement.

In particular, the claimant must comply with any reasonable request by the other party or the other party's insurer: to furnish specified information (in addition to the information furnished in the claim form) or to produce specified documents or records; or to provide a photograph of and evidence as to the identity of the claimant.

The reasonableness of a request may be assessed having regard to criteria including the following: the amount of time the claimant needs to comply with the request; whether the information sought is cogent and relevant to a determination of liability or quantum of loss, having regard to the nature of the claim; the amount of information which has already been supplied to or is available to an insurer to enable liability and quantum of loss to be assessed and an offer of settlement made; how onerous it will be for the claimant to comply with the request; whether the information is privileged; whether the information sought is sufficiently specified; the time of the request and whether the claimant will be delayed in commencing proceedings by complying with the request.

The duty under this section applies only until court proceedings are commenced in respect of the claim but if the claimant fails without reasonable excuse to comply with this section, court proceedings cannot be commenced in respect of the claim while the failure continues.

Subsection (1) expresses the object of this section. This being to maximise communication between the parties, so that sound and timely information is available and disputes are minimised.

Subsection (1A) imposes a duty of co-operation on the claimant. It expresses the purpose for the imposition of that duty (the giving of sufficient information to enable the performance of the functions set forth in (a) to (c) thereof).

Subsection (2) deals with a particular aspect of the duty (to comply with any reasonable request as to the matters specified in (a) and (b) thereof).

In this case, there is no issue between the parties as to the reasonableness of the requests made by the insurer. The issue raised for decision is whether or not the plaintiff has complied with the request (being the request made in `f' of the letter dated 13 May 1996).

The question of whether or not compliance has been made will be a matter of fact. The question will be determined on the facts and circumstances of the particular case before the Court. In the performance of the exercise, the provisions of subsections (1) and (1A) (as well as other relevant provisions) provide guidance.

In this case, I do not consider that the defendant has discharged the onus of proof borne by it. The defendant has not satisfied the Court that the plaintiff has not complied with the request.

I now turn to the question of relief claimed pursuant to section 50A (Provision of information to facilitate settlement of claim before commencing court proceedings). The section is in the following terms:- 
A Subject to section 52(1A), a claimant is not entitled to commence court proceedings against another person in respect of a claim until the claimant has given the other person's insurer (if any) full details of: the injuries sustained by the claimant in the motor accident, and all disabilities and impairments arising from those injuries, and if those injuries, or any of them, have not stabilised, the prognosis for future recovery, and any economic losses and other losses that are being claimed as damages, sufficient to enable the insurer, as far as practicable, to make a proper assessment of the claimant's full entitlement to damages.

Like other provisions in the Act, this section has its problems of construction. Counsel have not referred me to any authority which provides assistance in construing the section. This may be the first case in which the
Court has been asked to resolve the present issues.

It is alleged that the plaintiff has not given the insurer full details of economic losses. The plaintiff disputes that she is in breach of the requirements of the section.

The words "full details" are qualified by the words "sufficient to enable the insurer, as far as practicable, to make a proper assessment of the claimant's full entitlement to damages".

The words "as far as practicable" would seem to represent some recognition that there may be non "practicable" cases. There may be room for debate on the question of the identification of the subject matter (such as the giving of sufficient particulars or the making of a proper assessment) to which these words were intended to have application (by way of qualification or otherwise). It may be that the disentitlement to commence proceedings was not intended to apply in those non "practicable" cases. For present purposes, these considerations need not be pursued.

The section is expressed to be subject to section 52(1A). These words may throw up other considerations. Section 52 falls within Division 4 (Court
Proceedings on Claims) of Part 5. Subsection (1A) contains disentitling provisions (until the later or latest events referred to in (a) to (c) have occurred). As this aspect of the section was not agitated during argument, I put it aside.

As I have not had the benefit of full legal argument on the question of the proper construction to be given to the language employed in the section, it would not be profitable to embark on any protracted analysis of that language.
In any event, this is a case which can be disposed of on its own particular facts.

The issue I am asked to decide is whether or not the plaintiff has given the details of economic loss which the section requires (viz, full details sufficient to enable the insurer, as far as practicable, to make a proper assessment of the claimant's full entitlement to damages).

Again, I am of the view that the defendant has failed to discharge the onus borne in relation to the section. I am not satisfied that the details given were not sufficient in the sense required by the section.

In respect of the relevant question, a bare minimum of material has been placed before the Court. Largely, it consisted of correspondence passing between the parties and material that could be described as submissions.
Shortly after the commencement of the hearing, I raised with the defendant concern as to whether or not the defendant had placed sufficient material before the Court to discharge the onus on this matter. After giving consideration to this matter, the defendant elected to proceed on the existing evidence.

There is nothing in the material which deals directly with the issue of whether or not the details that had been given were sufficient to enable the insurer, as far as practicable, to make a proper assessment of the claimant's full entitlement to damages. The Court was merely left to draw inferences from the contents of the relevant correspondence. In this case, that largely left the Court to embark on a speculative exercise.

Before disposing of the Notice of Motion, I should add some general observations which concern both claims for relief.

On the material, it is open to the Court to take the view that the particulars given by the plaintiff to the insurer were the best particulars she could give at the time. Indeed, it was not suggested that the position was otherwise.
There is no correspondence from the insurer which communicated any insufficiency in the material which led to the insurer not being able to make either a proper assessment of the claimant's full entitlement to damages or an informed offer of settlement.

There was no intimation from the insurer that the claimant had placed herself in a position of being disentitled to commence Court proceedings in respect of her claim. The insurer stood by whilst the claimant waited for the relevant statutory period to elapse. She was allowed to bring these proceedings thereafter. The matters of sections 48 and 50A were not raised until the
Defence was filed. This application was filed on the same day as the Defence.

The defendant has placed much stress upon the additional information that was furnished after the commencement of the proceedings. It is said that the plaintiff should have waited until this material was available before commencing the proceedings. In the circumstances of this case, I do not accept that submission.

It is not said that these particulars did not satisfy the requests made by the defendant's solicitors. It is not said that they provided any further assistance to the performance of the insurer's statutory functions. It does not appear that the further information has led to the making of an offer.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The defendant is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
