

Regina versus Tran Matter No 71792/98 [1998] NSWSC 764 (12 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
REGINA versus TRI BINH TRAN /98 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: In the matter of Tri Binh Tran, the applicant is charged with robbery in company. The applicant has no prior convictions or entries. There is no presumption in favour of bail. 
The circumstances of the alleged offence are that it is put that the applicant, together with a number of other persons, was involved in an armed robbery at a BP service station and that this robbery was carried out with one -gauge sawn-off shotgun, one Colt 45 semi-automatic pistol and a knife. The proceeds of the robbery were $70 cash, 19 packets of cigarettes, some batteries and some chocolate.

The applicant, so it is said by the statement of facts, was the person adopting the role of driver of the vehicle which drove the assailants to the robbery and drove them away. They were followed by police for a distance of some eight kilometres during which time the pistol, the shotgun, cigarettes and confectionary were thrown out.

The vehicle was stopped with all five accused inside, whereupon they were arrested. Located in the vehicle was the $70 cash from the robbery, a large knife and clothing said to be worn by the various accused during the robbery.

Upon interview there were no admissions, except that this applicant stated that he was directed to drive the vehicle to the service station, he could not remember who left the vehicle or why, he had no knowledge of the robbery occurring and when pursued by police for eight kilometres whilst driving the vehicle stated, "I thought the police just wanted to overtake".

This is an allegation of a most serious offence. Not only that but there are aspects of this offence indicating a cool and calm intent to avoid apprehension and to escape justice. The applicant's lack of prior record in the circumstances does not have the weight that it might otherwise have had. I am informed, however, that it will be approximately 12 months before this matter can come to trial at Campbelltown, it being a potential joint trial.

I have weighed this very carefully in the balance. Relying on the information that I am given of 12 months and looking at the seriousness of this offence, I have most reluctantly come to the conclusion that I should, if that material is accurate, refuse bail. I emphasise, however, that I do so because of the matters that I have set out and because I have been informed that the applicant can come to trial in approximately 12 months.

Bail is therefore refused.
 * * * 
