

Regina versus Brett Agnel Vanjour [1996] NSWSC 631 (18 December 1996) 
REGINA versus BRETT AGNEL VANJOUR /95 
WEDNESDAY 18 DECEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
JAMES J, BELL AJ 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: Brett Agnel Vanjour has applied for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed upon him in the District Court on 4 October 1995 by Justice Blanch, following a plea of guilty to a charge of armed robbery committed on 19 April 1991. His Honour imposed a sentence of penal servitude for six years, consisting of a minimum term of two and a half years and an additional term of three and a half years. His Honour allowed for short periods of pre-sentence custody by making the sentence commence from 15 September 1995. The applicant had asked Justice Blanch to take into account, and his Honour took into account in sentencing the applicant, eight other offences consisting of armed robberies, robberies where no weapon was used or attempted robberies.

The facts of the principal offence can be briefly stated as follows. The applicant telephoned a Pizza shop and placed an order to be delivered. When a courier from the shop came to deliver the Pizza which had been ordered, the applicant produced a pistol made of plastic and robbed the courier of $390.

The other nine offences were similar offences. In each case the applicant placed a telephone order with a food shop and robbed or attempted to rob the courier delivering his order. Five of the other offences appear to have been armed robberies which were very similar to the principal offence. Two of the offences were robberies in which no gun was produced. Two of the offences were attempted robberies which were unsuccessful.

In his remarks on sentence Justice Blanch noted that all the ten offences had been committed within the space of about eight weeks between 19 April and 15
September 1991. The weapon which the applicant used was made of plastic, although the victims believed that the gun they were being threatened with was a real gun. No injury was inflicted on any of the victims, although the victims were clearly frightened by their experiences. The total proceeds of the ten offences was only $1584.00.

The applicant, who was born in January 1972, had a minor criminal record in early 1991, including that he was placed on a recognizance for offences of fraudulent misappropriation and break enter and steal. Justice Blanch inferred that the applicant had been on bail and subject to recognizances when he committed some at least of the ten offences with which his Honour was dealing.
However, his Honour recognised that the offences in early 1991 were part of the same episode of criminality as the ten robberies. The applicant had not committed any offence since the last of the offences to be taken into account in sentencing the applicant.

An unfortunate feature of the case was the long delay which occurred between the commission of the offences and the sentencing of the applicant. The applicant had originally pleaded not guilty to all but one of the charges against him. The trial of the applicant had been fixed for a date in October and then a date in June 1994 but on each occasion the applicant's trial had not been reached. In his remarks on sentence Justice Blanch found "there is quite a lengthy period between the time of his arrest on 23 April 1992 and the present time where the delay is entirely attributable to listing difficulties and congestion in the court lists".

A consequence of the delay was the applicant was being sentenced by his Honour when he was twenty-three years old, for offences which he had committed over a period of about eight weeks when he was only nineteen years old.

His Honour found that the "immediate spur" to all the offences was a gambling problem, which the applicant had, at least to some extent, since overcome. His
Honour also found that during the period since the offences had been committed the applicant had significantly improved in some aspects of his personality.
As I have already noted, the applicant had not committed any offences after
June 1991.

The sentencing judge referred in his remarks on sentence to some reports which had been admitted into evidence. Doctor Walker, a consultant psychologist, who saw the applicant both in 1993 and 1994, concluded in a report dated 2 August :- "Brett Vanjour is an immature, self-preoccupied young man who suffers
Narcissistic personality disorder. While he wishes no one ill, he has broken the law on a number of occasions, his stealing being to fund his then compulsive gambling habit. He has not gambled compulsively for some three years. Brett is very ill-equipped to cope in the prison environment and is, of course, likely, with his particular personality disorder, to be socialised into crime in a major way in that environment." 
A probation officer who prepared a presentence report dated 4 August 1995 described the difficult relationship the Probation Service had had with the applicant. The officer noted "Mr Vanjour presented in an offhand and arrogant manner, expressing contempt for the police and the court procedures. He appears to be somewhat immature and lacks a healthy work ethic." 
The officer also noted that the applicant would benefit from counselling for his gambling problem.

A reference from a Pastor of the Local Church spoke of a change for the better in the applicant's manner and attitude.

The sentencing judge saw his sentencing task as being how to balance a need to impose a salutary penalty on someone who had committed a number of armed robberies, the victims being couriers of takeaway food outlets who are often young persons performing part-time work and easy prey for offences of this sort, with the problems of the applicant and his need for rehabilitation and assistance for that rehabilitation. His Honour felt it was imperative to impose a significant custodial sentence but that he should find there were special circumstances within [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) and that he should considerably enlarge the additional term so that it exceeded the minimum term. In the result his Honour imposed the sentence of six years with a minimum term of two and a half years.

The applicant, who was unrepresented on the hearing of this application, urged upon us the delay which occurred in his being sentenced. However, this factor was adverted to and taken into account by his Honour, in a way which does not disclose any error.

The court provisionally received a report by Ms Anna Robilliard, psychologist, dated 19 June 1996 in which Ms Robilliard referred to an incident which the applicant said had taken place when he was six years old, when he was molested by a man who was a family friend and a Church Elder. That man died when the applicant was fifteen years of age. It is apparent from the report that the applicant himself attributes some of his problems to this episode in his childhood.

It does not seem to me that, consistently with the authorities binding a Bench of two judges, the report by Ms Robilliard can be received by the Court. The applicant was represented in the proceedings on sentence by a very experienced criminal lawyer and the applicant's father gave evidence in the proceedings on sentence. In my opinion, the report by Miss Robilliard cannot be characterised as fresh evidence in the strict sense; nor can it be regarded as additional evidence admissible according to the principles discussed in such cases as
Regina versus Harris, Regina versus Goodwin and Regina versus De Marco.

However, even if it were open to the Court to receive and take into consideration the report by Ms Robilliard, the report would not alter the conclusion which I have come to independently of the report, that there is no ground for disturbing the sentence passed by Justice Blanch. His Honour was correct in regarding the offences committed by the applicant as being objectively serious and his Honour sensitively and comprehensively considered the various subjective circumstances which were put to him, including the circumstance of the long delay between the commission of the offences and the time of sentencing.

I would propose that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal against sentence be dismissed.

BELL AJ: I agree with the proposed orders and the reasons stated.

JAMES J: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by me.
 * * * 
