

Dominic Iacullo and Lillian Iacullo versus Luigi Iacullo & Ors [2013] NSWSC (18 October 2013) 
Last Updated: 22 October 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Dominic Iacullo and Lillian Iacullo versus Luigi Iacullo & Ors  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): -6 September 2013; further written submissions 17 and 23 September 2013  
Decision Date: October 2013  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Black J  
Decision: 
Judgment that referee's report should be adopted in full by the Court and specified paragraphs should be struck out of amended cross-claim. Leave declined to file further amended cross-claim in present form. Parties to be heard as to directions which should be made so the matter can be set down for hearing.  
Catchwords: 
PROCEDURE - referral to referee - where matters in respect of transactions, assets and liabilities of five trusts were referred to a referee pursuant to r .14 [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) - whether referee's report giving an account of transactions, assets and liabilities of relevant trusts should be adopted. 
PROCEDURE - application for leave to file further amended cross-claim - strike-out application in respect of amended cross-claim - whether pleadings state with sufficient clarity the case that must be met - whether pleadings have a tendency to cause embarrassment in the proceedings. 
PROCEDURE - judgments and orders - application to stay other proceedings.  
JUDGMENT 
These proceedings have a lengthy history to which I should refer before turning to the several Notices of Motion before the Court which deal with significant matters in respect of the future conduct of the proceedings. I have summarised part of that history in my earlier judgment delivered on 26 March 2012 ([2012] NSWSC 274).
The Cross-Claimants, Mr Dominic Iacullo (to whom I will refer without disrespect as to "Dominic") and Mrs Lillian Iacullo (to whom I will refer without disrespect as to "Lillian") brought an extensive Cross-Claim, now in the form of an Amended Cross-Claim ("AXC") against Mr Luigi Iacullo (to whom I will refer without disrespect as to "Luigi"), Badminton Investments Pty Limited (an entity associated with Luigi) ("Badminton"), and the Third-Eight Defendants, Mr Michael Murr and various entities associated with him (to whom I will refer collectively as the "Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants"). Luigi and Badminton are not presently legally represented in the proceedings.
The relief presently claimed in the AXC comprises some twenty six orders, including a declaration that Badminton holds monies or property received from the development of a property at Hogben Street, Kogarah on trust for the Cross-Claimants, an order for the administration of that trust and an order for an account; an order for the administration of a trust known as the IMS Unit Trust; an order for an inquiry into funds or assets received by Homeline Constructions Pty Limited ("Homeline Constructions") from IMS Developments Pty Limited ("IMS"); further orders for an accounting in respect of trusts known as the Pacificon Unit Trust, the Hogben Unit Trust, the Engadine Unit Trust, and the Gladstone Street Unit Trust; equitable compensation; and such further or other order as to the Court deems fit.
The earliest of the unit trusts in issue in the AXC, the IMS Unit Trust, was established in 1997, with IMS being the trustee of the trust. The IMS Unit Trust was initially established to carry out a single property development at Sutherland but was extended to additional developments in 1999. Further unit trusts were later established to carry out other property developments or, Dominic and Lillian contend, in one instance to take over a development initiated through IMS. Orders were made by Bryson AJ in September 2010 in relation to the production of documents for some of the unit trusts. 
Whether the referee's report should be adopted
On 14 June 2011, Bergin CJ in Eq addressed the practical issue arising in respect of the claim for accounting in respect of five trusts over an extended period by making orders under [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p20) r 14 of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) ("UCPR") referring questions arising in the Cross-Claim in respect of broadly, an account of the transactions, assets and liabilities of the relevant trusts to Dr Rodney J Ferrier ("referee") for inquiry and report and made various directions in respect of the conduct of the reference. In particular, her Honour directed that: "An account be taken of the transactions, assets and liabilities of the [name of unit trust] and of all monies received and disbursed by [name of trustee] or any other person on its behalf in respect of the property comprised in the [name of unit trust] and that the dealings and transactions of [name of trustee] therewith."
By Notice of Motion filed on 16 February 2007, Dominic and Lillian sought an order that the reference be terminated and the accounting be returned to an Associate Justice or taken by a Judge and directions be made that require the accounting parties to bring in statements of the account. They advanced numerous criticisms of the conduct and utility of the reference in support of that application. By my judgment delivered on 26 March 2012, I declined to make orders terminating the reference but indicated that I proposed to amend the terms of reference to more closely reflect the scope of the referee's proposed approach. I also observed that: "the process adopted by the referee will ultimately produce an accounting for the trusts by which the respective trustees are bound which should narrow the issues in dispute in the balance of the Cross-Claim".
I also indicated my expectation that "the Referee's findings will at least narrow the issues in dispute." As will emerge below, the first of those objectives have been achieved since the trustees have adopted the referee's statement of the accounts of the trusts. The second objective has been achieved only to a limited extent. Mr Smallbone, who appears for Dominic and Lillian, indicated in oral submissions that of the some 5,000 transactions reviewed by the referee some 1,600 are not contested by the Dominic and Lillian and some 3,400 are contested.
In my further judgment delivered on 5 April 2012, I observed that the Court had not yet determined the basis for any accounting that might ultimately be ordered and that: "If an accounting were to take place in a traditional form, then it would be necessary for a determination to be made as to whether it would occur in common form, so that the trustees accounted for what had actually been received and disposed of and the Cross-Claimants could challenge the accounting by asserting that more was received or less was disposed of, or should take place on the basis of wilful default so that the trustees must also account for what should have been received if their duties had been properly discharged." 
That question would be determined by the factual matters that are to be determined at a final hearing. I also made order amending the terms of the reference after hearing further submissions from the parties as to the form of those orders. I directed that the referee's report should: "comprise a schedule, listing or other report of transactions, assets and liabilities of each trust prepared by Dr Ferrier in such form as he considers appropriate, by reference to the documents which are submitted to him in the course of the reference in respect of each Trust, and each such schedule is to identify any entry, transaction, asset or liability where adequate supporting or source documents were not available to Dr Ferrier to substantiate or support an entry, transaction, asset or liability. That report may include such additional materials as Dr Ferrier considers appropriate to explain his views."
The referee subsequently adopted a very comprehensive process in preparing his report. That report dealt separately with each of the five trusts and attached schedules dealing with the capital contributions, expenditure, incomes and distributions of each trust. The referee noted that, since in excess of 5,000 individual transactions were involved, and since between 10 and 15 years have elapsed since the trusts were established, it was not possible to examine source documents in relation to each transaction and identified the process that he had undertaken. This included extracting a list of transactions for each trust from detailed financial records provided by the parties, particularly printed MYOB records; providing an initial account to the Cross-Defendants and then providing that account and supporting source records to Dominic and Lillian so they could undertake an investigation of the accuracy of that initial account, and taking submissions as to that question; preparing a draft report on 31 October 2012; receiving further submissions in respect of that draft report and the draft accounts of the five trusts that he had prepared; and preparing a final report taking into account those further submissions. In the course of this process, the referee received several submissions from each of Dominic and Lillian and the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants. The referee noted that the process had had adopted resulted in an account for each trust which most closely aligned with the "common form" of accounting, identifying what had been received and paid by the trustees and any assets or liabilities that remain owned or owed by the trustees. He also offered the parties an oral hearing to address contested matters which they did not choose to take up. 
It is necessary to refer to the referee's report in some detail, to make clear the scope if his findings. The referee noted that he sought submissions to enable him to identify any transactions that had been incorrectly included in the accounts; that had not been, but should have been, included in the accounts; that were recorded with an incorrect amount or on an incorrect date in the accounts, or which were incorrectly described in the accounts or allocated to the incorrect category of income or expense. He observed, in relation to the IMS Unit Trust, that Dominic and Lillian had expressed no objection that any transaction was reflected in the account but did not occur or related to another entity; was not reflected in the account, but did occur; was reflected in the account for an incorrect amount or on the incorrect date; or was reflected in the account, but described incorrectly and/or allocated to the incorrect category of income or expense. The referee identified the transactions objected to by Dominic and Lillian and indicated whether additional supporting documentation, in addition to the MYOB records, was provided in relation to those transactions in paragraphs [21]-[23] of his report. The referee dealt with the corresponding issues in respect of the Engadine Unit Trust in paragraphs [27]-[30] of his report, the Pacificon Unit Trust in paragraphs [35]-[38] of his report, the Hogben Unit Trust in paragraphs [44]-[49] of his report and the Gladstone Street Unit Trust in paragraphs [58]-[67] of his report.
The referee noted that Dominic and Lillian objected to 178 transactions in the IMS Unit Trust, which they contended should not be considered bona fide transactions of the trust and should therefore be eliminated from the accounts. These included all transactions between the IMS Unit Trust and the builder, Homeline Constructions; all transactions between the IMS Unit Trust and related parties; all transfers of properties to related parties and all transactions with unrelated third parties for which no documentation was available; all transactions in which a transaction reference number was out of sequence; all payments to Homeline Constructions made before the receipt by the trust of a progress claim from Homeline Constructions; reduction of the loan account and transitory account to zero balances on the basis they are not supported by documentation; payments of construction costs from sale proceeds; repayment to the Murr Superannuation Fund of monies loaned to the IMS Unit Trust; and all transactions reflected in the short term loan account.
The referee determined many of those objections but did not determine any objection that actual transactions of the trust had no proper legal basis. The referee did not determine a dispute whether the IMS Unit Trust was legally entitled to undertake three further developments at Mill Street, Carlton, Harris Road, Five Dock and Old Princess Highway, Engadine, after completing its original development undertaken at a site at Vermont Street and Linden Street, Sutherland. The referee treated transactions between the IMS Unit Trust and Homeline Constructions as properly recorded in the accounts as trust transactions; he recorded transactions between the IMS Unit Trust and related parties in those accounts, noting that transactions which were unsupported by documentation would be identified in the accounts; he did not determine an objection by Dominic and Lillian that the sales of some properties were not at fair market value, which were outside his terms of reference, and he noted that no valuation evidence was in any event provided by Dominic and Lillian. The referee recorded payments to third parties as transactions that had occurred, but identified certain payments that were unsupported by documentation other than MYOB records; he rejected the submission that transactions that were apparently recorded out of sequence had not occurred; he rejected the submissions that the fact that payments made to Homeline Constructions before the receipt of a progress claim was evidence that the payment transaction did not occur and recorded such transactions in the accounts; he recorded transactions in which construction costs were paid from the proceeds of property sales as transactions entered into by the trust; he recorded repayments of amounts borrowed from the Murr Superannuation Fund as transactions entered into by the trust and noted that the recorded transactions did not indicate that the Murr Superannuation Fund received a cash benefit greater than it was entitled to receive by way of loan repayment; and he recorded transactions in the short term loan account as transactions of the trust if those transactions reflected the use of trust funds. He also identified transactions objected to by Dominic and Lillian and indicated whether additional supporting documentation was provided to him for those transactions.
The referee noted that Dominic and Lillian objected to 30 transactions in the Engadine Unit Trust. The referee undertook a similarly detailed analysis in respect of transactions of that trust, noting that all transactions with the builder, Homeline Constructions had been objected to by Dominic and Lillian, apparently on legal grounds; all transactions with related parties had been objected to, and an initial allocation of units to Badminton and the Murr Group in exchange for development costs was objected to because no development had been undertaken before these units were allotted. He did not determine the first of those objections, which he treated as raising a legal issue; he recorded transactions with related parties as transactions that had in fact occurred, and identified transactions which were unsupported by documentation other than MYOB records; and he accepted the Cross-Defendants' submissions as to the allotment of units to Badminton and the Murr Group as consistent with the accounting records of the trust. 
The referee noted that Dominic and Lillian objected to 31 transactions in the Pacificon Unit Trust, which they submitted should not be treated as bona fide transactions of the Trust. The referee considered that transactions between the Pacificon Unit Trust and the IMS Unit Trust should be recorded in those accounts, without determining Dominic and Lillian's submission that it was not established whether they accorded with the terms of any legal arrangement between those trusts. The referee accepted that certain payments by the IMS Trust to Homeline Constructions were not related to the Engadine project and were properly recorded in the IMS Unit Trust rather than in the accounts of the Pacificon Unit Trust. He treated payments to Homeline Constructions which had built the development as properly recorded in the accounts, without determining whether the trust transactions were consistent with the building contract, in circumstances that Dominic and Lillian had objected to those transactions on the basis that the building contract had not been produced. He recorded transactions with related parties in the accounts, and identified transactions which were unsupported by documentation in his report.
The referee undertook a similarly detailed analysis in respect of the Hogben Unit Trust, but did not determine a legal dispute between the parties as to whether a joint venture agreement between the parties was in the form for which the Cross-Defendants contended, or whether the Hogben Unit Trust did or did not have title to residential and commercial units ultimately acquired by co-owners of the land. That dispute was outside the terms of reference. He also addressed a range of disputes in respect of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust.
The referee noted that the account he had prepared for each trust did not resolve submissions or claims to the effect that the trustee was not authorised, by the trust deed or otherwise, to make certain payments and also did not address general submissions that the development profits made by the trust were less than might have been expected. Neither of those matters were properly within the scope of the reference to him.
The referee's report was prepared under UCPR [rule 20.14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s20.14.html) which permits the Court to refer to a referee "for inquiry and report by the referee", relevantly, any question arising in the proceedings. The term "question" is defined in r 20.13 as including any question or issue arising in the proceedings, whether of fact or law, or both, and whether raised by pleadings, agreement of the parties or otherwise. [Rule 20.24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s20.24.html) provides that: "20.24 Proceedings on the report (cf SCR [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p72), [rule )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s13.html) 
If a report is made under [rule .23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s20.23.html), the court may on a matter of fact or law, or both, do any of the following: it may adopt, vary or reject the report in whole or in part, it may require an explanation by way of report from the referee, it may, on any ground, remit for further consideration by the referee the whole or any part of the matter referred for a further report, it may decide any matter on the evidence taken before the referee, with or without additional evidence, and must, in any event, give such judgment or make such order as the court thinks fit.

Evidence additional to the evidence taken before the referee may not be adduced before the court except by leave of the court."
Dominic and Lillian acknowledge that the principles concerning the adoption of reports are such that a referee's report will generally be considered to determine the questions referred to him, and will generally be adopted and acted on unless some error, miscarriage or other ground for rejecting, qualifying or not acting on the conclusions stated in the report is established. McDougall J summarised the principles applicable to the court's discretion in the adoption or rejection of a report in Seven Sydney versus Fuji Xerox  <case> at <case>- <case> and in Chocolate Factory Apartments versus Westpoint Finance  <case> at <case>- <case>, where his Honour observed that: "The principles to be applied, in exercising the discretion conferred upon the
Court by [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p72) r 13 to adopt, vary or reject in whole or in part a report of a referee, are well established. There are a number of cases to which, customarily, reference is made. They include Super Pty Ltd versus SJP Formwork (Aust) Pty Ltd [(1992) 29
NSWLR 549]; the unreported proceedings in that case before Giles J (19
May 1992: the relevant considerations referred to by his Honour are sufficiently extracted in the decision of the Court of Appeal); Chloride
Batteries Australia Ltd versus Glendale Chemical Products Pty Ltd (1988) 17 NSWKLR ; White Constructions (NT) Pty Ltd versus Commonwealth (1990) 7 BCL 193; and
Foxman Holdings Pty Ltd versus NMBE Pty Ltd [(1994) 38 NSWLR 615.] As to the nature and content of the referee's obligation to give reasons, the relevant authorities include Xuereb versus Viola [(1989) 18 NSWLR 453] and
Hughes Bros Pty Ltd versus Minister for Public Works (Rolfe J, 17 August 1994 unreported; BC 9402885).

The relevant principles, distilled from those decisions, can be stated as follows: 
An application under [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p72) r 13 is not an appeal either by way of hearing de novo or by way of rehearing.

The discretion to adopt, vary or reject the report is to be exercised in a manner consistent with both the object and purpose of the rules and the wider setting in which they take their place. Subject to this, and to what is said in the next two sub paragraphs, it is undesirable to attempt closely to confine the manner in which the discretion is to be exercised.

The purpose of [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p72) is to provide, where the interests of justice so require, a form of partial resolution of disputes alternative to orthodox litigation, that purpose would be frustrated if the reference were to be treated as some kind of warm up for the real contest.

In so far as the subject matter of dissatisfaction with a report is a question of law, or the application of legal standards to established facts, a proper exercise of discretion requires the judge to consider and determine that matter afresh.

Where a report shows a thorough, analytical and scientific approach to the assessment of the subject matter of the reference, the Court would have a disposition towards acceptance of the report, for to do otherwise would be to negate both the purpose and the facility of referring complex technical issues to independent experts for enquiry and report.

If the referee's report reveals some error of principle, absence or excessive jurisdiction, patent misapprehension of the evidence or perversity or manifest unreasonableness in fact finding, that would ordinarily be a reason for rejection. In this context, patent misapprehension of the evidence refers to a lack of understanding of the evidence as distinct from the according to particular aspects of it different weight; and perversity or manifest unreasonableness mean a conclusion that no reasonable tribunal of fact could have reached. The test denoted by these phrases is more stringent than "unsafe and unsatisfactory".

Generally, the referee's findings of fact should not be reagitated in the
Court. The Court will not reconsider disputed questions of fact where there is factual material sufficient to entitle the referee to reach the conclusions he or she did, particularly where the disputed questions are in a technical area in which the referee enjoys an appropriate expertise. Thus, the Court will not ordinarily interfere with findings of fact by a referee where the referee has based his or her findings upon a choice between conflicting evidence.

The purpose of [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p72) would be frustrated if the Court were required to reconsider disputed questions of fact in circumstances where it is conceded that there was material on which the conclusions could be based.

The Court is entitled to consider the futility and cost of relitigating an issue determined by the referee where the parties have had ample opportunity to place before the referee such evidence and submissions as they desire.

Even if it were shown that the Court might have reached a different conclusion in some respect from that of the referee, it would not be (in the absence of any of the matters referred to in subpara (6) above) a proper exercise of the discretion conferred by [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p72) r 13 to allow matters agitated before the referee to be re-xplored so as to lead to qualification or rejection of the report.

Referees should give reasons for their opinion so as to enable the parties, the Court and the disinterested observer to know that the conclusion is not arbitrary, or influenced by improper considerations; but that it is the result of a process of logic and the application of a considered mind to the factual circumstances proved. The reasoning process must be sufficiently disclosed so that the Court can be satisfied that the conclusions are based upon such an intellectual exercise.

The right to be heard does not involve the right to be heard twice.

A question as to whether there was evidence on which the referee, without manifest unreasonableness, could have come to the decision to which he or she did come is not raised "by a mere suggestion of factual error such that, if it were made by a trial judge, an appeal judge would correct it". The real question is far more limited: "to the situation where it is seriously and reasonably contended that the referee has reached a decision which no reasonable tribunal of fact could have reached; that is, a decision that any reasonable referee would have known was against the evidence and weight of evidence".

Where, although the referee's reasons on their face appear adequate, the party challenging the report contends that they are not adequate because there was very significant evidence against the referee's findings with which the referee did not at all deal, examination of the evidence may be undertaken to show that the reasons were in fact inadequate because they omitted any reference to significant evidence.

Where the court decides that the reasons are flawed, either on their face or because they have been shown not to deal with important matters, the court has a choice. It may decline to adopt the report. Or it may itself look at the detail of the evidence to decide whether or not the expense of further proceedings before the referee (which would be the consequence of non adoption) is justified.

The twelfth point restates the aphorism of Mahoney JA in Super at 567. The thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth points are drawn (and include direct quotations) from the judgment of Hodgson CJ in Eq (with whom Priestley JA agreed and with whom, as to the relevant principles, Fitzgerald AJ also agreed) in Franks versus Berem Constructions Pty Ltd (NSWCA 2 December 1998, unreported; BC 9806367). If I may say so with respect, I regard what his
Honour said as giving content, on the facts of the particular case, to the operation of relevant principles rather than as stating any new principle."
Those principles have thereafter been adopted by judges of the Court on many occasions: New South Wales versus Bovis Lend Lease Pty Ltd <case> per Einstein J at [7]; Bitannia Pty Ltd versus Parkline Constructions Pty Ltd  <case> per White J at [12]; Corbett Court Pty Ltd versus Quasar Constructions Pty Ltd  <case> per Hammerschlag J at [30]-[31]; Sangain Pty Ltd versus Italform Pty Ltd  <case> per Rein J at [14], and see Mainteck Services Pty Limited versus Stein Heurtey Australia Pty Ltd  <case> In Bellevarde Constructions Pty Ltd versus CPC Energy Pty Ltd <case> at <case>- <case>, Spigelman CJ and Allsop P (with whom Campbell JA agreed) referred, expressly without criticism, to that approach and observed that: "We would only add that the approach of a judge faced with the requested adoption of a referee's report should be determined according to the nature of the issues and the circumstances of the case.

Highly relevant to that general overall consideration is the historical context of the rules concerning references, the recognition of the reference as a special form of hearing or trial (though not one leading, without more, to a verdict or judgment) over which the Court has a power of review, and the recognition of the place of references within the wider modern framework of alternative dispute resolution: see the discussion of these matters in the reasons for judgment of Gleeson CJ in Super versus SJP Formwork at 558-564. The history of references under an order of the Court in the disposition of justiciable controversies that is the subject of discussion by Stephen J and
Jacobs J in Buckley versus Bennell Design & Constructions Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 140 CLR 1] at 1522 and 2838, respectively, by Gleeson CJ in Super versus SPJ
Formwork and by Brooking J in Nicholls versus Stamer <case>; [[1980] VR 479] illuminates the wide general power available to the Court in the review and adoption process."
In BestCare Foods versus Origin Energy <case> McDougall J observed at [15]-[18], in a passage subsequently adopted by Sackar J in Mainteck Services at [51], that: "The discretions conferred by r 20.24 are not subject to limitations or conditions stated in the rule itself. It follows that they are to be exercised judicially, and in accordance with the dictates of, in particular, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) (see [s (2)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) 
Nonetheless, over the years, guidelines relevant to the exercise of the r .24 discretions (or the equivalent discretions under SCR [pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/index.html#p72) r 13) have been developed in many decided cases. I sought to collect the principles emerging from those cases in my judgment in Chocolate Factory
Apartments versus Westpoint Finance <case> at <case> to [8]."
The principles which determine whether the Court should adopt, vary or reject a referee's report were recently accepted by the Court of Appeal in Illawarra Hotel Company Pty Ltd versus Walton Construction Pty Ltd <case> at <case>, where Barrett JA (with whom Meagher and Ward JJA agreed) also observed that: "a judge considering whether or not to adopt a refereee's report is called upon to exercise a discretion - whether to give the court's imprimatur to a decision made outside the normal curial process by a person charged with the duty of assessing a particular question in the light of the evidence and coming to an informed conclusion, often as to matters lying within a field in which that person has special expertise."
By their Points of Cross-Claim filed on 16 April 2013, Dominic and Lillian now seek an order that the schedules to the referee's report stand as the Cross-Defendants' statement of the accounts of the five trusts subject to the order for reference made on 14 June 2011, as amended by the order of 5 April 2012, but not as a determination by the Court of the validity or accuracy of their statements of the accounts of the Trusts, and that the report be not otherwise adopted. Conversely, by Amended Notice of Motion filed on 14 June 2013, the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants sought an order that the referee's report be adopted in full and used as evidence in the proceedings. 
Dominic and Lillian's Points of Claim contend that the referee's report amounted to identification of the Cross-Defendants' contentions as to the transactions of the five trusts that were the subject of the reference, but did not go further than that and should not be adopted as a binding determination of any question of fact or of law. In Mr Smallbone's opening written submissions, Dominic and Lillian accept that the referee's report supplies a listing of transactions which are (they say) with some exceptions, supported by secondary accounting records of the five unit trusts and note that the Cross-Defendants have adopted those findings as their statements of the account. They point to an exception, that the referee has included in the Gladstone Street Unit Trust certain transactions, being unpaid invoices for building work and interest, between the Eighth Cross-Defendant, Glad Con Pty Limited ("Glad Con") and the proposed Ninth Cross-Defendant, Homeline Building Pty Limited ("Homeline Building"), which are not recorded in the MYOB records.
There seem to be several difficulties with the form of the order sought by Dominic and Lillian. The first is that it is outside the Court's power which does not extend to adopting a report so as to make it binding on some parties but not others in proceedings. The second is that it is superfluous, so far as the trustees of the trusts which have already adopted the schedules prepared by the referee as the accounts of the trusts and unjustified so far as other defendants who are not the trustees of the trusts and under any obligation to prepare accounts of the trusts. The third is that it takes no account of the application of the referee's expertise and the extensive process of taking submissions that went into preparing his report. The work undertaken by the referee involved a significant analysis of the underlying transactions in accordance with the orders previously made by the Court, so as to comprise not the Cross-Defendants' statement of the accounts of the five trusts (although they have adopted that statement) but the referee's statement of the account of the Trusts, having regard to the material which was made available to him and the extensive submission made by the parties.
Dominic and Lillian submit that the adoption of the referee's report in the manner for which the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants contend, or in any manner beyond that which they concede, would involve a denial of their "substantive and procedural rights" to have an accounting and to have a trial of their claims in the proceedings in the First Cross-Claim. I do not accept that submission. So far as Dominic and Lillian seek an accounting in common form, the trustees have adopted the referee's statement of the relevant transactions, and can be required to verify that step on oath at a final hearing. Dominic and Lillian have the opportunity to seek to falsify or surcharge the relevant transactions and (although out of time and subject to the other matters that I note below) have filed documents indicating the transactions that they challenge. They do not presently have a "right" to an accounting on the basis of wilful default by the trustees, since whether any such wilful default on the part of the trustees is established is a matter for the final hearing. The adoption of the referee's report would not prevent them establishing that matter at the final hearing.
Dominic and Lillian also seek to reagitate, in their submissions as to whether the referee's report should be adopted, the numerous complaints as to the transactions of the trusts that they made before the referee, including complaints as to payments to the builders of the units that were developed by the trusts; payments of professional fees to officers of the trustees and their relations or related companies; loans relating to those payments; transfer of strata units to related parties at an alleged undervalue or as offsets against those payments; acquisition of property and funding of the development at Hogben Street; and an amount paid for an allegedly unauthorised "redemption" of Badminton's units in the Gladstone Street Unit Trust. So far as these allegations involve allegation of breach of any legal duty on the part of the trustees, they remain open to Dominic and Lillian notwithstanding the adoption of the referee's report, because the directions given to the referee by the Court and his report make clear that he was not required to determine the legal issues raised by Dominic and Lillian in their claims. 
Dominic and Lillian also seek to reagitate the debate that previously took place before Bergin CJ in Eq in June 2011, and was determined by her Honour, as to whether the form of the accounting should have been inquisitorial, or adopted some other form. Dominic and Lillian claim that, by a letter of 11 November 2011, the referee reversed the onus by proceeding on the basis that it was for the Cross-Claimants to specify and prove error in the trust records. Dominic and Lillian also refer to a misunderstanding which, they contend, the referee had of his role, prior to the clarification of that role in my 2012 judgment. These submissions also reagitate issues which were put in the argument before me as to whether the reference should be vacated. Dominic and Lillian complain that the effect of the procedure before the referee, where the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants had adopted the referee's list of transactions, was to require Dominic and Lillian to make submissions without the benefit of the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants' statement of what their transactions had been and without requiring them to be cross-examined. I reject that submission. First, the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants made their statement of what the transactions had been, by adopting the referee's list of transactions, and there was no necessity for them to be cross-examined at that point; and, second, the referee expressly offered the opportunity for an oral hearing for the parties to deal with contested matters, at which such cross-examination could have taken place, which Dominic and Lillian did not choose to take up.
Dominic and Lillian submit that the referee refused to direct himself on any question as to law and that his findings of fact were vitiated by his refusal to direct himself on any question of law or to consider whether any transaction to which he referred was one of the trusts, in law and in fact. The referee was not asked to determine any question of law, was not qualified to do so and properly did not seek to do so. In my view, the referee properly addressed the question referred to him, namely how the transactions of the trusts recorded in appropriate source documents should be recorded in their accounts. Dominic and Lillian in turn contend that it was not open to the referee to prepare an account without properly directing himself to the relevant law and making appropriate findings as to the (legal) character of payments and receipts. I reject that submission. The referee nominated by the parties and appointed by Bergin CJ in Eq was an accountant, not a lawyer, and the orders that I made in April 2012 recognised his qualifications and expertise by narrowing the task which he was required to undertake. Accounts could properly be prepared in a manner that reflected the transactions of the trusts, reserving any challenge which Dominic and Lillian might identify to the legal basis of transactions for determination by the Court. The referee adopted that approach in accordance with the orders made by the Court in April 2012.
Dominic and Lillian also complain that the referee recorded related party transactions as "transactions which occurred". It seems to me that the fact a transaction is with a related party does not provide any basis for treating it as non-existent, whether or not there may be any challenge to its legal basis. I can see no error in the referee's approach in that regard.
Dominic and Lillian complain that the referee did not determine their submissions that the payments of construction costs to the builders of the relevant properties could not be supported except with the informed consent of the trust beneficiaries. The question of any breach of the conflict rule or the profit rule is plainly a matter of law which was not within the scope of the reference and it is open to Dominic and Lillian to establish the relevant breach in the proceedings before the Court, if it is properly pleaded in the relevant Cross-Claim. It is, of course, implicit in that proposition that the referee's report cannot and does not dispose of all matters in issue in the proceedings. That is plainly the case where the referee was not asked to, and has not, determined questions of law. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants ultimately did not press a submission that they at one point seemed to have advanced to the contrary.
Dominic and Lillian also draw attention to an observation that I had made in my earlier judgment that the referee needed to form a view as to the adequacy of the records supporting the transactions of the trusts to be stated in its accounts. I noted that: "The Cross-Claimants contend that they are being required to falsify and surcharge the account with the benefit of the trustees' own statement of the transactions, vouching or cross-examination. In my view, that misapprehends the task which the referee is undertaking. It will be open to the Cross-
Claimants to respond that a transaction is not relevantly supported by documentation; the referee has made clear that he will record that position in his report; and the resulting dispute, including any inferences to be drawn from the trustee's failure to produce supporting documents or other evidence to support transactions in the course of the inquiry before the referee, is a matter to which the Court can have regard in determining whether to adopt or vary the referee's report and in dealing with remaining issues in the Cross-
Claim. The Cross-Claimants also express an apprehension that they will be denied justice because of the principles of restraint in respect of findings of a referee, and that the Cross-Defendants are likely to assert that the
Cross-Claimants are "stuck with the outcome". I do not regard this as a realistic possibility. I would not expect the referee to reach an affirmative view that accounts are properly stated if significant transactions recorded in them are not supported by appropriate source documentation and I see no significant risk that the Cross-Defendants will be bound by such a view."
Dominic and Lillian challenge the referee's assessment of the adequacy of source materials for the transactions reflected in the accounts that he prepared. This challenge is put in several overlapping submissions including at least the following: * Dominic and Lillian criticise the approach adopted by the referee to determine the adequacy of supporting or source documents for particular transactions, by criticising a view which they attribute to the referee that he was not required to confirm the "accuracy" of MYOB entries by reference to source documents. They submit that the referee refused to go behind or consider whether he should go behind the MYOB records of the trust produced by one or more of the Cross-Defendants and misdirected himself by refusing or failing to consider the adequacy of records to substantiate transactions.
 * Dominic and Lillian contend that the referee did not form a view as to whether the documents are supported by appropriate source documentation, but has merely recorded the transactions stated in the MYOB records of the trusts in the accounts he has prepared. * Dominic and Lillian complain that the materials available in the reference were limited, because, for example, no itemised progress claims and few vouchers were available for expenses in respect of the IMS Unit Trust. * Dominic and Lillian complain that the building contracts were not produced, except for a contract for the Gladstone Street Unit Trust development, and contend that there is a live issue as to when such contract or contracts were entered, whether they were varied, and their terms. Dominic and Lillian in turn contend that it could not be shown that payments properly related to the costs of construction of the relevant works without the contracts and specifications and proper progress claims being produced. 
The referee did not, in terms, state that the source documents to which he refers are "adequate" or "appropriate". However, it seems to me plain that he in fact considered that question. His report identifies the matters that supported the adequacy of the source documents for the relevant purpose. He pointed to the number of transactions involved and the age of the transactions as relevant to the extent of examination of source documents that was necessary, and that observation seems to me to be plainly correct. He drew attention to the existence of contemporaneous MYOB records and to the fact that a substantial number of transactions in those records could be confirmed against other documents, although he also identified (as the terms of reference required) those that could not. He observed that at least some of the transactions to which Dominic and Lillian objected involved payments to related parties where a document had been provided in relation to the initial incurring of the liability and that, in principle, that meant that "documentary evidence has been provided to support both the incurrence of the liability and the payment of that liability". 
Mr Smallbone drew attention to an observation made by the referee in an email dated 15 February 2012 (Ex A7, p 27) that: "In particular, I do not intend to make any findings of law. Rather, I intend to confine the report to the preparation of an Account of the transactions which occurred for each trust. Any arguments which relate to the legal basis (rather than the existence) of a transaction should be put to the Court after my report has been completed.

Put briefly, my report will be limited to a listing of the transactions which occurred in relation to each trust, after taking into accounts the records which exist. My report will not amend those transactions in any way to, for example, exclude recording transactions which may not have a sound legal basis or for which documentary evidence other than the MYOB record does not exist." 
The referee here correctly recognised that the matters referred to him did not include the determination of the legality or propriety of transactions as distinct from accounts recording the transactions that in fact occurred. The last statement, that the referee did not intend to exclude recorded transactions for which documentary evidence other than MYOB records did not exist did not prevent Dominic and Lillian putting submissions as to the inadequacy of such records, which the referee made clear he would record. The referee also noted in his email dated 15 February 2012 that he would have "primary regard" to submissions that relate to specified matters. It should be noted, first, that these matters were plainly referrable to the preparation of accounts in accordance with the reference and the referee's statement that he should have primary regard to them seems to me to have been appropriate; and, consistently with that statement, the referee addressed those matters in his report, noting that Dominic and Lillian had not made submissions as to several of those matters. My judgments of 26 March and 5 April 2013, and amendments to the scope of the reference, subsequent to that email, drew attention to the question of adequacy of documentation and it has not been established that the referee indicated that he would not, or did not, act in accordance with that judgment.
I requested Mr Smallbone to identify the specific submissions made by Dominic and Lillian before the referee as to the adequacy of documents to support particular transactions included in the accounts. The most striking aspect of Mr Smallbone's identification of these submissions was the fact that many of them were not squarely directed to the adequacy of documentation to support the existence of the relevant transactions, as distinct from an attack upon the propriety of the transactions. Mr Smallbone drew attention to a letter dated 27 February 2012, by which: * Dominic and Lillian's solicitors contended that a contract between Homeline Constructions and IMS had not been produced and the documents produced did not disclose that claims and payments were made in accordance with a cost plus contract. That submission did not suggest that those payments had not been made so as to be recorded in the accounts for the IMS Trust, as distinct from attacking their contractual basis.
 * Dominic and Lillian's solicitors also referred to several transactions described as "retention payable transactions" and contended that the documents produced for inspection did not support the "validity" of those transactions. Again, that submission appears to be an attack upon the propriety of the transactions, not upon whether they had occurred.
 * Dominic and Lillian's solicitors also objected to the transfer of units to related parties on the basis that there was no evidence as to the basis upon which they were made, and advanced a submission that the transactions were related party transactions and the transferees were required to account for the greater of the amount received on resale of the properties or their then market value. This is again an attack upon the propriety or legal basis of the transactions, rather than upon whether the fact of transactions was properly established by underlying documents. * A similar submission was made in respect of payments to related parties for services on the basis that there was no supporting documentation "as to the basis upon which" any payment was made, and on the basis that such payments were contrary to an alleged agreement of the beneficiaries of the IMS Unit Trust. * A submission was made that other transactions do not appear to be "appropriately paid" and that there was no documentation that set out a "proper basis" for the payment. Again, no submission was squarely made that the supporting documentation did not evidence the fact of the transaction, as distinct from its appropriateness or propriety.
By letter dated 7 March 2012, Dominic and Lillian advanced a submission that entries made in the MYOB records that were out of sequence had the result that no reliance could be placed on the MYOB records generally, unless Dominic and Lillian accepted the validity of the transactions, as follows: "The fact that the entries which are out of sequence relate to related party transactions which have the effect of reducing the profits of the trust indicates that reliance cannot be placed on the MYOB records to prove the profit of the unit trust without reference to other documents and evidence, unless the transactions are admitted to be valid." 
The referee dealt with and did not accept that submission in his report.
By their submissions dated 30 March 2012, the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants responded to the submission that there were no documents in respect of the trust transactions and drew attention to MYOB records incorporating, inter alia, general ledgers and trial balances; tax returns and financial statements prepared by external accountants; minutes of meetings; letters notifying trust distributions and providing the trustee with payment instructions for distributions; trust deeds and tax invoices. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants' submissions to the Referee dated 30 March 2012 also addressed, in some detail, the question of the documents that had been produced to support relevant payments and contended that, inter alia,: * payments to Homeline Constructions were made by IMS upon receipt of tax invoices, and following approval from an external lender on receipt of certification of the value of the construction work from quantity surveyors; * documentation in respect of several retention payable transactions was in fact produced for inspection and the value of those transactions were a substantial portion of the total disputed retention payable transactions; * it was not surprising that all primary documents were not available where the relevant transactions had occurred some 11 years before, in 2001; * so far as the question of sequencing of transactions in MYOB records were concerned, many users of MYOB manually selected journal numbers, rather than using automatically generated sequential numbers. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants attached correspondence from MYOB and external accountants confirming both the relevant functionality to select such numbers in MYOB and the existence of that practice. 
By letter dated 14 May 2012, Dominic and Lillian's solicitors contended that: * Invoices issued by Homeline Constructions to the trustee for payment did not set out the detail of the costs of the building work for which payment was sought. That submission does not seem to me to undermine the fact that a payment made in respect of such an invoice was made, and should be recorded in the relevant accounts; and that criticism may also have lesser weight where the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants point to the reliance on a process of quantity surveyor certification of work done in any event.
 * Drawdown notices issued to the lender by the trustee were executed by Luigi and Mr Murr, and in "many cases" this occurred "without any claim being made on the trustee by way of a progress claim or tax invoice". There is no reason to think that the referee did not have regard to this submission, which would also need to be read in the context of the quantity surveyor certification to which I referred above.
 * In respect of the sequencing of the MYOB journal numbers, the books and records of the trust were prepared on a day-to-day basis by Peter El Murr who also maintained the books and records of Homeline Constructions. That does not, of course, provide any basis for the referee to disregard the existence of transactions apparently recorded in the MYOB records, where no suggestion of impropriety in the records was made beyond the existence of Mr El Murr's dual capacities. * Payments to related parties were "in breach of the Trust Deed". Rather than contesting the existence of such payments, or whether they were properly supported by documentation, that submission impugns their propriety. 
By a further submission dated 6 August 2012 Dominic and Lillian's solicitors submitted that the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants had not produced a document setting out the terms of any arrangement between the IMS Unit Trust and the Pacificon Unit Trust in respect of the Engadine properties. They submitted that such a document must be produced before any accounting in respect of the Pacificon Unit Trust, to determine whether the accounting accorded with the terms of those arrangements. Again, it seems to me that that submission confuses the question of the existence of transactions which should be recorded in the trust's accounts and their propriety. They also submitted that, until the terms of the arrangement with IMS were determined, it was not possible to finally determine the assets, liabilities, incomes and outgoings of the Pacificon Unit Trust. By letter dated 9 August 2012 Dominic and Lillian's solicitors advanced submissions as to the form of invoices in respect of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust and the absence of particulars to allow determination of how claims were calculated. They questioned why certain invoices issued in late 2005 and early 2006 were not paid until December 2007, if they had been rendered on or about the dates they bear. They contended that certain expenses paid to Homeline Building and/or the Murr Group were "not expenses payable to any contract which had been disclosed"; that is another example of a submission that assumes the relevant payments were made, so that they should be recorded in the accounts, while contesting their propriety.
The referee did not in fact adopt the view that Dominic and Lillian attribute to him that he was not required at least to assess the adequacy of the MYOB records by reference to source documents, since he did confirm the accuracy of a large number of transactions by reference to source documents where they were available. The referee's report indicated that he had regard not only to the MYOB records of the five trusts but also to amounts reflected in bank and loan accounts of the trusts and amounts reflected in accounts held by others on behalf of the trust, such as amounts expended from deposits on the sale of properties. The referee also refers to the use of records discovered and made available by the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants in preparing his report. To the extent that such documents were not available for some transactions, it seems to me to have been well within the referee's expertise to determine whether MYOB records of a trust were sufficient basis for an accounting of the relevant transactions, without the necessity to produce such source documents. Conversely, it would be a surprising result had the referee treated transactions as non-existent, where they were recorded as having in fact occurred in contemporaneous MYOB documents, simply because the source documents for transactions had not been retained, given the lapse of time between the transactions and the reference. As the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants also point out, Dominic and Lillian's complaints in respect of the adequacy of source documents maintained by the trustees must have regard to the fact that Dominic and Lillian did not apply to join Mr Murr and the four trustee companies to the proceedings until May 2011. The five Unit Trusts in issue in the proceedings were in turn established for the development and sale of properties between 1997 and 2006, between 5 and 14 years prior to the joinder of the trustee companies as parties to the proceedings. In particular, the IMS Unit Trust developed and sold properties between 1997 and 2002, at least 9 years before the joinder of its trustee as party to the proceedings.
For completeness, I should note that there was a dispute between the parties as to whether the contract between Homeline and the Glad Con had been made available for inspection by Dominic and Lillian before they made submissions to the referee based on the proposition that that contract had not been made available. It is neither possible nor necessary to resolve that dispute for the purposes of this application. I declined to permit Mr Lever, who appears for the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants, to tender the correspondence concerning that matter after the completion of closing submissions, in circumstances that Dominic and Lillian contended that, if that correspondence were to be tendered, they would seek to lead affidavit evidence in response that they had been unable to locate that contract in the course of inspection of documents made available by the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants. 
Dominic and Lillian contend that the referee misdirected himself by "failing or refusing to apply the rule that the accounting party bears the onus of proof of transactions set forth in its statement of transactions" and failed to engage in any appropriate fact-finding process and assumed that all transactions alleged by the Cross-Defendants were validly, lawfully and actually incurred. Dominic and Lillian also contend that the procedures and methods adopted in the reference were not appropriately adapted or suitable for the fair determination of disputed questions of fact in relation to the disputed transactions and that the referee misapprehended his task as the preparation of a statement of accounts of the trusts. I do not accept this submission. Dominic and Lillian have not at this point obtained an order for an accounting in a traditional form and the referee was not obliged to conduct the reference as though it were an accounting in a traditional form. The referee did not in fact assume that transaction were lawful and made clear that he was not asked to and did not determine that question. As I have noted above, he also undertook a process of verification as against source records in preparing the accounts, within the context that he had been asked to do so. 
Dominic and Lillian also identify particular criticisms of aspects of the referee's report in respect of the allotment of units in the Engadine Unit Trust to Badminton and the Murr Group; to the treatment of transactions in the Hogben Unit Trust; and to the referee's failure to determine a dispute as to the validity and terms of the building contract in respect of the Gladstone Street development. The referee's report refers to several invoices not recorded in Glad Con's accounts in respect of the amount of $77,000 now claimed by Homeline Building (paragraph 53), to the submissions made by Dominic and Lillian in respect of those invoices (paragraph 54) and to a dispute as to whether the building contract was varied which he notes is a legal issue not within the scope of the reference to him (paragraphs 55-56). He includes the invoices in the accounts, but specifically on the basis that the associated legal questions are matters for determination by the Court. That approach is supported both by the terms of the contract relating to the Gladstone Street project and by the quantity surveyor's support which is consistent with the contract price for that project. I can see no error in the referee's treatment of that matter, where the relevant legal issues are reserved for the Court's decision. 
Dominic and Lillian also contend that the fact that none of their objections were upheld in a complex accounting is "an indication that something has gone wrong somewhere". I do not accept that submission, which appears both to assume the merit of Dominic and Lillian's submissions and neglect the fact that many of those submissions primarily depended on issues of law that the referee was not required to determine and did not purport to determine.
Mr Lever accepted in oral submissions that, to the extent the referee's report is adopted, it is subject to the qualifications made in it in respect of matters that the referee has not determined. Mr Svelha, who appears for Homeline Building, in turn put in oral submissions that the referee's report identifies actual transactions that occurred in the assets and liabilities of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust, but adoption of that report would not prevent Dominic and Lillian raising causes of action that undermine the legal validity of particular transactions, including whether or not the Homeline Building contract was varied in the manner for which Dominic and Lillian contend. 
I referred above to Illawarra Hotel Company Pty Ltd versus Walton Construction Pty Ltd, where the Court of Appeal observed, inter alia, that the Court would have a disposition towards accepting a referee's report which showed a thorough, analytical and scientific approach to the assessment of its subject matter, since "to do otherwise would be to negate both the purpose and the facility of referring complex technical issues to independent experts for inquiry and report".

In the present case, it seems to me that the referee's report was in fact thorough and analytical and applied his expertise, being that of an experienced accountant, to the assessment of the accounting issues that had been referred to him.
Their Honours also observed that a report would ordinarily be rejected if a referee's report revealed an error of principle, patent misapprehension of the evidence or perversity or manifest unreasonableness in fact finding. Their Honours also emphasised that the Court will not reconsider disputed questions of fact where there is factual material sufficient to entitle the referee to reach the conclusions that he or she did, and also emphasised the futility and cost of relitigating issues determined by a referee, where the parties have had opportunity to place evidence and submissions before the referee. Their Honours also noted that unreasonableness was not established by the mere suggestion of factual error, which would be corrected on an appeal from a trial judge, but instead turns upon whether the referee's decision was such that "any reasonable referee would have known was against the evidence and weight of evidence". 
The parties had ample opportunity to place both evidence and submissions before the referee and each party took advantage of that opportunity, so far as submissions were concerned, although neither party chose to take up the opportunity of an oral hearing which the Court had contemplated the referee would permit and which the referee in fact offered to permit. To a significant extent, Dominic and Lillian's submissions before the referee focussed on issues that were not relevant to the preparation of the accounts of the trusts, recording the transaction that had in fact occurred, by focussing on the propriety of transactions rather than the question whether they had occurred. The criticisms advanced by Dominic and Lillian of the referee's reasoning process do not establish, in my view, that the referee's views were such that no reasonable tribunal of fact could have reached them, or that any reasonable referee would have known they were against the weight of the evidence. In particular, it does not seem to me to have been unreasonable for the referee to have relied substantially on MYOB records, given the age of the relevant transactions and the fact that many transactions recorded in the MYOB records were in fact supported by other records.
The Court of Appeal also noted in Illawarra Hotel Company that, even if the Court concluded that a referee's reasons were flawed, in that they had not dealt as fully as they should have with the adequacy of supporting documents for the accounts, the Court then has a choice whether to decline to adopt the report or to: "itself look at the detail of the evidence to decide whether or not the expense of further proceedings before the Referee (which would be the consequence of non-adoption) is justified." 
Even if I were satisfied that the referee's reasons should have expanded further on why the MYOB records provided a sufficient basis for the accounts, it seems to me that the evidence does not justify the expense of further proceedings before the referee concerning that or other matters. First, the fact that the MYOB records that were produced were contemporaneous records supports their reliability as a basis of the accounts; second, the referee's ability to verify many of the entries against other records also supports their reliability; third, there is no evidence that other records now exist that would allow the referee or the Court to form a different view from that which the referee has taken; and, fourth, it does not seem to me that transactions recorded in contemporaneous MYOB records could be disregarded simply because other primary records do not exist, many years later, to support them. It also seems to me that it would be inappropriate to return the matter to the referee in circumstances that the issue which Dominic and
Lillian seek to agitate as to the adequacy of supporting documents was largely raised by them before him only tangentially, in attacking the propriety of transactions as distinct from their existence.
In summary, it seems to me that the referee's report addresses the question that the orders made by Bergin CJ in Eq on 14 June 2011, as amended by my order made on 5 April 2012, required him to address. In my view the Court should adopt that report in full. It should not, as Dominic and Lillian contend, limit the effect of that report to be a statement of accounts provided by the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants, because that report reflects the application of the referee's expertise to the matters which he was asked to consider, notwithstanding that the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants have adopted its findings. The adoption of that report, in accordance with its terms, does not preclude Dominic and Lillian from addressing issues that were not within the scope of the reference and have not been determined by the referee, and in particular any contention that particular transactions were unlawful. That report does, however, determine the proper content of the accounts of the trusts, so far as the matters agitated before the referee and Dominic and Lillian are not now free to agitate before the Court matters that they could have agitated before the referee but chose not to agitate before him.

Cross-Claimants' application for leave to file Further Amended Cross-Claim and Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants' strike-out application in respect of
Amended Cross-Claim
The AXC sought relief in some 27 paragraphs and contained pleadings and particulars over 47 paragraphs, although some of those paragraphs contain numerous subparagraphs; for example, paragraph 11 contained 213 subparagraphs. By Notice of Motion filed on 10 May 2013, Dominic and Lillian seek orders, inter alia, that they be given leave to file and serve a Further Amended Cross-Claim ("FAXC") in a form served on the Cross-Defendants on 16 April 2013. The proposed FAXC seeks broadly corresponding relief to the AXC and some additional relief, and the pleading and particulars extend over some 353 paragraphs over 94 pages. It will be necessary to refer to both forms of the Cross-Claim, so far as the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants seek to strike out the existing AXC and resist leave to file the proposed FAXC.
By Amended Notice of Motion filed on 14 June 2013, the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants conversely sought orders refusing leave to Dominic and Lillian to file and serve the proposed FAXC and that the existing AXC be struck out. Alternatively they sought orders that, should Dominic and Lillian be granted leave to file the proposed FAXC, it should not include a large number of specified paragraphs and an order or declaration that, as a result of a deletion of those paragraphs, Dominic and Lillian were not entitled to the relief claimed by them in specified paragraphs of the proposed FAXC. In oral submissions the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants confirmed that, as an alternative to their submission that the entire AXC should be struck out, they sought orders that the particular paragraphs of the AXC addressed in submissions and argument should be struck out.
I should first say something as to the approach to be adopted in determining the adequacy of the pleading in the AXC and the proposed FAXC. The parties paid little attention to that matter in submissions but the relevant principles are well established and did not require extensive submissions on their part. The role of pleadings includes to define the issues in the proceedings and provide the basis upon which evidence may be ruled admissible or inadmissible at trial upon the ground of relevance: Dare versus Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 658] at 142-143, Hodgson JA (with whom Mason P and Handley JA agreed) in turn referred to: "The requirement for a pleading to state material facts which is to be found in the Rules includes the cause or causes of action which are relied upon.
Materiality of facts means how those facts are material to a cause of action."
In Gunns Ltd versus Marr <case> at <case>, in a passage subsequently approved by Garling J in Young versus Hones  <case> at <case>, Bongiorno J observed that: "Not only must the pleading inform the defendants of the case they must meet now, but it must clearly set out the facts which the plaintiffs must assert to make good their claim with sufficient particularity to enable any eventual trial to be conducted fairly to all parties. Vague allegations on very significant matters may conceal claims which are merely speculative. If this be not the case, the plaintiffs must put their allegations clearly."
In Downer Connect Pty Ltd versus McConnell Dowell Constructors (Aust) Pty Ltd  <case> at <case>- <case>, Harper J (as he then was) observed that "one of the primary purposes [of pleadings] is to reveal to the opposite party how the party pleading puts its case", and then dealt with a common response to criticism of a pleading: "A complaint that the pleadings do not achieve this end is often met with the response that the opposite party knows very well, from documents and perhaps other sources, what the case against it is. This is no answer at all, at least unless the relevant documents are properly incorporated into the pleading. It is, as a general proposition, true to say that each pleading should be sufficient in itself. And although an element in an adversarial process, pleadings are themselves intended to be the opposite of adversarial, at least to the extent that they must, if they are to perform one of their proper functions, inform the opposite party of the case that party will have to meet at trial.

But pleadings have another important audience: the Judge or Magistrate. In most cases, the opposite party will have the assistance of some knowledge of the factual background - some knowledge, in other words, of the facts against which the pleadings can be assessed. The tribunal of fact will never be in that position. The pleadings must therefore be drawn so as to allow the impartial and uninformed reader to know what the case is about. This end cannot be achieved unless the pleadings form a coherent narrative, of material fact, with the necessary detail included as particulars. They must be drawn with a careful eye to the evidence that will necessarily be called if the case is to be made out. If the party pleading does not have that evidence, then the case ought not go to trial. Indeed, it is generally true to say that it ought not to proceed beyond the point at which the party pleading appreciates, perhaps because the very act of pleading reveals it, that there is and will remain a gap in the evidence upon which the cause of action or defence is based and without which that cause of action or defence will fail." 
That passage was in turn approved by Ferguson J in Taylor versus Lederman &
Ors  <case> at <case>.
The relevant authorities were summarised in McGuirk versus University of New South Wales <case> at <case>- <case>, where Johnson J noted that the function of pleadings is to state with sufficient clarity the case that must be met by a defendant, and pleadings serve to define the issues for decision and ensure the basic requirement of procedural fairness that a party should have the opportunity of meeting the case against him or her, and that proper pleading is of fundamental importance in assisting courts to achieve the overriding purpose of facilitating the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings, as prescribed by [s 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) : McGuirk above at [21], [24]. 
UCPR r 14.28 permits the Court to order that the whole or any part of a pleading be struck out if the pleading, relevantly, has a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment or delay in the proceedings or is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court. The reference to "embarrassment" in this rule is to the concept described by Tamberlin J in Shelton versus National Roads & Motorists Assn Ltd  <case>; <case>, namely that: "Embarrassment in this context refers to a pleading that is susceptible to various meanings, or contains inconsistent allegations, or in which alternatives are confusingly intermixed, or in which irrelevant allegations are made that tend to increase expense. This is not an exhaustive list of situations in which a pleading may be embarrassing ..."
That observation was approved in McGuirk versus University of New South Wales above at [30], [33], where Johnson J noted that a pleading is embarrassing when it is unintelligible, ambiguous, vague or too general, so as to embarrass the opposite party who does not know what is alleged against him, or if the allegations are made at such a level of generality that the defendant does not know in advance the case he has to meet, and that the appropriate remedy in such a case is to strike out the pleading rather than to order the provision of particulars, as it is not the function of particulars to take the place of the necessary averments in a pleading. His Honour also observed (at [35]) that it is not the court's function to settle a party's pleading; the court is confined to the function of ensuring that pleadings are within the rules and fulfil the functions for which they exist; and the co-mingling of objectionable matter with other matter may lead to the conclusion that the pleading as a whole would tend to embarrass the fair trial of the action and ought to be struck out. It is also important to bear in mind the observation of the plurality of the High Court in Fortescue Metals Group Ltd versus Australian Securities & Investments Commission  <case>; <case> that: "The task of the pleader is to allege the facts said to constitute a cause of action or causes of action supporting claims for relief. Sometimes that task may require facts or characterisations of facts to be pleaded in the alternative. It does not extend to planting a forest of forensic contingencies and waiting until final address or perhaps even an appeal hearing to map a path through it."
In exercising the Court's power to strike out a pleading under UCPR r 14.28, or to decline leave to file a pleading, the Court must have regard to the role of pleadings and must give effect to the overriding purpose stated in [s 56(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) , namely "to facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the dispute or proceedings". [Section 58(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s58.html) requires the Court to act in accordance with the dictates of justice, and [s 58(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s58.html) requires that the overriding purpose specified in [s 56(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) be taken into account. 
I should also note a submission made by Dominic and Lillian that the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants should be criticised for the absence of a substantive previous response to the allegations against them. I reject that submission. First, Bergin CJ in Eq granted leave to Dominic and Lillian to file the AXC at the same time as referring the dispute as to the accounts of the trust to the referee and made no further directions for the filing of Defences by the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants at that time. Second, it is apparent that the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants have filed extensive submissions in the reference addressing the issues to be determined by the referee. Third, the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants are entitled to a proper articulation of the case they are required to meet before responding to it.

Pleading issues generally
I should first refer to several provisions of the relevant trust deeds on which the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants rely. Clause 14.4 of each trust deed permits the trustee to appoint and engage, inter alia: "Contractors and such other persons as may be necessary, usual or desirable for the purpose of exercising its powers and performing its obligations and all fees, charges and monies payable to any such person and all disbursements, expenses, duties and outgoings properly chargeable in respect thereof shall be paid from the Trust Fund." 
Clause 14.9 of the IMS trust deed in turn provides that: "The Trustee shall appoint Mr Michael Murr or a company of which he has a controlling interest (the Company) as the builder for each of the stages of the proposed development on terms and conditions outlined in the 'costs plus contract' issued by the Masters Builders Association, a copy of which is attached hereto and marked with the letter "A". ..." 
Clause 14.9 of the other trust deed provided that the trustee "shall appoint a company as the builder of the proposed development". Clause 14.10 of the Trust
Deed for the Gladstone Street Unit Trust permits the trustee to hold a fee of % of the gross realisable value of the sales of the residential units to be expended on certain matters.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants also rely on the powers conferred on the trustee under clause 15 of each trust deed, which relevantly provide that the trustee has all the powers over and in respect of the properties and assets constituting the trust fund that it could exercise if it were the absolute and beneficial owner of such properties and assets, including power to employ and pay for other persons to transact business or do any act required to be done in connection with the administration of the trust, including receipt or payment of money; power to do all things which the trustee could do if it were the absolute beneficial owner of the trust fund; and: "power to do all such things as are or may seem to the Trustee in its absolute discretion to be incidental or conducive to the furthering [of] the interests of the Unit Holder hereunder or any of them or to exercise by the Trustee of its powers hereunder or any of them or the performance of the trusts hereof of any of them." 
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants also rely on clause 17(b) of the trust deeds which provides for payment of the "costs, charges and expenses of establishing and administering the trust fund" as the trustee may in its absolute and unfettered discretion determine. The Cross-Defendants also rely on clauses .2 and 30.3 of the relevant trust deeds which specifically deal with related party transactions and contemplate, they contend, that Mr Murr's companies,
Homeline Constructions or Homeline Building would carry out the construction work.
Dominic and Lillian adopt a drafting technique throughout the AXC and the proposed FAXC of introducing pleaded allegations by the phrase "in the premises", which is presumably intended to indicate that the allegation is consequential upon other unidentified allegations elsewhere in the AXC and proposed FAXC. It is not necessary to determine whether the use of the phrase "in the premises" as an alternative to referring to pleaded facts or identified paragraphs elsewhere in a pleading is permissible within a relatively simple pleading, where the other party and the Court might be able to infer the factual basis of the allegation from its context. Given the length and complexity of this pleading, that form of pleading here does not identify the material facts relied upon for the allegation. I raised this matter with Mr Smallbone in the course of oral submissions and afforded Dominic and Lillian the opportunity to provide a schedule indicating the other paragraphs of the AXC and the FAXC that were intended by the various references to "in the premises", which they have now done. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants respond, with some force, that the clarification of this matter will provide more certainty to the pleading but does not address what they describe as its "disorganised and prolix" character. I will address more specific issues of that kind below.
The first reference to "in the premises" in the pleading occurs in paragraph 8.17 of the ASX and proposed FAXC, where the intended reference is to paragraphs 8, 8.4-8.7 and 8.15 and 8.16 of the ASX and FAXC. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants took no objection to these paragraphs, but paragraph 8.17 of the AXC and FAXC will need to be amended to identify the paragraphs to which it is intended to refer.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants contend that paragraph 9 of the AXC and the FAXC should not be permitted. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants initially contended that the issues raised in that paragraph, dealing with the acquisition, development and sale of trust properties by the IMS Unit Trust and the distribution of capital and income by the Trust to its unitholders are resolved by the referee's report. However, the referee's report, although adopted by the Court, does not determine Dominic and Lillian's challenge to the legal justification of payments to Homeline Constructions raised in paragraph 9 of the AXC and FAXC. I would not strike out that paragraph of the AXC or decline leave to file the FAXC on that basis.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants contend that paragraph 10 of the AXC and FAXC and its 51 sub-paragraphs should not be permitted. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants primarily focussed on that part of paragraph 10 and its subparagraphs that relate to an allegation of appropriation of $4 million, with reference to a resolution adopted by the unitholders of the IMS Unit trust on 28 April 1999 that IMS as trustee of that trust be authorised to purchase one or more construction sites in the Sydney metropolitan area during the period ending 30 April 2001 for a value not exceeding $4 million. Dominic and Lillian contend that the Hogben Street property was purchased in that manner. 
The Third-Eight Defendants devoted significant attention, in their written and oral submissions, to the proposition that the referee's report disposes of Dominic and Lillian's claim that an amount of $4 million was applied from the IMS Trust to fund the purchase of the Engadine property on behalf of Homeline. They draw attention to the referee's finding that IMS in fact purchased three sites after 20 April 1999 for close to $4 million, namely the Carlton project, Five Dock project and Engadine project (referee's report [15]-[17]). Mr Smallbone in turn points out that the referee's report records payments in excess of $4 million to Homeline Constructions as at December 1999. The referee in turn refers to that payment on page 12, item 100 of his report, where he notes that it is consistent with a variation letter by the lender, which Mr Smallbone points out is dated some 16 months earlier. This submission emphasises that the pleading of the payment of $4 million in the AXC and proposed FAXC does not clearly plead or particularise the manner in which that amount is alleged to have been paid, whether consistently with Mr Smallbone's submission or otherwise. However, it is sufficient to address that matter to note that a claim that is not pleaded or particularised by Dominic and Lillian would not be open to them.
In my view, several of the subparagraphs of paragraph 10 of the AXC should be struck out and the corresponding paragraphs in the FAXC not permitted on the narrower basis to which I now refer. Paragraphs 10.5-10.6 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraphs of the FAXC plead that Dominic does not know whether particular investments were made and paragraph 10.7 pleads that, if such an investment was made, IMS has failed to account for it and failed to account for its income and paragraph 10.8 pleads that, if it was not made, then IMS was in breach of its duty as trustee. No doubt, a party can plead alternative cases, including in some circumstances cases that depend upon alternative inferences that may be drawn from established facts. However, it does not seem to me that these pleadings contain an allegation of fact, in the alternative or otherwise. To the contrary, they acknowledge Dominic's lack of knowledge of the relevant facts, and then hypothesise the legal consequences of hypotheses as to what the relevant facts might be. Paragraphs 10.5-10.8 of the AXC should be struck out and the corresponding paragraphs of the FAXC should not be permitted.
Paragraphs 10.37 and 10.39 of the AXC and proposed FAXC similarly use the words "in the premises" as a form of indeterminate cross-reference. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that paragraph 10.37 is intended to cross-refer to paragraphs 8-8.21 and 10-10.36. This paragraph should be amended to make this clear, but will need to omit any cross-reference to paragraphs 10.5 and 10.8 and 10.32-10.33 of the AXC which will be struck out. That schedule also indicates that paragraph 10.39 is intended to refer to paragraphs 8-8.21, 10.9, 10.34-10.36 and 10.38. That paragraph should also be amended to make this clear.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants object to paragraph 10.40 of the AXC and the FAXC, which pleads that Homeline Constructions owed specified duties to IMS. Paragraph 10.41 of the AXC and the FAXC pleads a breach of those duties, by asserting that Homeline Construction acted to the negative of each of the pleaded duties. This is not a pleading of material facts; it is bare assertion of breach arising from an unidentified factual substratum. Paragraph 10.41 of the AXC should be struck out and paragraph 10.40 should be struck out since the pleading of duty has no relevance where there is no adequate pleading of breach. The corresponding paragraphs in the FAXC should not be permitted in their present form.
Paragraphs 10.47 and 10.48 of the AXC and proposed FAXC also use the words "in the premises" as a form of indeterminate cross-reference. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that paragraph 10.47 is intended to cross-refer to paragraphs 8-8.12, 8.15-8.20 and 10.42-10.46. That schedule also indicates that paragraph 10.48 is intended to refer to paragraphs 8-8.12, 8.15-8.20 and 10.42-10.47. These paragraphs should be amended to make this clear.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants contend that paragraphs 11.2-11.3 of and 11.12-11.14 of the AXC and FAXC should not be permitted. Paragraphs 11.2-11.3 relate to an allegation that IMS purchased five properties at Mill Street Carlton using accumulated profits of the IMS unit trust. Paragraphs 11.12-11.14 deal with an allegation that IMS made profits from the Mill Street project for which it failed to account to Dominic. While the relevant transactions are addressed in the referee's report, I do not consider that this provides sufficient basis to strike out these paragraphs for the reasons noted above in respect of paragraph 10 of the AXC and FAXC and its subparagraphs.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants contend that paragraphs 11.18-11.35 of the AXC and FAXC should not be permitted. Paragraph 11.33 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC contain a conclusory allegation that IMS received the proceeds of sale of two strata title units in a Harris Road project as agent for the venturers. The facts said to give rise to the asserted agency relationship are not identified. This paragraph of the AXC should be struck out and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC should not be permitted in its present form. No basis for striking out the wider range of paragraphs was established.
Paragraph 11.34 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the proposed FAXC pleads that "in the premises" IMS is liable to account to the venturers for its conduct of the venture as agent and for its transactions with the funds subscribed therefore and for the proceeds of sale of the two strata units that it retained and sold. The reference to "the premises" rather than to particular paragraphs did not identify the basis of the allegation. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to cross-refer to paragraphs 11.15-11.33. This paragraph should be amended to make this clear; however, the reference to paragraph 11.33 will have to be omitted where that paragraph will be struck out.
Paragraphs 11.41-11.42 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraphs of the proposed FAXC allege that IMS "failed to keep" records of certain matters. Paragraph 11.147 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the proposed FAXC similarly pleads that the Sixth Cross-Defendant, Pacificon Pty Limited ("Pacificon") "failed to keep" records of its transactions in respect of specified matters. These pleadings are ambiguous between on the one hand failing to bring such records into existence and on the other hand retaining them beyond the statutory period required for the maintenance of a company's financial records. It is not clear whether Dominic and Lillian intend more than the allegation, which may be correct but would be hardly surprising, that by the time the proceedings were filed many years after the relevant events, IMS and Pacificon had not retained all primary documents relating to several substantial construction projects. It seems to me that the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants are entitled to clarity as to whether the allegation is that they did not bring such records into existence or that they merely did not keep them until the date of commencement of the proceedings or something else. These paragraphs of the AXC should be struck out and the corresponding paragraph of the proposed FAXC should not be permitted.
Paragraph 11.48 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC pleads that: "In the alternative, no honest and reasonable person in the position of Murr as director of IMS and by reason thereof, Murr ought to have known of the terms of the Trust." 
This paragraph is incomprehensible and should be struck out and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC should not be permitted.
Paragraph 11.66 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC pleads that: "Before and after the de-registration of IMS, Murr and Luigi have withheld from Dominic and have suppressed the books and records of IMS, including primary and secondary accounting records, conveyancing files, settlement statements, bank statements, cheque directions, invoices, receipts, payment vouchers such as cheque butts, journals, ledgers and tax returns." 
A similar allegation is made in paragraph 11.163 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC that, before and after the deregistration of Pacificon, Murr "withheld from Dominic" and suppressed the books and records of Pacificon. It is unclear what is intended by the allegation of "suppression" of the books and records, which may be a superfluous repetition of the proposition that the documents have been withheld from Dominic or may be intended to imply some more sinister conduct such as the destruction of the documents. It seems to me that a pleading in this form does not give the
Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants notice of the allegations, which they are required to meet, and paragraphs 11.66 and 11.163 of the AXC should be struck out, and the corresponding paragraphs in the FAXC not permitted.
Paragraphs 11.55-11.70 of the ASX and FAXC plead that, at the time of IMS's deregistration, it held substantial assets as trustee of the IMS Unit Trust for which it had not accounted to Dominic. Paragraph 11.71 alleges that IMS purchased the Town Centre Engadine property for $915,000. Paragraphs 11.79-11.80 relate to an allegation that IMS has not accounted to Dominic in respect of transactions comprised in the purchase of the Engadine Town Centre and the transfer of that property to Pacificon. In paragraphs 11.98-11.114, Dominic and Lillian allege that Pacificon did not account to them for profits of sale of strata title units in the Engadine Town Centre project. Paragraph 11.100 pleads that the Cross-Claimants do not know the amount of those profits. Paragraphs 11.124-11.146 allege that Pacificon, in breach of its obligation as trustee of the Engadine Unit Trust, failed to render an accounting of its transactions to Dominic and Lillian. These matters are addressed in the referee's report. While that evidence may assist the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants, it does not seem to me to provide a proper basis for striking out the relevant paragraphs of the Cross-Claim.
Paragraph 11.112 of the AXC and proposed FAXC also uses the words "in the premises" as a form of indeterminate cross-reference. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that that paragraph is intended to cross-refer to a long list of paragraphs, namely paragraphs 11.72, 11.75, 11.77-11.79, 11.83, 11.87, 11.90, 11.92-11.94, and 11.110-11.111. This paragraph should be amended to make this clear. 
Paragraphs 17.4 and 18 of the AXC and proposed FAXC allege that the Seventh Cross-Defendant, MMAI Pty Limited ("MMAI") acquired 21 Hogben Street as trustee of the Hogben Unit Trust. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants contend that the referee concludes (referee's report [47(d)]) to the contrary, based on the accounting records. That question is not a matter determined by the accounts of the trusts although the referee's analysis of the accounting for the relevant transactions provide apparent support for that conclusion and may assist the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants at a final hearing. This does not warrant striking out these paragraphs.
Paragraph 18.3 of the AXC and FAXC pleads that the Hogben Street properties were acquired and developed by MMAI using in part funds or assets from the IMS Unit Trust and/or the Pacificon Unit Trust and/or the Engadine Unit Trust. That paragraph is particularised by the statement that: "The Cross-Claimants are unable to identify precisely which assets of the IMS
Unit Trust, the Pacificon Unit Trust or the Engadine Unit Trust were used because the Cross-Claimants have not received an accounting of the profits and transactions of those Trusts." 
Those particulars understate the position, since Dominic and Lillian do not identify any material facts to support this allegation. If they have a proper basis for the allegation, the material facts that support it should be identified. If they do not have a proper basis for it, it should not be made.
The paragraph should be struck out in the AXC and the corresponding paragraph in the FAXC should not be permitted.
Paragraph 18.8 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the ASX plead that "in the premises" (which are unidentified) each of Luigi, Murr, Badminton and MMAI is estopped from denying that Dominic is beneficially entitled to 50% of the interest of Badminton in the Hogben Street development. Paragraph 18.9 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph in the FAXC plead that "in the premises" Badminton held and holds its units in the Hogben Unit Trust on trust as to a 50% interest therein for Dominic. Paragraph 18.10 adopts the same phrase. Again, the reference to the "premises" prevents the Cross-Defendants or the Court identifying what factual matters are in fact relied upon for the allegation. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that these paragraphs are intended to cross-refer to paragraphs 13-18.7, 13-18.8 and 13-18.9 respectively. These paragraphs should be amended to make this clear, but will need to omit any reference to paragraph 18.3 of the AXC which will be struck out. 
Paragraph 27 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC pleads a conclusory allegation that Luigi was knowingly concerned in Badminton's breach of [s 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and is liable to Dominic for such breach by virtue of <case> of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). That paragraph does not identify the material facts said to underlie that allegation. It may be that the allegation is based on the pleaded relationship between Luigi and Badminton and nothing more; but if that is the case, the pleading should make that clear. This paragraph of the AXC should be struck out and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC not permitted. 
Paragraph 47 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC pleads that: "Murr has made various invalid attempts to invoke procedures for the compulsory valuation of units in the Glad Con Unit Trust, at the same time as he has caused Glad Con to refuse and fail to account, thereby preventing the
Cross-Claimants from exercising meaningful judgment as to such valuations or as to their rights in respect of such valuation." 
The pleading does not identify the relevant attempts to invoke the relevant procedures or the factual basis of their asserted invalidity. It should be struck out and the corresponding paragraph of the FAXC not permitted.

Proposed amendments in respect of Gladstone Street development
I now turn to the claim in respect of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust. Before doing so, I should note several terms of the relevant trust deed which are relevant to the pleading, and on which Homeline Building relies. The powers conferred on Glad Con as trustee of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust include to "apply any money for the time being forming part of the Trust Fund in erecting ... any building upon such land" (cl 14.2(c)) and in its absolute discretion to raise or borrow money and "to do all such other things as the Trustee could do if it was the absolute beneficial owner of the Trust Fund" (cl 14.2(s)). The trust deed also provides that Glad Con as trustee "shall appoint a company as the builder of the proposed development" (cl 14.9). The trust deed also provides that the trustee is not liable for any loss not attributable to dishonesty or the wilful commission of an act known by it to be a breach of trust and also provides that nothing in the trust deed shall prevent Glad Con or its statutory officers (namely Messrs Murr and Luigi) from contracting or entering into any contract or transaction whatsoever or from being interested in any such contract or transaction and none of them are liable to account to unitholders in respect of any such contract or transaction or for profits or benefits made or derived thereby or in connection therewith (cl 15.0). The trust deed also provides that the trustee and any member or statutory officer of it may exercise all powers and discretions given under the Trust Deed or by law to Glad Con as trustee "notwithstanding that it or he respectively may have a direct or other personal interest in the mode or result of exercising any such power or discretion" and a person so acting is not liable "to account to the Unit Holders or the Trustee for any remuneration or other benefits accruing therefrom" (cl 30.3). 
Paragraph 57 of the proposed FAXC pleads that Glad Con as trustee had "an equitable duty ... to act impartially between the beneficiaries of the Gladstone [Street] Unit Trust". That pleaded duty does not appear to be relevant to any alleged breach and leave should not be granted to include a paragraph in that form in the amended pleading.
Paragraph 59 of the proposed FAXC pleads that Glad Con as trustee of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust had: "a duty ... to refrain from acting or to take or confer a profit for itself or another person at the expense of the Gladstone [Street] Unit Trust".

It does not seem to me that it is open to Dominic and Lillian to plead an unqualified duty in a form that is plainly inconsistent with the terms of the trust deed. While that inconsistency could be raised by the trustee by way of defence, the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in dispute, particularly in a matter of this complexity, is not facilitated by Dominic and
Lillian pleading the FAXC in a manner which disregards the express terms of the trust deed and advancing a claim that would inevitably fail in the terms pleaded, then falling back to an unidentified alternative position at a hearing. Further, as Homeline Building points out, Glad Con's duty not to take a profit for itself does not arise, where the relevant dispute relates to a contract with a third party, Homeline Building, albeit that third party is associated with Mr Murr. Leave should not be granted to include a paragraph in this form in the amended pleading.
Paragraph 60 of the proposed FAXC pleads that Glad Con as trustee had "a fiduciary duty ... to refrain from making or conferring a profit by employing itself and its officers". Again, that pleading cannot stand in that unqualified form, which appears to be directly inconsistent with clause 30.3 of the relevant trust deed. The pleaded duty also seems to be irrelevant, where there is no suggestion that Glad Con as trustee employed either itself or its officers, as distinct from Homeline Building, in respect of the disputed activity. Leave should not be granted to include a paragraph in that form in the amended pleading.
Paragraph 61 of the proposed FAXC pleads that Glad Con had: "a fiduciary duty ... to refrain from entering into any transaction whereby its interest or the interests of its officers conflicted with the interests of its beneficiaries or with any of its duties to its beneficiaries".

Again, this pleading disregards the extent to which that duty was qualified by the terms of the trust deed, and it does not seem to me to facilitate the just, quick or cheap resolution of the real issues in dispute, or the identification of the case which Homeline Building has to meet, if Dominic and
Lillian are permitted to advance a claim that plainly could not succeed in the unqualified form pleaded.
Paragraphs 62-63 of the proposed FAXC plead statutory duties of Murr and Luigi in respect of their positions as directors of Glad Con. Those duties are owed in the ordinary course to the company and not to Dominic and Lillian and no facts are pleaded to change that position. Dominic and Lillian have not sought or obtained leave to bring proceedings in the name of Glad Con so as to assert any breach of that duty. Leave should not be granted to include paragraphs in that form in the amended pleading.
Paragraph 79 of the proposed FAXC contains an allegation that "in the premises" Homeline is liable to repay certain monies to the Gladstone Street Unit Trust. The use of the term "in the premises" again does not identify the particular matters relied upon to support this allegation. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 48-75 of the proposed FAXC. The paragraph would need to be amended to make this clear, if leave were granted to file the proposed FAXC.
Dominic and Lillian also plead in paragraph 80 of the proposed FAXC that Homeline Building converted the amount paid to it under the relevant contract, which was trust money, to its own use. Homeline Building contends that the claim for conversion of trust property, in respect of the payments made to Homeline Building to construct the units, is not properly arguable where the units were built and 18 of the 21 units were sold by Glad Con as trustee for over $7 million; Glad Con received rent on the remaining units; repaid third party borrowings and paid a substantial distribution of capital and surplus to unitholders. It seems to me that this pleading might well fail at a final hearing; however, if there were no other deficiencies with the proposed FAXC, that matter might not be sufficient to require that that pleading not be permitted at this stage.
Paragraph 85 of the proposed FAXC contains an allegation that "in the premises" Glad Con is accountable to the beneficiaries (who are not there identified) for the profits conferred on Homeline. The use of the term "in the premises" again does not identify the particular matters relied upon to support the allegation. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that these paragraphs are intended to refer to paragraphs 48-74 of the proposed FAXC. The paragraph would need to be amended to make this clear, if leave were granted to file the proposed FAXC.
Paragraphs 64, 66, 81, 92-94, 97, 99 and 109 of the proposed FAXC also contain pleadings that refer to an "alleged" building contract between Glad Con and Homeline Building was entered into and, in substance, seek to maintain a position that Dominic and Lillian do not admit the entry into that building contract. At the least, it seems to me that the pleading in this form would mean that it was not open to Dominic and Lillian to advance any affirmative case that the building contract had not been entered into or was not valid, not having pleaded any affirmative challenge to it. It is otherwise not necessary for me to address this complaint given the other findings that I have made in respect of the proposed FAXC. 
Paragraph 107 of the proposed FAXC contains an allegation that a third party, Mr Holt, is in relation to entities in which Mr Murr is directly or indirectly interested, accustomed to act at the direction of Murr. No material facts are pleaded to support that conclusory allegation. It should not be permitted in that form. 
Paragraph 128 of the proposed FAXC again uses the term "in the premises" and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 119-127. The paragraph would need to be amended to make this clear, if leave were granted to file the proposed FAXC.
Paragraphs 131-132 of the proposed FAXC plead that, "in the premises", Badminton is or ought still to be a unitholder in the Gladstone Street Unit Trust and is liable to repay an amount into the trust fund with compound interest. Given the length and complexity of this pleading, the use of the words "in the premises" does not disclose the factual basis of the allegations. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 119-128 of the proposed FAXC. The paragraph would need to be amended to make this clear, if leave were granted to file the proposed FAXC.
Paragraph 143 of the proposed FAXC pleads that, in undertaking certain steps, certain parties acted "on the conventional basis and understanding" that certain claims would not be made by Homeline against Glad Con. This allegation is conclusory in character and no material facts are pleaded to support the allegation that the parties in fact acted on the asserted basis or understanding. This paragraph should not be permitted in this form. Paragraph 144 is irrelevant, if paragraph 143 is not permitted, and paragraph 145 is consequential upon paragraph 143. Those paragraphs should also not be permitted.
Paragraphs 146-153 of the proposed FAXC allege that payments made to Mr Murr and his relations were not authorised by the terms of the trust deeds or made by Glad Con in breach of equitable and fiduciary duties. Paragraph 146 of the proposed FAXC seeks to introduce an allegation that Glad Con has made "many payments" to Murr or persons related to him or his relations, including RCA Pty Limited, including specified amounts. In my view, a pleading in this form is unsatisfactory, because it does not allow the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants to know the case that they have to meet or the Court to know the case it has to determine. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants and the Court are left to speculate who are the other persons, together with RCA Pty Limited ("RCA"), which are said to be related to Mr Murr, his relations, or possibly related to his relations, and the other unidentified amounts that are intended to be impugned and the Cross-Claimants are left free to change the content of either category at will. A paragraph in this form should not be permitted. Paragraphs 147-153 of the FAXC are consequential upon paragraph 146 and should not be permitted, where the paragraph that provides their basis may not be included. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants also rely on the discretionary powers given to the trustees by clause 14 of each Trust Deed, subject to a limited exception in clause 17(a) of the Trust Deed. It is not necessary to address this issue as these paragraphs should not be permitted on narrower grounds.
Paragraphs 156-157 of the proposed FAXC relate to the payment of certain legal costs. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants submit that the relevant costs related to these proceedings and were authorised under clause 14.10 of the Trust Deed for the Gladstone Street Unit Trust, and did not relate to costs of other proceedings in which the Court had made orders that Glad Con not be entitled to indemnity from the assets of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust. These matters may well be a factual answer to the relevant allegation at a final hearing but they do not provide a basis not to permit it.
Paragraph 162 of the proposed FAXC again uses the term "in the premises" and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 160-161. Paragraph 164 of the proposed FAXC also uses that term and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 154-163. Paragraph 169 of the proposed FAXC also uses that term and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 167-168. These paragraphs would need to be amended to make this clear, if leave were granted to file the proposed FAXC.
Paragraphs 173-174 of the proposed FAXC plead that: "[173] In the premises, by 1 July 1999, the cross-claimants were entitled to call for their proportionate share of: 
The profits of the Sutherland development derived during the financial year ended 30 June 1999; and 
The profits of the Sutherland development derived during the previous financial years which had not been applied to fund the purchase on the Linden
Street properties or the costs of construction at Linden Street.
 [174] By 1 July in each subsequent year, the cross-claimants were entitled to call for their proportionate share of the profits of the IMS Unit Trust derived during the financial year ending on the preceding 30 June." 
The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that the reference to "the premises" in paragraph 173 is intended to refer to paragraphs 167-172 of the proposed FAXC and this paragraph would need to be amended to make this clear, if leave were granted to file the proposed FAXC.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants point to the schedule to the referee's report dealing with the IMS Unit Trust, which suggests that there were no property sales and no profits for the relevant development prior to the financial year ended 30 June 1999. Again, this may provide an answer to the relevant allegation at a final hearing but it is not a reason to strike out that allegation. In submissions in reply, Dominic and Lillian contend that they do not need paragraph 173(b) of the proposed FAXC and do not otherwise respond to the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants of the paragraph. I will assume that sub-paragraph is not pressed.
Paragraphs 176-240 of the proposed FAXC relate to the alleged exclusion of Dominic from the Hogben Street development. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants rely on the fact that the accounts of the trusts as determined by the referee indicate that IMS as trustee of the IMS Unit Trust had in fact purchased other construction sites in Sydney during the period ending 30 April 2001 for not more than $4 million and, implicitly, that amount was therefore not expended in purchasing the Hogben Street site. Again, this finding may assist the Third-Eighth Defendants at a final hearing of the Cross-claim but does not warrant the striking out of these allegations.
Paragraph 181 of the proposed FAXC again uses the term "in the premises" and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 175-180. Paragraphs 188-191 of the proposed FAXC also uses that term and the schedule provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 167-177 and 182-187. These paragraphs would need to be amended to make this clear if leave were granted to file the proposed FAXC.
Paragraph 210 of the proposed FAXC pleads, again by reference to unidentified premises that: "In the premises, Murr and Luigi and each of them intended to deceive the cross-claimants into believing they were interested in the Hogben Street project, while excluding them from having any such interest." 
The schedule provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 167-177, 182-187 and 192-209. Paragraph 219 of the proposed FAXC again uses the term "in the premises" and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 167-218. These paragraphs would need to be amended to make this clear if leave were granted to file the proposed FAXC.
Paragraph 229 of the proposed FAXC pleads that Luigi owed an equitable or fiduciary obligation to disclose specified matters. So far as the positive obligation to make disclosure is alleged to be fiduciary in character, that allegation is inconsistent with authority that fiduciary duties are proscriptive not prescriptive in character and that there is no affirmative fiduciary obligation of disclosure. That principle has frequently been applied by courts at first instance: Fitzwood Pty Ltd versus Unique Goal Pty Ltd (in liq)  <case>; <case>- <case>. I would not therefore decline to permit that paragraph in an amendment on that basis, notwithstanding that the allegation might well fail at least at first instance. However, the material facts said to give rise to the pleaded obligation are not identified in the paragraph or by cross-reference, and I would not permit the paragraph on that basis. Paragraph 230 is an allegation of breach of the alleged obligation, and should not be permitted once the pleading as to the alleged obligation is not permitted. 
Paragraphs 234-235 of the proposed FAXC relate to a similarly pleaded equitable or fiduciary obligation of disclosure on the part of Mr Murr, again not supported by any identification of the material facts relied upon and a failure to disclose by Mr Murr and should not be permitted for the same reason.
Paragraph 238 of the proposed FAXC pleads that: "In the premises, the interest of each of the cross-defendants in the Hogben
Street properties and in the Hogben Street project is and all the profits thereof are, held upon trust for IMS." 
This paragraph again illustrates the vice in the use of the language "in the premises", which would have left the Cross-Defendants and the Court to speculate which of the previous 237 paragraphs in the previous 81 pages of the proposed FAXC comprised the basis of this allegation. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to cross-refer to paragraphs 167-237 of the proposed FAXC and the paragraph would need to be amended to make this clear, omitting otherwise objectionable paragraphs, if leave to file the proposed FAXC were otherwise granted.
Paragraph 241 of the proposed FAXC seeks to repeat numerous earlier paragraphs of the FAXC, namely paragraph 7.1, 8, 8.3, 8.8-8.9, 8.11, 8.13-8.17, 8.19, 8.21, 9.4, 11.4, 11.5, 11.21-11.22. This paragraph would not be permitted to the extent that it refers to other paragraphs that have not been permitted.
Paragraph 249 of the proposed FAXC contains an allegation that IMS has paid "various amounts" (which are unidentified) to Homeline Constructions in respect of claims for building work in respect of the Sutherland and Carlton developments; paragraph 263 makes the same allegation in respect of payments by IMS to Homeline in respect of the Five Dock development; and paragraph 275 pleads that IMS has made "many payments" to Badminton and to Murr or to persons related to Murr or his relations, including Peter L Murr and RCA, including specified amounts. Paragraph 275 also leaves open who are the unidentified persons related to Mr Murr or being his relations or persons related to his relations and what are the other unidentified amounts referred to by the paragraph. Paragraph 312 of the proposed FAXC similarly pleads "various amounts" (which are unidentified) paid to Homeline Building upon claims for building work in respect of the Engadine Unit Trust and Pacificon Unit Trust. These paragraphs should not be permitted without identification of the relevant payments and, where applicable, their alleged recipients. 
Paragraph 256 of the proposed FAXC again uses the phrase "in the premises" and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 241-255 of the proposed FAXC. Paragraph 261 of the proposed FAXC also uses that phrase and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 241-257 and 260. Paragraph 268 of the proposed FAXC also uses that phrase and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 241-248 and 263-267. Paragraph 273 of the proposed FAXC also uses that phrase and the schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that this paragraph is intended to refer to paragraphs 241-248 and 263-269. Paragraph 290 refers to paragraphs 7-8.21, 243-247, 274-283 and 292. Paragraphs 290, 295, 298, 316, 322, 338, 349 and 353 of the proposed FAXC also use the phrase "in the premises" and the schedule provided by Dominic and Lillian also indicates the paragraphs to which they are intended to refer. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants respond that the suggested cross-references in paragraphs 287 and 290 indicate the difficulty with the pleading, referring to paragraphs throughout the preceding 76 pages of the pleading. It is not necessary to address this contention given the other findings that I have reached. These paragraphs would at least need to be amended to make the relevant cross-references clear and to delete references to paragraphs that were not permitted, if leave were otherwise granted to file the proposed FAXC.
Paragraph 292 of the proposed FAXC repeats numerous paragraphs of the FAXC, namely paragraphs 11.78, 11.94-11.96, 11.115, 11.124, 11.127-11.128, 11.147-11.149. This paragraph would not be permitted to the extent that it refers to other paragraphs that have not been permitted.
Homeline Building also complains of a failure to specify dates or periods of time in the proposed FAXC, where it is contended that documents that would indicate the relevant matters were either held by Dominic and Lillian or had been made available for their inspection. It is not necessary to deal with this question given the conclusions that I reach in respect of other aspects of the proposed FAXC. Homeline Building also contends that the contract price between it and Glad Con was fair and reasonable, having regard to an estimate of the probable cost of the development prepared by quantity surveyors, which was provided to Murr and was consistent with the contract price. It seems to me that this would be a matter to be determined at a final hearing and I would not have held that it warranted refusing leave to file the proposed FAXC were it otherwise in proper form.

Allegations of dishonesty and knowing concern without identification of material facts
The AXC contains numerous allegations of dishonesty and of knowing assistance in a dishonest breach of trust, and those allegations have multiplied in the proposed FAXC. UCPR r 15.3 requires a pleading to give particulars of any fraud or breach of trust on which a party relies and UCPR r 15.4 requires a pleading that alleges a condition of mind (including fraudulent intention, but not including knowledge) to give particulars of the facts on which the party pleading relies. 
In Three Rivers DC versus Governor and Company of the Bank of England (No 3) <case>; <case> a unanimous Full Court (Emmett, Bennett and McKerracher JJ) observed that liability under the second limb of Barnes versus Addy requires that the person "has knowledge of a dishonest and fraudulent design on the part of a fiduciary and that person assists the fiduciary to carry out that design" with requisite knowledge. Their Honours observed that: "In order to succeed in a case based on the second limb, it must be established that the fiduciary embarked upon a dishonest and fraudulent design. It must also be established that the alleged assistor had knowledge, in one of the first four senses just described, of that dishonest and fraudulent design. While dishonest and fraudulent designs can include breaches of trust as well as breaches of fiduciary duty, any breach of trust or breach of fiduciary duty relied upon must be dishonest and fraudulent." 
Their Honours also held that a pleading should be struck out where the Cross-
Claimants had there failed to plead the key material facts as to the alleged assistor's knowledge of the relevant matters.
Paragraphs 10.32-10.33 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraphs of the proposed FAXC plead that Luigi and Murr were knowingly concerned in and assisted or induced a dishonest breach of trust by IMS. Each of these paragraphs is introduced by the phrase "in the premises" to which I have referred above and which is here presumably intended to indicate that somewhere else in the 60 pages of the AXC and the 94 pages and 353 paragraphs of the FAXC there are unidentified facts that are relied upon to support them. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that paragraph 10.32 is intended to cross-refer to paragraphs 5-8.21 and 10-10.31 and paragraph 10.33 is intended to refer to paragraphs 8-8.21 and 10-10.31. In my view, even with the cross-reference included, these paragraphs do not clearly identify the material facts relied on for the allegations of dishonesty or the allegation of knowing involvement, and they should be struck out and the corresponding paragraphs of the proposed FAXC not permitted.
Paragraphs 11.53-11.54 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraphs of the proposed FAXC plead that "in the premises" Luigi and Murr were dishonestly concerned in and dishonestly participated in causing IMS to dishonestly commit certain breaches of trust and failures to account. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicates that paragraph 11.53 is intended to cross-refer to paragraphs 5-8.21, 11.36-11.46, 11.49 and 11.51, and paragraph 11.54 is intended to refer to paragraphs 5, 7-8.21, 11.36-11.44, 11.47-11.48, 11.50 and 11.52. However, paragraphs 11.41-11.42 and 11.48 are to be struck out as noted above. In my view, even with the cross-references pleaded, these paragraphs do not adequately identify the facts alleged to give rise to the dishonesty.
Paragraphs 11.154-11.155 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraphs of the FAXC similarly plead that "in the premises" Luigi and Murr were knowingly concerned and dishonestly participated in causing Pacificon to commit specified breaches of trust and failures to account committed by it; no allegation is here pleaded that the relevant breaches of trust or failures to account were dishonest. The schedule subsequently provided by Dominic and Lillian indicate the paragraphs to which these paragraphs are intended to refer. In my view, these paragraphs do not clearly identify the facts alleged to give rise to the knowing involvement and should not be permitted in this form.
Paragraph 40 of the AXC and the corresponding paragraph of the proposed FAXC alleges that Mr Murr was "knowingly involved" in committing breaches of trust, without any identification of the facts relied upon for the assertion of knowledge, and also without any allegation of dishonesty in respect of the relevant breaches of trust. This paragraph should not be permitted in this form.
Paragraphs 76-77 of the proposed FAXC allege knowing concern and dishonest participation in a breach of equitable and fiduciary duties of Glad Con in causing a specified breach, again without identification of the material facts on which the allegation of knowledge or dishonesty is based. Paragraph 82 of the proposed FAXC contains an allegation of a breach committed by Glad Con "with the dishonest design" of assisting Murr and Homeline at the expense of Dominic and Lillian. The only matter relied on in that paragraph to support dishonesty is that the conduct occurred despite Dominic and Lillian's objection and that plainly is not sufficient to establish dishonesty. Paragraphs 83-84 of the proposed FAXC again contain allegations of knowing concern and dishonest participation in a breach of equitable or fiduciary duties by Murr or Luigi, without any identification of the material facts said to support that allegation. Paragraphs 90-91 of the proposed FAXC contain further allegations of knowing concern and dishonest participation in a breach by Murr and Luigi, again without identification of the material facts relied upon to support that allegation. 
Paragraph 133 of the proposed FAXC alleges that Glad Con acted with a "dishonest design" of benefiting Badminton and Luigi, and paragraphs 134-135 again plead knowing concern and dishonest participation on the part of Murr and Luigi without any identification of the factual matters relied upon for those allegations. Paragraph 148 of the proposed FAXC seeks to introduce a conclusory allegation of dishonesty on the part of Glad Con, with no factual basis for the allegation being identified; paragraphs 149 - 150 of the FAXC seek to introduce conclusory allegations of knowing concern and dishonesty on the part of Murr and Luigi again without any identification of the factual basis of those allegations. 
Paragraphs 221-222 of the proposed FAXC contain allegations of knowing concern and assistance for inducing IMS to dishonestly commit breaches of trust, and again do not identify the material facts relied upon to support those allegations. Paragraphs 224-225 appear to duplicate paragraphs 221-222. These paragraphs should not be permitted in this form.
Paragraphs 258-259 of the proposed FAXC allege knowing concern and dishonest participation on the part of Murr and Luigi, this time in respect of breaches alleged to have been committed by IMS, again without any identification of the material facts relied upon to support the allegation. Paragraphs 284-285 of the proposed FAXC contains further allegations of knowing concern and dishonest participation on the part of Murr and Luigi, also without identification of the material facts. Paragraph 318 of the proposed FAXC contains a claim for knowing concern and dishonest participation on the part of Murr, again without identification of the material facts on which it is based. Paragraph 320 contains a corresponding allegation of knowing concern and dishonest participation on the part of Luigi, again without identification of the material facts on which it is based. Paragraphs 335-336 and 351 fall within the same category.
In summary, the allegations to which I have referred above typically do not sufficiently identify the material facts relied on to support either the allegation of knowledge, or the allegation of concern, or the allegation of dishonesty. These paragraphs of the AXC should be struck out and the corresponding paragraphs in the proposed FAXC should not be permitted in their present form.

Outcome as to the AXC and the proposed FAXC
Many of the individual paragraphs in the proposed FAXC to which I have referred above are embarrassing and should individually not be permitted. However, I have reached the view that the proposed FAXC as a whole would tend in its present form to embarrass the fair trial of the action and would not advance the overriding purpose of facilitating the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings. For these reasons, I decline to grant leave to file the proposed FAXC. I will address a specific aspect of the proposed FAXC, in respect of the proposed joinder of an additional party, Homeline Building, and a proposed claim against it below. 
I have held that several paragraphs of the AXC should be struck out. I will hear the parties as to whether other paragraphs of the AXC should also be struck out consequential on this judgment, since there may be paragraphs that now cannot lead to any outcome given the other paragraphs that have been struck out and I have not undertaken a comprehensive review to identify those paragraphs. Subject to that matter, I will grant leave to the Cross-Claimants to file an amended pleading excising the paragraphs of the AXC which are to be struck out and inserting the cross-references in the form contained in their schedule in place of the reference to "in the premises". 
The Cross-Claimants have (with the exception of providing the schedule that I requested in the course of the hearing) not sought to amend the ASX or the FAXC to address the deficiencies that I have addressed above during the period since many of those issues were identified in the Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants' submissions and did not seek to do so at the hearing before me. Nonetheless, with some hesitation, I would permit them an opportunity further to amend the pleading to address those deficiencies within a relatively short time, if they seek to do so. However, they should be aware that, given the history of this matter and the burdens that it is imposing on the cross-defendants - particularly Luigi, who is self-represented - it does not seem to me that there would be any reason to give the Cross-Claimants more that one relatively short further opportunity to make amendments so as to properly plead the case they seek to advance in a manner that would be consistent with its just, quick and cheap determination.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants also seek an order or declaration that Dominic and Lillian are not entitled to the relief claimed in paragraphs 1-2, 4-23, and 24 of the AXC or proposed FAXC, by reason of the deletion of the paragraphs which they seek to have deleted from the AXC and proposed FAXC. I do not consider that such an order is necessary or appropriate. So far as the Cross-Claimants have not properly pleaded matters and the relevant pleadings have been struck out, and unless that is corrected in a further pleading, it is self-evident that those matters cannot support a claim for relief.
The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants contend that, if the Court grants leave to Dominic and Lillian to file a properly pleaded and particularised Further Amended Cross-Claim, such an order should be qualified by condition that they pay the Cross-Defendants' costs incurred in relation to the various Cross-Claims to date (including the costs of the reference), such costs to be assessed and payable forthwith. Any leave to file a Further Amended Cross-Claim must be subject to the usual order that the Cross-Claimants pay the costs thrown away, which should include costs incurred in respect of the previous Cross-Claims and the costs of this application, but I would not extend such an order to the costs of the reference. 
Motion in respect of Homeline Building
By their Notice of Motion filed on 10 May 2013, in addition to the application for leave to file the FAXC that I have determined above, Dominic and Lillian seek orders staying proceedings 2012/241942 in the Common Law Division ("Common Law proceedings") between Homeline Building as plaintiff and Glad Con as defendant and that Homeline Building be joined as Ninth Cross-Defendant to these proceedings. Homeline Building was the building contractor that undertook building works in respect of the Gladstone Street development undertaken by Glad Con as trustee of the Gladstone Street Trust. An undertaking was given by Homeline Building, when the matter was listed before me on 19 June 2013, not to take any steps or actions in the Common Law proceedings before this motion was heard. 
By its Statement of Claim filed in the Common Law proceedings, Homeline Building seeks damages against Glad Con, comprising an (alleged) outstanding balance claimed pursuant to the building contract of $770,000; interest on the outstanding balance calculated at 9% per annum in accordance with the building contract and costs. The claim relates to a building contract under which Glad Con retained Homeline Building to construct 24 home units at 24-30 Gladstone Street, Kogarah for a claimed contract price (subject to variations) of $3,884,600 inclusive of GST. Homeline Building pleads that it lodged progress claims with Glad Con pursuant to the building contract totalling $3,884,600 and that Glad Con paid only $3,114,600 in reduction of the progress claims, leaving an amount due and unpaid of $770,000 including GST. Homeline Building pleads that, on 1 August 2011, it wrote to Glad Con demanding payment of the outstanding balance of the contract price, together with interest accrued, and that Glad Con had failed to pay that amount. It is, obviously, somewhat outside the ordinary course of events that a claim was first made by Homeline Building in 2011 that appears to relate to progress claims made in April, July, August 2005 and December 2005, although it appears that some part of the delay may be explicable by deferred payment arrangements. 
Homeline Building acknowledges that there remain to be determined, following the referee's report, legal issues as to whether the Gladstone Street building contract was varied by Homeline Building and Glad Con so as to reduce the price under the Homeline Building contract so as not to require Glad Con to pay Homeline Building the additional amount of $770,000 claimed by Homeline Building; and whether Glad Con as trustee validly entered into the relevant building contract; and, if not, whether it has any liability to pay Homeline Building the amount of $770,000 claimed or interest at the contractual rate of 9%.
The first issue which arises is the basis on which Dominic and Lillian can bring a claim in respect of Homeline Building. There was a dispute between the parties as to whether Dominic and Lillian had a "right" to bring such proceedings in equity in the relevant circumstances, which does not need to be determined. The Court has a discretion, to be exercised in accordance with [ss 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html)-[58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s58.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), as to whether Dominic and Lillian should be permitted to bring a claim against Homeline Building since that claim can only be brought in these proceedings if the Court grants leave to file the proposed FAXC and to join Homeline Building as party to it notwithstanding the period for which the proceedings have already been on foot. In that sense, Dominic and Lillian plainly do not have any "right" to bring proceedings against Homeline Building in these proceedings.
Homeline Building points out that Dominic and Lillian are not parties to the building contract between Homeline Building and Glad Con as trustee of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust. Dominic and Lillian have not sought leave to bring proceedings on behalf of Glad Con under [s 237](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s237.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) and Mr Smallbone made clear in submissions that they do not seek to bring such a claim. Homeline Building recognises that a beneficiary may have standing to bring proceedings in respect of trust property, in some circumstances. In Jacobs Law of Trusts in Australia, 7th ed, the authors observe at [2303] that: "... Where a trustee refuses to institute proceedings against a debtor or to recover trust property, the beneficiary may wish to institute proceedings, either in the beneficiary's own name or in the name of the trustee. The rule here is that where relief is sought in the equitable jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court against a third party, a beneficiary may sue in his or her own name, joining as defendants the trustee and any other beneficiaries, but only where there are special circumstances. ... If the circumstances are not exceptional or special, the beneficiary's remedy is to sue the trustee for the execution of the Trust and then apply for the appointment of the receiver, and for leave to sue in the name of the trustee or of the receiver."
In Ramage versus Waclaw <case>- <case> per Leeming JA (with whom McColl JA and Sackville AJA agreed). Mr Svelha, who appears for Homeline Building, points out that the question whether Dominic and Lillian ought to be able to bring proceedings on behalf of Glad Con as trustee of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust needs to be determined in the context that they are a 20% unitholder in the trust, and the question whether such a claim should be permitted needs to be determined by reference to interests of unitholders as a whole and not only Dominic and Lillian.
Homeline Building rightly points out that Dominic and Lillian have neither sought to join all of the other beneficiaries of the Trust, which include, for example, Murr Alliance Pty Limited as trustee for the Murr Alliance Family Trust and RCA as trustee for the RCA Family Trust and Murr Group Pty Limited as trustee for the Murr Family Trust, which are not presently party to the proceedings. Even if an application had been made to join those parties to the proceedings, a significant question would have arisen as to whether that course would be consistent with the just, quick and cheap resolution of the matters in dispute, for the purposes of [s 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), where those parties have no other interest in the matters in issue in what are likely to be complex and lengthy proceedings, and where RCA is not, so far as the evidence goes, an entity controlled by Murr. 
Homeline Building also contends that there are numerous deficiencies in the pleading of the causes of action against Homeline Building, including misstatement of the duties owed by Glad Con as trustee of the Gladstone Street Trust; pleading dishonesty without a proper basis and without particularisation; pleading knowledge without identifying material facts and proper particularisation; failure to specify dates or periods of time; failure to plead the Gladstone Street Building Contract; and limitation issues with the proposed Cross-Claim. 
In particular Homeline Building points out that the proposed FAXC involves various allegations of dishonesty or lack of honesty on the part of Glad Con, in relation to the Gladstone Street Building Contract, including that Glad Con engaged in a "dishonest design of assisting Murr and Homeline Building" at the expense of Dominic and Lillian (proposed FAXC [75], [82], [117]); "acted with a dishonest design of assisting and shielding Homeline Building ... Murr and Luigi" (proposed FAXC [89]), and acted dishonestly in accepting in the reference that it owed $770,000 plus interest to Homeline (proposed FAXC [117]); Murr and Luigi as directors of Glad Con had "dishonestly participated in causing that breach to occur" (proposed FAXC [83]-[84], [90]-[91]); and Murr had also acted dishonestly in relation to the reference after Luigi's resignation as a director of Glad Con (proposed FAXC [118]). 
Homeline Building points out that, as I have noted above in respect of the proposed FAXC generally, Dominic and Lillian do not plead material facts to found the conclusory allegations of dishonesty or provide particulars of such dishonesty. Homeline Building also draws attention to the terms of the relevant trust deed and the width of the powers conferred on Glad Con as trustee. I have addressed these issues in dealing with the form of the proposed pleading above. 
Homeline Building also contends that the claim by Dominic and Lillian against it in relation to the Gladstone Street Building Contract was not commenced within 6 years of entry into the relevant building contract, or within 6 years of practical completion of the relevant property or, indeed, within 6 years of the bulk of the payments made by Glad Con as trustee of the Gladstone Street Trust to Homeline Building and that, to invoke the extended limitation period for fraud or a fraudulent breach of trust under [s 47(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s47.html) of the [Limitation Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) , Dominic and Lillian would need to establish a fraud of fraudulent breach of trust by Glad Con as trustee in entering into the Gladstone Street Building contract or in making the payments due under that contract. To the extent that allegations of dishonesty are made, and are necessary to give rise to an allegation of fraud so as to meet a limitations defence, they are not properly pleaded for the reasons noted above.
Homeline Building also points out, with considerable force, that it would be onerous and unfair for it to be joined to these proceedings which have been on foot for a number of years; where four of the five trusts in issue have nothing to do with it and where Dominic and Lillian seek to complain in these proceedings about the affairs of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust in respect of a wider range of matters other than the contract involving Homeline Building. 
It is ultimately not necessary or appropriate to determine whether, had the proposed FAXC been adequately pleaded, Dominic and Lillian would have been granted leave to bring it against Homeline Building, because the deficiencies I have referred to above are such that it is not properly pleaded. It is preferable that that question be determined in the context of a properly pleaded claim, if one is ultimately prepared, rather than in the abstract and without reference to the terms of a proper pleading. 
The next question is whether Homeline Building should be restrained from continuing the Common Law proceedings on Dominic and Lillian's application. Mr Smallbone contended that the Common Law proceedings should be stayed on the basis that, where a general administration is ordered in respect of a trust, actions at law should not proceed and such claims should be made in the administration proceedings. In McLean versus Burns Philp Trustee Co Pty Ltd [(1985) 2 NSWLR 623] at 635, Young J considered the circumstances in which orders for a general administration order can be made in respect of a trust and also pointed to the beneficiary's right to approach the Court for the appropriate order for performance of a trust, whether a specific order or a general decree. On the other hand, Mr Svelha submits that there should be no injunction restraining the Common Law proceedings brought by Homeline Building.
Mr Svehla contended that the principles on which Dominic and Lillian relied in respect of the administration of the trust reflected older authority in respect of deceased estates. I do not accept that submission. Mr Smallbone rightly responds that the decision in Burns Philp is authority that the equitable jurisdiction extends beyond deceased estates to trusts.
Mr Smallbone contends that Homeline Building's claim should now be brought forward in respect of the administration of the Gladstone Street Unit Trust, rather than as a separate claim against Glad Con. An immediate difficulty with that submission is that there is presently no administration of the trust; and Dominic's and Lillian's entitlement to any such administration would be a matter to be determined at the final hearing. Mr Smallbone contends that the Court should act to protect its jurisdiction, where Glad Con accepts that it owes the relevant amount to Homeline Building so that no-one but Dominic and Lillian dispute it, and contends that the Court's jurisdiction to determine the question in an administration suit will be defeated if the Common Law proceedings were allowed to mature to a judgment. Mr Smallbone contends that Dominic and Lillian may be prejudiced to the extent that Homeline Building can then execute against the assets of Glad Con or the Gladstone Street Unit Trust, pointing to the principle that the Court will not, in an administration suit, restrain execution of a judgment even if that judgment has not been enforced before a decree is made. 
It is also not necessary for me to decide, given the other findings that I have reached, whether an order could have been made on an interlocutory basis so as to protect the proceeds of an existing cross-claim against Homeline Building, possibly on the basis that an undertaking as to damages was required from Dominic and Lillian. Where I have held that significant parts of the AXC should be struck out and that leave should not be granted to file the FAXC, and where it may be some time before Dominic and Lillian prepare an adequate pleading if they are ultimately able to do so, it seems to me that there would be a considerable injustice to Homeline as plaintiff and Glad Con as defendant in the Common Law proceedings to delay the determination of the claims between them, for an indeterminate period, so as to allow Dominic and Lillian to put their pleading in order. 
Extension of time for objections, falsifications and surcharges
By orders made by consent on 7 May 2013, Dominic and Lillian were required to file and serve objections, falsifications and surcharges to the transactions dealt with in the schedules to the referee's report by 27 May 2013, and I directed that no further objections, falsifications or surcharges could be filed after that date without leave of the Court. I had suggested that course with a view to narrowing the issues in dispute if an accounting were ultimately to be ordered. I had anticipated that the number of transactions that were to be challenged by Dominic and Lillian might well have narrowed as a result of the submissions made by the parties before the referee and the referee's determination. It is now apparent that has not occurred, or at least has not occurred to a substantial extent.
Between 27 May 2013 and 31 May 2013, correspondence took place between the parties concerning the filing and serving of Dominic's and Lillian's objections, falsifications and surcharges. The objections served by Dominic and Lillian in respect of the IMS Unit Trust on 30 May 2013 included 1,021 objections and 68 surcharges, substantially exceeding the number of objections raised by Dominic and Lillian before the referee. By way of example, Dominic and Lillian's objections, falsifications and surcharges to the transactions in the IMS Unit Trust set out falsifications in relation to the IMS Unit Trust in Attachment 1 and surcharges in relation to the IMS Unit trust in Attachment 2. These falsifications related to over 1,000 items, on 11 bases, with many items being objected to on numerous alternative bases. This single set of falsifications in respect of one of the trusts in issue raised several thousand disputed issues including, for example, a challenge to a receipt of $2,300 by the trust on 30 June 1999 (which was by no means the lowest amount in dispute) which is sought to be falsified on eight grounds, namely that it was not admitted (apparently, notwithstanding the referee's report); its purpose was disputed; it was not authorised by the terms of the trust; it was in breach of the conflict rule; it was in breach of the profit rule; it was imprudent; it was not impartial; it was an unauthorised loan and proper records were not obtained or kept. A payment to AMI Insurance of $15.72 on 28 September 2000 is sought to be falsified on three grounds on the basis that it was not admitted (again, notwithstanding the referee's report); its purpose was disputed and proper records were not obtained or kept. A payment of $400 to RCA for bookkeeping on 29 March 2001 is sought to be falsified on nine grounds, namely waste; its purpose is disputed; the conflict rule; the profit rule; it was imprudent; it was not impartial; it was not authorised and proper records were not obtained or kept. The list of objections in respect of that trust comprises 68 items on various bases. 
On 31 May 2013, Dominic and Lillian served 870 objections and 16 surcharges in relation to the Hogben Unit Trust; on 3 June 2013 they served 302 objections in relation to the Engadine Unit Trust and 244 objections in relation to the Pacificon Unit Trust; and on 3 June 2013 they served 883 objections and 25 surcharges in relation to the Gladstone Street Unit Trust. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants point out that Dominic and Lillian have, in total, notified more than 3,420 objections, falsifications and surcharges for the five trusts, which they contend are not grouped in categories as my direction had required. To some extent, there is categorisation of the relevant claims, by the schedule to which I have referred above, although particular objections are in multiple categories. 
On 19 June 2013, I directed that submissions to be served by the Cross-Claimants should address the question of how their objections, falsifications and surcharges are to be addressed in a just, quick and cheap manner. Dominic and Lillian's submissions in reply identify the fact that certain of the claims, being those to related parties, can be categorised as payments to the builder, to Luigi's company, to Mr Murr and his various companies, to Peter El Murr and his companies, and as other payments to other Murr entities. That categorisation, which is not adopted in the objections and falsifications, does not substantially advance the question of how 3,420 objections and falsifications, each on multiple grounds, could be determined in a just, quick and cheap manner. Dominic and Lillian also acknowledge that particular objections may "stand or fall with the same objections to like payments" but the falsifications and objections are not structured in that manner. The Third-Eighth Cross-Defendants in turn contend that the preferable way forward is for the Cross-Claimants to prepare a properly pleaded and particularised Further Amended Cross-Claim treating each trust separately with properly particularised allegations against the Cross-Defendants, with each particularised allegation supported by reference to relevant accounting items under challenge, which should be categorised and listed collectively.
The purpose of my direction, to seek to narrow and clarify the issues in dispute if an accounting were ordered, has plainly not been achieved. The Court has now adopted a referee's report in respect of the five trusts, and the content of the objections, surcharges and falsifications that Dominic and Lillian seek to file appear to have no regard to the referee's findings that have now been adopted by the Court. It is common ground that the objections, surcharges and falsifications seek to raise numerous issues that were not raised before the referee, some of which appear to be legal issues that were not within the scope of the reference. Dominic and Lillian do not seek to distinguish, by the structure of their objections, surcharges and falsifications or in submissions before me, between matters not within the scope of the reference, matters already decided by the referee and sought to be reagitated and matters that were within the scope of the reference but were not raised within it. 
Dominic and Lillian filed the objections, surcharges and falsifications out of time, contrary to my direction and without leave of the Court. After I raised a concern with that course in further directions, Dominic and Lillian filed a notice of motion dated 19 June 2013 which seeks an order that an extension of time be granted nunc pro tunc, for the filing and service of their objections, falsifications and surcharges to the transactions dealt with in the schedules to the referee's report, until 30 May 2013 in respect of the IMS Unit Trust and until 4 June 2013 in respect of the Hogben, Pacificon, Engadine and Gladstone Street Unit Trusts. 
So far as the delay - which, of course, was relatively short - in filing the objections, falsifications and surcharges is concerned, Dominic and Lillian's solicitor gives evidence that Counsel was retained on behalf of Dominic and Lillian to prepare their objections, falsifications and surcharges to the transactions and that, when Dominic and Lillian consented to the orders made on 7 May 2013, they relied on Counsel's and the solicitor's advice as to the period of time which they estimated would be sufficient to prepare the objections, falsifications and surcharges. The solicitor also gives evidence that: "Our estimate proved to be inadequate because we under-estimated the time which would be required to fully consider the schedules to Dr Ferrier's report, the submissions made to Dr Ferrier in respect of the draft schedules prepared by him in relation to each trust, the submissions in reply, the terms of the cross-claim, the evidence adduced on behalf of the cross-claimants and the contentions which had then been notified by the cross-defendants as to the effect of the report of Dr Ferrier and then draft and review the objections, falsifications and surcharges."
The time taken to prepare the objections, falsifications and surcharges might well have been reduced had more attention been devoted to how these matters could be organised into categories (as my direction had required) or, consistent with [s 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) , to identify those issues which could realistically be determined in a cost-effective manner. In submissions in reply, Mr Smallbone submits that the matters which are addressed in the objections, surcharges and falsifications by attacks on numerous individual items, some of small value, could be approached by the determination of several wider issues. However, Dominic and Lillian did not in fact adopt that approach in their objections, surcharges and falsifications and do not now seek to amend the objections, surcharges and falsifications to do so. 
I have formed the view that I should nonetheless grant leave to Dominic and Lillian to file the objections, falsifications and surcharges in the form in which they seek to proceed with them, notwithstanding the concerns that I have expressed above. They will then be on the Court file so as to record the matters that Dominic and Lillian seek to have determined if an accounting is ordered in the traditional form at the final hearing. This course will not prevent the Cross-Defendants raising, prior to or at the final hearing, any issue as to abuse of process or case management arising from the manner in which those objections, falsifications and surcharges are presently structured, including whether they would reagitate accounting matters that have now been determined by the Court's adopting the referee's report or raise challenges to transactions that were within the scope of the reference but were not raised by Dominic and Lillian before the referee.
It would, of course, also be open to Dominic and Lillian to seek leave to file amended objections, falsifications and surcharges that are structured so as to identify matters to be determined in an efficient way, acknowledge the matters that have already been determined by the referee and exclude matters that were within the scope of the reference and were not raised before the referee when they had an opportunity to do so. It will be a matter for Dominic and Lillian and their legal advisers whether to take that course. If that course is to be taken, it would need to be taken promptly and may otherwise not be permitted. 
Next steps
Following the delivery of this judgment I will hear the parties with a view to directions which should be made so that the matter can be set down for hearing during the first half of 2014, whether on the basis of the existing Amended Cross-Claim (after excising the paragraphs that I have struck out and any further paragraphs that should be struck out in consequence) or any Further Amended Cross-Claim that Dominic and Lillian may seek and be granted leave to file. I will also hear the parties as to costs.
 * * * 
