

White and Another versus Kempsey Council [1996] NSWSC 131 (15 May 1996) 
WHITE AND ANOTHER versus KEMPSEY COUNCIL /96 
Wednesday 15 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs are the registered proprietors of two parcels of rural land situated on the western side of Five Day Creek which is situated near Kempsey. That creek follows a winding path, generally from north to south. The land in the district is generally mountainous, heavily timbered and sparsely populated. In time gone by the line of a road was "reserved" in that it was marked upon various maps and apparently dedicated for use as a road. In the jargon of this case that is the Reserved Road. A road has, in fact, been used, which does not accurately follow the line of the Reserved Road. That has been called the Made Road. Sometimes it coincides with the line of the Reserved Road and sometimes it is quite some distance way. The Reserved Road crosses the creek from time to time but a large part of the Made Road is entirely situated on the western side of the creek.

The plaintiffs and the defendant council have been engaged in discourse or argument for some years as to whether a public road should be constructed and, if so, just where. One element of the debate seems to have been that the occupier of the land which separates the plaintiffs' two parcels has had some difficulty obtaining access to her land arising, perhaps, from her relationship with the plaintiffs, perhaps from other matters. In any event, that factor seems to have something to do with a public debate concerning the construction of the proposed road. There seems to have been a measure of debate on a political level within the district for some time.

The plaintiffs are entirely opposed to the proposed road being constructed upon their land at all. Part of the Reserved Road is on their land and part of the Made Road is on their land. The present litigation arises because the council now proposes to compulsorily acquire certain land from the plaintiffs, that is to say, a narrow strip of land upon which the council proposes to build the new road. The strip of land proposed to be compulsorily acquired is, needless to say, different to the strip of land constituted by the Reserved
Road. The defendant council has recently taken steps, pursuant to the [Land
Acquisition (Just Terms Compensation) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/), with a view to compulsorily acquiring this strip of land crossing the plaintiffs' property.

The plaintiffs now seek an interlocutory injunction restraining the defendant from completing that compulsory acquisition process, in particular, by taking necessary steps to have a particular matter appear in the Gazette.

Within the meaning of the statute the defendant is an authority of the state.
It has given to the plaintiffs a particular notice as required by [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/index.html#p2) of the Act.
 [S13(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/s13.html) of the Act provides that the proposed acquisition notice must be given at least 90 days before the land is compulsorily acquired.
 [S14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/s14.html) provides: "(1) As soon as practicable after the expiration of the minimum period of notice of a proposed compulsory acquisition, the authority of the 
State must: acquire the land by compulsory process or by agreement; or withdraw the proposed acquisition notice.

The proposed acquisition notice is taken to have been withdrawn if the authority of the State has not acquired the land or withdrawn the proposed acquisition notice: except as provided by paragraph (b)- within 120 days after it gave that notice; or within such longer period as that authority and the owner of the land have agreed to in writing; 
If the proposed acquisition notice is withdrawn or taken to have been withdrawn, the authority of the state may not give a further proposed acquisition notice in respect of the land within 12 months after the date of withdrawal unless the Minister responsible for that authority is satisfied that in the circumstances of the case a further notice within that period is justified." [S15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/s15.html) provides that a proposed acquisition notice of the kind now under consideration must answer various descriptions. Subs(d) provides a notice must specify a period within which the land will be compulsorily acquired. The plaintiffs' first contention is that the notice which was given does not comply with [s15(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/s15.html) and therefore that the whole compulsory acquisition process is defective and the injunction should be granted upon that basis alone.

The notice which the defendant gave to the plaintiffs said in part: "The Kempsey Council intends to compulsorily acquire this land by acquisition notice published in the Government Gazette. This notice will appear in the
Government Gazette not less than 90 days after the giving of this notice unless the land is acquired by the Kempsey Council prior to that date of negotiated purchase." 
It went on to deal with other matters. The notice was dated 1 February 1996.

It seems to me that a notice in that form answers the description of [s15(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/s15.html) which gave to the plaintiffs the necessary 90 days notice and it specified the period within which the land will be compulsorily acquired. It specified that it would be done by a notice given not less than 90 days after giving the firstnotice. The contrary view seems to require that a notice must say at least 90 days in advance that the notice in the Gazette will appear on a particular day. That does not seem to me to be a sensible construction of the statute, particularly given the provisions of [s14.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/s14.html)
I, therefore, am of the view that the first ground taken by the plaintiffs fails.

The plaintiffs put an alternative case which I will summarise by saying that according to the plaintiffs the decision of the defendant to locate the proposed road along the strip of land in question was not a decision made in good faith, and that the decision necessarily involves the conclusion that the construction of the road and the subsequent maintenance and use of it would involve the defendant committing the tort of nuisance. The matter was put in a variety of ways. Most of the submissions depended upon the conclusion that the evidence demonstrates that the construction of the road and its subsequent maintenance and use would involve the commission of a nuisance. The argument depends, in part, on the view that according to the plaintiffs the defendant could construct another road which runs, at least in the relevant section, entirely upon the eastern side of Five Day Creek.

So far as I can tell, the prospects of the plaintiffs succeeding on this issue are extremely slender. The evidence in the plaintiffs' case does not, in my view, establish anything in the nature of a nuisance in the technical legal sense of that term. The argument seems to be founded upon a passage in a letter which the defendant wrote to the plaintiffs' solicitors on 16 December , in which the defendant council quoted a resolution it has passed. That resolution said in part: "2. That Council advise the solicitors that Council is still prepared to examine the alternatives in the vicinity of Mr White's residence to reduce the nuisance of traffic in relation to that residence." 
As I read that letter, particularly bearing in mind the context in which it is written, the resolution of the council used the word 'nuisance' in its ordinary or dictionary sense, and not in a technical legal sense. All human intercourse involves disadvantage to others in some ways, often noise. No doubt if a road is constructed near the plaintiffs' house it will involve some disadvantage to the plaintiffs. However, to say that that disadvantage or those disadvantages will necessarily constitute the tort of nuisance seems to me, in the circumstances of this case, to require a giant step which is just not justified by the evidence.

Mr White does not say anything to the contrary in his affidavit except to the extent that he annexes correspondence and other documents. The plaintiffs point to various snippets of evidence extracted from the defendant's affidavits. The supposed nuisance is said to be constituted of dust and noise.
The proposed road in question will be situated in a very isolated area. It will, presumably, provide access to various neighbours of the plaintiffs. If one looks at the exhibits, and perhaps the most helpful one is Exhibit 2, those neighbours are very few in number. The proposed road will apparently also provide access to a national park, although there are other means of access to that, it will provide an alternative route to other places.

It must be borne in mind that the Reserved Road has existed, apparently for many years, and the Made Road for at least 40 years, probably a little longer.
In the past the made road has been used by timber jinkers, but apparently that is not a present use. It is suggested that that kind of use might be renewed in the future. I do not think the evidence supports that but I am prepared to make that assumption.

The plaintiffs' primary contention seems to be that what the defendant proposes will necessarily constitute a nuisance. For the reasons I have mentioned I do not think it will. It might constitute some disadvantage, but I think that this is all that can possibly be said. The level of the disadvantage seems to be slight and seems to be no more than would be suffered by the occupant of a property adjacent to a rural road.

The one factor which is difficult about this case is that the proposed site of the road will be quite close to the plaintiffs' house and will separate it from one of the out-buildings used by the plaintiffs in farming and/or grazing activities. At one stage the defendant offered to relocate the road so as to avoid that detriment. The plaintiffs, or at least Mr White, refused that. I can only suggest to the parties that the defendant's suggestion looks like a very good idea from everyone's point of view. I do not say anything intending to force either party to make any decision that he or they or it does not wish to make. It just seems like a good idea, as it apparently seemed to the defendant's contract surveyor to be a good idea some time ago.

The plaintiffs also suggest that the decision of the council has been made in bad faith. That submission appears to rest, so far as I can tell, almost entirely upon the conversation between Mr White and the plaintiffs' contract surveyor. The surveyor denies the conversation. On an interlocutory application like this I cannot hope to resolve such a disputed question of fact, but it seems wholly unlikely that the surveyor had the authority of the defendant to make such a statement, and on what evidence there is it would be quite surprising if the Council or any of its officers did have the motive attributed to it by Mr White.

There seems to have been a great deal of ill feeling between Mr White and the
Council or at least one of its officers. Again, I cannot hope to resolve that dispute today. I only record my view the present evidence shows that the plaintiffs' prospects of success seem to be quite slight.

It was said that the proposed road does not go anywhere. This is just not right, on the evidence. It will go more or less from the same place and to the same place as both the Made Road and the Reserved Road. So far as I can see,in the foreseeable future, it is not likely to carry very much traffic at all. It has been suggested on the plaintiffs' behalf that the dialogue between the plaintiffs' solicitors on the one hand and the Council on the other hand has not been carried out in good faith. I do not think the plaintiffs' chances of succeeding on the matter are very great. The disadvantages to the plaintiff seem to be quite slight, so far as I can tell, and will be able to be ameliorated by granting appropriate compensation under the statute or by an award of damages, if the plsintiffs succeed.

I dismiss the application for an injunction, with costs.
 * * * 
