

Baldwin versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia [1996] NSWSC 300 (26 July 1996) 
BALDWIN versus COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA /95 
WEDNESDAY 24 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under section 145 of the [District Court Act 1973](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) to transfer proceedings which are pending in that Court to this Court. The proceedings were commenced in the District Court on 29 May 1995 and in fact came on for hearing before that Court on 3 July this year. On that day the defendant in the District Court, who is one of the plaintiffs in this Court, unsuccessfully sought an adjournment but because that application was finalised about 3.30 in the afternoon the matter was stood over to the next day. The District Court judge the next day, because there was some illness in the camp of the defendant in that Court, adjourned the matter and fixed it for hearing tomorrow, Thursday 25 July and Friday 26 July 1996.

The opposing party, which I will just refer to as the bank, says that it only consented to that occurring on the basis that the hearing on 25 and 26 July was firm and irrevocable. There is some material from the defendant's camp in the District Court that if that was said it was said without instructions, but it matters very little because the learned District Court judge did in fact fix the case for tomorrow and Friday.

The evidence put on by the defendant in the District Court shows that he was aware for some time this year that it would be prudent to transfer the
District Court proceedings to this Court, amongst other things, to save costs.
However, he was financially embarrassed and was unable to put up sufficient moneys to have his former solicitor transfer the papers to his current solicitor so that the application could be made. No application was made to this Court for transfer before 3 July and, indeed, the application was only made after three o'clock this afternoon.

Although it is somewhat obscure, and Mr McCulloch, who appeared for the bank, may be correct, I will assume for the present application that Mr Carnovale's statement is correct that both this case and the District Court proceedings involve overlapping issues of fact and some similar issues.

Mr Carnovale for the defendant in the District Court, the plaintiff in this
Court, says that when that occurs the plaintiff in this Court is entitled to choose the higher court because it is obviously inappropriate two separate tribunals should be dealing with the same question of fact and inappropriate that issue estoppels will be created which will make the second set of proceedings more difficult to conduct. There is some force, of course, in what 
Mr Carnovale says, but that is only one of the factors that need to be taken into account.

It is quite clear from the authorities, for instance Ritchie versus Gumley [(1953) 55 SR 334], that whether an order will be made under section 145 is a matter for discretion and the Supreme Court may remove District Court proceedings into this Court whenever it considers it appropriate or desirable to do so.

In the 1950's and 1960's the culture grew up of making sure that where there were property damage proceedings in the District Court and personal injury proceedings in the Supreme Court arising out of the same accident, that the
District Court proceedings were transferred to the Supreme Court almost as of right or, alternatively, the District Court proceedings were stayed until the
Supreme Court proceedings were heard. This was mainly because the judges of that generation thought that there should be protection of the statutory fund administered by the Government Insurance Office against any deals being done by personal property insurers who may be involved on the defendant's side of the record in the District Court. I think that culture is now gone. I do not think that those cases would necessarily be decided in the same way in the 's as they were in the 1960's. I also believe that the underlying assumption made in those cases, that trial in the Supreme Court was a superior method to trial in the District Court, is also now gone. Indeed, it is common in both courts for questions of fact to be sent out to arbitrators or referees for decision.

I think today that the main factors that tend to show a matter should be transferred into the Supreme Court is that a very, very large amount of money is involved, or that the issues are extremely complex, or that questions of equitable rights and titles arise which would be dealt with by a judge who is part of a specialist division for those matters to be decided. In other cases it seems to me that in this day and age that where there is a question of fact to be tried, there is no preference between trial in the District Court or trial in the Supreme Court.

It seems to me that the issues in this case are mainly issues of fact which can be satisfactorily determined in the District Court. There may be some issue estoppel which will affect the Supreme Court litigation. That may mean that the Supreme Court litigation takes less time to hear or perhaps more time to hear, but I do not think that one can say very much about that one way or the other.

Superadded to all this is the fact that the matter can get on in the District
Court tomorrow, assuming there is a judge to try it, whereas in this Court the matter has not been set down for trial so that unless there is expedition the matter is unlikely to be reached this year. Furthermore, this application is made at three o'clock in the afternoon of the day before the matter is due to be heard in the District Court.

In my view, the factors against granting the application outweigh by far the factors in favour of granting it and, accordingly, the notice of motion for transfer is dismissed with costs.

I give liberty to apply for indemnity costs should the bank be so advised, but otherwise I make the ordinary order for costs.
 * * * 
