

Kitson and Anor. versus Goodge and Anor. [1997] NSWSC 119 (9 April 1997) 
KITSON & ANOR. V. GOODGE & ANOR.
 /96 
Wednesday 9th April 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By their Amended Summons in these proceedings, the plaintiffs seek in substance orders providing for the discharge of a mortgage dated 8th June 1995, given by the plaintiffs to the defendants as mortgagees. By their Amended Cross-Claim, the defendants seek possession of the land subject to this mortgage. However, it is common ground that both sides really seek a declaration as to what payment is now required from the plaintiffs to entitle them to a discharge of this mortgage. 
OUTLINE OF FACTS 
In about August or September 1989, the plaintiffs became the registered proprietors of the property Lot 2, Old South Road, Alymerton, N.S.W.; and on st September 1989, they executed declarations of trust to the effect that they held this property on trust for their parents, Warren Kitson and Patricia
Kitson, who I will call Mr. and Mrs. Kitson. It is alleged on behalf of the plaintiffs that Mr. and Mrs. Kitson provided the deposit for this property of $35,000.00 in about June 1989, and the balance of purchase money of $315,000.00 in about August 1989; so that the declarations of trust were not liable to ad valorem duty. However, the plaintiffs are unable to locate any copy of these declarations of trust showing that they have been stamped; and so far, the Commissioner of Stamp Duties has not been satisfied that ad valorem duty is not now payable on these declarations.

In about May 1995, Mr. and Mrs. Kitson decided to borrow $50,000.00 on the security of a second mortgage over this property.

By a letter dated 24th May 1995 addressed to Mr. and Mrs. Kitson and the plaintiffs, Mortgage Advance Securities Pty. Ltd. (which I will call the mortgage manager) offered a loan of $50,000.00 for six months, at an interest rate of 20% per annum plus 4% per annum management fee, payable monthly in advance. This letter provided for an application fee of $500.00, and for liability of the borrower for the lender's legal fees estimated at $550.00. It contained no reference to penalty interest.

On or about 8th June 1995, Mr. and Mrs. Kitson and the plaintiffs put their signatures to an acceptance of this offer, which also stated that the signatories "hereby charge my interest in the said security to secure any costs payable hereunder".

By a letter dated 6th June 1995, the lenders' solicitors advised the borrowers' solicitors that they required, among other things, photocopies of the declarations of trust which indicated that the declarations had been stamped. All of the other requirements of the lenders' solicitors, apart from this one, were satisfied by the borrowers. Among the documents executed by Mr.
and Mrs. Kitson and/or the plaintiffs were the following:
A consent of Mr. and Mrs. Kitson to the mortgage and a charge of their beneficial interest in the property, both dated 7th June 1995, and a guarantee of repayment of the loan dated 8th June 1995.
A [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) mortgage in favour of the defendants executed by the plaintiffs dated 8th June 1995. This acknowledged receipt of the principal sum of $50,000.00 and promised repayment on December 1995; but contained no promise to pay interest, or any quantification of interest.
A mortgage management agreement dated 8th June 1995 executed by the plaintiffs and by Mr. and Mrs. Kitson, a copy also being executed by the mortgage manager and the defendants. This provided inter alia for the payment of all interest and or principal to the mortgage manager; that it was to apply notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the letter offering the mortgage and other documents; that it was agreed by the defendants that any interest penalty should be the property of the mortgage manager; and, in a schedule, for a "high interest rate" of 28% per annum, a "lower interest rate" of 20% per annum, that the term of the loan was six months, and for a collection and management fee of 4% per annum.

Prior to settlement, the lenders' solicitors, Skinner Veneris & Co., agreed to accept an undertaking in lieu of copies of the declarations of trust showing payment of stamp duty. On or about 14th June 1995, Mr. and Mrs. Kitson and the plaintiffs signed a document addressed to the mortgage manager in the following terms: 
We hereby acknowledge that we have 14 days from day of settlement to have the Trust Deed stamped and returned to James Veneris of Skinner Veneris & Co.
 
If after the said 14 days the Trust Deed is not stamped, we will be deemed in default of the Mortgage and will be charged a daily penalty of 8% of the Loan Amount until such Trust Deed is stamped and returned.
 
Despite the reference to a daily penalty of 8%, it is not suggested by anyone that this provision should be read otherwise than as providing for a daily penalty at the rate of 8% per annum. 
According to Mrs. Kitson, after signing this acknowledgement, she tried to locate the original Trust Deeds, and ascertained that her solicitor at the time of the purchase had disappeared. She telephoned the mortgage manager on three occasions, in about late June 1995, about late July 1995, and about
August 1995. According to Mrs. Kitson, she spoke to Ms. Angela Busuttil on each occasion, and told her in effect that her solicitors were trying to track down records; and she was told to the effect that it was OK. On the third occasion, according to Mrs. Kitson, she told Ms. Busuttil that the purchase had been six years earlier, and Ms. Busuttil said words to the effect: "So long as you keep making your usual payments and are doing your best, you need not worry about the other. Everything is alright".

Ms. Busuttil says that she does not recall making that last statement, and does not believe she would have done so: she believed she had no authority to waive any requirement of a transaction.

In fact, a letter dated 13th October 1995 from the mortgage manager, signed by
Ms. Busuttil, which Mrs. Kitson says she did not receive until 22nd November , advised Mr. and Mrs. Kitson and the plaintiffs that an 8% daily rate had been debited to the loan account for the months of July, August and September (a total of $1,008.20), and would continue to be debited until the stamped
Trust Deed was provided.

By a letter dated 8th December 1995, the mortgage manager advised Mr. and Mrs.
Kitson and the plaintiffs that the mortgage was due to expire on 15th December , and that if it was not paid the loan would be rolled over, with a fee of $500.00. The letter stated that any arrears would also be rolled over.

With a view to paying out the loan on 14th June 1996, the plaintiffs' solicitors asked the mortgage manager for a pay-out figure, with a break-down of the elements of that figure. A letter dated 12th June 1996 from the mortgage manager advised a pay-out figure of $54,443.36, comprising principal of $50,000.00, penalty interest of $4,193.36, and settlement fees of $250.00.
The penalty interest was stated to be charged at the default rate of 8%, on the basis that the mortgagors had breached the settlement condition by not providing a stamped copy of the Trust Deed. The letter advised that the mortgage manager would attend settlement on confirmation that the full amount would be provided.

By a facsimile dated 13th June 1996, the plaintiffs' solicitors denied liability for penalty interest, and advised that they would attend the settlement with a bank cheque for $50,250.00. In fact, a bank cheque for $50,250.00 was available at the settlement notified to the mortgage manager, but there was no attendance there on behalf of the mortgage manager or the defendants.

I note that the mortgage manager's account for the plaintiffs, tendered in evidence in the case, suggests that $500.00 of the $4,193.36 was the rollover fee said to have arisen on 15th December 1995. However, no submission was made to the effect that this $500.00 was justified independently of the penalty interest; and even if that $500.00 were payable, it is my opinion that, having squarely based the pay-out claim on penalty interest, it would not now be open to the defendants to say that the tender was inadequate for this reason.

The defendants' solicitors subsequently wrote proposing that a discharge be given on the basis that the disputed interest be paid into an account, and the entitlement to that interest be referred to an independent expert such as a senior junior counsel, on terms to be agreed. However, that proposal was not accepted by the plaintiffs, and these proceedings were commenced. It is now claimed on behalf of the defendants that something like $80,000.00 is required to discharge the mortgage.

ISSUES 
The main issues argued before me were whether the acknowledgement involving 8% penalty interest gave rise to a contractual liability secured by the mortgage; and, if it did, whether such undertaking was void as a penalty. The plaintiffs also relied on the Contracts Review Act and waiver. There was also a question whether, assuming the tender made on behalf of the plaintiffs was sufficient, the plaintiffs were still liable to pay interest accruing after the date of the tender, and, if so, at what rate. The defendants also relied on the plaintiffs' refusal of the defendants' offer to discharge the mortgage, and have the question of entitlement to the disputed sum of around $4,000.00 separately determined.

The parties have provided detailed written submissions, which I will leave with the papers; and I will be brief in referring to their submissions.

WAS THE ACKNOWLEDGEMENT SECURED BY THE MORTGAGE? 
Mr. Brender for the plaintiffs submitted that, at most, the acknowledgement amounted to an agreement by the plaintiffs to pay certain sums to the mortgage manager; an agreement which did not benefit the mortgagees, and was not secured by the mortgage.

Mr. Charles for the defendants submitted that the rate of 8% referred to in the acknowledgement linked to the difference between the two rates of interest referred to in the mortgage management agreement; and the reference to being deemed to be in default of the mortgage made it clear that the acknowledgement did amend the mortgage and gave rise to an obligation which was secured by the mortgage.

In my opinion, the terms of the mortgage were contained in the registered mortgage and the mortgage management agreement. Although the registered document contained no express obligation to pay interest and no quantification of interest, the mortgage management agreement was sufficient to give rise to a secured obligation to pay interest at the rate of 20%. The reference in the mortgage management agreement to a "higher rate" of 28% was, in my opinion, ineffectual; because neither the mortgage itself nor the mortgage management agreement contained any provision determining when such higher rate would be payable. However, the mortgage management agreement did make it clear that any interest which might be payable, over and above the 20% interest, was to belong to the mortgage manager.

The acknowledgement signed by Mr. and Mrs. Kitson and the plaintiffs was addressed to the mortgage manager, and there is no indication on the face of it that the mortgagees were a party to it. The reference to being deemed to be in default under the mortgage is one indication that the acknowledgement was to affect the mortgage, and the acknowledgement was required by solicitors acting for the mortgagees (and the mortgage manager) as a condition of settlement; but by reason of the mortgage management agreement, any "daily penalty of 8%" would be payable to the mortgage manager, and would belong to the mortgage manager to the exclusion of the mortgagees. Since the obligation purportedly created by the acknowledgement did not benefit the mortgagees, and since the mortgagees were not expressed to be parties to it, I do not think it can be regarded as amending the mortgage and giving rise to an obligation secured by the mortgage.

The only other basis on which it might be thought that the obligation could be secured by the mortgage is the charge given in favour of the mortgage manager by the acceptance dated 8th June 1995 of the offer of the mortgage. However, that charge was only "to secure any costs payable hereunder"; and in my opinion, could not extend to the penalty of 8%.

For those reasons, even if the obligation to pay 8% is not void as a penalty, it was not secured by the mortgage; and accordingly, it did not give rise to a liability which could justify withholding a discharge of the mortgage.

PENALTY 
Mr. Brender submitted that this provision was in substance a punishment for non-observance of a contractual stipulation: it was not a genuine pre-estimate of loss. See Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. v. New Garage & Motor Co. <case>; [(1915)
AC 79],
O'Dea v. All States Leasing System <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 359.] 
Mr. Charles submitted that the provision was an incentive, not punishment: see
Acron Pacific v. Offshore Oil <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 514] at 520; David Securities v. Commonwealth Bank <case>; [(1990) 23 FCR 1] at 29-30. It was a legitimate interest of the mortgagees to have all security documents properly stamped: there was a risk that, if trust documents had not been stamped, there could be trusts of which the mortgagees would be considered to have notice, giving rise to the possibility of Bahr v.
Nicolay fraud. The provision of a copy of the Trust Deed showing stamping was specified as a requirement for settlement, and the mortgagors went ahead, giving the undertaking in lieu. There was no unconscionability in the transaction: the parties were represented by solicitors.

In my opinion, the acknowledgement must be read as a promise to provide copies of the declarations of trust showing stamping, with liability for liquidated amounts specified as the consequence of failure. No consideration was given by anyone as to what, if any, damage could flow from non-provision of the copies; and the amounts specified could not be considered genuine pre-estimates of any damage that might flow from the breach. Nor do I think this can be regarded as a case of a "withdrawal of a mere incentive" (Acron Pacific, 157 CLR at ), because without this undertaking there never was any obligation to pay interest at 28% per annum or to pay the penalty figure of 8%. The reference to withdrawal of an incentive was intended to apply to cases where an obligation to pay a larger amount is established otherwise, and a discount is provided for prompt payment.

Accordingly, in my opinion, the liability provided by this acknowledgement was a penalty, and therefore void.

OTHER ISSUES 
The plaintiffs also relied on the Contracts Review Act; but in my opinion, the only aspect of the contract which could be considered unjust or unfair was precisely that aspect which made it a penalty.

The plaintiffs also relied on waiver; but, even assuming waiver can operate entirely independently of estoppel, the statements relied on were not, in my opinion, sufficiently unequivocal to have the effect that any right to penalty interest was forever abandoned: any such right would have been revived, for the future at least, by the letter of 13th October 1995.

On the view which I have taken on the other issues, the amount of $50,250.00 should have been accepted by the defendants as sufficient for a discharge of the mortgage; and in my opinion, the bringing of the bank cheque to the settlement was, in the circumstances, a sufficient tender of that amount. The question then is, do the plaintiffs have to now pay interest since June 1996 in order to obtain a discharge of the mortgage? 
Mr. Charles submitted that, in order to avoid payment of interest after a tender was improperly refused, a mortgagor should set aside the sum tendered and keep it ready for payment at any time. It was unreasonable that a mortgagor should make full use of a mortgagee's money without paying any interest: Kinnaird v. Trollope [(1889) 42 Ch.D. 610]; Edmondson v. Copland [(1911) 2 Ch. 301]; Graham v. Seal [(1919) 38 LJ.Ch. 31]; Barratt v. Goff-Thomas [(1951) 2 TLR 106]; Gardiner v. Fitzgerald [(1962) Qd.R. 29.] Mr. Charles also relied on what he submitted was the unreasonable refusal of the plaintiffs to the defendants' offer to discharge the mortgage on payment by the plaintiffs of the disputed amount into an account.

In my opinion, the cases relied on for the defendants do not establish a fixed rule that interest continues to be payable at the mortgage rate if the sum tendered is not set aside for payment at any time. In my opinion, in a case such as the present, where the defendants' mortgage provided for interest at %, while the mortgage from which the plaintiffs were to obtain the funds to discharge the mortgage provided for interest at a rate of 9.45% per annum, the latter is the rate which the mortgagors should now pay as consideration for the continuing use which they have had of the mortgagees' money. The offer of finance in fact referred to a variable rate of 9.45% per annum, but so far as
I am aware, neither side led evidence of any variations; and accordingly, subject to further submissions, I would fix the rate at 9.45% per annum. There was evidence given by Mrs. Kitson that interest was in fact paid for the first three months of the proposed advance, and I would provide in my orders for a credit to be given to the plaintiffs of any interest proved to have been paid to the proposed incoming mortgagee in respect of any period following 14th
June 1995, on the sum of $50,250.00 which was available to discharge the mortgage in June 1996. Subject to that, the amount now required to discharge the mortgage is $50,250.00, plus interest on that amount calculated at 9.45% per annum.

I do not believe that the offer made by the defendants has any bearing on this question. It may have a bearing on costs, and I will hear submissions about costs after delivery of this judgment.
 * * * 
