

Robert John Downing versus WIN Television Pty Ltd (No 4) [2011] NSWSC (24 October 2011) 
Last Updated: 13 December 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Robert John Downing versus WIN Television Pty Ltd (No 4)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): October 2011  
Decision Date: October 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Ball J  
Decision: 
See paragraph 22 of this judgment.  
Catchwords: 
COSTS - general rule that costs follow the event - whether indemnity costs should be ordered -whether should depart from general rule - no issue of principle  
Legislation Cited: [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/)  
Cases Cited: 
Calderbank versus Calderbank <case> 
Turkmani versus Visvalingam (No 2) <case>  
Texts Cited: 
Category: 
Costs  
Parties: 
Robert John Downing (Plaintiff) 
WIN Television Pty Ltd (First Defendant) 
Prime Television Limited (Second Defendant) 
The State of New South Wales (Third Defendant)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
Mr R J Brender (Plaintiff) 
Mr G A Elliott (Plaintiff) 
Mr D R Stack (Defendants)  - Solicitors: 
Galland Elder Lulham Solicitors (Plaintiff) 
Thomson Lawyers (Defendants)  
File number(s): /253463  
Publication Restriction: 
EX TEMPORE JUDGMENT 
On 18 August 2011 I gave judgment in the matter in favour of the plaintiff for approximately $242,000. The only outstanding issue now is one of costs. The parties raised a number of issues to justify a departure in one way or another from the normal rule that the plaintiff should recover his costs, having been successful in the proceedings: see UCPR r 42.1. Those issues were: whether the plaintiff should obtain an order for costs having regard to
UCPR r 42.34; whether, because of the way in which the plaintiff has conducted the case and, in particular, the attitude he took to offers made by the defendants in , some special order for costs should be made; whether the plaintiff should obtain part of his costs on an indemnity basis from the dates on which he made offers of compromise, those dates being March 2011 and 27 May 2011, on the basis that he did better than those offers; whether the plaintiff's costs should be reduced because: he failed in his claim for exemplary damages; he failed to retain title to the television transmission tower which the first defendant had erected on his land he only recovered nominal damages in respect of the defendants' trespass on his land from 1 May 2008; of the way in which the damages hearing was conducted;
The plaintiff also raised the following questions: whether the costs of a mediation should be treated as costs of the proceedings; and whether there should be an order for interest on costs.

UCPR r 42.34 
The effect of UCPR r 42.34 is that, if a plaintiff in proceedings in the Supreme Court recovers less than $500,000, the court should not ordinarily make an award of costs in the plaintiff's favour unless the court is satisfied that the commencement and continuation of the proceedings in the Supreme Court rather than the District Court was warranted. 
I am satisfied that in this case that it was appropriate for these proceedings to be commenced and continued in this court. The defendants filed a cross-claim in which they raised a number of issues including rectification, specific performance and estoppel which could only have been dealt with in this court. Although Mr Stack, who appeared on behalf of the defendants, submitted that one of or the principal reason the defendants filed that cross-claim was in answer to the plaintiff's claim for exemplary damages, the cross-claim went further than that and I think the likelihood is that the cross-claim would have been filed whether or not the plaintiff made a claim for exemplary damages. Consequently, it would have been necessary to transfer the proceedings to this court in any event. 
In addition, I think there were a number of factual and legal matters relating to the question whether the first defendant had the benefit of an agreement for lease or licence of that part of the plaintiff's property that it occupied, and issues concerning trespass, which made it appropriate for the plaintiff to bring the claim in this court. 
Plaintiff's conduct of the proceedings 
The second issue raised by the defendants was the way in which the plaintiff conducted the proceedings and, in particular, the fact that the plaintiff did not accept reasonable offers made by the first defendant in 1999 which would have permitted the defendants to remain on the plaintiff's land and pay rent. As events have turned out, if the plaintiff had accepted the first defendant's last offer, he would have received more than he has recovered as a result of the judgment that he has obtained. 
Mr Stack does not say that the first defendant's offers should be treated as if they were offers of compromise to which the principles stated in Calderbank versus Calderbank  <case>: 
The question of whether a departure from the ordinary rule might be justified on this basis should, in my opinion, be approached having regard to the idea of fairness underlying the making of costs orders, which I expressed as follows in Commonwealth of Australia versus Gretton <case> at <case>: [121] In my opinion, underlying both the general rule that costs follow the event, and the qualifications to that rule, is the idea that costs should be paid in a way that is fair, having regard to what the court considers to be the responsibility of each party for the incurring of the costs. Costs follow the event generally because, if a plaintiff wins, the incurring of costs was the defendant's responsibility because the plaintiff was caused to incur costs by the defendant's failure otherwise to accord to the plaintiff that to which the plaintiff was entitled; while if a defendant wins, the defendant was caused to incur costs in resisting a claim for something to which the plaintiff was not entitled: cf Ohn versus Walton [(1995) 36 NSWLR 77] at 79 per
Gleeson CJ. Departures from the general rule that costs follow the event are broadly based on a similar approach.
In my opinion, little weight can be placed on what happened in 1999. It was always open to the plaintiff to insist that the defendants leave his land and that is ultimately what he did. The approach taken by the plaintiff may appear to be commercially unreasonable, but all he was doing was exercising a right that he was entitled to exercise. That is not a reason for reducing the costs to which he is otherwise entitled. Nor do I think it can be said that he took a wholly unrealistic approach to the damages that he was entitled to recover. 
Plaintiff's offers of compromise 
The next matter, raised by the plaintiff, was that he had made offers of compromise on 17 March 2011 and 27 May 2011. The plaintiff claims that he did better than those offers and that consequently he should be entitled to indemnity costs from the time the offers were made: UCPR r 42.14. It is important, however, to understand the context of the offers and to look at the substance of what happened. 
On 17 March 2011, the plaintiff made separate offers to settle with the first defendant for $200,000, the second defendant for $100,000 and the third defendant for $70,000. Similarly, on 27 May 2011, the plaintiff made separate offers to settle with the first defendant for $160,000, the second defendant for $80,000 and the third defendant for $60,000. 
The judgment I gave in this matter for approximately $242,000 was a judgment against the first defendant. However, that amount represented the damages that I considered were recoverable by the plaintiff from all defendants. During the hearing in relation to damages, I indicated that it seemed to me appropriate to give judgment against the first defendant alone since the second and third defendants were sublicensees who had been indemnified by the first defendant and I calculated damages by reference to the rent payable under a lease which gave the first defendant exclusive possession. I raised with counsel the question whether there was any reason why I should not adopt that approach. Although Mr Elliott, who appeared for the plaintiff, submitted that it would not be appropriate to give judgment for the total amount against the first defendant in circumstances where the first defendant did not or could not satisfy that judgment, he did not suggest that there would be cost consequences if I gave judgment in the form I proposed. 
Taking those matters into account, in my opinion, the only fair way of assessing the question whether the plaintiff did better than the offer he made is to look at the total amount of the offers and compare that with the judgment which was intended to cover the total damages payable by the defendants. Looked at in that way, the plaintiff did not do better than the offers that he made. 
For that reason, I have concluded that this is a case in which the court should not permit the plaintiff to recover costs on an indemnity basis from the time the offers were made even if, technically, it could be said that, as against the first defendant, he did better0 than the offer he made to that defendant. 
Should the plaintiff's costs be reduced? 
The next issue is whether the plaintiff's costs should be reduced to take into account the matters I have referred to. Those matters can be divided into two categories . The first is the failure of the plaintiff to obtain exemplary damages, to retain title to the tower and to recover more than nominal damages from 1 May 2008. The second is the way in which the plaintiff approached the hearing in relation to damages. 
In relation to the matters falling into the first group, Mr Stack submits that each of those matters should be seen as separate events for the purposes of the general principle that costs should follow the event and, since the plaintiff failed on those matters, the defendants should have their costs of those events. 
I do not accept that submission. In my opinion, the facts relating to the questions whether the plaintiff was entitled to recover exemplary damages, or to keep the tower, or recover more than nominal damages from 1 May 2008, were inextricably linked to the facts that were relevant to the question whether the plaintiff was entitled to claim damages from the defendants on the basis that the defendants were trespassers on his land. The plaintiff succeeded in relation to that issue and should have his costs concerning it. Those costs necessarily include the costs which were also relevant to the other issues that I have referred to. 
That leaves the costs of the damages hearing. I find this a more difficult issue. The damages hearing did not occur until several months after the hearing in relation to liability. The reason for the delay was that the plaintiff wanted to undertake what turned out to be detailed investigations in relation to comparable sites in order to determine what damages he should recover arising from the defendants' trespass. That was in circumstances where, as a consequence of what happened, the first defendant entered into a lease of land adjacent to the plaintiff's land to be used for the same purpose as it had used the plaintiff's land - that is, the erection of a television transmission tower. 
On the face of it, the lease of the adjacent land, assuming it was an arm's length one, was the best means by which to measure the plaintiff's damages. I think that the plaintiff was entitled to investigate the question whether the lease was truly an arm' <case> one and that, as part of that investigation, to look at some comparables to see whether those comparables suggested the amount that the first defendant was paying to the owner of the land next door was an arm's length amount. However, I am not satisfied that the plaintiff was entitled to undertake anything like the investigation that he did undertake. In addition, the plaintiff called expert evidence from Mr Paris, who gave evidence by reference to a large number of comparables, but more or less ignored the evidence relating to the lease that the first defendant had actually entered into of the adjacent land, although there was no suggestion that that lease was not at arm's length. 
In my opinion, that was an unreasonable approach for the plaintiff to take and he must bear some costs consequences as a result of taking that approach. I think it is appropriate to reduce the plaintiff's costs relating to the damages hearing by 40 percent to take account of those matters. In addition, the plaintiff should not be entitled to recover the costs of Mr Paris's report. 
Costs of the mediation 
The next issue which was raised by the plaintiff is whether he should be entitled as part of his costs to recover the costs of a failed mediation. That mediation was ordered by the court. Having regard to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Newcastle City Council versus Wieland  <case>, I think it is appropriate that the plaintiff's costs include the costs of the mediation. 
Interest on costs 
The last question is whether the plaintiff should be entitled to interest on costs. I cannot see any reason in this case why the plaintiff should not recover interest on costs. In my view, that interest should run from 28 days after the date on which the costs were actually paid. 
Orders 
The orders of the court are: 
Subject to order 2, the defendants pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings (including all reserved costs and the costs of the mediation) on the ordinary basis.

In relation to the costs of the hearing on 6 and 7 June 2011, together with work done in preparation for that hearing, the defendants pay 60 percent of the plaintiff's costs other than the costs of Mr Paris's report (which are to be borne by the plaintiff).

The defendants pay interest on the plaintiff's costs calculated from 28 days after that date on which those costs were actually paid.
 * * * 
