

Regina versus Justin Gregory Slattery [1996] NSWSC 638 (19 December 1996) 
REGINA versus Justin Gregory SLATTERY /96 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, STUDDERT J, SIMPSON J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), [s 52A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) - New offence of dangerous driving - maximum sentence 14 years in lieu of 5 years - existing sentence patterns to move in a sharply upwards manner.

RESULT: Appeal allowed 
The respondent to a Crown appeal pleaded guilty to two charges of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning death, an offence which has replaced the offence of culpable driving previously provided by [s 52A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). The maximum sentence for each of the offences to which he pleaded guilty is imprisonment for fourteen years, in lieu of the five years for the earlier offence of culpable driving. He was sentenced on each charge to concurrent fixed terms of imprisonment for three years to be served by way of periodic detention.
 
Held: (Allowing the Crown appeal) The action of the Legislature in almost tripling the maximum sentence for a particular type of offence must be taken by the courts as reflecting community standards in relation to the seriousness of those offences, and the courts are required to give effect to the obvious intention of the Legislature that the existing sentencing patterns are to move in a sharply upward manner.

Regina versus Tomi Petteri Hartikainen (CCA, 8 June 1993, unreported) applied 
Discussion of the relevance to sentencing for dangerous driving of considerations previously taken into account when sentencing for culpable driving.

Regina versus Patrick James Murnin (CCA, 16 August 1985, unreported); Regina v
MacIntyre [(1988) 38 A Crim R 135];
Regina versus John Rudolph Sadebath (CCA, 14 May 1992, unreported); Regina v
Hallocoglu [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67]; Regina v
Burnett & Ors [(1996) 85 A Crim R 76] discussed 
Regina versus English [(1995) 82 A Crim R 586] referred to 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: This is an appeal by the Crown against a sentence imposed upon the respondent (Justin Gregory Slattery) by Judge Johnston QC in the District Court on 16 August last.

The respondent pleaded guilty to two charges of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning death. He had earlier pleaded guilty in the Local Court. The circumstances in which the offences were committed may be stated briefly. On
Friday, 29 October 1995, the respondent had been drinking with friends on licensed premises for a period of approximately three hours. During that period, according to the estimate of one of his friends, the respondent consumed five or six schooners of VB (that is, full strength) beer. His blood alcohol reading was subsequently found to be 0.138, which would suggest that, with the effects of metabolism, he probably had consumed more than six schooners, but the appeal has proceeded upon the basis that the estimate should be accepted. Other than a packet of chips, no-one ate anything. They left the premises at about 9.00 pm.

The respondent was the driver of his vehicle, and three of his friends were passengers. Shortly before the accident, the respondent was driving at a speed of 115 kph in a 60 kph zone, despite a number of protests from his passengers.
When attempting to negotiate a slight righthand curve on a crest, the respondent's vehicle crossed partially onto the incorrect side of the roadway, across double unbroken separate lines. An Australia Post truck was travelling in the opposite direction, and saw the respondent's vehicle slew in front of him as it headed back to its correct side of the road.

It appears that at this stage the respondent lost control of his vehicle. It mounted the kerb and collided at high speed and side on with a timber power pole on the grass verge. The vehicle broke into two pieces, with the front portion continuing to travel for more than ninety metres in the direction in which the vehicle had been travelling. The rear portion came to rest adjacent to the power pole. The two passengers in the rear seat had been killed in the collision.

The offence of dangerous driving provided by [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) replaced the earlier offence of culpable driving. It came into operation on 23 December
The offence of culpable driving had two gradations of seriousness, depending upon whether the culpable driving occasioned grievous bodily harm or death. The offence of dangerous driving has four gradations of seriousness, in that each of those former gradations is now accompanied by an aggravated offence. Circumstances of aggravation include the offender having the prescribed content of alcohol in his blood and driving at a speed which exceeds the applicable speed limit by more than 45 kph. The most dramatic difference between the two offences of culpable and dangerous driving, and one which applies in the present case, is that the maximum sentence for aggravated dangerous driving occasioning death is imprisonment for fourteen years, compared to five years for culpable driving occasioning death.

In the present case, the circumstances of aggravation identified in the charges was travelling at a speed which exceeded the 60 kph speed limit applicable by more than 45 kph, but the fact that the respondent's blood alcohol content was almost three times the prescribed concentration could not be ignored. Nor could the fact that only a short time before this offence the respondent had appeared in court to answer a charge of driving with a low range prescribed concentration of alcohol in his blood, and he was on bail in relation to that charge at the time of the events with which this appeal is concerned. In addition, during the five years he had been licensed to drive a motor vehicle, the respondent had received five traffic infringement notices for exceeding the speed limit and had his licence cancelled at one stage because of the number of points which he had lost.

The judge (who is a very experienced sentencing judge)[1] imposed concurrent sentences on each of the two counts of a fixed term of imprisonment for three years to be served by way of periodic detention. He recognized that the accident was a very serious one which had taken the lives of two young men and which had been caused by a combination of excessive speed and alcohol. He rejected the Crown's submission that the serious nature of the offence called for the imposition of a full time custodial sentence because of what he fairly described as the powerful subjective case presented on behalf of the respondent.

The respondent is now twentyfour years of age. He resides with his family which the judge found to be stable and supportive. He is studying to be an accountant, and had been fully and usefully employed since leaving school and until the accident. A number of witnesses certified to his good character and to the high regard in which he is held by those who know him. He is regarded as a conscientious worker and an honest employee. He is known favourably by a number of police officers in his local area. (His low range PCA offence was subsequently found to be proved but, in accordance with <case>, no conviction was recorded.) He has an excellent sporting record, and he had worked for a number of years with an organization which provides and promotes sporting and recreational opportunities for those with developmental disabilities, having an interest in such persons arising out of the severe intellectual disability of his younger brother, whom he cares for in association with other members of the family.

The respondent was himself injured in the accident. He had three fractured ribs, a fractured vertebra and the injuries to his spleen required its removal. The respondent has no recollection of the accident, a fact which makes his pleas of guilty at the earliest opportunity all the more significant. The victims were close friends, and he had looked upon one of them as an older brother. The respondent suffered a severe emotional reaction to the loss of his friends as a result of his own actions and he received professional help in relation to his emotional state from a psychiatrist, a psychologist and a grief counsellor. He has been devastated by the consequences of his offence, and he has contemplated suicide. The judge accepted that his remorse and contrition was genuine and profound. The father of the victim who was his closest friend gave evidence that, whilst he accepted that the law must take its course, the respondent had always been welcome in his home and still was. The judge described this as the most significant evidence.

The judge said that sentencing in this type of case presents a particularly difficult task. Indeed it does. He referred to the frequency with which the courts were confronted with what he described as culpable driving offences where the offender has no previous criminal history and has led an exemplary and socially useful life. That was said in a context which makes it clear that he viewed the present case as falling within that category. There are, however, two points to be made in relation to that statement. First, the reference to culpable driving was wrong. This is not a culpable driving case; it is a dangerous driving case (and an aggravated one at that) and, as I have already pointed out, there is a very important difference. I shall have to refer later to the significance of that error. Secondly, whilst it can fairly be said that the respondent had led a socially useful life, was highly regarded and had no previous criminal convictions, it was not correct to describe him as having led an exemplary life - in the light of his driving record and of the fact that these present offences were committed whilst he was on bail for an earlier drink-driving offence.

But the task was still a difficult one. This Court has accepted that, so far as the old offence of culpable driving was concerned, there was no clear range of penalties to be imposed, and that it could not be said that in every case, or even in the ordinary case, a fulltime custodial sentence is usually imposed.[2] But it has also said, and said often, that there are a number of considerations which must be taken into account when sentencing for this type of offence. It is, it seems, necessary to repeat some of them once more for they are considerations which are also relevant to the offence of dangerous driving. In Regina versus Patrick James Murnin,3 Street CJ said this: "A motor vehicle is a potentially dangerous - indeed lethal - machine. Those who drive motor vehicles on public highways, as do the overwhelming majority of members of our community, must inevitably accept that if they drive those potentially lethal machines dangerously and occasion death or grievous bodily harm, then the criminal law will exact from them a penalty appropriate to the degree of criminality which the whole of the circumstances disclose. The
Legislature has always placed a premium upon human life and the taking of a human life by driving a vehicle dangerously is by virtue of this particular section to be regarded as a crime of some seriousness." 
That is even more significant in relation to the new offence of dangerous driving with its substantially higher maximum penalty.

It is important to emphasize that, as with culpable driving, the gravamen of the offence of dangerous driving occasioning death is not just the dangerous driving; it is the dangerous driving in association with the taking of a human life.[4] So significant is the loss of life that, where there is more than one human life taken, it is not obligatory for the judge to impose concurrent sentences.[5] 
Then there are two considerations which were relevant to the young driver of good character who caused death by culpable driving, and which are applicable also to dangerous driving. Such is the prevalence of this offence amongst young drivers who may not have developed the skills to control motor vehicles when driven dangerously, and such is the need for public deterrence, that the youth of an accused is given less weight as a subjective matter than in other types of cases. In Regina versus MacIntyre,6 Lee CJ at CL said: "In dealing with the commission of a serious crime by a young man the courts make every effort, if it can be properly done, to avoid the penalty of gaol.
But against that, it must be said that when young men are able to hold licences at seventeen years of age and drive their cars after drinking excessive quantities of alcohol, and at a high rate of speed as in this case, and cause death, no significant reason can be found for differentiating between their driving and that of persons who are older. Each is a potential killer on the roads. The lack of foresight in youth, the reckless spirit of youth will always be there and must always be recognised by the courts, but that cannot, when punishment is under consideration, be recognised to the point of leading young drivers - who, regrettably, form a significant proportion of motor traffic offenders - to believe that an offence under [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) resulting in death will lead to light punishment." 
Earlier,[7] Lee CJ at CL had said that it was proper to take into account the good character of the offender - "...[b]ut it must be said that this class of offence is one which in many, perhaps even in most, cases is committed by persons who are not in any sense members of the criminal class or who even have criminal convictions against them, and for that reason the courts need to tread warily in showing leniency for good character to avoid giving the impression that persons of good character may, by their irresponsible actions at the time, take the lives of others and yet receive lenient treatment." 
The usual rule is that, where sentencing young offenders, considerations of general deterrence are not as important as they are when sentencing older offenders.[8] MacIntyre's Case makes it clear that this type of offence is thus an exception to that usual rule.[9] The views expressed in Western
Australia by Walsh J in Regina versus English,10 if they are to be interpreted as asserting to the contrary, upon which the respondent relies, are inconsistent with the firm views expressed by this Court, and they do not reflect the law of this State so far as this type of offence is concerned.

This Court has also said on many occasions that periodic detention has a strong element of leniency built into it.[11] It has also made the point that, as presently administered, periodic detention - so far as two thirds of the term is concerned - is usually no more punitive than a community service order.[12] It has accepted that the maximum period of periodic detention for three years is nevertheless a salutary punishment by itself, but it has at the same time reiterated that it is a lenient sentence.[13] 
So far as youthful offenders of good character who are guilty of dangerous driving, therefore, the sentence must be seen to have a reasonable proportionality to the objective circumstances of the crime, and persuasive subjective considerations must not lead to inadequate weight being given to those objective circumstances.[14] It is always a difficult thing to send a young person with a good character to gaol but, where appropriate, it is something which must be done as a deterrent to others.

None of those statements of principle interfere with the wide discretion of sentencing judges when applying them to the facts of particular cases.[15] A
Crown appeal against inadequacy will not usually be allowed unless the judge has acted upon a wrong principle or upon a misunderstanding or a wrong assessment of the evidence. It is submitted by the respondent in the present case that no such error has been demonstrated here. But such an error may be demonstrated by the sentence itself where it is not merely inadequate but manifestly so. Otherwise, in the absence of a well documented mistake, the discretion of the sentencing judge will be interfered with only in a compelling case; it is not sufficient that this Court would have imposed a more severe sentence.[16] 
I am satisfied that such error has been demonstrated in the present case. The reference to the offences being culpable driving rather than dangerous driving would usually be overlooked as a mere slip made by a busy judge in the course of his remarks on sentence, but the absence of any reference anywhere by the judge to the vastly increased maximum sentence applicable only reasonably recently - coupled with the leniency of the sentence imposed - suggests that, despite a passing reference to it during the course of submissions, the judge must have overlooked that increase at the time when he imposed the sentence.
Either that, or the judge (with respect) must have failed to appreciate the significance of the increase. The action of the Legislature in almost tripling the maximum sentence for a particular type of offence must be taken by the courts as reflecting community standards in relation to the seriousness of that offence, and the courts are required to give effect to the obvious intention of the Legislature that the existing sentencing patterns are to move in a sharply upward manner.[17] 
In any event, such is the leniency of the sentence imposed, I am satisfied that the judge must have allowed the strong subjective features of the respondent to outweigh the objective seriousness of the offences which he committed. The sentence cannot be otherwise explained in the light of the respondent's driving record and the fact that he was on bail at the time for a drink-driving offence. This Court's decision in Regina versus John Rudolph
Sadebath[18] was cited by the respondent. Despite some apparent similarities in the objective circumstances of the case, I do not regard it as providing any bench mark in the present case. The maximum sentences available were considerably lower; the offender there did not have the driving record of this respondent; and the Court proceeded in ignorance of the true nature of the periodic detention programme which was subsequently revealed in Regina v
Hallocoglu.19 Whichever way the matter is looked at, error has been established.

The respondent has pointed out that "for three years he will be without weekend leisure" but, with all due respect to the very experienced counsel who made that submission, it completely fails to persuade me that he was adequately punished in this case. Even if I were to pay regard to the views of
Walsh J in Regina versus English, there is, in my view, no option reasonably open in this case other than a fulltime custodial sentence to impress upon this young man that driving at high speed and whilst intoxicated is simply not acceptable. It is true that some months later he voluntarily handed in his driving licence, but in the circumstances that was but a sensible recognition of the inevitable. It does not, in my view, show that he has learnt his lesson. I see no matter upon which this Court should in the exercise of its discretion decline to interfere with the sentence imposed. I would therefore uphold the Crown appeal.

This is a very sad case. So many of this type are. Evidence has been led as to the respondent's present position. He has continued to receive grief counselling and he has found that he is better able to deal with his grief if he keeps active playing sport at night and working during the day. He has regularly attended at a Periodic Detention Centre since 23 August last. He should be given credit for that attendance over almost four months. The length of the concurrent sentences of three years was no doubt selected with the intention that it should be longer than it would otherwise have been were it to be served by way of fulltime custody.[20] For that reason, and bearing in mind the double jeopardy involved in a successful Crown appeal,[21] I would not therefore increase the length of the sentences imposed. Because this will be his first incarceration, and because of his youth, there are special circumstances within the meaning of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) warranting a variation in the statutory ratio between the respondent's minimum and additional terms.

I propose, therefore, that the following orders be made:
The Crown appeal is allowed, and the sentences imposed are quashed.
In lieu thereof, there is imposed on each count a sentence of imprisonment for three years, consisting of a minimum term of twelve months and an additional term of two years.
The minimum term commenced on 23 August 1996 and will conclude on 22
August 1997.
The respondent is to be released on parole subject to supervision on 23
August 1997.
The Court directs that the respondent be taken directly to Silverwater
Correctional Centre for classification, and it recommends that he be classified immediately into a minimum security institution.
The disqualification of the respondent's licence is to stand.

STUDDERT J: I agree.
 
SIMPSON J: I also agree.
 
HUNT CJ at CL: The orders of the Court are as I have proposed.
 [1] cf Regina versus Majors [(1991) 27 NSWLR 624] at 628.
 [2] Regina versus Hallocoglu [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67] at 76-78.
 (CCA, 16 August 1985, unreported), at 9.
 [4] Regina versus MacIntyre [(1988) 38 A Crim R 135] at .
 [5] Regina versus Wilkins [(1988) 38 A Crim R 445] at -451.
 [(1988) 38 A Crim R 135] at .
 [7] (on the same page).
 [8] Regina versus GDP [(1991) 53 A Crim R 112] at .
 [9] Regina versus Hallocoglu (at 76).
 [(1995) 82 A Crim R 586] at .
 [11] Many of the cases are collected in Regina versus Hallocoglu (at 73).
 [12] Ibid (at 74-75); Regina versus Burnett & Ors [(1996) 85 A Crim R ] at 82 (cf 96).
 [13] Regina versus Burnett & Ors (at 82-83, 96).
 [14] Regina versus Rushby [[1977] 1 NSWLR 594] at -599; Regina versus Dodd [(1991) 57 A Crim R 349] at .
 [15] Regina versus Ellis [(1993) 68 A Crim R 449] at .
 [16] See, generally, Regina versus Tait [(1979) 24 ALR 473] at 476-477;
Regina versus Holder [[1983] 3 NSWLR 245] at -256; Regina versus Dodd (at 353); Regina versus Allpass [(1993) 72 A Crim R ] at 562-563; Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295] at 299-300.
 [17] Regina versus Tomi Petteri Hartikainen (CCA, 8 June 1993, unreported) at 2.
 [18] (14 May 1992, unreported).
 [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67] at 73-75.
 [20] Regina versus Mikas [(1996) 85 A Crim R 34] at -48.
 [21] See Comptroller-General of Customs versus D'Aquino Bros Pty Ltd [(1996) ALR 649] at 669.
 * * * 
