

State Bank of New South Wales Limited versus Taylor Matter No 13125/97 [1998]
NSWSC 486 (31 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
STATE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES LIMITED versus TAYLOR /97 July 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The proceedings were commenced by Default Statement of Claim filed on 5 November 1997. The claim is presently formulated in an Amended Default Statement of Claim filed on 16 January 1998. The plaintiff seeks possession of two properties ("Wonga" and "Borrona Downs"). Each property is a farm within the meaning of the Farm Debt Mediation Act, 1994 (the Act). The claim is founded on default under security held over the properties. The security is a farm mortgage within the meaning of the Act. 
A Defence was filed on 6 May 1998. Apart from traversing certain matters pleaded in the originating process, it purports to raise alleged defences under the Act.

On 19 June 1998, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion seeking summary judgment. This application was heard on Friday, 17 July 1998.

The plaintiff relied on two affidavits sworn by Mr Moulds. The defendant relied on an affidavit sworn by Mr Maloney (his solicitor). The plaintiff tendered a bundle of documents (Exhibit A).

There was no issue between the parties as to what has to be demonstrated to obtain summary relief. The Court has a discretionary power. It is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best served between the parties. There is abundant authority to the effect that relief should be given only in what has been described as clear cases.
The onus of demonstrating an entitlement to relief rests with the applicant.

The defendant has submitted that there are issues which should be allowed to go to trial. The submissions are primarily founded on provisions of the Act.
In substance, it is said that a Certificate purportedly issued pursuant to section 11 of the Act is void.

Broadly speaking, it has been said that provisions of the statute have not been complied with and that there was a denial of procedural fairness. I shall expressly mention some of the specific matters raised in argument. The defendant has contended that requisite notice was not given to him under section 8. He has contended that there was non-disclosure of the issue of the
Certificate. He has contended that the plaintiff has not attempted to mediate in good faith in accordance with the requirements of section 11.

Although the defendant seeks to put the matter of the giving of notice in issue, he himself has not sworn an affidavit. He has relied on other material placed before the Court. Some of the material contained in Mr Maloney's affidavit was objected to and rejected. The Court is required to deal with the matters in issue on the evidence which the parties choose to place before it.

At this stage, it is convenient to refer to some of the relevant provisions of the Act. Section 6 provides that enforcement action taken otherwise than in compliance with the Act is void. Section 8 provides that a creditor must not take enforcement action against the farmer, until at least 21 days have elapsed after the creditor has given a notice to the farmer under the section.
Section 9 provides that a farmer, to whom notice has been given under section , may, within 21 days after the notice was given, notify the creditor in writing that the farmer requests mediation concerning the farm debt involved.
Section 10 provides that once a farmer has given such notification, the creditor must not take enforcement action unless and until the New South Wales
Rural Assistance Authority (the Authority) has given a certificate under section 11. Section 11 provides that the Authority must, on the application of a creditor, issue a certificate that the Act does not apply if the Authority is satisfied with the matters referred to in (a), (b) or (c) of subsection .

Exhibit A contains documentation relevant to the matters in issue between the parties. At this stage, it is convenient to mention some of the material found in that Exhibit.

By letter dated 8 July 1996, the plaintiff purported to give Notice under section 8 to each of the defendant and his wife. The Notices were sent by certified mail. The wife received a Notice which was forwarded to an address in Tibooburra. There was a typographical error in the address of the letter forwarded to the defendant. This error was repeated in later correspondence received by the defendant. Although a return receipt was required by the plaintiff, no such receipt has been placed in evidence.

There is material which suggests that a telephone conversation took place between an officer of the plaintiff and the defendant. This material suggests that the defendant verbally advised the plaintiff that he did not wish to enter into mediation. He was advised that it may be in his best interest to reconsider his options. This material is to be found in a letter dated 16
October 1996 from the plaintiff to the defendant. It appears that the defendant then gave instructions to his present solicitors. By letter dated 21
October 1996, the solicitors wrote to the plaintiff. It was said that they would contact the plaintiff when Mr Maloney returned from holidays. By letter dated 12 November 1996 from the plaintiff to the solicitors, the matter of mediation was again raised. Reference was made to the July 1996 Notices and the solicitors were advised that, in the absence of any response within 14 days, the plaintiff would be seeking "clearance from the NSW Rural Assistance
Authority". There was no such response from the defendant or his solicitors and the plaintiff proceeded to seek that clearance.

A Certificate was issued by the Authority dated 19 December 1996. The
Certificate was received by the plaintiff in either late December 1996 or early January 1997 (probably about 6 January 1997). It was expressed to expire on 18 December 1999.

By facsimile dated 20 December 1996, the solicitors advised the Bank that their client wished to enter into mediation. By letter of the same date, the plaintiff wrote to the solicitors in the following terms:- "I refer to the abovementioned and your facsimile received on today's date regarding same.

Please find enclosed for your attention a copy of the Section 8 Notice that was issued to the Borrowers on 8 July, 1996 and a Form 2 Section 9 Notice to
Creditor/Bank.

I advise that should the Borrowers now wish to enter into mediation with the
Bank then the Section 9 Notice is to be completed and returned to this office within the next twenty one (21) days.

Please note that should the Section 9 Notice not be received within the set timeframe, then the Bank will be seeking a clearance from the NSW Rural
Assistance Authority under the FDM Act." 
A Section 9 Notice was forwarded by the solicitors under cover of a letter dated 13 January 1997.

A Mediation Kit was sent to the defendant. By letter dated 21 January 1997, the plaintiff reminded the defendant of the provisions of section 11(2)(c).
The defendant failed to commence mediation within the prescribed 28 days. By letter dated 26 February 1997, the plaintiff advised the defendant that the
Certificate had been obtained and that it was proposing to take further action.

By letter dated 11 April 1997, the solicitors advised the Bank that the defendant "does seek a mediation". Despite what had happened, the plaintiff went along with a mediation. There was a pre-mediation conference. A mediation was fixed for 20 June 1997. In the documentation, this has been referred to as a commercial mediation and the plaintiff has purported to treat it as such.
Mediation took place on that date. There was a postponement pending the attainment of a valuation.

In August 1997, because of typographical errors in the existing Certificate, the plaintiff sought the issue of a fresh backdated Certificate correcting the errors.

A valuer (Mr Barnden) was instructed to make a valuation. The material suggests that he had been selected by the defendant. By letter dated 18
September 1997, the solicitors advised that the defendant did not wish to continue with the engagement of Mr Barnden. Thereafter, nothing further took place in the mediation process.

The Authority issued another Certificate. It was dated 5 September 1997. It was said to be in replacement of the earlier Certificate (with the 3 year life of the Certificate running from 19 December 1996).

Before proceeding further, I should perhaps mention two matters that emerged during the hearing. Firstly, the defendant has said through his Counsel that he remains desirous of participating in the mediation process. Secondly, it is said that the defendant is desirous of amending his Defence.

As to the first matter, apart from the protestations made in Court, there is little else to suggest a bona fide desire to return to mediation. Indeed, there is material which could lead to a contrary view.

As to the second matter, nothing has been done to put an Amended Defence before the Court. In any event, the case that was put saw some departure from the matters raised in the Defence and the hearing has been conducted on the basis that it was open to the defendant to rely on any of the material placed before the Court for the purposes of identifying an arguable issue.

In the course of argument, Counsel have referred to a number of decided cases and publications. The plaintiff has referred to, inter alia, Federal Airports
Corporation versus Aerolineas Argentinas & Ors <case>; [147 ALR 649],
Gain & Anor versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia & Anor [(1997) 42 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2042%20NSWLR%20252 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales versus Pangallo <case>; <case>; [(1984) 1 AC 262.] 
It must be borne in mind that what the Act does is to make void enforcement action taken by a creditor otherwise than in compliance with the Act. It does not make the Certificate issued under section 11 void in the event of statutory non-compliance. There is authority for the view that the decision to issue such a Certificate is amenable to judicial review (Gain). It would seem that the Court may move to set the Certificate aside in an appropriate case (inter alia, on the ground of unreasonableness or fraud infecting the exercise of power).

There was some debate as to whether or not the challenge to the Certificate should take place in these proceedings. For the purposes of this application, it is not necessary to pursue that debate. I shall assume that it can be done in these proceedings and turn attention to the question of whether or not there is an arguable case for disturbing the decision to issue the
Certificate.

In my view, there is not. In passing, I should mention that the Certificate has been on foot for quite some time and nothing has been done to bring forward a challenge to it.

Attention has been drawn to the provisions of section 23 of the Act and of section 76 of the [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/), 1987. These are provisions which enable the process to be served in the manner specified in the respective statutory provision. The provisions did not excite full argument and need no further exposition in this judgment.

In my view, the contention that [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s8.html) has not been complied with is not arguable. Further, I am of the view that the contention that there has been some lack of due process is also unarguable.
Further, I am of the view that none of the arguments (including the contention of failure to mediate in good faith) advanced on behalf of the defendant throw up an arguable issue to support the contention that the decision to issue the
Certificate should be disturbed.

Before leaving these matters, perhaps I should say something further concerning the submissions founded on [section (1)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s11.html)
This provision only has relevance if it happens to be the basis upon which the
Authority was satisfied to issue the Certificate. It would seem that the
Certificate issued on 19 December 1996 would have been founded on the
Authority being satisfied of (b). The issuing of the Certificate preceded the giving of notification in accordance with [section .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s9.html) The subsequent request for mediation was aborted because of inaction on the part of the defendant. The final attempt at mediation may not have been a mediation contemplated by the Act and in any event came to a halt when the defendant did not wish to continue with the engagement of the valuer. It seems that no action was taken thereafter to reinstate the mediation. Further, to the extent that it may be relevant, I see no basis for an arguable contention that the plaintiff has not attempted to mediate in good faith.

I consider that the plaintiff has discharged the requisite onus. Further, I consider that, in the circumstances of this case, it is entitled to summary judgment.

The plaintiff is to have judgment for possession of the properties described in paragraphs 3 and 7 of the Amended Default Statement of Claim. The defendant is to pay the costs of the proceedings brought against him. The Exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
