

Asset Risk Management Ltd versus Hyndes Matter No 3689/97 [1998] NSWSC 131 (2
April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 `ASSET RISK MANAGEMENT LTD versus MATTHEW JONATHAN HYNDES` ` 3689/97` `2 April 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are odd proceedings. The plaintiff seeks an order for account from a former employee. 
The simple facts are that from 15 February until 22 November 1996 the defendant was employed by the plaintiff under an agreement referred to as an
Executive Services Agreement to be the General Manager, Asia. During the course of the employment the defendant caused two sums of money, namely $450,000 Bahts on 2 May and 28.4 million Deutschmarks on 13 May to be deposited into an account which was either in the defendant's name or in the defendant's name and that of some other person. It would seem that those moneys were transferred to those accounts with the Bangkok Bank Public Company
Limited for the purposes of the business of the plaintiff who was seeking to acquire a business in Thailand. The defendant does not appear to have been the most superior officer of the plaintiff in Thailand. There was a Mr Gatland who has now gone missing and may well have been murdered, who may have been more completely in the picture of what was happening in Bangkok about those moneys than the defendant.

Somehow or other the greater proportion it would seem of the funds which were transmitted to Bangkok were lost. Some of this appears to have been because of the falling exchange rate, but not all. Needless to say the plaintiff was rather upset about this and requested information from the defendant. There was quite a considerable amount of correspondence between the parties, later involving solicitors as well. It would seem that almost all this correspondence took place after the termination of employment.

From time to time in the correspondence the defendant or his lawyers indicated that Bank account records or their translations or other information would in due course be supplied. However, by June 1997, the management of the plaintiff was getting concerned with the delay and made formal demands. On 20 August it issued the current summons for an account, including details, as to each receipt for payment from the relevant Bank accounts. It also sought an order that the defendant pay the plaintiff the amount, if anything, found to be due upon taking of accounts plus interest.

Pleadings were ordered and a statement of claim was filed on 21 October 1997.

Paragraphs 9 and 10 of the statement of claim pleaded that the defendant "received for and on behalf of the plaintiff" the amounts that I have referred to. Paragraph 11 pleaded that those moneys were received by the defendant in the course of his employment and in his position as a fiduciary as and for the plaintiff, that the moneys had been disbursed and the plaintiff had demanded an account which had not been forthcoming. The defendant admitted that the moneys were received in the course of his employment with the plaintiff; he denied that he was a fiduciary; he said that any moneys that were disbursed were disbursed at the plaintiff's direction and he denied any liability to account.

The defendant also said that any breach of fiduciary duty was consented to by the plaintiff, but, by an amendment made this morning, the defendant also said that it was an implied term of his contract of employment that the plaintiff would indemnify him from any claims made against him in respect of conduct in the course of his employment and, by way of circuity of action, that answered the plaintiff's claim.

There is no suggestion of any personal misconduct by the defendant at all.
There is no suggestion, at least until more information is available to the plaintiff, that there is any common law claim by the plaintiff against the defendant. The plaintiff's position is that apart from Mr Gatland (that exception for the reasons I have already given is irrelevant), there is no-one other than the defendant who could give the plaintiff information as to what has happened to the large sum of money that was in his Bank account.

When I was trying these proceedings this morning I kept coming back to the pleadings and pointing out that it was necessary to decide the case on the pleadings. Those pleadings initially said that there was an implied term that the defendant would account to the plaintiff upon demand, but that matter was not pressed. There is no allegation in the statement of claim that the defendant was a trustee in respect of the moneys that were deposited into his
Bank account unless such an allegation can be read out of the words "received for and on behalf of the plaintiff". Furthermore, it was not a suit for a declaration that the defendant was bound or is bound to supply information, but rather that the defendant was bound to the order to render accounts.

At common law, where a person received money which was not his to keep, the common law action of account lay to compel payment of the money. So in
Harrington versus Deane (1613) Hobart 36; 80 ER 186, Deane was employed by
Harrington to collect a debt of [sterling]200 from Rotherham. Rotherham asked
Deane to borrow the [sterling]200 from Stanhop on Deane's account. Deane did so and it was held that Harrington had an action in account against Deane.

Professor Stoljar shows in his article, "The Transformation of Account" [(1964) 80 LQR 203], 218-9 how by various misunderstandings a promise by the holder of the money was implied and, by contractualisation, the indebitatus account for money had and received came to lie at law for recovery in such circumstances.

The action for money had and received has been limited by the contractualisation process and by the error only recently exposed by the High
Court (in David Securities Pty Ltd versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 353)] that money had and received lay to recover payments made under a mistake of fact as opposed to a mistake of law. Thus part of the reasoning of Wynn-Parry, J in
Re Diplock [[1947] Ch 716], 723-8 no longer represents the law.

That contractualisation was an error has now been widely acknowledged; see
Westdeutsche Bank versus Islington LBC <case>; [[1996] AC ], 710.

However, even giving the expression "received for and on behalf of the plaintiff" the widest application there is still no allegation that the defendant holds money that is not his to keep. Furthermore this case is not one for a liquidated sum which would appear to be necessary for a claim for money had and received at law.

Up until 1972 it was extremely important to distinguish between the case where the Equity Court had jurisdiction and the case where it did not. This was because there was a defence in the Equity jurisdiction of "no equity". That meant that the claim was a claim at law and could not be dealt with by a Judge in Equity; it would have to be dealt with by a Judge and jury in Common Law, if at all. But a lot of decisions in this area deal with jurisdictional questions before 1972 (or 1875 in England). Today the question is not one of jurisdiction as each Judge of the Supreme Court has all the jurisdiction of every other Judge, but rather the question as to whether there is any action at all known to the law, and if there is whether the Court in its discretion should exercise its jurisdiction.
 [Section 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) confers on the
Court all the jurisdiction necessary to do justice in New South Wales.
However, despite the width of this section it is clear that the Court cannot give relief just because it considers it would be fair or commercially appropriate to do so. The plaintiff must put before the Court facts which show that, in accordance with authority, the plaintiff brings itself within the scope of the remedies it provides. Of course there is always a new situation that can exist where the Court gives relief, but generally speaking that is how cases are decided.

The action of account was one of the very oldest remedies at Common Law though it had gradually fallen into disuse at least by the beginning of the 18th century. One of the reasons for this was that the action for money had and received supplanted it. Another was that the machinery available to the
Chancery Court was far superior and efficient. However in the early 19th century the Chancery Court only had limited jurisdiction to deal with cases where the plaintiff showed "an equity".

So far as account was concerned, it was recognised that the Court had to draw some line as to what matters of account it would relieve and what matters it would not. Thus in Fowle versus Lawrason [(1831) 30 US 443] at 445
Marshall CJ said giving the decision in the Supreme Court of the USA: "That a court of chancery has jurisdiction in matters of account cannot be questioned, nor can it be doubted that this jurisdiction is often beneficially exercised; but it cannot be admitted that a court of equity may take cognizance of every action for goods, wares, and merchandise sold and delivered, or of money advanced ... ; or of every contract, express or implied, consisting of various items, on which different sums of money have become due, and different payments have been made. Although the line may not be drawn with absolute precision, yet it may be safely affirmed that a court of chancery cannot draw to itself every transaction between individuals in which an account between parties is to be adjusted." 
The Equity lawyers of the 19th century then laid down a series of principle as to when they would intervene by way of an action for account. These are best summarised in Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence 5th ed (1941) Vol 4 page
There the learned authors say that proceedings in equity for accounting are only proper:- 
Where there are mutual accounts ... ; or 
The accounts are complex; or 
Where a fiduciary relation exists between the parties and a duty rests upon the defendant to render an account.

They then point out at page 1079: "The principal difficulty is as to when equity will take jurisdiction of an accounting between principal and agent. The mere relation of principal and agent, without more, - the relation not being really fiduciary in its nature, and no obstacle intervening to a recovery at law, - is insufficient to enable the principal to maintain the action against his agent. But where the relation is such that a confidence is reposed by the principal in his agent, and the matters for which an accounting is sought are peculiarly within the jurisdiction of the latter, equity will assume jurisdiction." 
There are other lists in the various books (see for instance Ashburner's
Principles Of Equity 2nd ed (Butterworths London 1933) pages 349 and following). An expanded list is given in Meagher, Gummow and Lehane Equity
Documents and Remedies 3rd ed (Butterworths Sydney 1992) [2504]. The learned authors make the point at page 663 at the end of that paragraph that they do not suggest that the categories are closed.

The plaintiff put its case for an account in equity on the basis that the defendant came within the class of fiduciary mentioned above. I thus do not have to consider whether or not the accounts are sufficiently complex to fit within the second head.

It is a tiresome and relatively unrewarding task to go through the various authorities over the last 200 years as to which side of the line particular cases spanned and I will not endeavour to do so. I will merely select some cases which fall just one side of the line or the other. Very few of them involve employees, though some early cases deal with people like bailiffs and stewards where relief is traditionally given.

An illustrative decision is McKenzie versus Beaber <case>; [(1910) 12 WALR 45.] The plaintiff said that the defendant was the manager of his hotel and that she was required by her employment contract to receive moneys and keep proper books of account, and to account for all moneys that should come into her hands. Her employment was terminated and she did not render an account. But the defendant said that she was merely a housekeeper and that she did from time to time collect moneys and keep books but there was a full time book-keeper to whom she used to report.

Although the case was dealt with on an interlocutory basis it would seem that the Court thought that it may well be that the duty to account would apply if the defendant was in the category pleaded by the plaintiff, but not if she was in the category set out in her own pleadings and accordingly it was inappropriate to give summary judgment for an account. That is instructive because it shows that it is not determinative that the employee received money, even if she had an obligation to record the money in books, but that there had to be something more before an account could be ordered.

On the other side of the line there is the decision of the House of Lords in
Foley versus Hill <case>; [(1848) 2 HLC 28]; [9 ER 1002] where the House of Lords held that one could not get a banker to account. The reason was that banker and customer was a relation where the money paid by the customer to the banker ceased to be the money of the customer and was the money of the banker whose only duty was to repay it plus interest but in the meantime he could do what he liked with the money.
Accordingly whilst it might be thought in one sense that a banker was a fiduciary in that he owed some confidential and other duties, the House of
Lords held (see HLC <case>; [39,
ER 1007)] that in the sense required in this area of the law "the Banker does not hold that fiduciary character".

This again is useful because it shows that it is of little value to just put the tag "fiduciary" on the defendant and that even if in one sense the defendant might have some fiduciary duties, it does not necessarily mean that he will be an agent of a fiduciary nature which the authorities show is the only type of agent against which equity ordinarily orders an account. The discussion by MacPherson JA in "Fiduciaries: Who are they?" [(1998) 72 ALJ ] at 289 and 290 illustrates this problem and, like the word "agency", the word "fiduciary" is really a weasel word.

There are a series of cases of which the most prominent is the one referred to in the textbooks, MacKenzie versus Johnston <case>; [(1819) 4 Madd 373]; [56 ER 742], where it would appear that if one had an agent and one could only find by discovery how the agent had acted in the execution of agency, that relief by way of an account might be given. This was a case on which Mr
Martin for the plaintiff strongly relied. Mr Harrison SC who appeared with Mr
Grant for the defendant, distinguished the case on the basis that the pleadings showed such a relationship and such complexity that the Vice
Chancellor had no alternative but to overrule the demurrer, whereas in the instant case such a scenario was not disclosed.

However, the real significance of the case only appears if one goes back to the 19th century textbooks. If one looks at the 1886 Edition of Story's
Equity Jurisprudence (Little Brown & Co Boston 1886) (the same appears in the Second English Edition in 1920), one can see that from the footnote to paragraph 458 the solution for cases like MacKenzie versus Johnston comes from
Comyns Digest on Chancery where the learned Lord Chief Baron merely said that: "Chancery will oblige anyone to give an account by him received" and that the basis for the decision in Mackenzie versus Johnston according to
Story is: "the ground seems to be, though not explicitly stated by Leach VC, that there being a necessity for a discovery, the relief is consequent on that; and that it would be most unreasonable that he should pay his agent for a discovery, and then be turned around to a suit at law, which would be the case if he could not have relief on his bill." 
One might add "for account in equity".

This then seems to fit in with decisions made in the Exchequer when exercising jurisdiction in equity such as Frietas versus Dos Santos <case>; [(1827) 1 Y & J 574] and
King versus Rossett <case>; [(1827) 2 Y & J 33]; [148 ER 820.] In the latter case Alexander LCB actually enunciated that reason, but made it clear that if discovery failed so did also the suit for account.

Discovery today is of course dealt with as an interlocutory proceeding in the suit itself, but, in 1827, it could only be dealt with by way of a separate suit in equity in which the plaintiff had to pay the whole of the defendant's costs. But one could not get discovery unless one had some proceedings which set out a cause of action or an equity on which one could succeed (see
Cardale versus Watkins <case>; Madd 18; <case>; [(1923) 31 CLR 583] but they only concerned the dissenting judge, Higgins J, who refers to King versus Rossett at page 595 without disapproval.

There were allegations made that the defendant was by virtue of his contract of employment bound to give the information and bound to give an account.
There is no term proved or term which should be implied in the employment contract that was pressed on me as obliging the defendant to render fully detailed accounts. As I pointed out before, this suit is not a suit for information. There are some situations where a person is bound in equity to supply information. The most obvious case is the situation of a trustee who is asked about the state of affairs of the trust by a beneficiary (see for instance Ottley versus Gilby <case>; [(1845) 8 Beav 602]; [50 ER 237).] 
The duty of an employee to give information was considered by Millett J in the
English Chancery Division in Macmillan Inc versus Bishopsgate Investment Trust
Plc (No 2) [[1993] ICR 385] at 391. His Lordship referred to the passage in
Chitty on Contracts (which in the 27th (1994) edition is at para 37-051 page ) that, "An employee ... owes a duty to convey to his employer information of value to his employer which the employee obtained in the course of his employment; ...".

Millett J said at 391 that it must be remembered that: "It is not enough that the information should be of value to the employer. It must have been obtained "in the course of his employment"...".

There is I think an evidentiary problem as to whether that particular element was proved in this case. However assuming that it was, his Lordship makes it quite clear that there is a difference between an obligation to provide information and a duty to provide information in a particular form. All the employee is bound to do is to supply the information and as Millett, J said, "there is no legal obligation to do so in the manner most convenient to the obligee. He is not bound to consult his own convenience." 
So, in that case, when the employer demanded that the employee hand over transcripts of his evidence at a public examination, even though the most convenient method of performing the employee's duty to provide information would be to provide the transcripts, he was not bound to convey the information in that way and so the employer's suit to see the transcripts failed. In the instant case even if this was a suit to get information, which it is not, the demand to put the information in a particular form or to supply accounts containing the details referred to in the prayers in the summons and the statement of claim would be too wide.

The essence then of what I have said so far is that equity does not order accounts against employees or agents merely because there is a contract of employment which includes a duty to convey information or merely because the employee may have some fiduciary duties. It is a narrower class of case and where there is no equity or cause of action at law against the employee or agent then it is hardly ever that the court will order an account and I will not do so in this case.

What I have just said relates to the situation where the primary order sought by the plaintiff is for an account. Of course there will be many cases where an account will be ordered as relief where an employee has been found to have been in breach of his or her fiduciary duties; see eg Timber Engineering Co
Pty Ltd versus Anderson [[1980] 2 NSWLR 488.] 
My decision is reinforced by what would happen if there was a formal account.
First, the defendant would have to list all the moneys received and disbursed, then he would be subject to long cross-examination before the Master on those accounts. Then there would be surcharges and falsifications possibly filed, and on the falsifications the onus would be on the defendant to justify his account. Why should a defendant be put to all this inconvenience when he is under no obligation to do anything more than supply information? 
At the beginning of these proceedings I made it quite clear that I would not even entertain the suit unless there was an undertaking by the plaintiff to pay for the costs of the account. An undertaking was given in this form: "The plaintiff ... undertakes to the Court to pay the reasonable costs of the defendant in the taking of an account of all moneys ..." 
Although no point was raised during the case I am not too sure whether the undertaking would need to go further than that and amount to an indemnity.
Even with such an indemnity, the defendant would still be suffering quite considerable inconvenience.

So far as the information is concerned, as the contract of employment is now terminated it is quite doubtful as to whether the duty to supply information still exists. I know of no authority one way or the other. However it would seem to me that the very worst that the defendant would suffer would be an action for damages for breach of the contract of employment, and it would be rare indeed for a Court of Equity to grant specific performance of an obligation to give information in respect of a contract which has been terminated.

It is not necessary to deal with the extra claim made this morning about the employee's right to indemnity. This was based on an old English decision of
Adamson versus Jarvis <case>; [(1827) 4 Bing 66]; [130 ER 693] where an auctioneer had innocently committed a conversion and was entitled to be indemnified by his client. The reason why it does not enter into the picture is that unless the employee is allowed to supply the information in his own way, or unless there is a complete indemnity so far as him giving an account is concerned, the obligation does not arise.

Accordingly for these reasons the present proceedings must be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
