

Fai Traders Insurance Co Ltd versus Dominico Ferrara and Ors [1996] NSWSC 351 (15 August 1996) 
FAI TRADERS INSURANCE COMPANY LTD versus DOMINICO FERRARA & ORS /95; ED 3097/88 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Handley, Sheller, Powell JJA 
CATCHWORDS: CORPORATIONS - Directors' liability under s556 of Companies Code - debt incurred before company wound up - not recoverable under s18 (7C) (c) of Workers Compensation Act 1926 - whether defence provided to company is available to third parties 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
The appellant became the workers' compensation insurer for a company, Jarvelle
Pty Limited, on 1 July 1985. When the policy was entered into or renewed, the company was obliged to pay a premium based on its total wages during the indemnity period. The policy had been renewed and was in force at the time the company was wound up in 1986. The appellant sought to recover unpaid premiums from the respondents who were the former directors of the company under s556 of the Companies Code.

Hulme J found that there were reasonable grounds to expect that the company would not be able to repay its debts as and when they became due after 1
October 1986, and that consequently the directors were personally liable only for the 1986/7 adjustment which was incurred after that date. However, his
Honour also found that s18 (7C)(c) of the Workers Compensation Act 1926 (the
Act) prevented an action from being brought to recover the relevant debt in this case because of the failure of the appellant to serve an appropriate notice on the company. The appellant argued that the trial judge's conclusion involved a misconstruction of s18 (7C)(c) or <case> or both.

HELD: . The trial judge's conclusion about the effect of s18 (7C)(c) was correct. No action could have been brought by the insurer against the company prior to the making of the winding up order.
Section 556(1) operates in respect of a debt which has been incurred and makes officers "jointly and severally liable for the payment of the debt." The section applies to guarantees and other contingent debts; Hawkins versus Bank of
China [(1992) 26 NSWLR 562] at 572 per Gleeson CJ. There is nothing in the section to make it inapplicable to a debt which had not become payable prior to a winding up order, nor to debts which are payable at a future date and other future debts.
The debt remains owing and due by the company and there is nothing in s556 which enables former directors otherwise liable under that section to take advantage of procedural defences available only to the company, whether those defences arise under the Code or otherwise.

Re Beckwith <case>; [(1993) 43 FCR 256.] . Non compliance with the procedural requirements of s18 (7C)(c) is no answer to an action under s556 against former directors.
 (per Powell JA) The fact that, as no notice such as was contemplated by the provisions of s18 (7C) of the Act was served on the company, no action to recover that sum could successfully have been taken by the appellant is irrelevant, first, since the test of liability is whether a debt was incurred, and second, since that amount together with the amount of debts, could be the subject of a proof in the winding up of the company.

ORDERS . Appeal allowed;
Set aside the orders made in the Equity Division;
In lieu enter judgment against the respondents jointly and severally for $134,789.74 together with interest under s94 at the prescribed rate from 19
June 1987 until judgment;
Order the respondents to pay the appellant's costs of the proceedings in the Equity Division;
The respondents to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but, if qualified, to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/);
Direct the parties to bring in short minutes containing the appropriate interest calculation before Handley JA.

JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: Jarvelle Pty Limited (the company), which was incorporated on 7 January 1985, traded in the building industry as a formwork contractor until it was ordered to be wound up on 19 May 1987. In its short commercial life it incurred substantial premiums to the appellant, its workers' compensation insurer, which remained unpaid when it went into liquidation. The appellant brought proceedings under <case> of the Companies Code against former directors seeking to make them personally liable for the unpaid premiums. The proceedings failed at first instance because the trial judge (Hulme J) held that the only debt incurred after the company became insolvent had not become payable by the Company and it was therefore not recoverable under <case>.

The appellant became the company's workers' compensation insurer under the
Workers' Compensation Act 1926 (the 1926 Act) on its acceptance of a proposal dated 1 July 1985 covering the period from 1 July 1985 to 1 July
The policy was renewed in 1986 and was in force when the company was ordered to be wound up. The appellant was then owed $358,045.33 made up as follows: /6 Adjustment as per 24/9/86 Notice $ 44,649.00 /7 Premium as per 24/9/86 Notice $ 78,338.00 /6 Adjustment after Mr Astle's inspection $100,268.59 /7 Adjustment after Mr Astle's inspection $134,789.74 
Total: $358,045.33 
The company's assets available in the winding-up did not enable it to pay any dividend to ordinary unsecured creditors.

The trial judge found that after 1 October 1986 there were reasonable grounds to expect that the company would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due (s 556 (1)(b)(i)) but he was not satisfied that this state of affairs existed prior to that date. The premium adjustment for the 1985/6 year of $44,649 notified to the company on 24 September 1986 and the renewal premium of $78,338 notified the same day were therefore incurred before <case> applied. These findings have not been challenged.

The appellant arranged for Mr Astle, one of its inspectors, to audit the company's wages records during April 1987. This disclosed that a further $100,268.59 was due in respect of the 1985/6 year and a further $134,789.74 in respect of the 1986/7 year. The appellant's primary submission at the trial that these debts were incurred during April 1987 was rejected and not pursued in this Court.

When the policy was entered into or renewed, the company incurred an obligation to pay a premium based on its total wages during the indemnity period. A deposit premium based on estimated wages was payable at the inception of the policy and again on renewal. After the policy expired, the company was bound to declare the wages paid during the indemnity period, and the premium had to be re-calculated on that basis. Any balance due from the company became due and any excess was refundable.

The Judge inferred that the company was under no obligation to retain its employees and pay them beyond the period of reasonable notice. As he said: "Only if in any year it did so continue to employ to a stage where the actual wages paid exceeded the estimate ... did Jarvelle Pty Limited incur a debt beyond that which arose at the inception of the policy or on renewal. As week by week the total wages for the year increased beyond the level reflected in the initial premium, so did the debt Jarvelle Pty Limited owed the plaintiff".

Once the estimated premium for 1986/7 had been exceeded, the company began incurring week by week additional amounts of premium as further wages were paid. The Judge found that each increase was a separate debt for the purposes of <case>, and this conclusion was not challenged.

On this analysis the only debt incurred after 1 October 1986 which could come within the section was the premium adjustment of $134,789.74 for the 1986/7 year. It was common ground that the estimated premium of $78,338 for that year had been exhausted by the end of December 1986.

The whole of the 1986/7 adjustment was therefore incurred after December 1986 when there were reasonable grounds to expect that the company would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due (s 556 (1)(b)(i)). At the relevant times the first respondent was a director as was Antonio Cossu, who died after the commencement of the proceedings and was represented by the second respondent. Prima facie the requirements of <case> (1) were satisfied.

Section 556 (2) provides that it is a defence if a defendant proves that the debt was incurred without his express or implied authority or consent, or that when the debt was incurred he did not have reasonable cause to expect that the company would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due.
There was no evidence which satisfied those requirements.

The judge however held that this premium adjustment never became payable by the Company because the appellant failed to give it notice under <case> (7C)(c) of the 1926 Act. This provided: "Where - an employer has not elected under sub-section (7B) to pay a premium by instalments and fails to pay the full amount of the premium within one (1) month after service on him of a notice that payment of the premium is due; an employer who has elected under sub-section (7B) to pay a premium by instalments fails to pay an instalment by the due date; or an employer has failed to pay an adjustment of premium within one (1) month after service on him of a notice that payment of the amount of the adjustment is due, the full amount of the premium in the case referred to in paragraph (a), the balance of the premium unpaid or, where no instalment has been paid, the full amount of the premium, in the case referred to in paragraph (b) or the amount of the adjustment referred to in paragraph (c) ... is recoverable with interest as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction".

The judge held that this sub-section did not prevent a debt for premium being incurred prior to the events referred to in the paragraphs, but it did prevent an action being brought to recover such a debt until the relevant event had occurred. In the case of a premium adjustment therefore service of an appropriate notice by the insurer was a condition precedent to that adjustment becoming recoverable. He said: "Not without hesitation the view I have formed is that service of the notice and expiration of the period thereafter are made by <case> (7C) conditions precedent to the completion of a cause of action and to the creation of any present liability to pay or present entitlement in an insurer to be paid.
Absent such a notice the plaintiff's claim against (the company) for the adjustment of premiums was not complete. Consequently, having regard to the view I have formed as to the operation of <case> ... the plaintiff is not entitled to the judgment or order that it seeks that the defendants pay the amount of this premium adjustment".

The appellant submitted that the judge's conclusion involved a misconstruction of <case> (7C)(c) or <case> or both.

Section 18 (7C)(c) was introduced by Act No 79 of 1980 (sch 11 cl (1)(b)). The
Court was assured by counsel that there is no authority on it or on its successor in <case> of the 1987 Act. Para (a) requires a month's written notice to be given to the employer before a premium due on the issue or renewal of a policy becomes payable and recoverable with interest as a debt. In my judgment this does more than confer a right to interest on the insurer. It also confers a right to a period of credit on the employer. An action brought for the premium before the expiration of this period would be premature and would fail for that reason. See Palmer versus Temple <case>; [(1839) 9 Ad & E 508] at  <case>; [(111 ER 1304] at 1309).

Para (b) applies where the premium is payable by instalments and provides, on default, for automatic acceleration of any balance. An action for the recovery of instalments before default would fail.

Para (c) provides for cases where there has been an adjustment of premium. In normal circumstances an adjustment of premium becomes due following the expiration of the indemnity period under a policy (s18(7)(b)). The Act and the regulations made no other provision for such adjustments but the prescribed form of policy provided that the premium was "subject to adjustment as hereinafter provided". Such provision was made by condition 11 which read: "The Employer shall at all times allow any Officer duly authorised by the
Insurer to inspect the Wages Book, and shall supply the Insurer with a correct account of all wages, salaries and other forms of remuneration paid or allowed during any period of indemnity, within one month from the expiry of such period of indemnity, and if the total amount shall differ from the amount on which premium has been paid, the difference in premium shall be met by a further proportionate payment to the Insurer, or by a refund by the Insurer, as the case may be ...".

Although the insurer thus had a contractual right to inspect the employer's wages records "at all times", the condition only authorised an adjustment of the premium after the expiration of the indemnity period. There may have been an implied term in the policy which authorised the insurer to adjust the initial premium if the employer had not supplied "a proper estimate" of the wages payable during the indemnity period (s 18(7)(a)). However the express provision for adjustment after the indemnity period based on the difference between the estimated wages on which the initial premium had been calculated and the actual wages appears to exclude any implied right to interim adjustments. In this context <case>(7C)(c) takes on added significance.

The policy did not define how and when an adjustment of premium became payable. In the absence of other provisions those matters would have been covered by appropriate contractual implications, but there is no reason to doubt that <case> (7C)(c) entitled an employer to credit until one month after service of the appropriate notice. An action brought to recover an adjustment before that date would be premature and would fail. See Palmer versus Temple above.

In my judgment therefore the trial judge's conclusions as to the effect of s (7C)(c) were correct. The relevant indemnity period had not expired when the company was ordered to be wound up, and no notice complying with para (c) was ever served. It follows that no action to recover this adjustment could have been brought by the insurer prior to the making of the winding-up order.

Once that order was made, <case> (2) of the Code applied and proceedings could not be commenced against the company without the leave of the Court. The winding-up order also converted claims against the company into rights to prove in the winding-up (ss 371 (1), 386 (1), 438 (1), (2)).

The question therefore is whether a debt due, but not recoverable from the company at the time of its winding-up, can be recovered under <case> if the other requirements of that section are satisfied. Legal proceedings against the company will be stayed by, or may be stayed as a result of, orders for winding-up, resolutions for official management (s 343(a)) or schemes of arrangement (s 315 (4), (18)). These are typical situations in which <case> was intended to operate. It cannot be supposed that such procedural barriers to legal proceedings against a company would defeat the operation of the section, and Mr Gleeson for the respondents did not contend otherwise. His submission was that procedural barriers to the recovery of the debt arising outside the
Code were in a different position and could be relied upon as a defence by officers sued under <case>.

This submission finds no direct support in the language of <case> and there is no reason why a Court should construe it as having that effect. The section ought to apply for debts for goods, services or loans incurred shortly before the winding-up even if those debts had not been recoverable before the order was made. Sub <case> operates in respect of a debt which has been incurred and makes officers "jointly and severally liable for the payment of the debt".
Officers are not in terms made jointly and severally liable with the company, although the debt is the company's. The normal incidents of joint and several liability are preserved as between the officers (s 558), but they have no right to contribution or indemnity from the company (s 556 (4)). As Mr Conti
QC submitted, the statute imposes a co-ordinate rather than an accessorial liability.

Apart from the effect of the words "liable for the payment of the debt", there is nothing in sub <case> to make the section inapplicable to a debt which had not become payable prior to the winding-up order. The section applies to guarantees and other contingent debts (see Hawkins versus Bank of China [(1992) NSWLR 562)], and I see no reason why it does not also apply to debts which are payable at a future date and other future debts (cf [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s82.html) (1);
Companies Code <case>). The difficulties in relation to debts payable at a distant future date can be left to be resolved if and when that question should arise. The Court may be able to make a declaration of future liability in such a case. The section does not accelerate the company's liability or make the officers liable for payment before the company would have been, but nothing of substance turns on that question here where the company's right to credit was determinable at any time on one month's notice, and the summons was not issued until 6 May 1988.

This debt remained due and owing by the company despite the winding-up order (cf Clyne versus DCT <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 589] at 594-5). The condition precedent under <case>(7C)(c) to the commencement of proceedings against the company ceased to be directly relevant because such proceedings could not be commenced, and the section did not in terms prevent immediate proof of the debt in the winding-up. Moreover, whatever its consequential effect, the sub-section did not in terms apply to proceedings against persons other than the company.

Section 556 (2) also referred to the debt being incurred, but this adds nothing to sub <case>. It referred to the company's ability to pay its debts "as and when they became due", which probably means due and payable (cf Clyne v DCT <case>; [(1981) 150 CLR 1] at 8, 15), but nothing turns on this language either. The references in sub ss (3) and to proceedings brought for the recovery of a debt throw no light on the present question.

Mr Conti QC relied upon Re Beckwith <case>; [(1993) 43 FCR 256] as authority that procedural conditions such as that in question here do not prevent the accrual of a cause of action and are not available to officers sued for the debt of a company under this legislation.
In that case solicitors sued a former director of their client under the equivalent section of the Corporations Law (s 592) for legal costs incurred by the company. They had not delivered a bill of costs to the company as required by <case> of the Costs Act (Qld) and the period of a month referred to therein had not expired, and therefore they could not sue the company. The question was whether a director could be sued for a debt of the company under the statute when the company could not. (Compare [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) as amended [s .)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s192.html)
Cooper J said at 269: "Whereas <case> ... operates to postpone the ... creditor from bringing action against the company until delivery of the required bill of costs and the expiration of one month, the section does not in terms operate in respect of the statutory cause of action which the ... creditor may have against the director. Section 22 ... only operates as between solicitor and client; it is not available to third parties. This was recognised in re Lawler <case>; [(1878) 4 VLR (IP&M) 8] where Molesworth J rejected the contention now made where a guarantor of the client's liability sought to take advantage of the Victorian equivalent of s ...".

The judge had earlier quoted from the judgment of Lord Esher MR in Coburn v
Colledge [(1897) 1 QB 702] at 706 where, speaking of the equivalent prohibition in the Solicitors' Act 1843, his Lordship said that it: "... assumes that (the solicitor) has a right to be paid the fees, charges, and disbursements, but provides that he shall not bring an action to enforce that right until certain preliminary requirements have been satisfied. If the solicitor has any other mode of enforcing his right than by action, the section does not seem to interfere with it".

This is confirmed by long standing authority. In Ex parte Sutton <case>; [(1805) 11 Ves 163] [(32 ER 1050)], Lord Eldon held that an attorney who had not delivered a bill of costs in accordance with 2 Geo II c23 s22 could issue a petition in bankruptcy because the attorney "has all the remedies that are not taken away by Act of Parliament". See also Ex parte Dewdney [(1809) 15 Ves 479] at 488-9 <case>; [(33 ER 836](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=33%20ER%20836 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 839); and Ex parte Steele  <case>; [(33 ER 945](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=33%20ER%20945 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 947). It is also established that a solicitor may prove for costs in the bankruptcy of the client, although he has not delivered an appropriate bill of costs. See Eicke versus Nokes (1829) M&M 303 at 306 [(173 ER 1169] at 1169); Ex parte
Ditton [(1880) 13 ChD 318] at 320 and In re Van Laun [(1907) 2 KB 23.] These cases, although not referred to in Re Beckwith (above), support the conclusions of
Cooper J in that case.

The debt for the 1986/7 premium adjustment remains due and owing by the company, and there is nothing in <case> which enables former directors otherwise liable under that section to take advantage of procedural defences available only to the company, whether those defences arise under the Code or otherwise. Moreover the settled interpretation of provisions similar to <case> is that they do not apply to other remedies and do not avail third parties. In my judgment therefore non-compliance with the procedural requirements in <case> (7C)(c) is no answer to an action under <case> against former directors.

The appeal therefore succeeds and the following orders shall be made:
Appeal allowed with costs;
Set aside the orders made in the Equity Division;
In lieu enter judgment against the respondents jointly and severally for $134,789.74 together with interest under <case> at the prescribed rate from 19
June 1987 until judgment;
Order the respondents to pay the appellant's costs of the proceedings in the Equity Division;
Direct the parties to bring in short minutes containing the appropriate interest calculation before Handley JA.

SHELLER JA: In this matter I have had the benefit of reading the reasons for judgment prepared by Handley JA and by Powell JA. I agree with their Honours that the premium adjustment of $134,789.74 for the period referred to as 1986/7 was within the meaning of s556 of the Companies Code a debt incurred by Jarvelle Pty Limited and accordingly, since at the time it was incurred there were reasonable grounds to expect that the company would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due, recoverable in proceedings brought against the respondents pursuant to s556 (3). I agree with their Honours for the reasons they have given that this is so even though no notice has ever been served on the company under s18 (7C) (c) of the Workers Compensation Act 1926. In the result the orders that Handley JA has proposed should be made but if qualified the respondent should have a certificate under the provisions of the [Suitors Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 
POWELL JA: Although, in the Judgment which he has prepared and which I have had the opportunity to read in draft, Handley JA has set out the basic facts which gave rise to these proceedings, there are certain additional matters which it seems to me might conveniently be recorded and which I therefore set out below.

At the times which are relevant to these proceedings, s.18 of the Workers
Compensation Act 1926 ("the Act") provided (inter alia) as follows: - "18. ...
 
Where an insurer issues to an employer a cover note or a policy of insurance or indemnity or renews such a policy so issued, the employer shall - not later than 1 month after the issue of the cover note or policy, whichever is the earlier, and not later than 1 month after the renewal of the policy, supply the insurer with a statement giving a proper estimate of the wages that will be payable by the employer during the indemnity period to workers in respect of whom the employer would be entitled to claim under the policy and such other information as may be prescribed; and not later than 2 months after the expiration of the indemnity period, supply the insurer with a full and correct statement of such amounts in respect of which he was required by paragraph (a) to supply an estimate as were actually paid by him during the period relevant to the determination of the premium payable by him for the policy.
 .........
 
Where, in respect of a policy of insurance or indemnity under this Act - the indemnity period is 1 year; and the premium payable is at least $500 or, where some other amount is prescribed, that other amount, the employer may, in such manner as may be agreed upon between the employer and the insurer, or in default of agreement, as may be prescribed, elect to pay the premium by 4 instalments, the several instalments being payable on dates that are 1, 3, 5 and 7 months after service on the employer of a demand or request for payment of the premium, each instalment being equal to one-fourth of the premium disregarding any remainder together with, in the case of the first instalment, that remainder.
 
Where - an employer has not elected under subsection (7B) to pay a premium by instalments and fails to pay the full amount of the premium within 1 month after service on him of a notice that payment of the premium is due; an employer who has elected under subsection (7B) to pay a premium by instalments fails to pay an instalment by the due date; or an employer has failed to pay an adjustment of premium within 1 month after service on him of a notice that payment of the amount of the adjustment is due, the full amount of the premium in the case referred to in paragraph (a), the balance of the premium unpaid or, where no instalment has been paid, the full amount of the premium, in the case referred to in paragraph (b) or the amount of the adjustment referred to in paragraph (c) bears interest until payment (except to the extent that payment of interest is waived by the insurer) at the rate of 10 per centum per annum (or, where some other rate of interest is prescribed, that other rate) and is recoverable with interest as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction." while ss. 371, 438 and 556 of the Companies (New South Wales) Code ("the Code"), so far as relevant, were as follows: - "371. (1) An order for winding up a company operates in favour of all the creditors and contributories of the company as if it had been made on the joint application of all the creditors and contributories.
 
Where an order has been made for the winding up of a company, or a provisional liquidator has been appointed in respect of a company, no action or other civil proceeding may be commenced or proceeded with against the company except - by leave of the Court; and in accordance with such terms as the Court imposes.
 ..........
 (1) In every winding up, subject in the case of insolvent companies to the application in accordance with the provisions of this Act of the [Bankruptcy Act 1966](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/), all debts payable on a contingency and all claims against the company (present or future, certain or contingent, ascertained or sounding only in damages) are admissible to proof against the company, a just estimate being made so far as possible of the value of such debts or claims as are subject to any contingency or sound only in damages or for some other reason do not bear a certain value.
 ..........
 (1) If - a company incurs a debt, whether within or outside the State; immediately before the time when the debt is incurred - there are reasonable grounds to expect that the company will not be able to pay all its debts as and when they become due; or there are reasonable grounds to expect that, if the company incurs the debt, it will not be able to pay all its debts as and when they become due; and the company is, at the time when the debt is incurred, or becomes at a later time, a company to which this section applies, any person who was a director of the company, or took part in the management of the company, at the time when the debt was incurred is guilty of an offence and the company and that person or, if there are 2 or more such persons, those persons are jointly and severally liable for the payment of the debt.
 
Penalty: $5,000 or imprisonment for 1 year, or both.
 
In any proceedings against a person under sub-section (1), it is a defence if the defendant proves - that the debt was incurred without his express or implied authority or consent; or that at the time when the debt was incurred, he did not have reasonable cause to expect - that the company would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due; or that, if the company incurred that debt, it would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due.
 
Proceedings may be brought under sub-section (1) for the recovery of a debt whether or not the person against whom the proceedings are brought, or any other person, has been convicted of an offence under subsection (1) in respect of the incurring of that debt." 
On 12 June 1985, His Excellency the then Governor, on the recommendation of the Insurance Premiums Committee, and in pursuance of the provisions of s.30AB of the Act, made the first Insurance Premiums Order ("IPO") to be made following the passing of the Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act 1985, which IPO was published in the New South Wales Government Gazette ("the Gazette") of 14 June 1985. That IPO provided (inter alia) for the manner of calculating the basic tariff premium of a policy of insurance or indemnity issued pursuant to the provisions of s.18 of the Act and, in Table A, the basic rates of premium applicable to various forms of business, or industrial, activity including "building n.o.c.", "carrying and carting" and "clerical staffs - office work".

The form of proposal pursuant to which the Workers Compensation Policy in question ("the subject policy") was later issued by the Appellant contained, in Schedule 1, a statement of the estimated earnings of the employees of
Jarvelle Pty. Limited ("the company") for the year 1 July 1985 to 30 June 1986 broken down by "class of employees", that estimate being $172,000.00, made up as to $56,000.00 for "clerical staff/& supervisors", as to $90,000.00 for "formworkers" and as to $26,000.00 for "carrying". On the obverse of the proposal there appear the words and symbol: " NEW VENTURE * Quarterly payments 
Please First $6,573.00 
Second $6,555.00 
Third $6,555.00 
Fourth $6,555.00" 
The form of policy which issued pursuant to this proposal, which policy was in the form prescribed pursuant to the Act, so far as relevant to this appeal contained the following: - "
 ..........
 
NOW THIS POLICY WITNESSES that in consideration of the payment subject to the provisions of s.18(7B) of the Act by the Employer to the Insurer of the Premium as shown which Premium is subject to adjustment as hereinafter provided.......
 ..........
 
CONDITIONS ...........
 . Premium 
The first and every subsequent premium that may be accepted shall be regulated by the amount of wages, salaries and all other forms of remuneration paid or allowed to workers during each period of indemnity.
 . Wages Book Must be Kept.
 
The name and earnings of every worker employed by the Employer shall be entered regularly in a proper Wages Book, so that a record may exist of such workers as are entitled to call upon the Employer for compensation.
 . Adjustment of Premium.
 
The employer shall at all times allow any Officer duly authorised by the Insurer to inspect the wages book, and shall supply the Insurer with a correct account of all wages, salaries, and other forms of remuneration paid or allowed during any period of indemnity, within 1 month from the expiry of such period of indemnity, and if the total amount shall differ from the amount on which premium has been paid, the difference in premium shall be met by a further proportionate payment to the Insurer, or by a refund by the Insurer, as the case may be, subject always to the retention by the Insurer of the Minimum Premium stated in the Proposal.
 .
 ..........." 
In the Schedule to the policy which was issued, the premium payable was shown as $26,222.60, which amount appears to have been calculated by an employee of the Appellant by reference, in the case of "clerical staffs/or supervisors" and "formworkers" to the rate of premiums set out in the IPO, but, in relation to "carrying" by reference to a rate higher than the basic premium shown in Table A to the IPO, the premium thus calculated on those figures being approximately $1,200.00 more than if the premium had been correctly calculated.

On 4 June 1986, His Excellency the then Governor on the recommendation of the
Insurance Premiums Committee, and in pursuance of s.30AB of the Act amended the IPO which had been published in the Gazette of 14 June 1985 as from 30
June 1986, that amending Order being published in the Gazette of 6 June 1986.
Insofar as is relevant to the present proceedings, the amending Order increased the basic rates of premium set out in Table A.

On 12 September 1986, the company submitted to the Appellant a Wage
Certificate and Renewal Declaration. In Schedule 1 - Actual Wages Paid For
Period ended 30.6.86, the wages of "clerical" employees were shown as having been $191,287.00, those of "formworkers" as having been $259,729.00 and those of "driver" as having been $41,300.00, a total of $492,316.00, while in
Schedule 2 - Renewal Estimate for ensuing 12 months, the wages of "clerical" employees were shown as $190,000.00, those of "formworkers" as being $260,000.00 and those of "driver" as $45,000.00, a total of $495,000.00.

On 24 September 1986, the Appellant forwarded to the company a document ("the
Notice") which was in part as follows: - "

Workers Compensation - NSW  
Policy No. 2010110960  ---  
Period of Insurance From 01/07/86 to 01/07/87 
Thank you for your Renewal instructions in respect of this Insurance. The premium required which has been calculated in accordance with the Regulations is as follows: 
Premium payable for coming year $ 78,338.15 
Adjustment for last year (if applicable) $ 44,649.63 
Total payable $122,987.78 ..........
 
This renewal premium if unpaid is payable within thirty (30) days or if you so wish, it may be paid in 4 equal instalments at 1, 3, 5 and 7 months from inception date. Should you wish to take advantage of this option please inform us in writing when returning your first payment. It should be noted that the Act provides that if any instalment should not be paid by the specified date the total outstanding balance becomes immediately payable plus interest calculated at 10%.
 ........." 
So far as the material before the Court enables one to judge, the company did not in relation to this premium elect to pay by instalments, although there is a suggestion in the material that is before the Court (Appeal Book pp.8R, 12 X/Y, 17K/L, 429R, 429X) that, at some time which is not specified, but which appears that it may have been after 24 September 1986, $22,987.78 was paid to the Appellant by the company.

Although it is not clear when it was that the company ceased to trade, the probability is that it was at the end of February or early in March 1987 - the
Summons pursuant to which, on 19 May 1987, the Court ordered that the company be wound up was filed on 19 March 1987.

Whether or not, as had earlier been threatened, (Appeal Book pp. 390-391) the
Appellant had thoroughly investigated "all matters pertaining to (the company's) workers compensation policies" it is the fact that, in early April , a Mr. Astle had carried out, on behalf of the Appellant, an audit of the company's wages records. As the result of that audit, the following were revealed: - in respect of the year ended 30 June 1986: in contrast to the figure of $492,316.00, which, in the Wage Certificate and Renewal Declaration, were said to have been the wages paid, the wages in fact paid were $771,600.00, of which $53,487.00 was said to relate to "clerical workers", $675,347.00 was said to relate to "formworkers" and $42,766.00 was said to relate to "carters, carriers and drivers"; in contrast to the premium of $26,222.60 originally assessed, and the sum of $70,871.60 ($26,222.60 plus $44,649.00) later assessed, the premium finally assessed for the year was $171,140.52; after giving credit for the amount of the premium originally assessed and paid, the shortfall was $144,917.92; for the period ended 28 February 1987 - in contrast to the total of $495,000.00 which, in the Wage Certificate and
Renewal Declaration, were shown as the renewal estimate for the 12 months to June 1987, the wages in fact paid for the period ended 28 February 1987 were $829,510.00; in contrast to the amount of $78,288.50 shown as the premium for the 12 months to 30 June 1987 in the Notice, the amount finally assessed as premium for the 8 months to the end of February 1987 was $213,127.89; the difference between the premium originally assessed for the 12 months to end of 30 June 1987 and the premium assessed for the 8 months to the end of
February 1987 was $213,127.89; if it be the fact that $22,987.78 was paid in respect of the premium originally assessed for the year ended 30 June 1987, the shortfall was $190,140.11.

These proceedings were commenced on 6 March 1988, when there was filed in the
Commercial Division of the Court a Summons in which the Appellant, relying on the provisions of s.556 of the Code, claimed against the then Defendants
Judgment in the sum of $339,096.13 that sum representing what was claimed to be the amount of unpaid premiums together with the amount of silicosis levy payable in respect of two policy periods under consideration.

On 6 April 1994, after the proceedings had - at some time which is not revealed by the material before the Court - been transferred from the
Commercial Division to the Equity Division, the proceedings were amended by substituting the Second Respondent as a party-Defendant in lieu of the original Second Defendant who had died meantime.

The essential elements in the Judgment which Hulme J was to deliver on 15
December 1994, appear to me to have been as follows: - that his Honour was not satisfied that, prior to October 1986, the requirements of s.556(1)(b) of the Code were satisfied; that it was his Honour's view that before a debt for the premiums, or adjustments of premiums, payable in respect of the policy could be said to have been incurred, there needed to have been served on the company a notice requiring the payment of the premium in question, or of the amount of the adjustment in question, and the period of time allowed for payment by s.18(7C) of the Act, had expired; that it was his Honour's view that as to so much of the amounts claimed by the Appellant as represented the unpaid balance of the premium originally assessed for the 12 months to 30 June 1986, the additional premium assessed for the same year, and the amount of the premium originally assessed for the months to 30 June 1987, the liability to pay that amount was incurred prior to October 1996; that it was his Honour's view that, as no Notice requiring the payment of the additional premium finally assessed in respect of the 12 months ended 30
June 1986 and the 8 months to the end of February 1987 had never been served upon the company, no liability to pay those sums had ever been incurred by the company; that, accordingly, those sums were not recoverable by the Appellant and had not been incurred by the company within the meaning of s.556 of the Code; that, in any event, the Fourth party-Defendant had not consented to the company incurring a liability to the Appellant in respect of premiums for workers compensation insurance whether as originally assessed or as later assessed.
that the Defendants were thus entitled to Judgment as against the
Appellant.

However, formal Orders dismissing the proceedings appear not to have been made until 9 February 1995.

To the Notice of Appeal which was filed on behalf of the Appellant on 8 March , only two of those who had been parties-Defendants at the trial were joined as parties-Respondents - the proceedings against the Third party-
Defendant, Mr. Vezza, who, although once a director of the company, had been removed as such at a meeting of shareholders on 30 June 1986, were compromised on the third hearing day (Appeal Book p.327) and - one assumes because of
Hulme J's finding that the Fourth party-Defendant, Mr. Mesnik, who, in any event, was not a director, but only the secretary of the company, had not consented to the incurring by the company of liability for premiums, was not joined as a party-Respondent. Further, although the bases upon which the
Appellant had sought to found its claim at first instance were more extensive, the only ground of appeal taken in that Notice of Appeal was: - "His Honour erred in the law (sic) in holding that service of a notice pursuant to Ss 18(7C) of the Workers compensation (sic) Act and the expiration of the period of time provided for in the said sub-section constituted conditions precedent to: completion of the Appellant's case (sic) of action against the Respondents based upon s.556 of the Companies Act/Code of 1981; and the creation of any liability of the Respondents to pay the amount which otherwise would have been found by His Honour to be payable in respect of the applicable premium adjustment in favour of the Appellant." 
If I may, with respect, say so, it seems to me that if, as appears to have been done on the hearing before Hulme J, and as was done on the hearing of this appeal, one concentrates on the provisions of s.18, and in particular of s.18(7C), of the Act one's attention is diverted from the real question at issue in the present proceedings, that is, did the company, on or after 1 October 1986, incur a debt to the Appellant. I say the one's attention is likely to be diverted from that issue for although it is true that s.18 of the Act imposed on an employer - unless he was a licensed self-employer to obtain from a licensed insurer, and to maintain, a Workers Compensation Policy, that Workers Compensation Policy to be in the form which was, from time to time, prescribed, and although, as I have earlier noted, the policy which was issued to the company was in the form prescribed, and although the exercise of the rights - as, for example, the right to sue to recover the amount by which a premium properly payable exceeded the amount in fact paid, or the right to terminate a policy - was governed or restricted by the provisions of the Act, the source from which the rights and liabilities of an employer or insurer were derived was, not the Act, but the policy itself (see Brakespeare v. The Northern Assurance Company Limited 1; see also Kodak (Australasia) Pty. Limited v. Retail Traders Mutual Indemnity Insurance Association 2; Green v. Windman 3) - it is otherwise in the case of any right which a worker or his dependants may claim to have to enforce an award, made against the worker's employer, against the workers compensation insurer of that employer (Devine v. Devine & Anor. 4; Devine v. Queensland Insurance Company Limited 5; Coleman v. The Mercantile Mutual Insurance Company Limited 6; Miller v. Law Union and Rock Insurance Company Limited 7).

Those provisions of the policy which I have set out above, in my view, make it clear that the consideration which was given for the indemnity contained in the policy was the promise of the company to pay to the Appellant the premium set out in the Schedule to the policy together with such further sum, if any, as might become payable by way of premium should it later appear that the amount of wages, salaries and other forms of remuneration paid, or allowed, during the period of indemnity exceeded the amount of wages and salaries and other forms of remuneration set out in the proposal, or in a Wage Certificate and Renewal Declaration.

The question then is, when, in a case in which it is later made to appear that the total amount of premium payable in respect of a period of indemnity exceeds the amount of premium set out in the Schedule to a Policy, can it be said that the employer incurred a debt for the total amount of premium or any part of it.

If I may, with respect, say so, a reference to the authorities - both in relation to the provisions of s.556(1) of the Code and of its predecessor, and successor, provisions provide little guidance as to the result appropriate to be achieved in the present case. As Gleeson CJ said in Hawkins v. Bank of
China 8: - "The identification of the time when the debt was incurred is central to the operation of s.556, because that is the time by reference to which the relevant expectations as to the company's financial capacity are to be judged. When one is concerned with a company that has become insolvent, expectations of the kind in question may change over time, and such changes may be rapid. 
As was observed by senior counsel for the appellants, the operation of s.556 may be clear enough in cases where the incurring of a debt is the result of a single act. Thus, for example, if a company borrows money there may be little difficulty about deciding when the resulting debt was incurred. On the other hand, debts often come into existence as a consequence of events that occur over a period of time, during which the financial position of the company in question may undergo significant change. Decided cases in relation to the section show that courts have, on occasion, had difficulty with the question of the time when a debt has been incurred: e.g. Russell Halpern Nominees Pty. Ltd. v. Martin [[1987] WAR 150] 
A reference to the authorities to which Gleeson CJ referred, far from providing any real guidance as to some general principle to be applied in cases such as those now under consideration, in my view, provides none.

Although the essential facts involved in Russell Halpern Nominees Pty.
Limited v. Martin 9 are less than clear, it would seem that the proceedings arose out of an agreement for lease made in November 1980 ("the agreement"), that is, before the coming into force of the provisions of the Companies (Western Australia) Code ("the W.A. Code"), which agreement for lease required the intending tenant companies ("the tenants") to enter into a formal lease.
It would further seem that, although the tenants went into possession of the subject premises and paid some rent, they did not execute the form of lease, and, further, they fell into arrears with the payment of rent, in consequence of which the plaintiff in the proceedings ("Halpern") commenced proceedings against the tenants seeking a decree for specific performance and also
Judgment for the arrears of rent. It would further seem that, in June 1982, the Supreme Court of Western Australia made a decree for specific performance and as well ordered the tenants to pay the arrears of rent up to and including the date of Judgment. It would further seem that the tenants failed to comply with the decree for specific performance or to satisfy the amount of Judgment despite which fact they continued in occupation of the premises. Halpern then brought proceedings seeking to recover against the directors of the tenants the amount of the unsatisfied Judgment debt and the further instalments of rent, which proceedings were, on the application of the directors struck out on the ground that they failed to reveal a course of action. Halpern then appealed.

The primary submission advanced on behalf of Halpern in the appeal was that the total of the unpaid rent which had fallen due under the agreement was incurred in November 1980 when the agreement was entered into and that the provisions of s.556(1) of the W.A. Code were merely procedural so that those provisions had a retrospective operation, a submission which did not find favour with the Court which held that s.556(1) of the W.A. Code was entirely new, so that it did not apply to debts incurred before the W.A. Code came into operation.

The alternative submission advanced on behalf of Halpern in the appeal was to the effect that a debt was incurred as, and when, rent became payable pursuant to the provisions of the agreement and was not paid, a submission which, in its turn, found no favour with the Court. In his Judgment Burt CJ, with whom
Smith and Olney JJ concurred, said (at 153): - "That submission should be dealt with upon the basis that the lease was for a term which had not expired when on 25 May 1983 the appellant sold the premises. So understood, the proposition is that a tenant holding premises for a term `incurs a debt' within the meaning of s.556(1) of the Code upon each and every rent day. I do not think that to be correct. Whatever the expression `incurs a debt' might mean, it is clearly descriptive of an act which when done by the company in the stated circumstances exposes a director of the company and a person who took part in the management of the company when the debt was incurred, sc, when the act was done to a criminal liability. The incurring of the debt by the company in the stated circumstances is the act which constitutes the offence created by the sub-section and that act is done at a particular and identifiable point of time, sc, `when the debt was incurred'. In a case such as this, when the term of the lease has not expired and when the landlord is holding the tenant to the agreement so that the tenant, whether in occupation of the leased premises or not, becomes liable to pay rent on the agreed rent days, I do not think that any relevant act on the part of the tenant beyond his entering into the lease in the first instance can be identified. And that being so, I do not think that it can be said that a tenant company `incurs a debt' within the meaning of the sub-section whenever a present liability to pay rent is created by the tenant's covenant in the lease operating upon the passage of time. To hold otherwise would be to say that if a company when in all respects financially sound were to enter into a lease for a term of years and at some time thereafter and for reasons which could not be anticipated it were to fall on bad times and be unable to pay its debts, the directors would thereafter and on every rent day within the remainder of the term be guilty of an offence for the reason that on that rent day the company `incurs a debt'. I am unable to accept that." 
The decision of Connolly J in John Graham Reprographics Pty. Limited v. Steffens 10 - even if, which I would dispute, correctly decided - if I may say so takes the matter no further. In that case, the majority of the facts in which need not be recorded, an agreement had been made between a supplier of goods and a company which later went into receivership, at a time when there were significant liabilities owing to the supplier, by which agreement the original trading terms were varied so as to allow an extended period of credit, but on terms that all amounts outstanding after the 60 days credit which had been allowed had expired were to attract interest at bank overdraft rates until paid. In the course of his Judgment, Connolly J said (at 784): - "I turn then to the question whether the other elements of the cause of action are satisfied. These are that immediately before the time when the debts in question were incurred, there were reasonable grounds to expect that the company would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due; or reasonable grounds to expect that if the company incurred the debts, it would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due. The debts constituted by the April and May invoices were obviously incurred in those months. So far as the interest which became due at the end of May, June and July is concerned, the liability arose because the debit balance at the end of the preceding months was not paid. However the contract pursuant to which this interest became payable was made on 17 December 1985. In relation to the interest, therefore, it seems to me that this situation rather resembles that considered by the Full Court of Western Australia in Russell Halpern Nominees Pty. Ltd. v. Martin [(1986) 10 ACLR 539] The court there held that the periodic accrual of rent does not involve the accruing of a debt on each day when rent falls due. It follows that if the interest which became payable at the end of May, June and July is to be recoverable, s.556(1)(b) must be satisfied as at 17 December 1985." (I regret that I am unable to see how the case before Connolly J could be said to resemble Russell Halpern Nominees Pty. Ltd. v. Martin) 
Hussein v. Good 11 was a case in which, in November 1987, a company, of which the appellant was a director, which company carried on business under the name of "Samba Boutique", ordered from the respondent, who was a clothing manufacturer, a quantity of clothing to be delivered in March 1988, and to be paid for on delivery. The garments were in fact delivered in May 1988, by which time the company's financial position was poor - in the following month creditors passed a resolution to wind up the company and to appoint liquidators. The respondent then relying (inter alia) upon the provisions of s.556 of the Companies (Victoria) Code sought to recover from the appellant the unpaid balance of the cost of the goods delivered, a claim which the appellant sought to oppose upon the ground that the debt was incurred in November 1987 when the order was placed. That defence having failed at first instance, the appellant obtained an order nisi to review. 
In the course of his Judgment, Southwell J, before whom the matter came on the return of that order nisi, after referring to (inter alia) Russell Halpern
Nominees Pty. Ltd. v. Martin 12 and Shapowloff v. Dunn 13 said [14]: "I have said that the parties were in agreement as to liability for payment - that was to be made upon delivery of the goods. In the circumstances of the present case, I am of opinion that the company did not `incur a debt' within the meaning of s.556(1) until the goods were delivered. Some of the relevant goods were delivered on 3 May, the remainder on an unstated date some days later. Accordingly, I am of the view that the Magistrate was correct in looking at that period as the relevant period." 
The closest which one comes, in the authorities, to any statement of general principle is to be found in the Judgment of Gleeson CJ in Hawkins v. Bank of
China 15 where his Honour said [16]: - "The words `incurs' and `debt' are not words of precise and inflexible denotation. Where they appear in s.556 they are to be applied in a practical and commonsense fashion, consistent with the context and with the statutory purpose. `Debt' is capable of including a contingent liability. The word was used in that sense in s.292 of the [Companies Act 1961](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) which referred to `debts payable on a contingency'. That expression did not involve a contradiction in terms. Dictionaries define `debt' as a liability or obligation to pay or render something. Such a liability may be conditional as well as present and absolute. ..........
 
Similarly the word `incurs' takes its meaning from its context and is apt to describe, in an appropriate case, the undertaking of an engagement to pay a sum of money at a future time, even if the engagement is conditional and the amount involved uncertain. Once it is accepted that `debt' may include a contingent debt, then there is no obstacle to the conclusion that, in the present context, a debt may be taken to have been incurred when a company enters into a contract by which time its subjected itself to a conditional but unavoidable obligation to pay a sum of money at a future time. This is such a case." 
The use by the Chief Justice, in the passage to which I have just referred, of the word "unavoidable" seems to me to provide the solution to the present case. As I have earlier indicated, the consideration provided by the company for the indemnity to be provided by the Appellant under the policy was the company's promise to pay the amount of premium set out in the Schedule to the policy and, in the event that the wages and allowances in fact paid during the period of indemnity exceeded the amount set out in the proposal, or the Wage Certificate and Renewal Declaration to pay the additional amount of premium assessed in respect of the excess amount so paid. It follows that, although the obligation to pay the amount of premium set out in the Schedule to the policy accrued on the acceptance of the proposal, or of the application for renewal, no obligation to pay any additional premium accrued unless, and until, the company, by continuing to trade reached a point at which the amount set out in the proposal, or the Wage Certificate and Renewal Declaration, was exceeded. A similar approach appears to have commended itself to Hodgson J in Standard Chartered Bank of Australia Limited v. Antico 17 and appears to have been regarded by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Western Australia in Commissioner of State Taxation (WA) v. Pollock 18 as being at least arguable.

If, as I believe to be the case, this is the correct approach to be taken to the amounts which the Appellant has sought to recover in these proceedings, then, as it seems to me, the position is: - that the total of the amounts claimed represents debts incurred by the company; of that total, the $44,649.00 and the $78,338.00 referred to in the Notice of 24 September 1986, together with the amount of $100,268.59 representing the further excess premium assessed in respect of the year ended 30 June 1986 following Mr. Astle's inspection were incurred prior to 1 October 1986; it being "accepted that the initial premiums for each year were `used up' at respectable (sic) the end of September 1985 and December 1986" (Appeal Book p.724) the amount of $134,789.74 representing the additional premium assessed in respect of the 8 months to the end of February 1986 after Mr. Astle's inspection was incurred after 1 October 1986; given the findings made by Hulme J as to the state of the company's finances prior to 1 October 1986, the only amount to which the provisions of s.556(1) might apply is the sum of $134,789.74.

The fact that, as no notice such as was contemplated by the provisions of s.18(7C) of the Act was served on the company, no action to recover that sum could successfully have been taken by the Appellant is irrelevant, first, since the test of liability is whether a debt was incurred, and second, since that amount together with the amount of $100,268.59, being debts, could be the subject of a proof in the winding up of the company.

For these reasons I agree with the Orders proposed by Handley JA but I would add an order that, if qualified, the Respondents have a Certificate under the provisions of the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
  <case>; <case>; [[1964] VR 297] (1928) 28 SR 503 (1928) 29 SR 1; [1929] WCR 56 [1933] WCR 231 (1969) 71 SR 201 [(1992) 26 NSWLR 562], 567-568  <case>; [(1981) 148 CLR 72] [14] (supra) 719 (supra) [16] at 572 [(1993-1995) 18 ACSR 1], 57 [(1993) 12 ACLC 28] * * * 
