

Regina versus Lucre Matter No 001/92 [1996] NSWSC 22 (5 February 1996) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
REGINA versus DESMOND DARRELL TREVOR LUCRE /92 February 1996 
Michael Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
DETERMINATION OF LIFE SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: Desmond Darrell Trevor Lucre (the applicant) seeks fixing of minimum and additional terms which will together replace a sentence of penal servitude for life imposed by Roden J on 29 March 1985. The applicant has been in continuous custody since 3 January 1984. This application for redetermination was lodged before to the proclamation of the Sentencing (Life Sentences) Amendment Act 1993 and in accordance with transitional provisions therein, the law to apply is the [Sentencing Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) as it stood prior to the amendment. The Crown does not support this application "because of the seriousness of the offence" but concedes that, in the light of applicable authority, it will be granted. I conclude that I should accede to the application and the principal remaining issue is the quantification of the term. 
The applicant is one of three offenders responsible for the murder of Francis
Anthony (Frank) Galluzzo each of whom was originally sentenced to penal servitude for life. Philip Henry Cramer's sentence was redetermined on 21
October 1993 to fifteen years divided into minimum and additional terms of ten and five years respectively. He had been recruited by the applicant as an assistant, principally to remove the body of the intended victim. There was no real comparison between the culpability of Cramer and this applicant nor was it suggested that there should be parity of sentence between them. Special considerations pertain to Cramer and these are set out in my remarks upon the redetermination of his life sentence and it suffices now to incorporate them by reference.

The other offender was Kerrie Anne Galluzzo the applicant's niece. The victim was her husband. Her life sentence was redetermined on 20 December 1994 to sixteen years penal servitude divided into minimum and additional terms of eleven and one half and four and one half years respectively. As with Cramer, my remarks on imposition of the redetermined sentence may be taken as incorporated. It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that there should be parity, or at least only modest disparity, between his sentence and that received by Galluzzo. I must, of course, deal with the applicant in relation to findings made on the evidence in these proceedings and must not draw upon other sources. That is not to say that I should not consider comparability of the sentences on co-offenders, taking guidance from the judgments in Lowe v
The Queen <case>; [1984 154 CLR 606.] 
The applicant was released from gaol in Western Australia in early October and was paroled to this State where he resided with his sister-in-law (the offender Galluzzo's mother) at Casula. He had been imprisoned in Perth in
March 1974 for armed robbery but escaped about two years later. He was convicted and sentenced to imprisonment in Queensland in 1977 but was not extradited from Brisbane to Perth to serve the remainder of his sentence there until July 1981. He was also sentenced for the escape. In 1974 Kerrie Anne
Galluzzo would have been about fourteen years of age. It does not appear that the applicant would have had any significant contact with her until after
October 1983 by which time she was aged twenty three and was married with two children.

It is the applicant's evidence that his niece complained to him of physical mistreatment by her husband. He said she showed him marks upon her body. The applicant claims he saw Galluzzo on one occasion strike one of the children.
These were not facts asserted by Kerrie Anne Galluzzo but they stand uncontradicted in these proceedings and therefore I assume accuracy to the extent that these were things which Kerrie Anne Galluzzo said to the applicant. They do not, in my view, evidence a factor for mitigation to be extended to the applicant but rather reveal some matters which may have contributed to his motive. Another element of motive is a seeming infatuation at the time harboured by the applicant for his niece. There is no evidence of her reciprocation. The applicant wrote, but did not send, two letters addressed to her which were subscribed "your future husband, Des" and "all my love, future hubby, Des xxxxx". Roden J. remarked that the planned removal of the deceased may have been seen by the applicant as more than just a financial benefit.

Conversations between the applicant and Kerrie Anne Galluzzo culminated in an agreement that her husband would be killed. Financial reward to the applicant was to be harvested from the proceeds of some insurance. The applicant twice positioned himself to carry out the killing but on each occasion aborted his mission for reasons which are no longer important. The murder was planned, calculated and the result of persistence.

The applicant had left residence with his sister-in-law and moved to Gosford.
He procured the assistance of Cramer for a promised reward of some $2,000 about two weeks prior to 2 January 1984 when the two of them travelled by train to the victim's home at Ingleburn. The applicant carried in a bag a loaded rifle which he had shortened. In the early hours of the following morning they entered the house through a door which had been left unlocked by arrangement with Kerrie Anne Galluzzo. The applicant become aware of the presence in a nearby residence of an employee of the victim so he decided not to risk attracting attention by discharging the firearm. There was an axe in the garage through which they had gained entrance.

The applicant entered the bedroom where the victim and his wife were occupying the bed. He struck Frank Galluzzo several fatal blows with the blunt end of the axe. He told Kerrie Anne Galluzzo to leave the room and she did. He called
Cramer and together they rolled the body in a sheet and carried it into the boot of a motor car belonging to the deceased. The three offenders participated in inept attempts to clear away signs of the crime. Kerrie Anne
Galluzzo made coffee which they shared and after partaking of it the applicant and Cramer drove off.

The vehicle was taken to isolated bushland where it was doused with petrol and ignited. The pair then set off on foot. The applicant still had his bag containing the unused weapon. Patrolling police came to investigate the fire and encountered the two offenders. The applicant brandished his sawn off rifle but yielded to one of the policemen who had drawn his pistol in response.

After arrest the applicant made candid admissions in interview with police and signed the record. Although he pleaded not guilty at the trial he did not seek to resile from his confession.

I do not accept that the applicant could harbour a justifiable sense of grievance if he is treated somewhat more harshly than Kerrie Anne Galluzzo. It is attractive to theorize that the culpability of the hirer of the killer and the executioner should be identical but the matters for discrimination in this case are many and major. I set out some of the contrasts.

The applicant was at the time a man of forty years; his niece was twenty three. She had no prior convictions. His record demonstrated continuing offending which included other instances of violence. He commenced planning this crime within weeks of release on parole. The decision to kill the victim in a particularly brutal fashion with the axe was taken by the applicant while he was in the garage and in the absence of Kerrie Anne Galluzzo. If there be truth in the complaint of mistreatment which the applicant says was conveyed to him - and there is it should be emphasized no evidence that the deceased in fact mistreated his wife - the gravity of her offence might be mitigated but the same consideration would not attach to him. The whole of the circumstances bespeak an aggravated responsibility of the actual perpetrator as compared with the conspirator who sought to bring about a death. I am speaking in terms of relativity only. I certainly do not suggest that Kerrie Anne Galluzzo's culpability was minor.

I turn to some subjective matters touching the applicant. Shortly after his arrest he wrote letters to members of the deceased's family. I was invited as
I understand it to consider these as exhibiting some contrition. The applicant gave evidence that they were intended as apologies. The letters represent to my eye an extraordinary externalization of responsibility. Blame for the killing was vehemently attributed to Kerrie Anne Galluzzo while the applicant's own contribution is markedly glossed over. The words in the letters do incant the applicant's sorrow but I do not assess them as expressions of one who is truly contrite.

It stands to the appellant's credit however that he has sought to improve himself whilst in prison. He has produced an impressive array of achievement certificates. I have also taken into consideration the report obtained from Dr
Westmore. The achievement certificates are consistent with and complemented by two favourable reports prepared by the Serious Offenders Review Council. There is no purpose to be served in reciting the contents of those reports and it suffices to note in the applicant's favour that the council regards his progress as satisfactory and in September last year concluded that "in due course a program will be prepared for him which will be directed to prepare him to return to the community as a law abiding citizen".

The applicant is not addicted to illicit drugs and expressed contempt for those who traffic in them. It stands further to his credit that he placed himself at risk by communicating to authority some drug related activities on the part of other inmates. Unfortunately a letter which he wrote was intercepted and he was transferred from the Training Centre at Long Bay to
Berrima in order that his safety might be better assured. I take into account the conditions of his incarceration have been affected as a result of his cooperation with authority. The ultimate sentence will be lessened in reflection of considerations akin to those discussed in Cartwright [17 NSWLR ] and
Gallagher [23 NSWLR 221.] 
The applicant is now fifty two years old. He has children from various relationships (in 1988 he claimed to a probation officer that he had sired fourteen children who were spread about five States of the Commonwealth) but there is no indication of particular family support which might be available to him on release. He has married twice whilst in prison but he has not seen his second wife for nearly twelve months now and he stated that that relationship was "on the rocks". I accept that this must be so.

The applicant testified to his desire to achieve rehabilitation and to lead a law abiding life in the future. The sincerity which he sought to convey was diminished in my view by the somewhat chilling detachment with which he was able to refer to the horrific crime which he had perpetrated. His expressions re-echoed the unemotional descriptions to the police during his interview after arrest when he spoke of agreeing to "knock" Frank Galluzzo.

I am required by the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) to have regard to the original sentencing judge's remarks and I have already made some reference to them. Roden J. detected no mitigating circumstances significantly diminishing culpability and observed that no matter what the precise motivation, this was a callous, calculated killing, planned over two months and carried out after two earlier plans were abandoned. I adopt those observations. If there was a spark of passion for Kerrie Anne Galluzzo in the applicant's motivation it was clearly extinguished by the time he wrote to the deceased's family shortly after his arrest. I am satisfied that the financial benefit held out to the applicant was a most prominent factor and the killing has sufficient of that element to place it in the category of a professionally undertaken homicide. It was contended on behalf of the Crown that the professional assassination of a sleeping victim placed the circumstances close to a worst case. There is substance in that contention. Choice of language should not blunt reality of meaning. A worst case would attract a life sentence if that were available. I have already noted the lodgement of this application before the 1993 amendments. Absent the amendments, the application in a worst case category might be refused, or a very long sentence imposed. I do not overlook that the submission refers to "close to" as distinguished from worst case but, on any view, the objective seriousness of this crime must attract a substantial sentence. Mitigation is derived from the subjective matters to which I referred earlier in these remarks.

I have, as further required by the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/), noted what I might call the usual statistics concerning release of prisoners on ticket of leave prior to that statute. The statisticians note that under that scheme a survey group of one hundred and sixty one prisoners served a mean length of 11.7 years before first release but acknowledged that the range stretched between three and thirty four years.

Mine is essentially a sentencing exercise. I am not bound to divide any total term in accordance with [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). The favourable subjective matters persuade me to set a somewhat lengthy additional term. There will be a consequent advancement of the eligibility date for parole which gives practical reflection to the applicant's rehabilitation goals. It is not my task to determine actual release and this must be decided by appropriate authority. It is apt to observe the statutory inhibition upon ordering parole unless it is determined that the applicant, if released from custody, would be able to adapt to normal lawful community life.

The applicant's own behaviour will be a factor in determining whether or not he receives the benefit of parole during the additional term.

Desmond Darrell Trevor Lucre, for the murder of Francis Anthony Galluzzo, in substitution for the existing term of penal servitude for life I impose a sentence of twenty two years penal servitude. This is to consist of a minimum term of sixteen and one half years to date from 3 January 1984 and will expire on 2 July 2000 together with an additional term of five and one half years commencing on 3 July 2000. You will be eligible for parole on 2 July 2000.
 * * * 
