

Donnelly versus Amalgamated Television Services Pty Limited and Anor Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 509 (5 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 November 1998 
DONNELLY versus AMALGAMATED TELEVISION SERVICES PTY LIMITED & ANOR /98 November 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 2nd November 1998, I granted an ex parte injunction restraining the defendants, up to and including 3rd November 1998, from broadcasting a video recording made of the plaintiff Peter Donnelly at about 7.30am on 24th March 1998 in the home of his mother at 11 Buffalo Road, Gladesville. On 3rd November 1998, I heard a contested application for the continuation of that injunction. I reserved my decision, and continued the injunction in the meantime. 
OUTLINE OF FACTS 
The plaintiff was arrested on 24th March 1998, and charged with numerous offences under s.85ZE(a) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cwth) involving the use of a telephone to menace or harass other persons. He pleaded guilty to those charges on 28th October 1998, and was remanded in custody to be sentenced on 6th November 1998.

On 1st November 1998, a child of the plaintiff's solicitor told the plaintiff's solicitor about an advertisement for Channel 7's Today Tonight programme for 2nd November 1998, which showed the plaintiff in his underpants in his bedroom in his mother's house, and a police officer then saying to the plaintiff "You are under arrest".

There is in evidence a copy of a search warrant granted to police under the
Search Warrants Act by a Justice on 23rd March 1998, expiring 26th March 1998, giving police power to enter premises at 11 Buffalo Road, Gladesville and search for and seize certain items. The search warrant was granted on the basis that the applicant police officer had reasonable grounds to believe there were items on the premises connected with certain offences of the general nature of those with which the plaintiff was later charged.

Although the evidence is very sketchy, I believe I can infer that there will be evidence available on a final hearing that a video was taken inside the house of the plaintiff's mother, by police who had gained access to the interior of that house in exercise of coercive powers which they had pursuant to the warrant and/or for the purpose of arresting the plaintiff, which video showed the plaintiff in his bedroom dressed only in underpants, and showed his arrest; and that this video has never been shown in Court in the prosecution of the plaintiff or otherwise been made public, except by advertisements by the defendant such as that referred to above. There is certainly an inference available that the defendants propose to show this video on the Today Tonight programme, and this is not denied.

It also appears clear that the defendants have obtained the video from the police, although there is no evidence as to precisely how this happened.

SUBMISSIONS 
Mr. See for the plaintiff referred me to Bathurst City Council v. Saban [(1985) 2 NSWLR 704] at 707-8 for the proposition that the taking of offensive photographs was an exception to the general rule that no tortious conduct is involved in taking photographs of another person, or his or her private property, without consent.

Next, he referred me to the [Search Warrants Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/), [ss.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/s5.html) and [7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/s7.html), and the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), [ss.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s38.html)-[40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s40.html), concerning the execution of search warrants and the disposal of property obtained thereby. He submitted that these made no qualification to general law principles concerning the execution of search warrants, including the principle that police were not entitled to retain goods seized for longer than was reasonably necessary for the purposes of evidence (Ghani v. Jones (1971)
QB 693 at 708-9, Rowell v. Larter [(1986) 6 NSWLR 21] at 31-2,
Bartlett v. Weir <case>; [(1944) 72 ACrimR. 511)] and may be liable in detinue if they do so (Gollan v.
Nugent (1988) 166 CLR at 29. He also referred me to Crowley v. Murphy [(1981) FLR 121] at 150, for the proposition that search warrants must be exercised in good faith, for the purpose for which they are conferred, and with due regard to the rights of those affected.

In this case, even accepting that the taking of the video on private premises, to which access had been obtained in exercise by the police of powers under the warrant and/or of arrest, was reasonably incidental to the exercise of those powers if done for the purposes for which the powers were conferred, the use of that video for purposes other than the investigation or prosecution was outside those powers and would involve an abuse of those powers. Use of the video by the defendant, knowing all these things, would also be such an abuse.

Mr. See submitted that the plaintiff was particularly affected, and so had standing to seek the prevention of such abuse. Although his undertaking as to damages was of little, if any, value, the balance of convenience was in favour of preventing the defendants using this material for their own commercial advantage.

Mr. Blackburn for the defendants referred me to the decision of Levine, J. in
GS v. News Limited, 20th February 1998, for the proposition that there is no right of privacy which can give rise to a cause of action.

He submitted that an injunction against the police, and a fortiori against the defendants, would be an unjustified interference with police administrative action: see Jarrett v. Seymour [(1993) 119 ALR 10] at 35. The taking of a video was merely incidental to the exercise of police powers and to the legitimate informing of the public of the progress of investigation and prosecution of offences.

Further, there was no contempt of court. No court proceedings were in train at the time. In any event, this was not a case where the Court would intervene by way of injunction. Mr. Blackburn referred me to Dobson v. Hastings [(1992)
Ch. 394], where, in a situation where inspection of documents held by the Court was permissible only with the leave of the Court, there was no contempt where the documents were inspected without leave in circumstances where the person did not know that leave was required. Reliance was placed in that case on what was said by Lord Reid in Attorney-General v. Times Newspaper [(1974) AC ] at 294, to the effect that the law concerning contempt was not to protect the private rights of parties, but to prevent interference with the administration of justice. No such interference was threatened here.

Mr. Blackburn also referred me to Gouriet v. Union of Post Office Workers <case>; [(1978) AC 435] on the question of whether the plaintiff had locus standi to bring these proceedings.

On the balance of convenience, Mr. Blackburn submitted that one purpose of criminal law is deterrence, and that the Courts rely on the mass media to assist in the deterrent purpose of the criminal law by publicising the course of prosecution and dealing with offenders. There was a very important public interest in freedom of speech and expression; and Mr. Blackburn referred me to the decision of Young, J. in Summertime Holdings v. Environmental Defender's
Office, 28th September 1998. He also submitted that the likely lack of substance of the plaintiff's undertaking as to damages was a significant discretionary factor.

DECISION 
I consider first whether the plaintiff has shown a serious question to be tried.

I note that Levine, J. in GS did not expressly deal with Young, J.'s proposition concerning offensive photographs; but I would not in any event regard the possibility that there has been commission of a tort of invasion of privacy by offensive photographs as sufficient ground for relief in this case.
The threat of a defamatory publication would also not be a sufficient ground for injunctive relief. The real question is whether use of a video taken within private premises, to which access has been obtained by exercise by the police of powers under a warrant and/or of arrest, for purposes other than for which those powers were given, could be such an abuse of those powers that it should be restrained.

I would not infer, even provisionally, that the video was initially taken otherwise than for the purposes of criminal investigation or prosecution, and so I would not find that the exercise of powers under the warrant and/or of arrest were vitiated at the time. The question is, assuming the video was taken initially for a proper purpose, what consequences flow from its later use for different purposes.

Some analogy is provided by the law concerning discovery of documents. It seems clear that if a person obtains access to documents by the coercive process of discovery, it is contempt of court to use those documents or copies of them otherwise than for the purpose of the relevant proceedings, at least where the documents have not otherwise become public; and it may be contempt for newspapers to publish such documents: Attorney-General v. Times
Newspapers [(1974) AC 273]; Home Office v. Harman [(1983) AC 280]; Eltran v.
Westpac [(1990) 98 ALR 141]; Ainsworth v. Hanrahan [(1991) 25 NSWR 155.] However, this is based on the proposition that a party or legal adviser using the coercive process of discovery impliedly undertakes to the Court not to use documents thereby obtained otherwise than for the purpose of proceedings. It is by no means clear that there is any implied undertaking to any Court by police, using their powers under a warrant and/or of arrest, that they will not use material obtained thereby otherwise than for the purpose the relevant investigation or prosecution.

There are Courts and Judicial Officers involved in warrants and arrests.
Warrants are issued by Justices pursuant to powers under the [Search Warrants
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/), but no undertaking is expressly given when a warrant is obtained; and in any event, it is doubtful whether the breach of an undertaking to Justices would be a contempt which would be restrained by injunction. Arrest is for various purposes considered as the commencement of criminal proceedings: see James v.
Robinson <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 593]; The Queen v. Rogerson <case>; [(1991-2) 174 CLR 268.] But the police exercise of powers of arrest would not appear to involve any undertaking by them to the Court in which the prosecution is brought. In both cases, an improper purpose at the time of the exercise of powers could invalidate that exercise, and also make any intrusion on private property a trespass; but as I noted above, I am not concerned with that position here.

Where what is obtained by exercise of such powers is a person's property, then dealing with that property otherwise than for the purpose of the powers could be conversion or detinue: see Gollan v. Nugent <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 18] at 29. But the video recording in this case is not property of the plaintiff, or of the owner of the premises to which access was obtained by exercise of the powers.

A possible basis for relief for the plaintiff is the tort of misfeasance in public office, which is committed where damage is suffered as a result of an act done by a public officer with the intention of causing harm to the plaintiff or which he knows or ought to know is beyond power and which involves a foreseeable risk of harm: see Northern Territory v. Mengel (1995) CLR 307, Sanders v. Snell, High Court of Australia, 8th October 1998. It is arguable that the use of this video by the police so as to permit the broadcast of it by television is conduct which the police know or ought to know is beyond power and involves a foreseeable risk of harm to the plaintiff.

I accept that it is beneficial that the processes of justice be public, and be depicted in the mass media. I accept that the mass media perform a useful function in publicising these matters. I think it is legitimate for police to give information to the media about the progress of investigations and prosecutions. I would be very reluctant to interfere with a decision of police to notify the media of an event concerning the investigation or prosecution of an offence, and to permit the recording and broadcasting of such an event, unless there was a tendency thereby to prejudice the fair trial of an accused person. I accept that since the only outstanding matter in this case is the sentencing of the plaintiff by a judge, it is very unlikely that the broadcasting of this video could prejudice the fair disposal of the case against the plaintiff.

Publicity may involve in various ways the humiliation of accused persons, but in general terms, subject to the law of defamation, I do not see that this infringes their legal rights if it does not prejudice a fair trial, and if it is no more than what follows from the media informing the public about the progress of the investigation and prosecution of offences. In the present case, if the police had notified the media that an arrest was to be made, so that the media could have recorded events as seen from a public road, then, so long as a broadcast of that recording had no tendency to prejudice a fair trial, I do not believe I would have prevented such a broadcast. Apparently some of the video in this case shows events which could have been seen and recorded from a public road; and these considerations weigh against preventing the broadcast of that material.

However, as regards material recorded inside the house itself, which could only have been obtained by entry into the house, the position is different.

If police, in exercising powers under a search warrant or of arrest, were to enter into private property and thereby obtain documents containing valuable confidential information, albeit not protected by the law concerning intellectual property, I believe they could in a proper case be restrained, at the suit of the owner of the documents, from later using that information to their own advantage, or to the disadvantage of the owner, or passing the information on to other persons for them to use in that way; and if other persons acquired such information from the police, knowing the circumstances of its acquisition by the police, then I believe those other persons could likewise be restrained.

I believe the same applies to material obtained in that way which is gratuitously humiliating rather than confidential, particularly where no basis has been put forward for suggesting that the dissemination of this material is required for the legitimate publicising of the investigation, prosecution, and disposal of the matters to which the plaintiff has pleaded guilty. Mr.
Blackburn did submit that the strong defence of this case by the defendants indicated that they believed the broadcasting of this material was necessary for their purposes, and that I should not question their judgment on this; but he did not provide me with any material or any submissions which could satisfy me that the inclusion of the material recorded within the house in question was reasonably necessary or appropriate for the broadcast concerning the plaintiff which the defendants proposed to make.

I note further that cases such as The Queen v. Ireland <case>; <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 1] and Lippl v. Haines [(1989) 18 NSWLR 620], in addition to those mentioned earlier, show how concerned the Courts are to ensure that the coercive powers of the police under a search warrant and/or of arrest are not abused. I believe that the Supreme Court does have a general jurisdiction to restrain threatened abuses of the processes of criminal justice.

I also note that in Lincoln Hunt Australia v. Willesee [(1986) 4 NSWLR ],
Young, J. refused to grant an injunction against the broadcasting of video material obtained during a trespass on the plaintiff's land, on the ground that a threat of irreparable damage was not shown. In the present case it would be particularly difficult to quantify damages involved in gratuitous public humiliation of a person whose reputation will in any event be gravely damaged by conviction and sentence for numerous most unpleasant and distressing offences; and it is not clear that this could be overcome by the availability of exemplary damages as relied on in the Willesee case.
Furthermore, in so far as the Court is acting to prevent an abuse of the processes of criminal justice, damage to the plaintiff is only an element giving the plaintiff standing to seek the injunction.

On the balance of convenience, the fact that the plaintiff's undertaking as to damages is probably of little or no value is a powerful discretionary factor against the grant of an interlocutory injunction. However, I am inclined to think that the broadcasting of material recorded within the house of the plaintiff's mother may well involve the knowing participation by the defendants in a serious abuse by the police of their powers under a search warrant and/or of arrest, and that an injunction would as a practical matter be the only satisfactory remedy. On balance, I believe this broadcasting should be restrained.

In the short time since the matter first came before the Court, neither I nor
Counsel have been able to locate any similar case. Counsel's research and submissions, and my consideration of the matter, have necessarily been less than desirable for determination, even on an interlocutory basis, of a point of this apparent novelty and possible significance. It is possible that some relevant authority or principle has been overlooked, and it is possible that in some way the factual situation may have been misconceived. If the defendants wish to submit that either of those possibilities holds good, then it would be open to them to apply to have the injunction discharged.

I note that the existing injunction imposes a restraint only in relation to images and sound recording of the plaintiff in the home of his mother; and, consistently with what I have said, I do intend that the injunction only extend to recording made actually inside the home; and not to recordings made of events outside the home but within the property of the plaintiff's mother, being events which could have been observed from a public road. With that explanation of the order, for the reasons I have given, I propose that the order continue until the final hearing of the matter or further order; and that decision in fact requires no alteration of the order which I made to cover the situation pending the delivery of this judgment.

At present, I would be minded to make the costs of the interlocutory hearing costs in the proceedings.
 * * * 
