

Regina versus George Damatre [1997] NSWSC 217 (23 May 1997) 
REGINA v. George DAMATRE /96 
Friday 16 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: George Damatre seeks leave to appeal against the severity of a fixed term of imprisonment for six months for supplying cannabis leaf. It was a deemed supply. The jury convicted after a 4 day trial. The sole ground of appeal was a lack of parity in the sentences imposed on Damatre and his co- offender.

About 8.12 am on 17 July 1995 the applicant was a passenger in a car being driven by his co-offender, Mohammed Choukair, along the Sturt Highway near
Darlington Point. Travelling at an estimated 140 kph this car overtook an unmarked police car. In response the police officer turned on the car's siren and affixed a blue flashing light and gave chase at speeds up to 170 kph.
After a chase of 23 kms the car driven by the co-offender stopped. The police officer waited in his vehicle until other police arrived shortly thereafter.

In the car's boot there were 2 sports bags, one belonging to Choukair and the other to Damatre. In each bag there was an identical resealable plastic bag, each of which contained 1 ounce of cannabis leaf. There was a further black plastic bag in the boot and that bag contained 32 identical resealable plastic bags, each of which contained approximately 1 ounce of cannabis leaf. The weight of the cannabis leaf in all of the bags was 946 grams and its wholesale value was estimated at $4000 to $5000. A cone used to smoke cannabis was located inside Damatre's pants. In his jacket there was $1000 and a note containing a list of arithmetic equations.

Apparently Choukair's employer had intended to lead the journey but withdrew at the last minute. The car had already been hired at the time that Damatre decided to go on the journey. He described it as an unpremeditated trip as far as he was concerned.

It seems that Choukair and his employer had decided on the trip and hired the car. Choukair directed the trip and controlled the car. There does not seem to be much difference in the criminality of the 2 men.

Initially, the judge was disposed to attach importance to what he believed was the 4 year age difference between the two men. The judge was corrected, it being pointed out that the difference was 2 years. It was marginally less. The judge added that even 2 years could be significant when men were in the mid 's. At the time of the offence Damatre was aged 23 and Choukair was aged 21.
There was no material suggesting that Damatre had led Choukair or dominated him. It is important that general observations should not cloud the assessment of the particular facts.

After the mistake had been pointed out to the judge and noted by him, he continued: "But the real difference between the two offenders is that one had a prior conviction and the other did not".

That is a difference. Whether it should have led to Choukair receiving 12 months periodic detention and Damatre six months in gaol is the point at issue.

Damatre was convicted on 24 February 1993 at Waverly Local Court of breaking, entering and stealing, stealing and receiving. For the first offence he was ordered to serve 200 hours community service and for each of the other offences he was placed on 2 supervised 2 year good behaviour bonds. Damatre completed his community service within the specified time and was of good behaviour. The Probation Officer thought that he did not get much out of the supervision. She described the applicant as a "fairly closed man". The circumstances of those offences which arose out of the one incident suggest that the criminality was not of a high order. Another person actually carried out the breaking, entering and stealing. Damatre was convicted because he had possession of the items. He pleaded guilty and did not disclose the involvement of the other person.

Both Choukair and Damatre maintained their innocence despite their convictions. This is hardly surprising, especially when it was a "deemed supply".

Both Choukair and Damatre were born overseas and came to Australia when they were very young. Choukair came from a happy home with good parents. Damatre came from a broken home, his mother leaving his father and the three children after having been violent and abusive towards them. The father assumed the children's care.

Both men left school in year 11. Damatre wanted to continue his education but his father declined to support him.

Both men had been in regular employment and had been good workers. Damatre earned more than Choukair. Both men produced good work references. Damatre led additional evidence of good character.

Both men have formed a relationship with a lady. Choukair was engaged to be married. Damatre had been living with a lady for 12 months, having previously known her for 6-9 months. She had 3 children aged 14, 9 and 7. She testified that Damatre was very good with the children, helping to look after them and taking them out. He assisted with the support and care of the children. This is a significant responsibility. Both Damatre and his lady stated that he did not use drugs.

Damatre has no previous convictions for possessing or using drugs or any other drug offences.

The convictions of Damatre in February 1993 do not provide a sufficient basis for the difference in the sentences. The evidence established that Damatre had settled down.

The responsibilities which he has assumed are a strong factor in inducing him to abstain from crime. The approach taken by the judge was not reasonably open. Disparity has been established.

Damatre spent 10 days in custody after his arrest and before entering bail.
The surety was required to deposit $5000. Damatre spent 21 days in custody after his sentencing and before entering into bail pending the hearing of this appeal. Damatre seeks periodic detention. That period is likely to be in the order of 1 year.

Having regard to the 10 days spent by the applicant in custody in July 1995, I would have regarded a sentence of 12 months periodic detention as correct. The applicant sought periodic detention based on parity principles. The 21 days which the applicant spent in custody in November/December 1996 amounts to 10 weekends. In all the circumstances the applicant should be sentenced to 10 months periodic detention to commence as from Friday, 23 May 1997.

I propose the following orders:
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal allowed. Sentence of a fixed term of 6 months quashed. In lieu thereof order that the applicant be sentenced to imprisonment for 12 months to be served by way of periodic detention at Silverwater Periodic Detention
Centre. Such sentence is to commence on 23 May 1997 and the applicant is to report to such centre at 7pm on such date to enable such sentence to be commenced.

Bruce J: I agree.

Smart J: The orders will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
