

Iol Petroleum Ltd versus J H O'Neill and Ors [1996] NSWSC 380 (29 August 1996) 
IOL PETROLEUM LIMITED versus JOHN H. O'NEILL & ORS (D3) /94 
THURSDAY 15 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 31 July there were outstanding two notices of motion, the first brought by the fourth defendant. I have made orders this morning and reasons have been prepared coded as Judgment D2 in this matter, which will be distributed as soon as possible; that is, as soon as my computer malfunction has been cured. 
I intended to stand over the other notice of motion brought by the first and second defendants seeking that the confidentiality regime which had been put in place be liberalised so that the first and second defendants can have access to the documents which have been produced on discovery. At present the only persons who have access to those documents are the solicitors and counsel who signed what is popularly called the USSC undertaking.

It has been put before me that probably at some stage in the past the first and second defendants have seen all the documents and that the basic philosophy of the law as set out by the Full Federal Court in Australian
Broadcasting Commission versus Parish <case>; [(1980) 29 ALR 228] is that documents produced on discovery should be able to be inspected by the parties. That concept may need to be re-examined in the light of the philosophy behind the new discovery rules which come into force shortly but will not apply to this case because the existing rules apply to existing cases. Nonetheless, the philosophy must be borne in mind when making orders for discovery.

Furthermore, the authorities tend to show that the mere fact that a document is confidential is insufficient to require the Court to put in place some confidentiality regime. See Ex parte Fielder Gillespie Ltd [[1984] 2 Qd R ]
and Magellan Petroleum Australia Ltd versus Sagasco Amadeus Pty Ltd [(1993) 25
IPR 455.] 
However, Mr McQuillen for the plaintiff has strongly put that the present regime was instituted by consent and that a consent regime should not be relaxed without full examination.

I am not convinced at this stage that circumstances have come into existence which warrant the re-examination of the regime.

My view is that I should not make any further orders unless necessary on the matter of discovery and inspection. There is a question as to whether this case will be heard by a jury. Once that is determined a new regime can be put in place for the production of evidence and I would not be prepared to make any further orders which would involve the expenditure of a vast amount of costs on discovery and inspection until that procedure had played its course.

If at that stage the existing confidentiality regime has to be reviewed, it should be reviewed on proper notice with the parties putting on affidavits, on the one side, as to why it is essential that confidentiality be maintained and, on the other side, what the difficulties are if the regime is maintained.

However, at this stage the application by the first and second defendants is premature and the motion should be dismissed. Costs, costs in the cause.

IOL PETROLEUM LIMITED V O'NEILL & ORS (D2) /1994 
Thursday 15 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Ten months ago, I gave reasons for making orders for further discovery in this matter. Unfortunately, the parties are still involved in disputes over discovery and there are various outstanding notices of motion reflecting disputes in this area. On 31 July 1996, I thought that I had outflanked these dry costly questions, by directing that the matter proceed by the parties filing affidavits and bundles of documents. All counsel seemed to be content with this course. I stood the outstanding motions over to the hearing.

However, on 6 August 1996, counsel for the fourth defendant sent me a letter which, in essence said that "the Fourth Defendant is of the view that, in any event, a decision is required of your Honour on the Fourth Defendant's Notice of Motion" of 12 July, 1996. As I had already prepared a draft before 31 July, there is no difficulty in complying with this "requirement". A party is entitled to have a decision on a notice of motion which is before the court.
In the absence of any rational basis for the requirement, however, the costs of it will need to be considered.

There are two aspects to the fourth defendant's notice of motion viz (a) it seeks an order for a more detailed list of the documents noted as "Privileged" in the plaintiff's list of documents; and (b) it seeks that there be a variation of the confidentiality restrictions currently in force with respect to inspection of documents discovered. I will deal with each of these in turn.

As to (a), Mr D J Russell who appeared for the fourth defendant submitted that this matter had really been decided by my reasons in this case delivered on 9
October, 1995. I agree with this submission, subject to one proviso. That proviso is that the Supreme Court Rules as to discovery have been completely recast to operate in respect of proceedings commenced on and after 1 November,
The philosophy behind these new rules is that discovery is no longer to be available as of right by notice, but that the court will need to be satisfied in each case mainly during directions hearings that the advantages of discovery will outweigh the costs of discovery. Moreover, it is most likely that general orders for discovery will not be as often made as orders for particular discovery. Under the new rules, the technical rules of discovery enshrined in Bray on Discovery will be relaxed. One of the rules that might be relaxed is the rule as to particularity of description referred to in my previous reasons.

However, I believe that fairness requires that the plaintiff should be subject to the same regime as the defendants. Thus, as I earlier held, on the application of the plaintiff that there should be such a description of allegedly privileged documents, I should apply the same principle on this motion.

In my earlier reasons I held that a formula describing the privileged documents in a compendious form did not amount to compliance with the rules as to discovering documents adequately. Mr McQuillen, for the plaintiff, says that the description that the plaintiff has employed in its list of documents is superior to that used in the defendants' list which was the subject of my earlier reasons. He is correct up to a point. However, I do not consider that the form of the plaintiff's list has overcome the problem.

I should also deal with the request for numbering documents which are contained in lever arch files. At first sight, I should consistently with my judgment of October 1995, order further discovery. However in the ultimate, a court only makes such an order if it is necessary. I do not consider it necessary to make such a further order because I really do think that the index sheets which are part of the exhibit to the affidavit of Mr Lim, one of the solicitors acting for the fourth defendant, mean that there is, for all practical purposes, sufficient identification. I also bear in mind the philosophy of the new discovery rules referred to above. Thus, the fourth defendant is entitled to order 3 in its notice of motion. However, in view of the proposal to prepare a bundle of documents, I will stay this order until further order.

As to (b), the present position is that, by consent, all parties have agreed that their inspection of documents will be limited to those solicitors and counsel who have given an undertaking of confidentiality as formulated in
United States Surgical Corp versus Hospital Products International Pty Ltd, unreported 7.5.1988 (see Ritchie's Supreme Court Practice [13037]) (a "USSC Undertaking").

Mr Lim has sworn that he cannot understand some of the documents he has inspected and wishes to widen the category of people who can inspect and to weaken the undertaking as to what those inspecting the documents may communicate. The plaintiff opposes the latter, but does not oppose the widening of the class of those who may inspect to encompass bona fide accounting and geological experts under certain conditions.

I think the mere fact that Mr Lim cannot understand the documents is not sufficient reason to vary the existing regime. If after expert accountants and geologists have looked at the relevant documents, (they having given a USSC undertaking), there is still some need for others to see the documents, then perhaps there would be grounds for relaxation of the present regime.

Mr McQuillen submits, and I believe him to be at least partially correct in this submission, that as the present regime was imposed by consent, it should not be lightly set aside and that, in any event, there should be due notice of the application for relaxation supported by evidence of difficulty. The opposite submission, for which there is also support is that the existing regime was set up as a provisional one to be reviewed from time to time. It is put that Mr McQuillen keeps shying away from why the relevant documents are confidential and that, in any event there is the factor that the first and second defendants probably have sighted the documents at some stage in the past.

I hope that this dry argument can be outflanked by the bundle of documents procedure that is now to be implemented. If it cannot be outflanked, there will have to be yet another interlocutory hearing on discovery. My initial view of the authorities is that they tend to the view that confidentiality by itself is not enough to move a court to decline inspection of discovered documents by a party, see Ex parte Fielder Gillespie Ltd  <case>; [(1980) 29 ALR 228.] 
Thus, I am not prepared to vary the USSC undertaking regime at this stage.

Accordingly, the only order I am prepared to make at this stage on the fourth defendant's notice of motion of 12 July is order 3 which I will stay until further order. I will reserve all questions of costs on the motion, but I will record my present feeling that the fourth defendant having mainly failed, should pay its own costs of the motion and that the plaintiff's costs should be its costs in the cause.

IOL PETROLEUM LTD versus JOHN O'NEILL & ORS /94 
THURSDAY 29 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by the plaintiff by notice of motion that the proceedings be tried with a jury.

These proceedings were commenced in the Equity Division in 1994 for orders resulting from alleged loss to the plaintiff as a result of the activities of the first, second and third defendants in a corporate joint venture. It is alleged that the fourth defendant, the State Bank of New South Wales, is also liable to the plaintiff because of its involvement in those activities. As the
Registrar was having difficulty getting the case ready for trial, it was referred to me for case management and has been in my list for that purpose for about ten months.

The plaintiff's application for a jury is resisted by the first, second and fourth defendants, the third defendant not appearing.

Mr McQuillen, for the plaintiff, urges trial by jury for two basic reasons.
The first is that in an issue of fraud, or perhaps generally, jury trial is the sacred bulwark of the nation and is to be preferred to other methods of trial. The second is that the flavour of [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s85.html) to 89 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) makes it clear that the judge has a discretion as to the mode of trial and further indicates that, with any fraud matters, trial by jury may be a preferable course.

The submissions based on the history of juries seem to have derived from what the Court of Appeal said when dealing with a Common Law judge's order of his own motion to deny a trial by jury in a hospital negligence case; Pambula
District Hospital versus Herriman [(1988) 14 NSWLR 387.] As Mr
Russell, for the fourth defendant, has pointed out that case is no real guide to the present because the court was there dealing with the situation where there was a right to a jury at Common Law in the circumstances that had happened. However, Kirby P does at pp 394-397 trace through in outline the history of jury trials and Blackstone's phrase "sacred bulwark of a nation" occurs at the top of p 395.

The argument of history does not appeal to me very much at all. The potted version given by Kirby P in the Pambula case does not, nor was it intended to, deal with the full history of the system.

At Common Law the civil jury as we now know it evolved through a series of accidents of history. In the middle ages trial was by God not by man, and thus by ordeal or by compurgation until and indeed even after the writ of trespass came into being in about 1250. That writ provided for a superior method of trial in the eyes of more progressive thinkers, namely by the men of the locality certifying what the facts were to the Commissioner of oyer and terminer or nisi prius, who was sent out to the country to inquire into the matter. The writ to the local sheriff provided that all those local men who knew something about the matter were to come into Westminster, unless before (nisi prius) a Commissioner visited the area in the meantime. The
Commissioners of nisi prius were sent out into the locality two by two during the vacations between law terms. The Commissioners may or may not have been judges of the court where the suit was pending.

Initially the Commissioners found out from the local inhabitants what the truth was, answered the question in issue for trial and awarded the postea to the successful party. At the beginning of the next term the Court in Banc then considered what judgment should be given.

As time went on the jury changed from being a group of witnesses to impartial triers of fact; the watershed being Bushell's case in <case>; (1670)
Vaughan 135; [124 ER 1006.] However, the theory was still the same. A Common Law action was divided into three parts, (a) ascertainment of the issues for trial in
Westminster; (b) the trial at nisi prius before a Commissioner and a jury in the country where the event had happened; and (c) judgment before the Court in
Banc in Westminster.

In New South Wales trial by jury was introduced in principle by the New South
Wales Act of 1823 9 George IV, chapter 96, but initially juries were military assessors and it was not until the Act 8 Victoria IV in 1844 that civil juries of four were introduced as we now know them in New South Wales.

It would seem that four were selected because there was a very limited number of free citizens of appropriate qualifications who could serve on a jury.
Thereafter, until the coming in of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), the jury was the ordinary method of trial at Common Law.

However, it must be remembered that the way in which the jury system worked at
Common Law up until 1972 was much the same as it worked in England last century. First, issues for trial were produced. This was by the pleading system introduced by the rules of Hilary term 1834, which were adopted in New
South Wales, of the plaintiff putting out his story (called "count" after the
French word "conte", a little story) in recognisable legal form in a document called a declaration, to which the defendant would then put on a plea.

With certain exceptions, such as pleas of abatement and pleas requiring novel assignment by the plaintiff, the plea was either a confession and avoidance or a traverse. If it was a traverse the replication joined issue and would produce a question to which a jury could answer yes or no. If the plea was a confession and avoidance then either in the replication there would be a traverse and then there could be a joinder of issue in the rejoinder, or else somewhere along the line a traverse would be produced, which would allow the jury to find yes or no to a particular question.

The pleadings were then reproduced into a document called "Issues for Trial".
In England and Australia last century these were then put in the saddlebag of the judge going on circuit. However, in more modern times, whether by trial at nisi prius or whether in the Supreme Court in King Street, Sydney, they were merely put at the front of the court file, but that was the only document which the judge at nisi prius had when he was trying the matter with a jury.
The jury then returned an answer yes or no, though if there was a damages trial and the plaintiff succeeded it also fixed the amount of damages.

The Supreme Court of New South Wales by the Third Charter of Justice was given all the power of the Court of Chancery, as well as the Common Law courts and the Ecclesiastical courts.

In the 1840s provision was made for a primary judge in Equity. It must be remembered that at that stage when there is a reference to the Supreme Court it meant the Supreme Court in Banc. A single judge could not sit by himself, except as a Commissioner of nisi prius, oyer and terminer or general gaol delivery. However, the Act was amended so that the power of all the judges sitting in Banc was delegated to the primary judge in Equity, later called the
Chief Judge in Equity, to deal with the Equity suits that arose within the court.

Thus from 1842 onwards trials of fact at Common Law were dealt with by juries at a hearing presided over by a Commissioner of nisi prius, though in New
South Wales invariably this was a judge, and trials in Equity were dealt with under the fact-finding power of the Full Court by its delegate the primary judge.

Although in New South Wales the Commissioner at Common Law was a judge who sat with a jury, on the famous occasion when Milner Stephen, J died in chambers in after the jury had retired, another judge, Pitt AJ, was able to take the jury's verdict without there being any mistrial. This showed that the judge was really not part of the fact-finding process at all.

When the procedure in Equity was consolidated into the Equity Act of 1901, as a result of the activities of the Commissioners for Law Reform in the last five years of the nineteenth century, the rule was set out in <case> of the
Equity Act 1901, which was the consolidation of previous legislation, that: "The evidence to be used at the hearing of any suit (in Equity) shall be taken before the judge sitting in open court without a jury." 
However, there was power for the judge to order a jury.

As far as my researches go, no jury has actually sat in Equity since 1904 and that a jury actually sat then I have on purely anecdotal evidence.

In Goodsell versus National Bank of Australasia <case>; [(1889) 6 WN 55] the then Chief Judge in Equity ordered that there be a trial by jury and seemed to consider that if there was a question of fact of sufficient importance it was appropriate to order trial by jury. However, in Sullivan v
The English Scottish and Australian Bank Ltd <case>; [(1904) 5 SR 52]
Walker J considered that that case was not sufficiently reported to have him convinced that the then Chief Judge was laying down some general rule and although Walker J's inclination was to let the jury have the responsibility of deciding the case rather than himself, he thought that where the application for jury was opposed the party applying to make out a case that a jury should be granted in Equity bore the onus and he had to show some good reason why the normal form of trial should be departed from. As far as my researches go that was the last time when the matter was actually considered in Equity in New
South Wales.

So far as England is concerned, the last reported example which I can find of a trial by jury in Equity is Evan versus Merthyr Tydfil UDC [[1899] 1 Ch .] In that case Romer J had ordered that an issue of fact, which was specified in his order, be tried before a special jury at Swansea. The matter does seem to involve the right of commons in that part of Wales. Why his Lordship ordered a trial by jury in that case is not reported.

It must also be remembered that prior to 1875 or a little before that date the fact-finding process in Equity was extremely limited. Mostly the evidence was in a written form, which was presented to the Lord Chancellor or the Master of the Rolls by a Six Clerk having put together the affidavits from statements of the witnesses. The Six Clerks seemed to be a sort of combination of Registrar in Equity and solicitors. There was no cross-examination and so the procedure was just not suitable for deciding contested issues of fact. Thus the practice grew up in Equity of having the parties put up a feigned issue at Common Law.

According to Blackstone (1857 ed vol 3 p 523), feigned issues were borrowed from the sponsio judicialis of the Roman Law. Feigned issues were employed not only to try disputed facts arising in equity proceedings, but also, by consent, to determine other disputed questions of fact without the formality of pleading.

The procedure for trying a feigned issue was that the plaintiff would bring an action at law and declare, fictitiously, that he had a wager of [sterling]5 with the defendant that the fact that needed to be proved was true. He averred that this fact was true so that he was entitled to the [sterling]5. By his plea, the defendant admitted the feigned wager but traversed the allegation of fact. Issue would thus be joined and a question framed which the jury could answer yes or no. Feigned issues were previously dealt with under the General
Legal Procedure Act, 1902, and, when that Act was repealed by the [Supreme
Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), feigned issues were considered to be abolished.

However, in New South Wales there has never been any need for a special procedure in Equity because the primary judge has never been limited by the fact-finding machinations of the Six Clerks. We never had the equivalent of the Six Clerks or the Sixty Clerks in New South Wales and judges in Equity have been able to hear and decide matters of fact just as any other judge. The need, accordingly, for questions of fact to go out to Common Law juries was very much more limited in New South Wales than it was in England last century.
When it did happen, it happened by way of feigned issue.

Indeed, in New South Wales the feigned issue was, so far as reported cases show, used not for fact-finding in equity, but to try facts where a statute referred a problem to the Full Court or where facts needed to be found for the
Full Court to consider whether it would make a prerogative writ absolute. See
Re Rundle [(1894) 11 WN 159 (Stamp]
Duties Act); Ex parte Saunders [(1900) 16 WN 166 (Real]
Property Act); Ex parte Keegan [(1907) 24 WN 72 (Public]
Works Act) and Ex parte Rae; Re Hartigan <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 438 (Mandamus] under Government Railways Act).

One of the reasons why the feigned issue was adopted was that it is necessary to isolate questions for a jury. At Common Law, as I have said, that question was isolated by the procedure laid down in the rules we got from England, being the rules of Hilary term 1834. The feigned issue procedure picked up those rules or else special orders could be made under <case> of the General Law
Procedure Act.

Accordingly, I do not really consider that Mr McQuillen's excursus into history assists him because since 1842 these questions have ordinarily been heard by a judge sitting alone in Equity or in the Equity Division.

Looking at the Statute, the general rule is that there should be trial by judge alone. In Common Law there is an exception where fraud is involved, but the Statute limits this to Common Law trials. The flavour of the Statute is there however.

I consider that the submission of Mr McClellan QC, who appeared with Mr
McGovern for the first and second defendants, is correct, that that provision is there not for the benefit of plaintiffs who attack someone else's character, but rather for the benefit of a person whose character is attacked to have a chance of vindication by a jury of his or her peers on the subject matter of that attack. That is why <case> deals with a seemingly heterogeneous list of fraud, defamation, false imprisonment and seduction. The provision as to breach of promise of marriage has been superseded by Commonwealth legislation prohibiting such actions.

Mr McClellan QC says that there is no discretion to order trial by jury in
Equity. I reject that submission. However, it seems to me that when considering whether to exercise the discretion the judge takes into account the fact that the normal method of trial is by judge alone, and he also takes into account the sort of factors mentioned by Mr Russell, for the fourth defendant, namely, length of trial by judge compared with trial by jury, the cost, the fact that commercial factual matters are involved and that the factual matters are complex.

Mr McClellan QC's response to that is that judges at Common Law and in criminal trials are constantly directing juries on complex matters of fact and that the Pambula Hospital case shows that these are really irrelevant considerations.

I know that judges do have to direct juries on complex matters, but I think the general feeling in the legal profession is that despite the quality of the judges who do that direction, the trial by jury of such issues is second best.

Accordingly, I do not consider that there is sufficient reason to grant trial by jury and the notice of motion filed by the plaintiff on 23 August 1996 is dismissed with costs.

I now have to consider what directions should be made to get the trial ready for hearing.

COUNSEL ADDRESSED 
Mr McQuillen has submitted that because this matter is being case managed and this question is one of the matters that have to be dealt with under case management, and that there was no indication of opposition before this morning, costs should be costs in the cause.

On the last occasion I was ready to make directions as to the filing of witness statements or affidavits, but I could not do that because of this outstanding question. Accordingly, the matter had to be set down for a special day for this question to be dealt with because until it was dealt with the whole case management was held up.

Accordingly, although there is some validity in Mr McQuillen's submission, as there always is, I do think that this is a case where, with this particular motion, the plaintiff having lost should pay the costs.

I have just given directions. The only matter that needs comment is the question of photocopy access.

It is not uncommon for photocopy access to be had to subpoenaed documents. Two problems, however, arise. The first is that the documents belong to a third party. They have been produced by a compulsory process and without that person's consent or very strict controls there should not be wide dissemination of such documents.

The method I have devised is that there should not be general photocopy access, but if Mr Sherlock who produced the documents agrees the defendants may have photocopy access, otherwise the matter should be determined by a
Registrar.

The Registrar will need to take into account, on the one hand, the interest of the person producing the documents and, on the other hand, the need for the documents by the defendants. Of course, the defendants' solicitors and counsel may take notes, so the Registrar may consider that so long as appropriate undertakings are given photocopy access will not materially increase the risk of the document being widely disseminated.

The other matter that concerns me in photocopy access is the cost. What is particularly disturbing is that one frequently sees large bills for photocopying where solicitors have subcontracted to their service companies at a premium, the cost of photocopying.

As I have said in some previous judgments, it is only a matter of time before the court very closely looks at profit making by service companies by photocopying documents and it is certainly always a matter that I bear in mind when considering photocopy access.

One other matter was raised by Mr Russell and that is that he says there is a misstatement of fact in my judgment of 15 August 1996 that the bank, his client, had consented on an earlier occasion only to access subject to a USSC undertaking. He says the bank has always resisted that method of proceeding.

Without going into a reconsideration of the 15 August 1996 judgment, my view is that at this stage it is only if a USSC undertaking is given that documents may be inspected until the matter is reviewed generally, if it has to be.
 * * * 
