

Regina versus Batiste Matter No Cca 60135/97 [1998] NSWSC 402 (31 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
REGINA versus DONNA MARIA BATISTE 
CCA 60135/97 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Mason P, Smart J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against a decision of his Honour Judge Flannery given in the District Court as long ago as 21 February 1997 refusing to grant a stay of proceedings in respect of a second trial of the applicant, there having been a hung jury at the first trial. 
The argument in support of the application has extended over several hours and has gone well beyond what would ordinarily be appropriate for a leave application. Nevertheless, the Court has been anxious to hear full argument in support of the proposition that this is a proper case for leave. The decision of the Court will be confined to the question whether this is an appropriate case for leave.

The background to the case, much of which appears from the decision of Judge
Flannery, is one of a long history of criminal and civil proceedings, heavy expenditure by the applicant on legal costs and expenses, and somewhat complex investment dealings by the applicant involving substantial sums of money.

The nature of the Crown case against the applicant can most conveniently be seen from the remarks on sentence by Court DCJ of 15 October 1992 when sentencing an alleged co-conspirator Mr Freeman, who pleaded guilty to a conspiracy with the applicant to defraud certain persons. The nature of the defence case can perhaps most conveniently be seen summarised on p9 of the written submissions filed on behalf of the applicant.

The application for a stay before Flannery DCJ was based in part upon the principles established by the High Court in Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 163.] In relation to that aspect of the case I consider that leave to appeal should be refused on the ground that there is no sufficient reason to doubt the correctness the decision of Flannery DCJ on the issue of fact, to the effect that his Honour was not satisfied that the applicant was indigent.

The application for stay was also based in part upon documents that, for a variety of reasons, were missing, and deceased witnesses. The test which
Flannery DCJ applied in dealing with that aspect of the application is stated by him at pp24 and 25 of his reasons for judgment and it is not argued on behalf of the applicant that his Honour applied the wrong legal test. What is sought to be challenged in any appeal is his finding of fact for the purposes of the application of that test. The finding of fact involved a review by the
Judge carrying on over many pages of reasoning of matters of detail that are set out in the judgment. Once again I consider that it has not been established that there is sufficient doubt as to the correctness of his
Honour's reasoning on those issues of fact to warrant the grant of leave.

There has also been a reference to considerations relating to the variable health of the applicant, but these have not been advanced as a separate and discrete matter. This is not a case in which it is alleged that the pursuit of this prosecution amounts to oppression of the applicant.

As I have pointed out, there has already been one trial of the applicant in relation to the conspiracy charge with which we are presently concerned and what the Crown is proposing to conduct is a re-trial following a jury disagreement.

I consider that the application for leave to appeal should be refused.

MASON P: I agree. 
SMART J: I agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court will be as I have announced. * * * 
