

Western Export Services Inc versus Jireh International Pty Limited [2010] NSWSC (11 June 2010) 
Last Updated: 11 June 2010 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Western Export Services Inc versus Jireh International Pty Limited <case>  
JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /175257  
HEARING DATE(S):  ,20,21,22,27,28,29 April and 3,4,5,6,10,11 May 2010  
JUDGMENT DATE:  June 2010  
PARTIES: 
Western Export Services Inc - Plaintiff 
Jireh International Pty Limited - Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Hammerschlag J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
F.C. Corsaro SC with F.G. Kalyk [Plaintiff] 
D.J. Higgs SC with T. Maltz [Defendant]  
SOLICITORS: 
Koffels [Plaintiff] 
Meerkin & Apel [Defendant]  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACTS - intention to create legally binding relations - written instrument entitled Letter of Agreement ("the agreement") signed by the plaintiff and the defendant included a clause providing for review after six months of commissions payable under the agreement - whether agreement was legally binding from date of execution or only after review and further agreement on commissions had taken place - MISTAKE - whether the defendant was labouring under a serious and fundamental mistake that the contract was not to be immediately binding and whether the plaintiff induced this mistake by failing to correct it - FRUSTRATION - whether the agreement was discharged by supervening impossibility when this state of circumstances was induced by the defendant - RECTIFICATION - whether the omission of the words "or an associated entity" in the agreement was a mutual mistake and whether its inclusion would give effect to the parties' common intention - CONSTRUCTION - construction of commercial contracts - agreement provides for commission payable on "sales by" the defendant but on 11 March 2004 the defendant executed a Supply Agreement with an associated entity appointing it as the defendant's preferred supplier - whether "sales by" the defendant should be construed to include sales by the defendant or an associated entity of the defendant - whether sales to the defendant's Franchisees through the medium of the associated entity are "sales by" the defendant - IMPLIED TERM - whether a term should be implied into the agreement under which the defendant is obliged to refrain by its own voluntary act from depriving the plaintiff of the benefits it would be entitled to, but for that voluntary act, under the agreement - whether the defendant has breached this term by interposing a third party to supply products to its Franchisees 
TRADE PRACTICES - MISLEADING AND DECEPTIVE CONDUCT - [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) - whether the plaintiff engaged in conduct which was misleading or deceptive, or likely to mislead or deceive by inducing the defendant to believe that the contract was to be non-binding until further agreement on commissions had taken place 
EQUITY - ESTOPPEL - general principles - whether the plaintiff held out and the defendant relied upon the assumption that the agreement was to be non- binding until further agreement on commissions had taken place - FIDUCIARY
DUTY - whether the plaintiff was acting as legal advisor to the defendant and thus owed a fiduciary duty to act in the defendant's best interests - whether the plaintiff breached this duty by failing to disclose that the agreement between them was legally binding  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth)  
CATEGORY: 
Principal judgment  
CASES CITED: 
Ermogenous versus Greek Orthodox Community <case> 
Air Great Lakes Pty Limited versus K S Easter (Holdings) Pty Limited <case> 
Upper Hunter County District Council versus Australian Chilling and Freezing Co Ltd <case>; [(1968) 118 CLR 429] 
Trawl Industries of Australia Pty Ltd versus Effem Food Pty Ltd trading as "Uncle
Bens of Australia" <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] 
Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Mehta [(1991) 23 NSWLR 84] 
Kimberley NZI Finance Ltd versus Torero Pty Ltd [(1989) ATPR (Digest) 46-054] 
Winterton Constructions Pty Ltd versus Hambros Australia Ltd <case>; <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] 
Kelly versus CA & L Bell Commodities Corporation Pty Ltd <case>; <case> 
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd versus Alphapharm Pty Ltd (2004) 219 CLR 165 
International Air Transport Association versus Ansett Australia Holdings Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) <case>; <case>; <case>; <case> 
Wilkie versus Gordian Runoff Limited <case>; <case>; <case>; [[2009] 1
AC 1101](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b2009%5d%201%20AC%201101 "View LawCiteRecord" ) 
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Limited versus Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 
Secured Income Real Estate (Australia) Limited versus St Martins Investments Pty
Limited <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR 596] 
Elders IXL Limited versus National Employer's Mutual General Insurance Association
Limited (1988) 5 ANZ Ins Case 60-847 
Australis Media Holdings Pty Limited versus Telstra Corporation Limited [(1998) 43
NSWLR 104] 
RDJ International versus Preformed Line Products (Australia) Pty Limited [(1996) 39
NSWLR 417] 
Reigate versus Union Manufacturing Co (Ramsbottom) [[1918] 1 KB 592] 
Lazarus versus Cairn Line of Steamships Ltd [[1918] 106 TLR 378] 
Rhodes versus Forwood [[1876] 1 App Cas 256] 
Roadshow Entertainment Pty Limited versus (ACN 053 006 269) Pty Ltd Receiver &
Manager Appointed (1997) 42 NSLWR 462  
TEXTS CITED: 
Michael Furmston and GJ Tolhurst Contract Formation Law and Practice, 2010,
Oxford University Press 
JW Carter, Elisabeth Peden and Greg Tollhurst, Contract Law in Australia, 5th ed (2007) 
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane's Equity Doctrines & Remedies, 4th ed (2002),
Butterworths LexisNexis 
Halsbury's Laws of England, 5th ed, vol 1 
Fridman, The Law of Agency, 7th ed (1996) Butterworths  
DECISION: 
Verdict for the plaintiff. Defendant's cross-claims dismissed.  
JUDGMENT:  - 1 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
COMMERCIAL LIST  
HAMMERSCHLAG J  JUNE 2010  /175257 WESTERN EXPORT SERVICES INC -V- JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT  
INTRODUCTION   HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff ("WES") sues the defendant ("Jireh") for breach of what it contends is a written contract with Jireh, embodied in a document styled Letter of Agreement signed by the parties on 19 March 1996. I shall refer to the document as "the Letter Agreement" (the parties sometimes referred to it as the WES agreement).
 WES claims damages equivalent to payments which it says that Jireh should have, but has not, made under the Letter Agreement.
 The Letter Agreement is in the following terms:  
WHEREAS, Nabi Saleh and Peter Irvine (collectively "JIREH INTERNATIONAL
PTY LTD."), desire to obtain the right from Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees
Franchising Corp, ("GJGC CORP."); to become the Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees
Master Franchisee for Australia, including the right to operate and franchise
Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Stores ("GJGC STORES"); to import and supply products to those stores, and; to establish Australia as a regional supplier of Gloria Jeans' coffees, tea and accessories ("Products"), and 
WHEREAS, David Cisneros and Steven Meier (collectively "WES") have provided and will provide contract negotiation assistance, logistical support and export services to JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD.
 
THE PARTIES agree to the following terms and conditions: . WES shall, on behalf of, and in conjunction with, JIREH
INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD., negotiate and otherwise assist JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY
LTD. to enter into an Agreement with GJGC CORP, and with the establishment of
GJGC STORES in Australia.
 . Except as the parties may otherwise agree, WES shall be the sole and exclusive supplier and exporter of Gloria Jean's products from the United
States to JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD. For this service, WES shall receive a commission (or margin) of 5% of the ex-factory price.
 . One of the primary goals of negotiation with GJGC CORP is to establish JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD, or an associated entity, as a roaster/supplier of Gloria Jean's, or other branded coffees, teas and other products for sale in GJGC STORES in Australia and to GJGC Master Franchisees or GJGC STORES in other countries. For sales by JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD to
GJGC STORES in Australia and to other countries, WES shall receive a commission of 5% of the ex-factory price of the coffees, teas and other products.
 . It is mutually understood that WES and JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY
LTD. (or its principals) will pursue all opportunities to supply coffees, teas and other products to GJGC CORP, or its related companies. The parties shall agree to mutually acceptable compensation for such supply as opportunities arise.
 . In consideration for the above services and in furtherance of the relationship between the parties, upon the sale or transfer of any interest of JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD., JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD. shall upon the closing of the sale or transfer, pay to WES a total of four percent (4%) of the sales price of that interest.
 . Payment of any compensation due under the terms of this
Agreement shall be made on a quarterly basis and each party shall provide to the other, at the time payment is due, an accounting of all sales which come within the scope of this Agreement.
 . JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD. and WES agree to meet within six months after the effective date of this Agreement and review the business of the parties under the terms of this Agreement to determine if the compensation established herein is fair and reasonable based on mutually agreeable factors for the venture.

Effective the 19 day of March 1996 
JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD WES 
By: ...[Signature].................. By: ...[Signature]...............
 
Nabi Saleh David Cisneros 
By: ...[Signature].................. By:...[Signature]............... Peter
Irvine Steven P. Meier During the hearing the parties referred to the commission provided for in cl as the clause 3 or roasting commission. I will use the same terms.
 
FACTUAL BACKGROUND The events which give rise to this dispute span something in the order of ten years. Well over 2000 pages of documents were tendered in evidence and the court was taken to many of them. The affidavit material runs to hundreds of pages. The principal witnesses were extensively cross-examined. Whilst it would be neither practical nor productive to refer to every conceivably relevant event and document, it has proved necessary to recount many events and contents of many documents to enable a proper understanding of why I have reached the conclusions to which I have come.  
The parties  WES is a corporation established under the laws of Colorado, USA. It is owned by Messrs David Cisneros and Steven Meier. It was incorporated in about and carries on business as a manufacturers' and buyers' representative.
It is based in Denver, Colorado.
 Messrs Cisneros and Meier have legal qualifications. At the times material to these proceedings Mr Meier (but not Mr Cisneros) was qualified to practise as an attorney in Colorado.  Jireh was incorporated on 2 November 1995. It is owned in equal shares by
Messrs Peter Irvine and Nabi Saleh or interests associated with them. They are the sole directors.
 Before his involvement with Jireh, Mr Irvine held a senior position with an advertising agency. He relinquished that position in order to devote his efforts to Jireh's business.
 Mr Saleh is a businessman who for many years has been involved in the import-export business.
 
Other relevant persons Maranatha Imports Exports Pty Ltd ("Maranatha") is a company of which Mr
Saleh is the sole director.
 Columbia Coffee and Tea Pty Ltd ("Columbia") was a company established by
Mr Saleh. Amongst others, it was a roaster and wholesaler of roasted coffee.
Columbia went into liquidation in about 1992 after which its business was sold to a company in which Mr Saleh has no interest. The new owner continued to trade as Columbia Coffee and Tea. Columbia has since been deregistered.
 Jireh International Warehouse and Distribution Pty Ltd ("JIWD") was incorporated on 21 May 2003. Messrs Irvine and Saleh are its sole directors.
One half of its shares is owned by a company associated with Mr Irvine. The other half is owned by Jireh Group Pty Ltd, of which Messrs Irvine and Saleh are the sole directors. It is owned in equal shares by interests associated with Messrs Irvine and Saleh respectively.
 Gloria Jeans Coffees International Pty Ltd ("GJCI") was incorporated on 19
November 2004. Messrs Irvine and Saleh are its sole directors. Its shares are held equally by interests associated with Messrs Irvine and Saleh.
 Mr Robert McCullough has been Mr Saleh's personal accountant since 1975. He has at all times material to these proceedings been Jireh's and Maranatha's external accountant.  
Events leading up to the execution of the Letter Agreement on 19 March 1996 Brothers' Gourmet Coffees Inc ("Brothers'"), a US corporation, operated coffee lounges in that country. It marketed coffee under the Brothers' brand.
 In about 1993, Brothers' purchased Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp, an
Illinois corporation which then managed a chain of about 250 mall-based coffee shops, predominantly in the US, under the name Gloria Jean's. Where it is not necessary to distinguish between specific corporations and, unless the context indicates otherwise, I shall refer to the US operation of Gloria Jean's (including as franchisor for Australia), as "Gloria Jean's".  WES represented Brothers' in selling wholesale packaged gourmet coffee products into international markets.
 In 1993 Maranatha was carrying on business as an importer of gourmet products. Mr Saleh was looking to place Brothers' products into retail and institutional outlets in Australia. He contacted Mr Cisneros, expressing an interest in importing and distributing Brothers' products. He says that Messrs
Cisneros and Meier told him that they had become frustrated with the legal profession and had started their export business.
 In April 1994 Mr Cisneros visited Australia to review the Australian market and to discuss the appointment of Maranatha as an importer of Brothers' products. Maranatha was appointed, and placed its first order for Brothers' products in the middle of 1994. Maranatha, as wholesaler, on-sold these products to retail outlets such as the well-known Australian stores David
Jones and Woolworths. WES received commission on these sales from Brothers' at five per cent of the sale price. Maranatha itself paid no commission to WES on these sales.
 In about June 1994, Mr Saleh discussed with Mr Cisneros the possibility of obtaining a Brothers' franchise for Australia. Mr Cisneros suggested that he consider the Gloria Jean's coffee concept because it was mall-based, more proven and more established.  Correspondence passed between WES and Mr Saleh over the remainder of 1994, amongst others about the possibility of a franchise. In December 1994 Mr
Cisneros wrote that WES was pushing hard for international expansion of
Brothers' franchises and that he thought there would be good opportunity to move forward in several countries, including Australia. In December 1994 Mr
Cisneros wrote optimistically about the prospects of a franchise of the Gloria
Jean's coffee concept from Brothers'.
 By the middle of 1995 Mr Saleh had been provided with a draft Master
Franchise Agreement from Gloria Jean's. He consulted Mr Garry Best, a solicitor and partner in the law firm Mallesons Stephen Jacques about the document. He met with Mr Best on 26 June 1995. Mr Best gave him comprehensive written advice on 3 July 1995. One of the things on which Mr Best advised was a provision in the draft that provided it was to be governed by the laws of
Illinois. Mr Best thought that there may be aspects of the law of that State which would affect interpretation of the document and in respect of which Mr
Best was not qualified to advise. He told Mr Saleh to let him know if he would like such advice.
 At around this time (probably on or about 9 July 1995) WES proffered to
Maranatha a proposed Letter of Intent intended to record arrangements between it and Maranatha under which WES would be compensated for the introduction of
Maranatha to Gloria Jean's and for ongoing liaison, representative and export management services. The Letter of Intent provided for payment to WES of "not less than 5% of the ex factory price for supply of Gloria Jeans' products from
USA" and "10% ownership in the entity established by Maranatha designated for the purposes of this Letter of Intent".
 A file note of Mr Best reflects that he had a discussion with Mr Saleh on the 12 July 1995 about the draft Master Franchise Agreement. The note reflects further that Mr Best recommended in relation to tax matters that advice from accountants be obtained before signing. Mr Saleh told him that he did not want to involve US lawyers but may consider that later on prior to signing.
 In a letter dated 13 July 1995, Mr Best gave Mr Saleh further written advice in relation to the draft Master Franchise Agreement. On 24 July 1995,
Gloria Jean's provided to both Mr Cisneros and Mr Saleh a document described as an "Offering Circular Offering a Franchise". The circular explains certain obligations upon a proposed franchisor offering a franchise, apparently in conformity with obligations under US law.
 In addition to the prospects of a franchise, Mr Saleh wished to roast coffee beans within Australia. He raised this with Mr Best. Mr Best told him that this should be raised expressly with Gloria Jean's and that an amendment would be needed to the draft Master Franchise Agreement to confirm the arrangement.
 On 4 August 1995, Messrs Cisneros, Meier, Irvine and Saleh met at WES' offices in Denver, Colorado. They discussed the proposed negotiation of a deal with Gloria Jean's, with whom they were later to meet. They also engaged in negotiations concerning the terms of a proposed arrangement between their respective interests. By all accounts the discussions took most of the day.
 Mr Cisneros says that at the 4 August 1995 meeting he suggested that the
WES side have a ten per cent interest in the equity of the proposed enterprise and receive five per cent compensation on products from the US. He says that
Mr Saleh said that he had no problem with five per cent, except that they (the
Jireh side) needed to ensure competitive pricing for what was purchased from the US. He says that Mr Saleh stated that as to the ten per cent ownership proposal, Mr Saleh had been advised by his solicitor that it was very difficult to have foreign ownership in an Australian entity and that Mr Saleh suggested that their side be the sole signatory to the proposed Master
Franchise Agreement. At some point during the discussion, Mr Cisneros says
Messrs Saleh and Irvine left the room for a private discussion and that on their return, a discussion to the following effect occurred: 
SALEH: Peter thinks 10% is too much. We are willing to offer you 4%.

CISNEROS: There is a significant difference between 10% and 4% and I don't think that 4% is fair for the amount of work we are going to have to do.

SALEH: Well here's an idea. We'll do 4% at the time of sale and give you the balance of your equity interest as a 5% commission on products supplied from the US. In addition, if we get this roasting licence, we will give you 5% of the roasted coffee sales until the end of the day. As we go along we are also going to want to switch to local supply for some products, so we will also agree to pay you 5% on those products even though they are sourced from countries other than the US. So David, instead of getting a 10% equity interest and 5% on US sales, your partnership interest will be 4% of the value of the franchise on sale and you are going to get 5% of all sales until the end of the day.

CISNEROS: This is significantly different to what Steve and I proposed. So what we will do is to talk about it and then draft an agreement setting out what we will accept.
 Mr Meier's version of this part of the conversation is as follows: 
CISNEROS: WES should have a 5% fee on products from the US and a 10% ownership of the venture as originally proposed by our Letter of Intent of 5
July 1995.

SALEH: Peter and I need to talk about that privately.

After which Saleh and Irvine left Cisneros and Meier for private discussions. After their discussions, they returned.

SALEH: The WES interest should be 4% of the value of the franchise on sale and 5% of all sales.

CISNEROS: Steve and I need time to consider this proposal. We will let you know.
 Mr Irvine says that they were provided with the Letter of Intent at the meeting. According to him, Messrs Cisneros and Meier said that the ten per cent share of the proceeds of sale which they wanted was for bringing the opportunity and because of their relationship with Gloria Jean's. He says that his and Mr Saleh's reaction was that ten per cent was a lot. He says that at some time during the meeting, Messrs Cisneros and Meier went to another office and when they returned, the number was reduced to four per cent. He recalls that at one meeting (in Denver or later in Chicago), a conversation to the following effect took place: 
SALEH: 5% of any number, we don't know if the business will sustain that, all we can do is agree to go forward and then have a review after six months to see how it is going.

I don't know whether the product will sustain the 5% when we start operating.

CISNEROS and/or MEIER: 
Well, we will talk about it when that event occurs.
 In his principal affidavit sworn 9 September 2009 Mr Saleh does not recount the contents of any discussion about the Letter of Intent or its terms at the
Denver meeting.
 After meeting in Denver, the group travelled to Chicago to meet Gloria
Jean's and then went on to the head office of Brothers' and Gloria Jean's at
Boca Raton, Florida. Messrs Irvine and Saleh returned to Australia on or about August 1995.
 On 21 August 1995, Mr Meier sent a facsimile to Mr Saleh referring to discussions he had had concerning the proposed Master Franchise with Gloria
Jean's and providing a reformulation of certain provisions of the proposed franchise. As well, Mr Meier attached a proposed Letter of Agreement between the plaintiff and Messrs Saleh and Irvine (collectively defined as GJGC
Australia) containing proposed terms of an arrangement between them. The document had already been signed by Messrs Cisneros and Meier and contained provisions for the payment of five per cent commission on products from the US and five per cent commission on coffees, teas and other products sold by GJGC
Australia to Gloria Jean's stores in Australia, as well as for payment to WES of four per cent of the sale price upon the sale or transfer of any interest of GJGC Australia. The covering facsimile stated as follows: 
Also, following is a "Letter of Agreement." Kindly review and let us know if it accurate reflects the understanding we reached. Please note, paragraph , which we have previously discussed; additional language to paragraph 5 to provide an option for David and me to receive our interest prior to a "sale" of Peter's and your interest; and paragraph 6 regarding providing a payment and accounting schedule. If you have any questions or comments, I would like to discuss with you by telephone.

The proposed cl 6 provided for payment of any compensation to be made on a quarterly basis and for each party to provide the other at the time payment was due, an accounting of all sales which came within the scope of the proposed agreement.  As at 8 September 1995 there were still aspects of the proposed Master
Franchise Agreement from Gloria Jean's which needed to be resolved, and Mr
Meier was in contact with Mr Cecil Johnson (Gloria Jean's director Franchise
Development) about them. Mr Meier wrote to Mr Johnson and Mr Saleh on 8
September 1995 suggesting solutions for various unresolved matters. On 11
September 1995, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh advising that they were working on all legal matters identified in Mr Meier'[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s8.html)
September 1995 letter and that once they had Mr Saleh's solicitor's final comments and the final name chosen for the holding company, a final agreement could be sent to them. He mentioned that other legal matters were being attended to as "as we speak".
 On 28 September 1995, Mr Best wrote to Mr Meier with comments on the terms of the proposed Master Franchise Agreement, with a view to finalising them. Mr
Meier responded to Mr Best's suggestions on the same day. He also mentioned that repeated requests had been made for a draft roasting agreement which would allow Mr Saleh to roast Gloria Jean's Coffees in Australia for sale in
Australia as well as other regional markets. On 4 October 1995, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Saleh referring to a request by Mr Saleh to review his file in respect of matters which Mr Saleh or Mr Best needed to address. In his facsimile, Mr
Meier said: 
Lastly, the only other pending matter from your side is confirming acceptance of the letter of understanding we sent regarding our relationship, or if you have any suggested changes. Our goal is to have this as a foundation upon which to build our relationship and would like to also have this finalized by the time the Master Franchise Agreement is executed.
 In late September 1995, Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp was purchased from Brothers' by Second Cup Ltd, Canada's largest specialty coffee retailer.
 On 27 October 1995, Mr Meier provided Mr Saleh with a draft roasting agreement prepared by Mr Meier. On 31 October 1995, Mr Best wrote to Mr Meier with suggested amendments to the Master Franchise Agreement. On 28 November , Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh amongst others about the registration of the trade name Gloria Jean's (which had apparently been previously registered in Australia by people called Illoski), and the language of the Master
Franchise Agreement. He noted that comments were awaited from Mr Saleh's solicitor in relation to the roasting agreement.
 On 15 December 1995, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh indicating that the proposed arrangements with Gloria Jean's were full speed ahead. He wrote, amongst others: 
Based on your lack of comments regarding the tendered WES agreement with you, we understand this is acceptable also and will be signed prior to or contemporaneously to the main and roasting agreement.
 On 20 December 1995, Mr Best provided Mr Meier with comments on the draft roasting agreement. He informed Mr Meier that the Master Franchisee was to be "Jireh International Pty Ltd" (that is, Jireh).
 On 4 January 1996, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh, referring to having talked extensively the previous day, and confirming several matters which had been discussed in relation to trade name registration, the main agreement and the roasting agreement. He also wrote: 
WES agreement - We understand that this agreement is basically acceptable to you, subject to Peter's review. We understand that this agreement will be signed at the same time as the main agreement.
 On 9 January 1996, on a Maranatha letterhead, Mr Saleh wrote to WES for the attention of Mr Cisneros, relevantly the following: 
Many thanks for your fax of 4 January 1996 and all your earlier faxes. My secretary is back from vacation and life is back to normal.

It was a great pleasure talking to you and Steve and resolving several matters on the phone and I also thank you for your confirmation fax. Our responses to the various matters raised in your fax are as follows:- . Gloria Jean's.

I have noted that the Illoskis have in fact released the name and we are now awaiting response from the firm carrying out the registrations in other states on our behalf. Will pass the information on to you as soon as it comes to hand.
 . Main Agreement.
 
As indicated to you, our solicitors are due back on 10th January at which time they shall get the Main Agreement and revert to us. We believe there should not be any problems and should it be acceptable to them, we would be happy to sign should all other matters not be resolved by Friday, January 12, and have a letter of intent attached regarding the contingencies as recommended by Steve and yourself.
 . Roasting Agreement.
 
Yes, we would need to have this confirmed and signed off at the same time which would be the ideal way to go and what we intend to roast would be all the coffees that Gloria Jean's would be ranging in Australia and all the coffees that need to be roasted for export to Asia. I would appreciate your comments regarding future reference for Brothers and the other companies in respect of roasting to their specification out in Australia.
 . W.E.S. Agreement.
 
Other than a few points of clarification on my part, I am awaiting Peter's comments and he mentioned he has a few concerns which do not concur to our discussions while in Denver. Once these come to hand I will pass them on to you. Here again, should it be possible to sign with the Main Agreement, we would be only too happy to do so, otherwise will be done as soon as physically possible.
 On 12 January 1996, Mr Best made further comments on the terms of the proposed Master Franchise Agreement. On the same day, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr
Saleh amongst others, repeating a request that the agreement between them be signed prior to, or contemporaneously with the other agreements. He said: 
WES agreement - If you have any concerns, we need to know immediately. All the points in the agreement are based on our discussions, taken from written notes. We have requested from the beginning that our agreement be signed prior to, or contemporaneously with the other agreements. Please respect and honor this request.

We recommend a target date of January 19 to sign all 3 agreements.
 On 15 January 1996, Mr Saleh wrote to Mr Cisneros, relevantly as follows: 
Many thanks for your fax of 12 January 1996 and I must say, in this fax we seem to have good news in every area. I am happy to note the response to Gary
Best's fax and I believe that we have now come to the end of the agreement.
This should be ready for signing off once Gary has got all the last bits and pieces together.
 
I am also happy to note that the roasting agreement has now been returned to you and that you will finish this side in the course of this week.
 
With regards to W.E.S. agreement, you can rest assured that I will see that
I pull this together to our mutual advantage and that both parties are happy.
I am awaiting response from Peter Irvine and shall fax you as soon as this comes to hand. This should not be any later than the next two days.
 
With regard to signing off, once all these agreements are in place I believe we need to be looking at towards the end of January as that is when
Peter returns from his vacation. I will be away this week and shall call you on your Friday to update you with all things at this end.
 
With regard to the report on Brothers and also our requirements, these will be with you in the next two days.
 On 18 January 1996, Mr Saleh wrote to Mr Cisneros on Maranatha letterhead with the following comments on the proposed WES agreement:  re: W.E.S. AGREEMENT 
My sincere apologies for the delay in responding to this agreement. As mentioned to you several times during the course of our telephone conversations and by fax, we have the spirit between your organisation and ours to put this agreement into practice to our mutual advantage, however, you need to keep in mind that we do not want to constantly chop and change the agreement but would like it resolved in a manner that we believe would be to our mutual benefit.

I have been waiting on suggested changes from Peter as he had taken down notes of our last meeting in Denver. I also made notes and we needed to have these confirmed as being exactly what was agreed upon in your office. The following changes are suggested:- 
Point 2 of your Agreement: 
W.E.S. shall be sole and exclusive supplier for products from the United
States. Europe was not to be included. The 5% was very clearly mentioned and it was agreed that we should be in a position to still be competitive in our pricing for items obtained on our behalf and should the item not be able to wear this additional percentage we would need to look at a lower percentage depending on each item category.

Point 3.

With regard to coffee, there was no percentage that was agreed upon as we were waiting to see the outcome of our meeting with G.J. and as you no doubt are aware, Jim Wayman gave the roasting agreement to me up front. We can tell you right now that there will be no way that a 5% commission on coffee is sustainable as Gloria Jean's themselves are only getting 25 cents a pound. We believe that once we have costed out the product to the selling price, we would be in a far better position to tell you what the product can bear but as an indication feel that this would be in the vicinity of 20-25 Australian cents per kilo.

Point 4.

We believe for any exports that 1% would be the likely figure that we could give in way of commission to W.E.S.

Point 5.

We agree to the 4% and this is on the sale of company and not equity and not limited to a period of six years.

Should the above be acceptable to you, we are happy to have this agreement signed and sent over to you even prior to the main agreement being signed.
 On 18 January 1996, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh: 
Thank you for your several faxes. In preparation for our telephone conference tomorrow, please let me advise as follows: . Gloria jeans a. Main agreement. We recommend immediate completion of the agreement per our January 12 fax and then signature. Since the roasting agreement is still being finalized, we have drafted a Letter of Intent which you can sign in conjunction with the Main Agreement, a copy of which we can send to you tomorrow during our telephone conversation. We need immediate confirmation of trade name status.
 b. Roasting agreement - This is being finalized, and we are confident we can sign at least within close proximity of main agreement.
 c. WES agreement - Please let me review the points in your letter.

Point 2 - We are glad to take Europe out, but we would still like to handle export from Europe also. As to commission, 5% is our minimum standard charge to all our customers for export service, and does not make any product uncompetitive because it is a necessary cost to get products effectively from here to there. I assure you it is reasonable based upon the organization and efforts it takes to supply products from this end. We would like to keep this figure in the agreement, and if and when we agree that based on total volume or other factors a reasonable compromise is necessary, we will discuss. I don't think we should leave this open on an item by item basis.

Point 3 - The basic reality is that the main business of Gloria Jean's will be coffee sales. The bulk of this coffee will be roasted at your facilities, not only for Australia, but also for Asia, a deal that we helped put together, despite the fact that we won't make nearly as much money on licensed product, than if we sold from the U.S. The fact that Gloria Jean's is licensing this opportunity for 25 cents a pound, does not bear on our relationship. We are willing to compromise, but your offer is only approximately 1.7% of sales. Let's finalize something during our conversation tomorrow.

Point 4 - The amount of commission in this paragraph will depend on the efforts necessary for WES to assist with development of supply opportunities for Jireh with Gloria Jeans, and assistance with import facilitation. This is why we left the amount open for now. However, if we are to be motivated to actively and aggressively develop supply for Jireh in the U.S., then we are partners no less than other aspects of our business, and the margin should be more reasonable than 1%.

Point 5 - If you review the agreement, the 4% is only upon the sale of the franchise, but allows WES principals to take their share after six years, only based upon your reasonable approval. Frankly, in six years you may want to purchase our share and not wait until your final sale.
 . Brothers - We appreciate your efforts, but I think we need to talk about a more specific report, similar to your original proposal to Brothers, though of course shorter and simpler. I talked with Steve Kintz yesterday, the
VP in charge of international, and advised the outline would be forthcoming, with projections and order schedule. Let's review tomorrow.
 . Other projects - We can discuss tomorrow further to our last telephone conversation, particularly the Kroger opportunity.

Thank you and best regards.
 On 22 January 1996, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh as follows: 
Thank you for talking with Steve and me on Friday regarding various matters. Sorry for tiring you out a bit, but I hope it didn't effect the enjoyment of your weekend.
 
Gloria Jeans- a. Main agreement - We are awaiting confirmation of signature date from you, but our advice is to sign within this week if possible. GJ is concerned and their mother company, Second Cup, has been approached by another qualified
Australian company. Since we negotiated a strong deal, and another company might be willing to pay more for the franchise, we should take the deal quickly.
 b. Roasting agreement - Steve is negotiating with GJ concerning exclusivity as to roasting standards and not by various buyers. If your solicitor has any other concerns, we need to know them immediately, so we can finalize the agreement.
 c. WES agreement - Please find attached revised agreement, which should meet your concerns. Please feel free to sign the fax copy and fax back to us to sign.
 d. Planning schedule - Assuming prompt signatures on above agreements, we need to get your planning schedule asap, so we can start organizing.
 . Brothers - We have advised Brothers that we will provide your outline on Wednesday (with suggested revisions), along with your order plan and next order.
 . Kroger - We are ordering your coffee bag samples post haste, and we will start negotiations for Kroger representation for Australia. As we discussed, if we want the agency, we will have to outline a basic marketing plan. I think we can focus on a limited number of items that have good potential in the Australian market, but it must be on a growing basis if we are to maintain the agency.
 . Other projects - As per our last conversation, we await your further advice.

We look forward to hearing from you tomorrow. Thank you again.
 The revised proposed WES agreement inserted Jireh's name as a contracting party and contained the following cl 7:  
JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD and WES agree to meet within six (6) months after the effective date of this Agreement and review the business of the parties under the terms of this Agreement to determine if the compensation established herein is fair and reasonable based on mutually agreeable factors for the venture.
 On 30 January 1996, Mr Saleh made further comments on the proposed WES agreement. He wrote as follows to Mr Cisneros: 
Many thanks for your revised agreement. Our comments are as follows:- 
Point 2: 
You do need to include that the 5% is subject to the product being able to sustain the on-selling price.

Point 3: 
This will be 25 Aust. cents per kilo on the coffee and not 5% and also that a figure to be determined for the teas and other products.

I believe that once this is altered we should be in a position to sign your agreement and send it even before the main agreement has been signed.
 On 31 January 1996, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh, relevantly as follows:  
Thank you for your fax of 23/01 and 30/01. Please be advised as follows: 
Gloria Jeans- . Main agreement - All your solicitor's final points/revisions have been passed on to Gloria Jeans. However, I believe we should assume that the agreement is now in its final form, and Gloria Jeans is awaiting receipt of final agreement and remittance no later than the business week of February 5.
 . Roasting agreement - Suggested final revisions sent to Gloria Jeans, we are requesting final confirmation of agreement by end of this week and will advise so this can also be sent out next week.
 . WES agreement - If you review Point 7 of the agreement, we changed it to reflect a final negotiation of the numbers as you requested, and hence, we don't see the need to change Points 2 and 3, since these will be subject to a final discussion anyway. We believe that a full discussion of the nature of our relationship should be discussed when Steve or I visit for the Gloria
Jean's first store opening, and the numbers will naturally follow from that discussion.
 On 6 February 1996, Mr Saleh wrote to Mr Cisneros, relevantly as follows: 
Gloria Jean's - Have noted Steve will be faxing to me to pass on to
Gary Best his confirmation that matters mentioned in Gary Best's last fax to him are all in order.

Roasting Agreement - Have noted that the final version should be made available to us in the course of this week.

W.E.S. Agreement - Have noted that the inclusion of Point 7 to this agreement makes this matter quite clear that none of the above becomes operational until we have negotiated the numbers together and worked out what in fact is the right mix and what each product can bear for an on charge by
W.E.S. Happy to go through this in total detail when you or Steve visit
Australia.

The letter went on to deal with various other matters including other proposed projects not presently relevant. I will refer to this letter as the "6
February letter".
 On 13 February 1996, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh, relevantly as follows: 
Please be advised of the following matters:
Gloria Jeans - We talked to GJ today, and they approve the roasting agreement as we faxed to you yesterday. As advised, we recommend signature on this and the main agreement before the end of this week. Please send both documents via express mail to the following address: 
Stephen Cleary 
Gloria Jeans Gourmet Coffee West Lake Ave.

Glenview, Illinois 60025 
Tel: (708) 808-0580 
As advised previously, we will send you an original roasting agreement for your records. Please also make appropriate remittance to the previously advised bank. Finally, please send us a signed, fax copy of the WES agreement at the same time. Starting next week, let's get our planning in synch! On 20 February 1996, Mr Saleh wrote to Mr Cisneros, relevantly as follows: 
It was indeed a great pleasure talking to you on the phone on your Friday, our Saturday.

As mentioned to you our attorney has been away and when speaking with him on the telephone on his return last Friday he mentioned various points as raised with you.

I will meet with him early this coming week and will do our best to have all matters resolved and the documents signed. These will then be sent to you or if you require, to Steven Cleary. The funds will also be transferred.

We would request that signed copies be sent back to us from Gloria Jean's and all the changes to be implemented within the contracts. We have based our entire costings on the figures of sales given to us by Gloria Jean's through
Cecil Johnson via yourself. It is important that these figures do stand when put to the test in Australia in way of profitability.

All other contracts including yours will be signed off and sent to you during the course of this week.

We would also request you to inform us of the whereabouts of the airfreight shipment as this is most urgently required. Your help in this regard would be very much appreciated.

Furthermore, we would like an air shipment of 200 cartons of Irish Cream
Trial Packs to be sent as soon as possible. For one reason or the other we have had a run on the product and stock are down to five cartons. Please find attached the order duly completed.

We look forward to working with you on the Gloria Jean's project and will have details of all our requirements sent to you within the next week.
 At about this time, Messrs Irvine and Saleh were taking advice from Mr Best about a Gloria Jean's requirement that they personally guarantee the obligations of their master franchisee entity as well as about the fact that they were relying on financial information provided by Gloria Jean's. On 23
February 1996 and again on 26 February 1996, Mr Best wrote to Mr Meier about these issues. Mr Best wrote to Messers Irvine and Saleh about them on 23
February 1996. Gloria Jean's agreed to limited modifications of the proposed
Master Franchise Agreement to alleviate certain concerns of Messrs Irvine and
Saleh.
 On 5 March 1996, Mr Saleh wrote to Mr Meier, relevantly as follows: 
Re: GLORIA JEAN'S 
It was a pleasure talking to you on the phone on 1st March and confirming to you that we believe that you have achieved all that was needed to proceed with the signing of the contracts.

Do please accept my sincere thanks for all your efforts and commitment to see this contract come through.

We will be meeting with Gary and Athena on Monday, 4th March, or at the very latest on the 5th of March, depending on their availability, to have the contract signed and couriered out to Gloria Jean's Corporate Counsel. We would have made all the necessary changes and would be waiting to receive their count-signed copy at which time funds would be transferred to Gloria Jean's account.

We now look forward to giving you a new address for this venture, telephone numbers, etc. etc. Also, details of items that we would need faxed to us together with details of visits by Gloria Jean's executives.

Once again, please accept my sincere thanks to you and David for all of your help and assistance.

The W.E.S. contract will be couriered to you directly as well.

We look forward with interest to the growth in our relationships and that of our organisations.
 
Best personal regards 
I will refer to this letter as the "5 March letter".
 The 5 March letter refers to a telephone conversation between Mr Saleh and
Mr Meier on 1 March 1996.
 In his affidavit sworn on 14 December 2009 in the proceedings, Mr Meier says that this conversation was to the following effect: 
MEIER: Nabi, I am surprised with your letter of February 6. We have already talked about your concerns with our commissions and you agreed with the language of clause 7 when we spoke on January 19. That was why we changed the agreement to add clause 7 and sent it to you on January 22.

SALEH: Steve, we just need to be certain that all of the items can bear the 5% commissions on products supplied from the U.S. under clause 2 and 3, especially the roasted coffee.

MEIER: We are willing to meet after the first stores are opened to review the commissions. Unless Jireh shows the 5% commission causes each product line to have gross profit margins that aren't workable for the stores, then the 5% commission will continue for that product line. However, it is important that you understand we need to have an agreement in place with Jireh until we review the commissions and before we move forward with this business.

SALEH: Steve, thank you for talking with me. I believe you have achieved what
I needed to proceed with the signing of the agreement. I look forward to proceeding with you and David with this venture and to seeing you or David in
Australia.  Mr Saleh's response by way of an affidavit sworn on 8 April 2010 is that he does not recall this conversation. He says however, that at various times such as the parties' initial meeting in Denver Colorado on 3-5 August 1995, in his facsimile to Mr Cisneros dated 18 January 1996 and in his letter to Mr
Cisneros dated 6 February 1996, he informed Messrs Meier and Cisneros that before any commission was agreed between the parties and became operational, the parties had to be certain that the items on which commission was charged could bear the rate of commission of five per cent. He says that he said words to the effect of: "we need to ensure the 5% for the items from the US and coffee will be competitive".
 
The Master Franchise Agreement, the Roasting Agreement and the Letter Agreement On 6 March 1996, Jireh signed the following agreements with Gloria Jean's
Gourmet Coffees Corp: a a Roasting Licence Agreement under which the defendant was granted the exclusive right to roast, blend, flavour and package products marketed and sold under various names and packages with the distinctive Gloria Jean's
Gourmet Coffees trademarks owned by Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp ("the
Roasting Agreement"); and  b a Master Franchise Agreement under which the defendant was granted the right to grant franchises for the development and operation of Gloria Jean's Gourmet
Coffees stores in Australia ("the Master Franchise Agreement").
 On 8 March 1996, Mr Best sent those instruments to Gloria Jean's Gourmet
Coffees Corp for execution.
 On 19 March 1996, Messrs Irvine and Saleh signed the Letter Agreement and on the same day, under cover of a Maranatha letterhead, Mr Saleh wrote to Mr
Meier as follows: 
Dear Steve, re: AGREEMENT 
Please find enclosed three copies of our agreement duly signed by Peter and myself.
 
Would you and David kindly sign these and have two original copies sent out to us at your convenience.
 
Please also find enclosed an original copy of Roasting Licence Agreement for your records as requested. We have sent the originals to Steve Clearly directly.
 
We look forward with interest to the continuing growth of the business relationship between our organisations and we thank you and David for all the help and assistance in this regard.
 
Best personal regards.

Yours sincerely, 
MARANATHA IMPORTS EXPORTS PTY LTD 
NABI SALEH Before Gloria Jean's executed the agreements, an issue arose about the fact that the Master Franchise Agreement had been delayed whilst the Roasting
Agreement was being negotiated. This had the consequence that the payment by
Jireh of the Master Franchise Fee provided for would be delayed beyond what was said to be Gloria Jean's' expectations. Mr Cisneros described this as a serious dispute between Jireh and Gloria Jean's which endangered the whole deal. With the assistance and intervention of Messrs Cisneros and Meier, this issue was resolved and on or about 5 April 1996, Gloria Jean's executed the
Master Franchise Agreement and the Roasting Agreement.
 Messrs Cisneros and Meier signed the Letter Agreement on the same day, that is 19 March 1996.
 
The course of the parties' relationship until the denial by Jireh of a binding agreement with WES Once the Master Franchise Agreement and Roasting Agreement had been signed,
Jireh proceeded with WES' assistance to plan for the commencement of a franchise operation in this country. Mr Meier was in contact with Gloria
Jean's executives and legal counsel in the US. The Gloria Jean's Illinois operation was apparently moved from Illinois to Castroville in California, where Mr Meier travelled to meet Gloria Jean's general counsel. Plans were made for the opening of initial stores, for the supply of products and for the roasting of coffee in Australia, beginning in September 1996.
 On 5 August 1996, Mr Meier sent Mr Irvine invoices for Ghiradelli (a well- known brand of sweet ground cocoa), which had been ordered for Jireh. The invoices were sent under cover of a fax which referred to the invoiced amounts as including "our 5% commission". On 16 August 1996, Jireh made payment to WES for all amounts due in August (apparently including in respect of the
Ghiradelli invoices).
 WES assisted in what Mr Cisneros described as the "mammoth task" of sourcing, negotiating the supply terms for and the export to Australia of a large number of different product lines for the new stores.
 The first Australian Gloria Jean's coffee store opened on 4 November 1996 in Miranda, a southern suburb of greater Sydney and the second on 27 November in a shopping centre known as Eastgardens, which is in an eastern suburb of greater Sydney.
 Unprocessed (or unroasted) coffee was commonly referred to by the parties as green coffee, bulk coffee or GJ bulk. Clause 3 of the Letter Agreement contemplated Jireh or an associated entity roasting such coffee and then supplying it as Gloria Jean's or other branded coffee for sale in Gloria
Jean's stores in Australia. The Roasting Agreement licensed Jireh to roast.
 Initially, Jireh bought green coffee and had Columbia roast it on its behalf. By arrangement with Columbia, Mr Saleh placed orders for green coffee on behalf of Columbia for Jireh's exclusive use. The green coffee was delivered to Columbia for roasting and Columbia invoiced Jireh for a roasting fee and packaging costs. WES routinely invoiced Columbia for green coffee delivered. Later (in about 1999) Maranatha installed its own roasting facilities and obtained green coffee which it roasted for on sale by Jireh.
Maranatha remains the prime roaster. As will appear below, however, coffee is now roasted for GJCI, which in turn supplies it to JIWD for sale to Jireh's
Franchisees in Australia and to other Master Franchisees around the world.  Mr Cisneros came to Australia on 8 January 1997 and met with Messrs Irvine and Saleh. Mr Cisneros says that a conversation with Messrs Irvine and Saleh to the following effect took place:  
CISNEROS: Let's talk about pricing and payments according to our agreement.
How is the pricing working for the first store, including our margins? 
SALEH: We don't know yet. We have just opened up the first store.

CISNEROS: Well keep us advised if there are any problems with pricing, including our margins. We'll continue to work on additional discounts, GJ trade show specials or other incentives from the suppliers.  On 15 January 1997, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh, referring to matters discussed at their meeting. He wrote, relevantly: 
GJ roasting - Since we travel to Japan and Korea, it is important that we establish a relationship with buyers. We need to organize a supply plan promptly, so Steve or I can meet with these buyers when we visit Japan in
March. We also need to develop a reporting system on royalties for GJ and WES.
 Mr Saleh does not recall this conversation. He says that there was no direct discussion or review of the commissions at this meeting because only two stores had opened over two months and they were dealing with issues relating to the store model. He says that there was discussion about the high cost of goods and ways this could be reduced. Mr Irvine's recollection is that he said that the price of goods was uncompetitive and that they had to get the cost down. He says that the cost of goods included WES' margin under cl 2.
Each party prepared notes in anticipation of the discussions. They make no direct reference to roasting commission.
 Also on 15 January 1997, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Irvine asking for information from Jireh including sales figures by category.
 To facilitate the obtaining of products from US suppliers, WES pledged its own credit. Suppliers invoiced WES, and it in turn invoiced Jireh. From as early as January 1997, Jireh was late in making payments to WES. On 31 January , Jireh put a payment plan to WES in respect of then outstanding invoices.
On 12 March 1997, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Saleh: 
In the near term, you will need to pay the agreed royalties to GJ and to
W.E.S. per the agreements. We do not add any commission on our invoices to
Columbia for green coffee.
 From this time on and over substantially the whole period of the working relationship of the parties, Jireh was regularly late in paying invoices due to WES and WES regularly pressed Jireh to meet its obligations. WES showed remarkable patience. In relation to the payment of the roasting commission, its frustration is revealed by the following, which Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr
Saleh on 6 July 1999: 
Bulk royalties- We await your promised outline by no later than July 15.
We are very frustrated that Maranatha evokes a team spirit, in which we have supported without question, and then shorts or delays payment to its partners of agreed-to commissions.
 On 26 March 1997, WES invoiced Jireh for an amount of US$ 3657.44 for product plus "commissions earned" of US$ 182.87 at a stated rate of five per cent.
 As I have said before, to begin with, Jireh selected Columbia as the entity which would carry out the physical work of roasting. Green coffee for roasting was regularly shipped directly via WES to Columbia and WES invoiced Columbia.
Columbia roasted coffee under this arrangement until Maranatha installed its own roasting facilities in about late 1999. From approximately late 1999,
Maranatha started roasting and supplying to Jireh, ordering green coffee directly from Gloria Jean's in the US and later directly from growers.
 During the period March to June 1997, WES invoiced Jireh on at least five occasions, claiming, in addition to the price of the goods delivered, five per cent for "Commissions Earned". Jireh paid these commission amounts, according to Mr Saleh, because they were referable to export services and he was prepared to make payment on some charges in respect of these export services.
 Up to this time WES had not invoiced Jireh in respect of the roasting commission, it seems, because it understood that Jireh was financially stretched. On 28 April 1997, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Saleh: "[w]e can discuss the royalty to W.E.S. later - perhaps when you come over for the Gloria Jean's convention".
 On 26 November 1997, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Irvine, relevantly as follows: 
We have not included any handling commission with the previous shipments from Gloria Jean's to Columbia Coffee and Tea. Next week, we will submit our invoice for 5% of the value of prior shipments of product. Beginning with the pending flavouring shipment, we include a 5% handling commission on all future invoices.
 On 16 December 1997, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Irvine, relevantly as follows: 
DEAR PETER, 
FOLLOWING IS AN INVOICE FOR COMMISSIONS FOR SALES OF GREEN BEANS AND
FLAVORS FOR COFFEE ROASTED IN AUSTRALIA. OUR AGREEMENT PROVIDES THAT WE
RECEIVE 5% OF THE AUSTRALIA EX-FACTORY PRICE FOR COFFEE ROASTED AND SOLD IN
AUSTRALIA AND TO OTHER COUNTRIES. RATHER THAN REQUIRE AN ACCOUNTING BY JIREH
FOR ALL COFFEE ROASTED, WE BELIEVE 7% IS A FAIR ALTERNATIVE. DAVID HAS ALSO
DISCUSSED WITH NABI.

BEST REGARDS, STEVE.
 On 16 December 1997, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh, relevantly as follows: 
Thanks for talking with me yesterday. Several quick points today: . ...
 . Commission on GJ bulk - An invoice will be faxed to Jireh per your advice On 9 January 1998, Mr Irvine wrote the following to Mr Meier: 
Invoice for commissions for sale of green beans and flavours.
 
Nabi has spoken with me regarding the commission charge. There are several issues we would like to raise for discussion. These issues are to put Jireh's view on the table regarding Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees current profitability and ongoing profitability.
 . The original agreement with W.E.S. stated a 5% commission of the ex- factory price of the coffees, teas and other products. Nabi discussed this issue with David at the time of the agreement in 1996 and it was to be reviewed after six months. This hasn't happened as we were still in set-up phase and basically putting together a Gloria Jean's head office in Australia.
 . Profitability of stores and Jireh 
This area continues to present considerable concern. We are not achieving anywhere near the gross profit in stores that Gloria Jean's achieved in the USA. Phillip has confirmed this issue when he first arrived in
Australia.
 
Jireh (in March, '97) cut considerably the GP on component, merchandise and roasted beans to try and improve store GP. The stores still don't achieve
GP's anywhere near the USA. Jireh is now even worse off when I was sustaining greater losses.
 
The problem comes to the add on costs at every stage in getting product to
Australia. We still have to send 2% of gross sales to Gloria Jean's and 0.25c lb US on coffees sold to stores to Gloria Jean's. All product imported seems to have several add on commissions to the original price.
 
It is difficult to franchise stores on a large scale with the high investment, high work level and poor returns.
 
There is a point where retail prices can't go any higher. We are expensive compared to most stores.
 . Columbia Coffee (our Roasters) 
Nabi has confirmed that Columbia's small margin on sales to Jireh has eroded with the Australian Dollar drop, therefore they have no margin to pay the W.E.S. commission.
 . Both families have put a large financial commitment in this business with no early likelihood of return of the loans. We also owe the bank considerable dollars and they are vigilantly watching and waiting pay back of these loans.

Sue and I work full time in the business for no salary. The Partners receive no payments.
 
Steven, with all this in mind, Jireh meets to review the next steps.
 . Pay this initial $US84,698.00 and discuss with W.E.S. the ongoing situation. Jireh and Gloria Jean's in Australia has to improve financially to be an ongoing concern. There are too many costs being added in the product before getting to store.
 . Forget Gloria Jean's for Australia. Sue and I don't personally want to go through another year like 1997. Maybe we just close and write off the losses. These losses will be large because we will probably be sued by the two current franchisees and Rydges.
 . Do we order green beans and flavourings direct via Gloria Jean's for
Columbia? We are not complaining about the job W.E.S. does for Jireh. You do a great job.
 . We are reviewing with Phillip the overall issue on Gross profits, stock and how we go about overcoming the GP issue and will you posted.

We have to look seriously about where we are going before we open any more stores and commit ourselves any further. We have signed a lease for Broadway which opens in March , 1998.
 
Let's discuss.
 On 22 January 1998, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Saleh: 
Dear Peter; 
I hope this finds you well. We understand it is summer vacation time in
Australia. We're suffering through our coldest month.

I will briefly respond to your letter of January 9th. Our agreement with
Jireh addresses, among other matters, two issues you raise: "For products sold through the Gloria Jean's stores, WES acting as the sole and exclusive supplier and exporter from the United States for products to Jireh, for which we shall receive a margin of 5%." Per the agreement, we have been including this margin on our invoices covering various products sourced from US suppliers.  "For coffee roasted by Jireh in Australia, WES shall receive a commission of 5% of the ex-factory price of the coffees." This is for coffee sold to the GJ stores in Australia or to other countries, such as Japan. Given the ex- factory prices for roasted coffee offered to GJ Japan, we felt it would be more reasonable to assess a margin of 7% of the ex-Gloria Jean's US green coffee cost vs. 5% of the ex-factory Australia price on roasted coffee and hence prepared our invoice accordingly. The invoice in the amount of US$ ,698.00 needs to be paid.  
Nabi is planning to be in Denver the week of February 23rd. At that time, we can review the current arrangement per the agreement.
 
Our interest is the long-term success of Jireh in Australia and the corresponding increase in the number of stores and sales of products - which we supply. With sales to date, the 5% margin has not adequately compensated us for the time and expenses of initial and on-going negotiations with Gloria
Jean's, with vendors, attending the trade shows and the administration of orders and shipments. However, we continue to work to reduce the cost of goods, increase trade terms and otherwise strive to increase the profitability and success of Jireh.
 On 18 February 1998, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Irvine, relevantly the following: 
LASTLY, FOLLOWING IS A CURRENT AGING REPORT FOR JIREH. THE INVOICE FOR
COMMISSIONS FOR THE ROASTED COFFEE (#4282) IS WELL PAST DUE AND THERE ARE
SEVERAL OTHER INVOICES DUE THIS WEEK. KINDLY ARRANGE PAYMENT BY FRIDAY.
INVOICE 4282 NEEDS TO BE PAID - THIS AMOUNT IS ACTUALLY LESS THAN IF WE WOULD
BILL JIREH PER THE AMOUNT IN OUR AGREEMENT. PLEASE CONFIRM.
 On 19 February 1998, Mr Irvine responded. In relation to the Aging Report, he said: 
Invoice for commissions for roasted coffee. Nabi said to hold until he meets with you.
 On 21 February 1998, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Irvine, relevantly the following: 
Thank you arranging payment yesterday. However, our invoice for commissions also needs to be paid - before Nabi comes to Denver in 2 weeks. We fully performed our obligation and did not issue our invoice until well after the coffee was shipped, roasted and sold through to customers. We based our invoice on the FOB Gloria Jean's green coffee cost instead of the FOB
Australia warehouse price of the roasted coffee per our agreement. We believe this is very fair given the Australia roasted price. Payment of this invoice is necessary to help cover our costs of managing this business and isn't something Nabi needs to negotiate in Denver, though we will discuss with him this issue going forward. We are committed to the success of Jireh. Based on sales to date, this business is not profitable to us either. However, as we continue to improve efficiencies and prices/terms on this side and you continue to improve profitability of the store, we see the long-term potential of this business.
 Mr Saleh travelled to the US in early March 1998. On 25 March 1998 he met with Messrs Cisneros and Meier after which Mr Meier travelled with Mr Saleh to
Gloria Jean's corporate office in Castroville, California.
 On 25 March 1998, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Irvine referring to some of the main points discussed. Amongst others he wrote: 
Roasting Agreement * Payment of $4,968.81 invoice for commissions on green coffee per invoice 4282.  * Jireh/Nabi to provide an accounting for all green coffee, in addition to above, and negotiate mutually agreeable payment schedule.  * Future, we will assess Jireh a 5% handling fee at time we issue invoices for green coffee purchases.  * Jireh (Phillip) to contact and organize sales of roasted to GJ Japan.
 On 27 March 1998, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough. At that time, according to Mr Meier, Jireh owed WES $255,332.45 not including "Jireh commissions for roasted coffee".
 On 9 June 1998 WES provided Mr McCullough (copy to Mr Saleh) account balances which included an estimated amount of $5000 in respect of unpaid GJ roast royalties, subject to confirming a mutually agreed amount.
 On 15 June 1998, Mr Saleh wrote relevantly as follows to Mr Meier: 
I sincerely hope that the GJ convention is working out well and that you are having meaningful discussions with Peter. I have had long discussions with
Peter assuring him that we do need to have all our products sourced through you and that at no time should we go outside of the system even if Phillip puts pressure on Peter. I have made this quite clear in our meetings to
Phillip as well, so work on the affirmative that they do need to support the relationship and the arrangements that we have, that everything be passed through WES.

With regard to the roasted coffee commission, this has been a very delicate issue but have been able to work this through with Peter and will have the amounts due, over and above what has been in fact worked out by you, on figures given by us, in the next week. At that you can put in your claim and this will be met. You do not need to have this brought up at all in your discussions as this has been dealt with at this end.

I am looking forward to talking to you on your return.
 On about 15 June 1998, WES rendered invoice no. 4449 to Columbia in an amount of $5000 for "COMMISSIONS EARNED UNPAID ROYALTY TO WESTERN EXPORT
SERVICES FOR COFFEES ROASTED FOR JIREH/GLORIA JEAN'S".
 On 11 December 1998, Mr Saleh wrote, relevantly, to Mr Cisneros: 
Your Fax of 9th December.

Will have a letter from Bob outlining specific points as requested with both columbia and Brothers repayment programme. Also with regard to Maranatha and Brothers payment against regular monthly orders. Will also come back to you with a quantifiable number of coffee that was used for royalty basis.
However, with regard to coffee 5% commission, this should not be double charged both to Columbia and to Jireh and as such, with enormous pressure on margins, we would need this to be charged out to only one of the parties, and this time it should be Columbia. However, will need to discuss this with you and come to a resolution.

I have been given several invoices by Jireh who cannot see the rationale in them having to pay for this 5% of coffee. However, if this is the 5% that was agreed upon for all sales of items by Jireh, as being charged out by you for shipments made out of the US then this would be to Jireh's account. Hence, would need to discuss this together.
 On 1 March 1999, Mr Tim King, Jireh's internal accountant, wrote to Mr
Meier, relevantly as follows: 
With reference to the invoices for commission on green beans and flavours we understand from Nabi that this matter is in abeyance pending your discussions with him on your visit to Australia in the next couple of months.

This program has been calculated with reference to a reasonable forecast of cash flows of the Company over the next couple of months. Should more favourable circumstances arise, such as new franchisees being signed up to the system we will endeavour to clear these payments sooner than what has been outlined here.
 On 1 March 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Irvine, relevantly as follows: 
WES Receivables * Our agreement is that Jireh pays WES within vendor terms. However, to help out in the short term, we will accept the proposal Tim set out. We will need to assess interest of 2% per month on the past due months from the invoice due dates to cover our cost of funds and loss of use and the funds. We'll provide a statement with these charges shortly.
 * Commission on green beans and flavors were not an issue we had discussed with Nabi to hold in abeyance pending my visit. Our original agreement was that a fee based on Jireh's Australia roasted coffee price would be paid to WES. For ease of administration, we agreed to the handling fee on green coffee and flavors. This actually results in much lower fees to Jireh so payment shouldn't be delayed - some invoices are 115 days old.
 * In the future, we will be willing to consider providing additional purchase financing to Jireh on a case by case basis, but we need to discuss and agree in advance.
 On 2 March 1999, Mr King wrote: 
Hi Steve 
Further to your fax to Peter today, we wish to advise at this stage there will be no amendments to the payment program to Progress Packaging advised yesterday.

A revision of Jireh's cash flow forecast has been done and there is not the scope to bring these payments forward, unless this is done in lieu of payment of some of the other WES receivable outstanding. However we reiterate the point that if our circumstances improve such as new franchisees being signed then the payment timings would obviously be brought forward.

On the issue of the outstanding commissions on the green coffee and flavours, we will be incorporating payments on these into WES receivables payment program outlined.

Please contact me if you have any questions.

Regards 
Tim King 
Accountant.
 On 15 July 1999, Mr Cisneros wrote, relevantly to Mr Saleh: 
Finance: * Payments - I will confirm this week's payment with Donna. Thank you. Maranatha and Columbia are still not meeting their weekly payment obligations as agreed with Steve in Australia, both paying for new orders before eta Sydney, and paying off debt. The debt is still significant, and we have had to make payments to P&G to cover again. Steve will confirm specifics with Bob early next week.
 * Maranatha/Jireh bulk commissions - We were promised that Maranatha would organise this sales information for your meeting with Steve. If we don't receive this information by end of July, then we will have to approximate ourselves and send an invoice. Nabi, please understand that this information is important for many reasons, both for our sales numbers/program for our transition partner, and also an important part of our compensation.
 On 27 July 1999, Columbia wrote to Mr Meier concerning invoice 4449. In their fax, which was copied both to Mr Saleh and to Mr McCullough, Columbia said that invoice 4449 should never have appeared in their account, as it was strictly between Jireh and Gloria Jean's (presumably meaning WES). They requested that the payment be reallocated.
 On the same day, Mr McCullough wrote to Mr Meier, advising that invoice for $5000 should be "charged to Jireh...for Gloria Jeans and accordingly credited to Columbia's account".
 On 10 August 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Columbia (copy to Messrs Saleh and
McCullough) as follows: 
The issue of 4449 invoices royalties due Western Export under our agreement with Jireh for coffee roasted by Columbia. Payment should be resolved between Jireh and Columbia Coffee and Tea. Upon confirmation from both Jireh and Columbia Coffee & Tea, we will allocate the payment as you agree with Jireh.
 On 10 August 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr Saleh), relevantly as follows: * Per our agreement with Jireh, we are to be paid royalty on all coffee roasted in Australia for the Gloria Jean's stores because we aren't supplying Jireh with roasted coffee from the USA. We have requested that Jireh provide a report on coffees purchased from Columbia, but haven't received. Please ask Kathaleen to provide us with an accounting of coffee Columbia has sold to Jireh.
 * Columbia's contention that they were not aware the past due amount was accruing interest is without merit. Initially, we included accrued interest charges by invoices, which were faxed and mailed to Columbia. Subsequently, I have had extensive communications with Nabi and you regarding a promissory note and rate of interest.  On 25 August 1999, WES reissued invoice 4449 (as invoice 5066) and directed it to Jireh. The notation on the invoice was: "COMMISSIONS EARNED
ROYALTY ON ROASTED COFFEE PREVIOUSLY BILLED TO COLUMBIA COFFEE & TEA (INVOICE NUMBER 4449)".  On 26 August 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Saleh relevantly as follows: 
Columbia - 
Following is letter I plan to send to Kathaleen. We have issued a $5000 credit, but will need to invoice Jireh. I imagine Kathaleen will also want an interest adjustment with respect to this (we will need to add this to Jireh's account). The $5000 was an amount we agreed to, since we never received an accounting of coffee roasted by Columbia. You advised that Columbia was preparing a report of coffee roasted in 1998 and 1999 to date. Please include coffee roasted from inception of the Gloria Jean's business.
 On 31 August 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Messrs Irvine and Saleh as follows: 
Dear Peter and Nabi; 
As you know, over the past weeks, Jireh has been stretching payments of our invoices. We understand there have been cash flow issues, especially with opening of all of the new stores and the corresponding build-out and other costs.

Our agreement with Jireh is that we would obtain best domestic customer terms from vendors and Jireh will pay us within the vendor terms. We have obtained 45 - 60 day terms with many of the vendors and continue to push for longer terms. However, in order to maintain these terms, we must pay vendors within terms. When timely payment is not received from Jireh, we must borrow against our bank line to pay the vendors.

David and I understand that to date, this business has not been profitable for Jireh and will not be until additional stores open with corresponding store opening fees and growing royalties on sales. At current levels, our supply business has also not been profitable. But, again as sales volumes increase, we should start covering overhead and see a profit, with an eventual bigger pay-out when you and Nabi convey your interest in Jireh or the Gloria
Jean's business to another entity.

To help Jireh though (sic) the current cash-flow situation, we would offer an additional 30 days to pay our invoices for an additional 2% fee. As an alternative, David and I are open to discuss increasing our interest in Jireh in return for providing longer payment terms.

Our bank reviews our account receivable aging reports and is pressuring us to limit our open account exposure to customers who don't pay within terms. We will need to have timely payment or some acceptable agreement, or our ability to continue selling Jireh on open account will be limited.

I have sent Tim an invoice for a royalty on green coffee for 1997 - we had previously invoice Columbia Coffee & Tea but they have refused to pay.
Given the fact our agreement for royalties on the roasting of coffee is within the supply agreement we have with Jireh, we would agree that this should be invoiced to Jireh. For 1998 and 1999 to current, are awaiting Columbia's report regarding the quantity of coffee roasted under the roasting agreement.
Upon receiving this information, we can discuss past due royalties to W.E.S.
from Jireh under our supply agreement.

Best regards, On 21 September 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough (copy to Mr Saleh), relevantly as follows: * Columbia Bulk - We know how much we sold last year, and we know how many stores there are this year, and a good idea how much bulk is being sold. And yet, Columbia has not yet paid down its account, and has only ordered $4,163.74 this year. Last year, it ordered $84,802.07, which did not include a large amount of unauthorised coffee and this quantity was for fewer stores. Even if Jay did authorise Nabi to make some blends in Australia, still some coffees need to be supplied from GJ, and a royalty fee to GJ and commission to WES paid on all non GJ coffee sold there. We don't care if Columbia or Jireh pays this only, that it is timely paid.
 * Audit/payment to WES - What we have requested many times is very reasonable. These commissions are critical, and well earned, for our company. Maranatha paid us a commission for unauthorized coffee sold in 1997, but still has not made payment for any of 1998 or 1999 to date. Therefore, we request the following by no later than October 15, with full payment before end of year: 
Audited amount of non-Brothers bulk coffee sold in 1998 through third quarter, 1999. We will retain the right to independently audit these figures.
We have a very good idea of the quantity of bulk sold, and it is far greater than the Brothers bulk bought over the last two years.
Audited amount of non-GJ coffee sold in 1998 through third quarter, 1999.
Payment of commissions, after confirmation, before the end of 1999.
Quarterly commission payments/audit for both Brothers and GJ, starting with 4th quarter, 1999, payable within one month after the end of each quarter.
 On 23 September 1999, Mr Meier faxed Mr McCullough (copy to Mr Saleh), relevantly as follows: 
Dear Bob: 
Thank you for talking with David and me today. Let me confirm as follows: 
Brother's payments 
Maranatha will make US$25,000 payments each and every week until all regular shipments and outstanding note have been paid. The payments will be made starting Monday, September 27.

WES will release Invoice 5068 shipment on Monday, October 4, based on receipt of first payment, and written confirmation (wire remittance notice) of second $25,000 payment.

Next ocean shipment will be held at MAP until third $25,000 payment is received, and will be held in Sydney until fourth $25,000 payment received.

Thereafter, subsequent weekly payments will be applied to outstanding notes and regular shipments at WES' discretion. Maranatha's goal is to place regular money orders that can be financed effectively, while at the same time paying down outstanding note. Based on this payment schedule, and an October order of no more than $35,000, this account will be down to zero by November 6 weekly payment. No exceptions to this payment schedule will be accepted, and orders/shipments will be halted until schedule met. Thereafter, Maranatha can increase orders if necessary, consistent with demand, ability to pay, and WES finance system under an export insurance program (to be finalized separately).

Columbia payments - I will make necessary adjustments to
Columbia/Brothers' accounts tomorrow, and fax same. Then, please confirm two or three weekly payments within October to finish off this account.

Outstanding commissions for bulk - McCullough will provide an audited report of Brothers and Columbia/Jireh bulk coffee sold, according to the system as outlined in our September 21 fax, by no later than October 15. We will then mutually agree as to the commission amount and payment schedule.
Thereafter, we will also establish a quarterly payment/report for payment of commissions from fourth quarter, 1999.

We are going to continue to work with you and Nabi to establish a more sound, long term financing capability that allows us to grow these and other businesses in an effective manner and one that is mutually beneficial.

Please sign this fax and return by fax acknowledging your agreement to the above matters, so that we can proceed. Thank you.
 By letter dated 13 October 1999, Mr McCullough returned a signed copy of
Mr Meier's facsimile. He wrote: 
Dear Steve 
MARANATHA IMPORT EXPORT PTY LTD/COLUMBIA 
I refer to the above and your fax to me of 23 September 1999 following our discussions.
 
I now attach duly executed agreement to payment terms for Maranatha. Nabi undertakes to pay as per the proposed schedule and will advise you if there is any problem in meeting the commitment.
 
Nabi confirms having sent payments of $20,000 and $10,000 and will continue to send weekly payments.
 
I propose to review the Columbia account reconciliation, including some interest adjustment, and shall advise you accordingly.
 
Yours faithfully 
McCullough & Associates Pty Limited On 14 October 1999, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr
Saleh), relevantly as follows: 
Outstanding commissions for bulk- According to our agreement, your report of bulk sold by Brothers and Columbia/Jireh is due this week. Please ensure that it is provided. Once agreed upon, we will mutually schedule agreed weekly payments.
 On 19 October 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr Saleh), that as of that day, the payment of $20,000 had not been received.
 On 2 November 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough as follows: 
Thank you for signing and returning David's letter of November 24. Based on your signature and assurance, we released the coffee at Sydney and also authorized the soonest shipment of the Brothers coffee from Mapcargo.
 
Our bank received $15,000 on Friday. However, we did not receive a fax copy of the bank application for remittance of the $25,000. Please fax a copy to us today.
 
Per your advice, we will await reply today of your payment schedule and audit of whole bean coffee sale for Maranatha and Jireh.
 The relationship between WES and Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp was apparently informal until 6 December 1999 when they entered into a Letter of
Understanding under which, amongst others, WES was authorised to supply products to Gloria Jean's Master Franchisees in, amongst others, Australia.
 On 15 December 1999, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr Saleh), as follows: 
Dear Bob: 
Though promised since June of this year, and many times since then, we have not received a clear audit and report for the bulk sales, both to Jireh's
Gloria Jean stores and for Maranatha bulk hoppers. Therefore, we have determined the bulk quantity based on the following facts and projections:
Commissions earned for Maranatha bulk coffee - 1998 - $16,510 based on a % commission under the following formula: Estimate hoppers in 230 stores at lbs. sold per month per store. Total estimated sales: 110,400 lb. x $4.54/lb. = $501,216. Less actual purchases from Brothers of $171,000 leaves a balance of $330,216 x 5% = $16,510.
 . Commissions earned for Maranatha bulk coffee - 1999 - $47,670 based on a 5% commission under the following formula: Estimate hoppers in 350 stores at lbs. sold per month per store. Total estimated sales: 210,000 lbs. x $4.54/lb. = $ 953,400. Less actual purchases from Brothers of $ 0 leaves a balance of 953,400 x 5% = $47,670.
 . Commissions earned for Jireh bulk coffee - 1998 - $5,300 based on a 5% commission on purchases from GJ of $84,402, and projected additional unauthorized green coffee purchases of an additional $21,598 of roasted coffee. This projection is based on an average green coffee purchases of average four stores multiplied by $26,500 per store per year; and . Commission earned for Jireh bulk coffee - 1999 - $13,250 based on a 5% commission on roasted green coffee for an average ten stores multiplied by $26,500 in green coffee purchases per store per year.

The Jireh information should be readily available because Jireh is paying royalties to Gloria Jean's under the roasting agreement.
 
Based on this analysis, please find attached our invoice for the same amounts. These amounts will serve as the presumed amount, unless
Maranatha/McCullough can establish promptly, through figures that can be independently audited, that these numbers are in some way inaccurate.
 
The purpose of our telephone call today is to discuss two things:
Weekly payment status; 
Review bulk invoices and determine a mutually agreeable resolution before year-end, as agreed by Maranatha; 
Establish on-going reporting, audit and payment procedures for both
Maranatha and Jireh; and 
Discuss a roasting license from the Brothers/new gourmet coffee venture to
Maranatha for hoppers.

We look forward to talking with you and Nabi shortly. Thank you.
 On the same day, WES rendered an invoice to Maranatha claiming US$ 82,730 under the following notations: 
DESCRIPTION OF GOODS AND/OR SERVICES 
QTY 
RATE 
AMOUNT  ---|---  
COMMISSIONS EARNED MARANATHA BULK COFFEE 1998 
COMMISSIONS EARNED MARANATHA BULK COFFEE 1999 
COMMISSIONS EARNED JIREH ROASTING 1998 
COMMISSIONS EARNED JIREH ROASTING 1999 ,510.00  ,670.00  ,300.00  ,250.00 ,510.00  ,670.00  ,300.00  ,250.00  
Total USD $82,730.00 On 20 March 2000, Mr Saleh wrote to Mr Meier, amongst others, the following: 
Thank you for understanding our frustration in being able to obtain payments from retailers to meet our ongoing commitments to you...

With regard to the bulk coffee used by Jireh and Maranatha, let me work these figures through with both Tim and Bob and I would be happy to then discuss this matter and resolve it with you at that point in time.
 On 13 June 2000, Mr Cisneros sent an email to Mr Saleh which contained, amongst others the following: . Bulk commissions- Once you have resolved the outstanding payments with
Steve, within June, then you and I need to discuss this matter and work out an agreement, including monthly payments starting in July. There is no way it can legitimately take over a year to determine these sales, and you will admit that this is not a reasonable delay by any means. This problem will not go away and will just grow unless Maranatha and Jireh take responsibility to resolve the past and move into the future in a manner that is consistent with the rights and responsibilities of our partnership; On 29 June 2000, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh as follows: 
Dear Nabi: 
The following reflects our agreement.

Finance 
Current trade account - The current balance due on the trade account of
US$3,768.00. This needs to be received before arrival of the next ocean shipment, currently scheduled for ETA Sydney July 16.
On going orders - We will continue to accept an ship on-going orders.
Payment must be received before arrival in Sydney of each order. We will release the cargo (B/L) for each order upon receipt of payment.
Note receivable - The current balance, not including accrued interest for
June, is US$87,250.00. We must receive four remaining payments on the note receivable prior to August 31, 2000. These payments must be made according to schedule and independent of on-going orders. If payments on the note receivable are not current, we will not release any on-going orders until payments on the note receivable are brought current.

Week of 7 July $21,812.50 
Week of 28 July $21,812.50 
Week of 18 August $21,812.50 
Week of 8 September $21,812.50 (plus accrued interest for June, July) 
Maranatha agrees to fully and reasonably resolve the outstanding bulk commissions on both Maranatha and Jireh bulk, both in terms of resolving past commissions and/or license fees. This resolution will be effected by no later than the end of July 2000.
 At the foot of Mr Cisneros' letter, provision was made for Maranatha to sign its acceptance, which it did. Mr McCullough returned the signed version by facsimile on 30 June 2000.
 On 19 July 2000, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr Saleh), relevantly as follows: 
Commissions due on Maranatha/Jireh bulk - We have been extremely patient now for several years on this matter. Your statements concerning the bulk "over supply" are not based in fact. The last shipment of Brothers' bulk was in December 1998. We negotiated with Brothers for a very strong discount on that shipment, which met requirements, set by Maranatha. In addition, throughout 1998, 1999 and 2000, Maranatha has sold its own roasted coffee in the Brothers Coffee bins, presumably at a good profit-given the cost of roasting bulk green beans vs. buying roasted bulk from the US. Despite this, we have not been paid our commissions on the Maranatha/Brothers bulk or the
Jireh bulk for over two and a half years now. We have long agreed to accomplish two things:
Establish the amount owing (now through June 2000) for both Maranatha and
Jireh bulk coffees. This report needs to be provided immediately, and may be audited independently. Based on the amount agreed upon, we will need to set up a monthly payment program for arrears starting in September; and
Establish a system for ongoing quarterly payment of our commissions, starting with third quarter, 2000. We need to establish an ongoing payment system, or commissions will just keep accruing for both Maranatha and Jireh and we will need to accrue interest on past-due amounts.

As to your comment about our "bank's attitude" about Maranatha as a valuable customer - Maranatha is a valuable customer and Nabi is a good friend. However, this has no connection whatsoever to over three and a half years of delinquent payments, and a finance system that has yet to properly supported to establish current purchases, let alone market growth. Our bank has been very tolerant with respect to our use of the credit line. In essence, we are borrowing money to lend to Maranatha to pay us so we can pay the vendor and our bank no longer wishes to finance this type of business arrangement.

We request that we have a telephone conference call with you and Nabi on this Friday morning (Australia time). Please confirm a time on this date when we can review the above matters.

Thank you for your assistance.
 On 5 August 2000, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr Saleh), relevantly as follows: 
Maranatha/Jireh commissions 
You have agreed that this matter has been too long unresolved and the situation will only get worse if not resolved. By the end of August, you have agreed to provide a full accounting of whole bean sales for Maranatha and
Jireh for the years 1998, 1999 and 2000 (through June 2000) and understand this accounting may be subject to an independent audit. If the accounting is not provided in a timely manner, we will proceed with an independent audit.

Along with providing the accounting, you agreed to following: * Starting in September, establish a monthly payment plan for the past due amount (until the outstanding payment is fully resolved); and  * A plan to provide a quarterly accounting of both Jireh and Maranatha bulk sales (from 3rd quarter 2000 onwards) including regular quarterly payments, separate from past due amount, payable within the month following each quarter.  On 6 September 2000, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough (copy to Mr Saleh), relevantly as follows: 
Dear Bob: 
Thank you for your letter today regarding payments to be made this week.
Unfortunately, we are in the same position this week as we seen to be for every shipment arriving in Sydney - no payments made per your schedule and then several payments are made together with a request to release the cargo without receiving promised payments.
 On 12 September 2000, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr Saleh), relevantly as follows: 
Invoice 5535 is for two separate bills from Gloria Jean's covering flavors ordered directly by Nabi. Gloria Jean's claims the amount is still owed and required us to pay this invoice to keep our trade account with Gloria Jean's current. Maranatha has advised that these bills have already been paid to
Gloria Jean's. Please work with Maranatha and/or Jireh to confirm payment directly to Gloria Jean's. Unless Maranatha or Jireh can provide proof of payment, we will apply a portion of Maranatha's next payment to this invoice.

Lastly, we still await receipt of your report detailing coffee roasted and sold by Maranatha and Jireh so we can calculate compensation owed to Western
Export. These reports were most recently promised the end of August. Please confirm that you can provide by the end of September. Both accounts continue to accrue obligations that need to be confirmed and addressed by a payment plan-for arrears and going forward. If you cannot provide an accounting within
September, most likely we will hire an accountant to review Maranatha's and
Jireh's records to determine the quantities of roasted coffee sold. This isn't intended as a threat, but rather a means to complete the necessary process.
 This letter was sent to Mr Saleh under cover of a fax from Mr Meier, in which he said: 
We understand you will be meeting with the potential financier today regarding various opportunities. Both David and I wish you success with your discussions.

With respect to Jireh, please keep in mind our interest, which is triggered by a sale or transfer as you consider alternatives for structuring a deal with the investor. Also, we are still waiting for an accounting for the roasted coffee sold by Jireh for which we're entitled to compensation per our agreement. In lieu of compensation by dollars, David and I would consider exchanging that compensation for an additional equity interest in Jireh, if we can mutually agree to formula.
 On 9 October 2000, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr Saleh), relevantly as follows: 
Dear Bob: 
On last Thursday, we sent a letter again requesting advice regarding report of Jireh and Maranatha bulk sales commissions for 1998-present day, and a plan for ongoing payment of commissions.

This report and plan was originally promised several times in 1998 and , and again, before the end of August, 2000. It is clear that this information is readily accessible, and that the failure to provide this information is simply a longstanding delaying tactic on your part.

Unfortunately, this debt is only increasing month by month, and failure to have a plan to resolve it will not benefit Maranatha or Jireh, but only injure their long term prospects. In addition, if these debts are not fully disclosed on Maranatha's and Jireh's financial records, then there may also be other potentially negative consequences.

McCullough has not advised the outstanding commissions owed, nor advised a quarterly payment plan for ongoing payments. To assist Maranatha and Jireh to resolve this longstanding problem, by way of this letter, we are attaching an invoice for $9,000. An invoice in this amount will be sent on a monthly basis, and must be separately paid on a monthly basis. This amount will cover payments for the ongoing commissions due, and the remainder (if any) will start paying down the outstanding commissions owed. Any unpaid amount will be added to the note receivable within two months of invoices.

The total amount of the outstanding and the ongoing commissions due will be finally determined upon provision of the report/plan, and if necessary, our audit thereof, and any payments made in the interim will of course apply to reduce the total amount due. We simply cannot risk, for out partners' sake and our own, this continuing and building problem.

Once a reasonable amount of the outstanding debt is paid down, based on the final confirmed amount for outstanding, and a workable system is established for reporting and paying on going commissions, we are most willing to discuss ways to invest a portion of the remaining debt back into Jireh, for a mutually agreed interest, in addition to our existing 4% interest in Jireh.

Thank you for your prompt attention to this matter.
 On 14 December 2000, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough, (copy to Mr Saleh) as follows: 
Dear Bob: 
Nabi advised you were unable to be available for our scheduled telephone conference earlier this week, and that a conference is not possible today.

We are quite frustrated that Maranatha and Jireh were unable to meet our scheduled dates for discussing the commissions. It seems, after failure to pay on both accounts for several years, and failure to provide accountings when these are reasonably available based on actual sales by Maranatha and Jireh, that both entities are avoiding their obligations in this matter.

Until resolved, we will continue to issue monthly commissions invoices to
Maranatha and Jireh per our letter to you of October 9. Our company is now carrying these invoices on our books, though we do not know the exact amounts, due to your failure to provide accountings. Also, per our October 9 letter, the unpaid invoices (net 60 days) will be moved to the Maranatha's note receivable and we will establish a note receivable for Jireh, with interest assessed at 2% per month on the unpaid balance.

Failure to pay these amounts is resulting in serious damage to our company. Further, these obligations need to be brought above-board. Maranatha and Jireh also need to bring these obligations above-board as well, particularly if you're looking at investment partners.

We have worked long and hard as part of the team for many years, with in effect, little or no net compensation. Unfortunately, we have been ignored or minimized, despite ongoing promises to resolve these issues. These amounts need to be quantified and a system needs to be organized to make payments or alternative arrangements if agreeable. The accountings have been promised now for over a year.

I will be back in the office on Tuesday, December 26. I will call Nabi and
Peter on that date to arrange a telephone conference within that week, with our without your participation. We need to resolve this matter within
December, as our final books are completed on December 29.

Best regards, 
The defendant denies an obligation to pay commission On 22 December 2000, Mr McCullough wrote to Mr Meier as follows: 
Dear Steve 
RE: MARANATHA IMPORT EXPORT PTY LIMITED 
JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LIMITED 
I refer to the above and would advise I am reviewing the position, but I am finding some difficulties in completing my report as I need to reflect the significant losses incurred.

I will respond to you on my return from annual leave. Maranatha advises that there was no commission arrangement and Jireh advise commission would only be paid from when the business is profitable.

The existing invoices for commission are not presently recognised.

Yours faithfully 
McCullough & Associates Pty Limited Mr Cisneros responded to Mr McCullough, copy to Mr Saleh on the same day: 
Dear Bob: 
We are in receipt of your letter of the above date, and I have discussed this matter with Steve by telephone. He has requested that I advise you as follows: 
First, it is highly inappropriate of you to write to us on the eve of your annual leave, when you have ignored our many good faith requests for a telephone conference. We imagine this action was intentional. You are doing a serious disservice to your clients by not fully and directly resolving these matters to our mutual satisfaction.

Second, as to the report referred to in your letter, we assume you mean the accounting of Maranatha and Jireh coffee sales for the last several years.
Since you promised this report many times last year, your have now had several years now to complete it. At this stage, this is just another attempt to continue to delay this process. Any alleged losses for either Maranatha or
Jireh are not relevant to finalizing the report itself, as it is simply an accounting of the coffee quantities sold.

Third, as to Maranatha's agreement, we have significant verbal and written correspondence and agreements reflecting Maranatha's understanding to pay our commissions on our mutually developed retail bulk program, including agreements signed by yourself. If you need a copy of these correspondence and agreements, we are glad to provide them, though you have a complete record as well. Any attempt on your part to disavow our agreement is highly inappropriate.

Fourth, as to Jireh, we suggest your look at our Agreement again. It does not advise that commissions would only be paid when the business is profitable. These commissions are due and owing, just as with any other legal obligation. As we have advised several times, because our main goal is to support Jireh, we are willing to discuss options for these sums due, but only when the past due amount is clearly determined, and an ongoing accounting is in place.

Fifth, the invoices sent for commissions are lawful, and though we do not have an accounting after more than a year now, the invoices likely reflect a small portion of the amounts due by Maranatha and Jireh. As such, the invoice will be included in our 2000 financial documents, and will continue on a monthly basis in 2001. These invoices need to be paid in a timely manner, until a full accounting is provided and this matter mutually agreed upon.

Finally, since out 2000 financial documents need to be completed within next week, we are planning to talk with Nabi per our scheduled telephone call next Wednesday morning (your 9:00 a.m.), without tour presence. Hopefully, we can in good faith, directly and promptly resolve these matters.
 Mr Cisneros came to Australia in May 2001. He met with Messrs Saleh and
McCullough at Jireh's office in Sydney.
 He wrote on 30 May 2001, amongst others, as follows: 
Thank you for meeting with me yesterday. We do appreciate your sincere efforts to resolve these longstanding financial matters. After discussions with Steve, let me review the following...
 ...
 . Maranatha and Jireh roast coffee commissions- * Jireh- We have provided a draft Letter of Understanding to resolve this matter in a win win manner. For this to work effectively, we have agreed that Jireh will provide a complete accounting by the first week of July of the ex factory value of all roasted coffee produced from 1998 through second quarter, 2001, by quarter. This accounting will be subject to independent verification. At a separate meeting at convention, we will finalize this matter and the proposed Letter. At this stage, following the form proposed in the Letter, we would agree to the following: $54,000 payment by the year end- We would accept a payment of this amount for past due commissions. This amount will allow us to take the $27,000 amount invoiced for past due commissions off our 2000 books, and includes an equal nominal payment for 2001. The remaining amount due will be bundled into a future payment at the time of sale or transfer of Jireh, per IPO, investment, etc., projected for 2003 or [2004. For 3rd] and 4th quarter, 2001 onwards, Jireh will report the amount of roasted coffee on a quarterly basis, and this amount will either be paid in full, or bundled into the future payment due. For 2002 onwards, we will agree to a reasonable amount of commissions to be paid for that year, likely in one lump sum, again with the remainder to be bundled into the future payment due. At the first week of
July, we will need to determine a mutually agreeable interest rate on the underlying amounts charged from the quarter in which each amount is due. As per out agreement, we are also willing to consider a mutually agreeable exchange rate for this amount (not including the 4% existing interest), though this hopefully won't be an issue by 2003 or 2004.
 * Maranatha- We would consider this matter resolved as it now stands based on the following:
Provision of mutually acceptable Jireh accounting by first week of July 
Signed Letter at international convention 
Payment of $54,000 within 2001 
Documentation provided by Bob showing Maranatha losses on bulk program for though 2000, to be provided by end of June.

If these points are not met, we will consider both the Jireh and Maranatha matters to be unresolved, with serious consequences for all parties concerned.
 On 9 July 2001, Mr Cisneros wrote to Mr Saleh, relevantly as follows: 
Maranatha/Jireh Roast Coffee commissions- We agreed to waive Maranatha commissions, and resolve Jireh commissions based on the following points: 1)
Provision of mutually agreeable Jireh accounting by first week of July; 2)
Signed Jireh letter at international convention; 3) Jireh payments totaling $54,000 within 2001; and 4) complete accounting showing losses on Maranatha bulk coffee for 1998 through 2000 provided by end of June. We received neither the Maranatha or Jireh accounting.
 On 10 July 2001, Mr McCullough wrote to Mr Cisneros, relevantly as follows: 
Roasted Coffee Commission - Jireh 
In respect to roasted coffee commission for Jireh, I would confirm that payment terms of $50,000 by end of this year can be achieved with balance being deferred until disposal of the Gloria Jeans business by Jireh. This obligation is for Jireh and there is no commission obligation on Maranatha.
Invoicing is to be to Jireh only.

I will assemble the information to determine Jireh commission liability as soon as possible. I will also report separately to you on the Maranatha bulk coffee losses which are extreme.
 On 10 September 2001, Mr Saleh emailed Mr Meier as follows: 
Dear Steve, 
Many thanks for your mail of the 4th and 7th September respectively. We thank you for taking the trouble and obtaining for us the Cherry Vanilla and
Mango flavours to be used in Tea, and we do acknowledge what Melchez have said that one would need flavour flakes for a dry flavour for teabags, as any oil would come through the teabags.

Your mail of the 7th gives us the pricing for both the Mango Flavour and
Cherry Vanilla, and both these are acceptable by us. We have also noted the percentage to be added to the tea.

We would request you to have this sent through to Indonesia where these trials are currently being conducted.

We would need these flavours to be made with the least possible delay, and your help and assistance in this regard would be appreciated.

Steve, whatever comes under our letter of agreement will be dealt with accordingly and you should have implicit trust and faith that this will be the case.

With regard to GJ's USA, we are carrying out tests at the moment and they are well aware that we are looking at a tea program for ourselves.

Have been working with Bob and sincerely hope that this week will have all matters dealt with according to our arranged agreement, and that you should have correspondence and initial payments.

Best regards, 
NABI SALEH Mr Meier forwarded this email to Mr Cisneros with the following message: 
FYI. One to keep in the file.
 On 14 September 2001, Mr McCullough wrote to Mr Meier as follows: 
Dear Steve, 
RE: JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LIMITED 
I have received a report from my above client regarding bean roasting quantities (copy attached) to determine commission due to WES. The quantity of roasted coffee up to 30 June 2001 was 186,532 kgs.

The commission due is to be 5% of the ex factory price which is calculated to be US$3.50 per kg. This calculates as follows:- x US$3.50 x 5% = US$32,643 
I would suggest this amount be met by 3 monthly payments of US$5,548 by 31
December 2001 and the balance deferred for payment with the fee due by Jireh to WES when the business is sold. I would appreciate your comments regarding the above.

I have attached executed letter of understanding for your counter signature and return.

Sale of products other than roasted coffee already attract a 5% commission on each invoice and hence no further adjustment is necessary.

Yours faithfully 
McCullough & Associates Pty Limited The Letter of Understanding attached was in the following terms: 
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING  
This letter of Understanding ("Letter") is entered into as of the day of  ("Effective Date") by and between Jireh International Pty Ltd ("Jireh"), an
Australian Corporation, and Western Export Services, Inc. ("WES"), a USA
Corporation, also referred to as the "Parties".  
RECITALS 
Whereas, through the assistance of WES, Jireh is the master franchisee for the development of Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffee franchise ("GJ") in the Australian market; 
Whereas, WES is Jireh's partner and supply manager, pursuant to Agreement, dated March 19, 1996, negotiated in Denver, and subsequent and ongoing dealings between the Parties (the "Agreement");  and  
Whereas, Jireh and WES wish to resolve longstanding issues under the Agreement with regard to the payment of commissions owed to WES on the sale of roast coffee and other products in GJ stores franchised or owned by Jireh;  
Now, therefore, in consideration of the foregoing Recitals, and the promises, terms and conditions set forth below, the Parties agree as follows: 
PAYMENT FOR PAST DUE COMMISSIONS FOR COFFEE: Jireh shall pay outstanding commissions due WES in the total amount of US$32643 as follows: 
A) The amount of $32643 shall be paid in one yearly instalment of $16643 commencing no later than 31 December 2001. The exchange rate for these payments will be .50c; 
B) The remaining balance of $16000 shall be payable upon the sales price from a sale or transfer of the value of the assets, shares or securities sold or transferred or other interest in Jireh, projected for 2003, which, together with the 4% interest granted WES under Paragraph 5 of the Agreement, shall be paid to WES upon the closing of any such sale or transfer.
PAYMENT OF FUTURE COMMISSIONS. Jireh agrees to provide a quarterly report of roast coffee sold in GJ stores franchised or owned by Jireh within fifteen days of the end of each calendar quarter, and to make payment to WES for commissions due on those sales within the month following the end of each quarter. If such commissions are not paid on a timely basis, then this amount will be payable under Paragraph B) above. 
GENERAL: WES continues to reserve the right to independently audit amounts of past due and future commissions. Jireh will keep WES fully advised in writing of any actions taken that may affect the value of WES' interests in
Jireh, that may trigger WES' right to payment under Paragraph 5 of the
Agreement dated March 19, 1996, or such additional interests established in this Letter. 
COMMISSION RATE: The original Agreement provided for a Commission Rate of % and, due to significant initial losses incurred by Jireh, the rate is hereby reduced to 2%.  
This Letter shall not be modified or amended except in writing signed by both
Parties and shall be binding upon their successors or assigns, and the Parties shall at all times undertake to perform their obligations under this Letter with the highest standards of good faith, fair dealings and ethics.  
The Parties acknowledge the acceptance of the terms and conditions of this
Letter.

Jireh International Pty Ltd Western Export Services Inc  On 28 November 2001, Mr McCullough wrote to Mr Meier as follows:  
Dear Steve, 
RE: JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LIMITED 
I refer to previous correspondence regarding outstanding commission due to
WES and now set out details of the amount due from commencement to 30 June .

Coffee quality 186532 kgs 
Ex factory Price (A$13.50) US$6.75 
Commission Due 62,954 % deferred to end sale 31,477 
Already paid 13,300 
Amount due US$18,177 
This amount to be paid by 3 equal monthly instalments of US$6,059 during the months of December 2001, January 2002 and February 2002.

Ongoing commission to be calculated quarterly and reported by 15th day of the month following quarter. Reports to 31 December 2001 to be made by 15
January 2002.
 
Maranatha Import Export Pty Limited 
A further payment of approximately $10,000 is to be made by the first week of December 2001.
 
Yours faithfully, 
McCullough & Associates Pty Limited On 13 August 2002, Mr McCullough wrote to Mr Meier in the following terms: 
Dear Steve 
I refer to your fax of 10 August 2002 in reply mine of 7 August 2002 and advise Nabi and Peter insist the commission arrangement be amended to conform with my letter of understanding attached to my fax of 7 August 2002.

I summarise the liability to 30 June 2002 as follows:- 
US$ 
To 30 June 01 $62,954 
To 31 Dec 01 9,690 
To 30 June 02 11,988 $84,632 % deferred 42,316 
Less paid 13,300 $29,016 
I would suggest this be paid at the rate of $4836 per month, for 6 months with subsequent quarters commissions paid on time and no interest be charged.
This is the only basis Jireh can pay the commission. Your suggested payment of $2500 per week does not meet our cash flow projection.

I confirm A$13.50 is the Maranatha sale price to Jireh of roasted coffee.

Yours faithfully, 
McCullough & Associates Pty Limited 
CC N Saleh / P Irvine On 13 August 2002, Mr Meier wrote to Mr Saleh and Mr McCullough, informing them that WES was not agreeable to modifying the existing agreement or Letter of Understanding.
 On 27 August 2002, Mr McCullough wrote to Mr Meier in the following terms: 
Dear Steve 
I have met with Nabi and Peter regarding your commission in respect to both the formula and the payment terms. Whilst we recognise that in earlier years both Jireh and WES were unprofitable in this venture, Jireh are prepared to recognise your contribution to the establishment of the business by 5% basis to June 01.

The agreement was subject to renegotiation, but as there was a distinct possibility the venture could fail, which would have been personally horrendous for Nabi and Peter, no renegotiation took place until I sent you the proposed amended joint venture agreement in September 01 which reflected the commission reduction from 5% to 2%.

I believe you were aware of the significant losses incurred by Jireh (in excess of A$1M) and would have been aware of Jireh's incapacity to pay any commission previously.

Although volume increase has been significant, it is still a very marginal business and the 2% rate is as much as Jireh can afford. You would be aware they also pay US25 per lb to Gloria Jeans USA.

To preserve the franchisees margin it is not possible to increase prices.

Payment terms would be 50% of accrued liability to 30 June 02 to be deferred to end sale and 50% to be paid on terms suitable to Jireh's cash flow but to be cleared by June 03. In the meantime, current commission would be paid as due at the new rate.

Commission payments are to be kept separate from other stock payments.

I agree the quarterly calculations will be made in A$ and converted to US$ at the time payment is made.

Our belief is the agreement is not legally binding and was a sign of good faith. If our requested amendments are not agreed to the arrangement will be terminated.

I am instructed that no payment will be made until the matter is resolved, when appropriate terms (as previously indicated by me) will commence.

Nabi and Peter maintain that no interest charge should be made due to the aforementioned matters as WES will receive a significant sum from their 4% of the end sale. This would be forfeited if the agreement is terminated.

I accept, for reconciliation purpose, your payment credit of $7,900 instead of my requested payment credit of $13,300 as mine was in A$ and not
US$.

I look forward to discussing this matter with you further after you have received this fax. I will make myself available for you at 10.00am Thursday th August, our time.

Yours faithfully, 
McCullough & Associates Pty Limited On 30 August 2002, Mr Meier wrote to Mr McCullough as follows: 
Dear Bob: 
We are in receipt of your 27/08 letter regarding the outstanding commissions due by Jireh. While we do appreciate Jireh's recognition of our contribution to the establishment of our mutual business in Australia, we were very disappointed to receive your letter. Let me advise as follows: 
We recognize the tremendous risks and efforts taken by Nabi and Peter. We too have made significant and unrecompensed contributions to our joint venture over these many years. We all understood when we starting this venture that there would be significant investments of time and money, especially on the front-nd but also for many years.

Most importantly, it is critical that you understand that the Agreement we entered into is legally binding under both Australian and American law. If you advised Jireh to the contrary, you provided them a dis-service. Neither can the Agreement be unilaterally terminated. These statements are counterproductive and contrary to the nature of our partnership with Nabi and
Peter.

Our Agreement provided for a possible renegotiation of the terms within six months. There were ample opportunities to do so but to claim that you attempted to "renegotiate" the Agreement six and a half years after its signing date is simply untrue. As you well know, the Letter of Understanding was undertaken for one simple purpose- to assist Jireh in the short term to carry forward this obligation, because Jireh had not reported or made timely commission payments. As the correspondence of that time period clearly show, our discussion was never intended to amend the Agreement. Nabi, you and David negotiated a Letter of Understanding last summer during his visit to
Australia, which went back and forth, until December 2001, at which time a final Letter of Understanding was agreed upon. This has been confirmed numerous times in writing, in conduct, and by telephone. In fact, you again confirmed your belief in our last several telephone conversations, that it was your understanding that the December 2001 Letter of Understanding was valid and binding.

We already have clearly showed our commitment to Jireh by agreeing to carry forward 40% of the commissions due on the coffee roasting to the time of sale or transfer, and to carry forward 100% of the non-coffee GJ product commissions due and owing. Since the majority of commissions due and owing are being carried forward, these do not affect the margin and the profitability to the franchisees. The remaining 3% rate on roasted coffee only is quite reasonable and affordable to Jireh, especially given the significantly reduced costs from the roasting license versus outright purchase of the roasted coffee from GJ.

However, to finalize this matter once and for all, we would be willing to amend the Letter of Understanding by agreeing to accept the proposed 2% commission amount paid quarterly and to put 3% in abeyance, from third quarter onwards, based on the following: * Payment of past due commissions per the existing Letter of Understanding, as outlined in my e-mail letter of August 14 and attached Commission Acct Finance Overview. This overview is re-attached, and sheet "Aug 30" reflects a modification to a weekly payment for the past due amount. Based on the Letter of Understanding, these amounts have been entered into our books through 2001 year-end.
 * Timely quarterly reports and payments from third quarter 2002 onwards at the 2.0% rate. Interest would continue to be charged on the 3% held in abeyance per the Letter of Understanding.

This is a continuing significant investment on our part in Jireh, and shows our commitment as partners and members of the team.

Since you advised in one of our most recent telephone conversations that you are no longer authorized to treat this matter, and because of the serious statements made in the letter, we will plan to contact Nabi early next week to directly and finally resolve this matter, and promptly commence weekly payments on the past due amounts and quarterly payments for the future. We are hiring a supply manager primarily to handle Jireh matters, and these monies will be used with a positive effect to continue to improve our support to
Jireh.
 On 2 October 2002, Jireh's premises were destroyed by fire.
 On 25 September 2003, Mr McCullough wrote to Mr Cisneros as follows: 
Dear David 
RE: JIREH INTERNATIONAL PTY LIMITED 
I refer to prior discussions regarding outstanding commissions due, and now advise, after discussion with Peter and Nabi, that the terms previously offered still stands.
 
Upon your execution of the new agreement, payment terms will be negotiated.
 
Yours faithfully 
McCullough & Associates Pty Limited The parties continued to communicate, but no further Letter of
Understanding was executed.
 Jireh did not provide the full (or any) accounting of the sales of roasted coffee and it did not pay the roasting commission which WES was claiming.
 From about 23 July 2003, Jireh ceased ordering products through WES.
 
The defendant changes its supply arrangements and the international franchising rights are acquired from Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Franchising Corp by Gloria Jean's Coffees International Pty Ltd In about late 2003, Mr Craig Fishburn approached Messrs Irvine and Saleh about joining their business and they decided to offer him an equity interest in the warehouse and distribution aspect.
 According to Mr Saleh, JIWD was established to facilitate a relationship with Mr Fishburn without granting or disposing of any interest in Jireh. The intention was to set up a distribution arm of Jireh's business (to be held by
JIWD) and Mr Fishburn was to be provided with a shareholding in it.
 The proposed venture with Mr Fishburn did not eventuate but Messrs Irvine and Saleh decided nevertheless to continue to supply through JIWD because they had already informed Franchisees that, as Mr Saleh put it, invoicing would take place through JIWD.  On 11 March 2004, Jireh and JIWD executed an instrument entitled "Contract for supply of products directly to the Franchisees of Jireh International Pty
Limited"("the Supply Contract").
 Under the Supply Contract the defendant appointed JIWD as its preferred supplier of all products as agreed from time to time to be supplied to the
Franchisees of Jireh.
 Clause 2 of the Supply Contract provides relevantly for Jireh to nominate
JIWD as its preferred supplier of products to the Franchisees.
 Under cl 3 JIWD must pay a fee on a monthly basis, based on total monthly sales less costs of the sales and freight.
 On 1 July 2004, under a contract for supply of consumables, JIWD appointed
Maranatha as its supplier for coffee, chocolate and tea products in Australia for a period of five years with an option to renew for a further five years.
 GJCI was established to purchase the international franchising rights which had been operated by Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Franchising Corp.
 On 5 December 2004, by way of a written Asset Purchase Agreement, GJCI (for a purchase price of US$ 16 million) acquired from Gloria Jean's Gourmet
Coffees Corp and Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Franchising Corp all their right, title and interest to and in the international franchise operation of
Gloria Jean's, excluding the US and Puerto Rico. GJCI thereby acquired the right to supply coffee and other products to the international Master
Franchisees including in Australia.
 The US company retains exclusive coffee roasting rights for the globe until 2011. On 10 February 2005, a new grant of roasting rights (replacing the earlier Roasting Agreement) was given to Jireh for the rest of the world excluding the US.
 The Master Franchise Agreement expired on 6 March 2006. JIWD now deals exclusively with GJCI and with Australian Franchisees. Jireh deals with GJCI regarding Master Franchisees.
 According to Mr Saleh since the establishment of JIWD in 2003, Jireh does not purchase goods (including coffee) from suppliers, including roasted coffee from Maranatha and does not sell goods to its Franchisees. Since 2005, GJCI purchases and then supplies all coffee and other Gloria Jean's branded and non-branded products to JIWD. JIWD continues to supply these products to
Franchisees in Australia.
 By 2006 there were 348 Gloria Jean's stores in Australia and by 2009 there were 489.
 In evidence were two examples of standard store franchise agreements between Jireh and Australian Franchisees, one of 18 December 2002 and the other of 17 December 2009. Both contain provisions under which the Franchisee must not (without Jireh's prior written approval) offer for sale at the store any products or services other than as specified in writing by Jireh from time to time, and under which the Franchisee must purchase from Jireh all gourmet coffee and other products as specified by Jireh from time to time.
 
Termination of WES' arrangements with Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp  On 3 February 2004, Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp and WES executed a
Letter of Understanding "to memorialize the terms of the relationship". The letter provided that WES was authorised, subject to the agreement of
Franchisees (excluding in the US) to supply products and services to
Franchisees. WES was to be given a six per cent discount off the standard wholesale coffee pricing which Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp charged domestically to its Franchisees in the US. Either party could terminate the agreement within 60 days before the end of each one year term by written notice. Absent such notification, the agreement was to automatically renew on January each year for consecutive one year terms.
 According to the unchallenged evidence of Mr Matthew McGuiness, the then executive vice-president of development for Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees
Corp, on 20 December 2004, as a consequence of the sale by Gloria Jean's
Gourmet Coffees Corp of its international business to GJCI, Gloria Jean's
Gourmet Coffees Corp terminated the Letter of Understanding with WES with effect from 31 December 2004 from which time WES' authority to supply products to Gloria Jean's international Master Franchisees was terminated.
 
CONTENTIONS ON LIABILITY 
WES WES puts that: a the Letter Agreement is a binding contract and is still on foot;  b by cl 3 Jireh was and remains obliged to pay WES a commission of five per cent of the ex-factory price of Gloria Jean's or other branded coffees, teas and other products sold by Jireh to Gloria Jean's stores;  c in breach of that obligation, Jireh has failed to pay to WES commission in respect of such sales;  d as a consequence WES has suffered, and continues to suffer, damage.  WES puts, in the alternative, that Jireh should be estopped from denying an agreement because, from 19 March 1996, the parties operated on the common assumption that there was an agreement and WES acted to its detriment upon that common assumption.
 After June 2004, Jireh itself ceased selling directly to the stores. That function was taken over by JIWD pursuant to the Supply Contract. Since 2005 products have been supplied by GJCI to JIWD, which continues to supply them to franchisees (or GJGC stores) in Australia. GJCI itself made some sales to stores during the period early 2006 to early 2010.
 Clause 3, however, whilst referring to the goal of establishing Jireh or an associated entity as a roaster/supplier, refers in terms, only to sales by Jireh.
 This gives rise to the question whether (if the Letter Agreement is binding) sales made by JIWD and GJCI to Gloria Jean's stores attract cl 3 commission. WES puts that the provision covers sales (or their equivalent value) by JIWD and GJCI for one or more of the following four reasons.  WES puts firstly, that on the proper construction of cl 3 and in the events that have occurred, sales by JIWD and GJCI are sales by Jireh within the meaning of the provision.
 Secondly, it puts that the reference to Jireh, where it appears second in cl 3 should be construed to mean Jireh or an associated entity, and that each of JIWD and GJCI is such an entity.
 Thirdly, WES puts that the Letter Agreement should be rectified by inserting after the reference to Jireh in the second sentence of cl 3, the words "or an associated entity".
 Finally, it puts that it is an implied term of the Letter Agreement that: a Jireh would not voluntarily remove itself as, or cease to be, the seller of
Gloria Jean's, and other branded coffees, teas and other products to GJGC stores in Australia and to GJGC Master Franchisees and GJGC Stores in other countries;  b Jireh would not voluntarily do anything to cause or permit WES' enjoyment of the right to commission referred to in cl 3 to be rendered nugatory, worthless or to be undermined; or  c WES would not, by the voluntary act of Jireh, be deprived of the circumstances which entitled WES to receive a commission under cl 3, namely sale of the products by Jireh.
 WES puts that Jireh has breached one or more of the asserted implied terms by entering into the arrangements which have resulted in JIWD and GJCI, rather than it, selling to the GJGC stores. It says it has suffered, and continues to suffer damage equivalent to the commissions it would have earned.
 
Jireh Jireh's first submission is that there is no binding agreement between the parties on the terms of the Letter Agreement. It puts that neither party intended to contract when signing it.
 Secondly, Jireh puts that when it signed the Letter Agreement, it was, to the knowledge of WES, labouring under the serious and fundamental mistake that the Letter Agreement was not binding and was not to be operational. Jireh does not, however, plead that any contract was thereby rendered void. Nor does it claim any order for rescission on the basis of mistake. Rather, it pleads that the Letter Agreement should be rectified to contain a provision that it is not binding or operational until a further negotiation between the parties concerning the compensation amounts is concluded successfully in accordance with cl 7. During the hearing, however, it abandoned any claim for rectification. I will accordingly proceed on the basis that its true contention is that there is no contract, or if there is one, it is voidable by reason of its unilateral mistake.  Thirdly, Jireh puts that: a WES held out to Jireh, or knew that Jireh held the assumption, that the
Letter Agreement was not to be binding or operational until there was further agreement on the commissions, if any, which Jireh was to pay;  b in reliance on WES' representation, or on the said assumption, to its detriment it signed the Letter Agreement;  c it is now unconscionable for WES to depart from the representation or assumption and WES is estopped from so doing;  d the effect is that WES cannot assert or rely on the Letter Agreement as a binding contract.
 Fourthly, Jireh puts that at the time it signed the Letter Agreement it held the belief, as a result of conduct on the part of WES which was misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive within the meaning of [s 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), and that the Court should make an order under [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the Act declaring the contract void ab initio.
 Fifthly, Jireh puts that: a when the Letter Agreement was signed, WES owed it a fiduciary duty not to permit WES' personal interests to conflict with those of Jireh;  b WES breached that duty failing to disclose to it (if it be the fact) that the Letter Agreement was a binding contract; and  c the Letter Agreement should be set aside.
 Finally, Jireh puts that in 2004 (presumably on 31 December 2004) the
Letter Agreement was frustrated and discharged by supervening impossibility when WES' arrangements with Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corporation came to an end.  Jireh puts that, if the Letter Agreement is binding, only sales by itself directly to GJGC stores (and not any sales by JIWD) attract cl 3 commission.  
CONTENTIONS ON QUANTUM The parties are at issue on the meaning of the term "ex-factory price" in cl 3. WES contends that it is the price invoiced by Jireh, JIWD or GJCI (as the case may be) to the store. Jireh contends that it is the price invoiced by the roaster (Columbia or Maranatha in most cases) to Jireh, JIWD or GJCI.
 Both parties called expert evidence to establish the value of sales to
GJGC stores by Jireh, JIWD and GJCI during the period 1997 to 30 June 2009.
The figures were ultimately agreed between the experts. The agreed figures do not take into account interest from time of the accrual of any obligation.  On the basis of WES' construction of ex-factory price, the agreed figures are as follows: 
SELLER 
SALES PER CENT COMMISSION  ---  
JIREH 319 705 815 985  
JIWD 343 478 767 174  
GJCI 202 465 123  
TOTAL SALES 643 282  
LESS COMMISSIONS PAID 824  
TOTAL $ 11 470 458  On the basis of Jireh's construction of ex-factory price, the agreed figures are as follows: 
SELLER 
SALES PER CENT COMMISSION  ---  
JIREH 168 729 408 436  
JIWD 074 794 513 740  
GJCI 930 697  
TOTAL SALES 560 480  
LESS COMMISSIONS PAID 824  
TOTAL $8 387 656  
THE COURSE OF THE PROCEEDINGS The proceedings were commenced in the General List of the Equity Division in 2004. On 26 June 2009, I made an order transferring them to this List.
Thereafter there were a number of extensive interlocutory skirmishes, including discovery disputes, some of which were resolved by the appointment of an expert to inspect business records stored on computer, and applications for leave to administer interrogatories.
 On 18 February 2010, I confirmed that the hearing would commence on 19
April 2010.
 Shortly before the hearing there was an unsuccessful mediation.  Jireh pleaded and intended to motivate an argument that the relationship of the parties (or at least significant aspects of it) were regulated by the law of Colorado on the basis that Messrs Cisneros and Meier were lawyers in that jurisdiction and were bound by the rules thereof in their dealings with
WES. Expert evidence from practitioners in that jurisdiction was served. The
Colorado proposition was correctly abandoned by Jireh on commencement of the hearing. It also abandoned a contention that the Letter Agreement was subject to a condition precedent which suspended its operation until the review contemplated by cl 7 occurred. Jireh also abandoned propositions that the
Letter Agreement had been terminated on reasonable notice and that WES' claim was statute barred. It also abandoned cross-claims which it brought personally against Messrs Cisneros and Meier. For its part WES abandoned a claim based on unjust enrichment. It also did not press a contention that by subsequent conduct the parties entered into an agreement on the terms of the Letter
Agreement.
 The hearing took place over 13 hearing days between 19 April and 11 May .
 Mr F C Corsaro of Senior Counsel, together with Mr F G Kalyk of Counsel appeared for WES.
 Mr D J Higgs of Senior Counsel together with Mr T Maltz of Counsel appeared for Jireh.
 
THE ISSUES  The following issues arise for determination:  a whether in entering into the Letter Agreement, the parties intended to create binding legal relations;  b whether (assuming that WES did), Jireh, to the knowledge of WES, mistakenly believed that the Letter Agreement was not to be binding or operational;  c whether WES is estopped from denying that the Letter Agreement was not to be binding or operational until there was further agreement on the commissions, if any, which Jireh was to pay;  d whether WES engaged in conduct which was misleading and deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive by inducing Jireh to believe that that the Letter
Agreement was not to be binding or operational until there was further agreement on the commissions, if any, which Jireh was to pay, and if so, whether an order should be made declaring the contract void ab initio;  e whether WES owed to Jireh, and breached, (by not disclosing that the Letter
Agreement was binding), a fiduciary duty not to permit its personal interests to conflict with that of Jireh so that their contract should be set aside;  f whether the Letter Agreement was frustrated and discharged by supervening impossibility when WES' contractual arrangements with Gloria Jean's Gourmet
Coffees Corp came to an end;  g whether, (if there is a contract between the parties on the terms of the
Letter Agreement), cl 3 should be rectified by the insertion in the second sentence after the words "Jireh International Pty Limited" of the words "or an associated entity";  h whether, (if there is a contract between the parties on the terms of the
Letter Agreement), the words "Jireh International Pty Limited" where they appear in the second sentence of cl 3 should be construed to mean "Jireh
International Pty Limited or an associated entity";  i whether, (if there is a contract between the parties on the terms of the
Letter Agreement), sales by JIWD to GJGC stores are sales by Jireh within the meaning of cl 3;  j whether, (if there is a contract between the parties on the terms of the
Letter Agreement), a term or terms are to be implied into it, to the effect that:  i. Jireh would not voluntarily remove itself as, or cease to be the seller of
Gloria Jean's and other branded coffees, teas and other products to GJGC stores in Australia and to GJGC Master Franchisees and GJGC stores in other countries;  ii. Jireh would not voluntarily do anything to cause or permit WES' enjoyment of the right to commission referred to in cl 3 to be rendered nugatory, worthless or to be undermined; or  iii. WES would not, by the voluntary act of Jireh, be deprived of the circumstances which entitled WES to receive a commission under cl 3, namely sale of the products by Jireh;  k the proper construction of the term "ex-factory price".
 There is no issue that if the Letter Agreement is binding, WES' damages equate to the amount of cl 3 commission it should have, but has not, received, plus interest for the delay.  I will consider the issues in turn.  There was little, if any, debate between the parties as to the legal principles to be applied in resolving the various issues. I have in the circumstances only briefly set out the applicable legal principles in the context of specific issues.
 
INTENTION TO CREATE LEGAL RELATIONS For an agreement to be legally enforceable there must be an intention to contract, that is, an intention to create binding legal relations.  Whether parties have an intention to create contractual relations depends on an objective assessment of the state of affairs between them as distinct from the identification of any uncommunicated subjective reservation or intention that either may have harboured. Intention in this context means that which would be objectively conveyed by what is said or done in the circumstances in which the statements and actions happened: Ermogenous v
Greek Orthodox Community of SA Inc [(2002) 209 CLR 95] at 105-6;
Australian Broadcasting Corporation versus XIVth Commonwealth Games Limited [(1988) 18 NSWLR 540] at 548-549.  In ascertaining the intention of the parties, whether from a series of communications or from a single document, regard can be had to the commercial circumstances in which the parties exchanged their communications or arrived at the document and to the subject-matter of the putative contract. The objective intention of the parties is fact-based, found in all the circumstances. Regard can also be had to the conduct of the parties after the occasion of the putative contract, to cast light on the meaning of the communications in question and otherwise on whether they intended immediately to be contractually bound: Sagacious Procurement Pty Ltd versus Symbion Health
Ltd <case> at 69 per Giles JA; see generally Michael Furmston and GJ Tolhurst Contract
Formation: Law and Practice (2010) Oxford University Press, Ch 10.
 The existence of a contract is a consequence which the law imposes upon, or sees as a result of, what the parties have said and done. Actual subjective intention to contract is a factor which the law takes into account in determining whether a contract exists but it is not, or not always, the determining factor: Air Great Lakes Pty Ltd versus K S Easter (Holdings) Pty Ltd [(1985) 2 NSWLR 309] at 330 per Mahoney JA, 337 per McHugh JA.
 It has been said that in commercial or business agreements an intention to create legal relations is presumed and must be rebutted by the party seeking to deny it: see Michael Furmston and GJ Tolhurst at 10.02, 10.33. However, in
Ermogenous versus Greek Orthodox Community of SA Inc the High Court expressed doubt (at least in the context of that case) about the utility of using the language of presumptions. The Court reiterated that a party alleging a contract bears the onus of proving its existence. Undoubtedly, the commercial and business setting in which an alleged contract is concluded, including the presence of valuable consideration, is relevant in an assessment of whether there was an intention to contract.  WES puts that on any objective view of what the parties did and said, (orally and in writing) they had an intention to contract. In addition, and insofar as it is relevant, it says that the parties subjectively intended to contract.  The features of the parties' behaviour which are said to support this conclusion include the following: a the form and terms of the Letter Agreement itself. It is a formal document which identifies the parties, stipulates for the performance by each of various obligations, refers to WES receiving consideration for services to be provided, makes reference to the payment of compensation and states that it is effective from 19 March 1996;  b the parties' dealings leading up to execution of the Letter Agreement. These dealings include the negotiation of the percentages which appear in the Letter
Agreement and WES having made it clear that it wanted it executed prior to, or contemporaneously with the Master Franchise Agreement and Roasting Agreement;  c WES having expended, and Jireh having accepted, the benefits of WES' significant efforts in providing negotiation assistance to Jireh which contributed materially to Jireh's success in bringing about the Master
Franchise Agreement and Roasting Agreement from Gloria Jean's; and  d the parties' conduct after the Letter Agreement was signed. This conduct includes payment by Jireh of commissions and WES' repeated assertions of and references to the existence of an agreement, to which Jireh never demurred for over four years until Mr McCullough's letter of 22 December 2000.  WES puts that it subjectively intended to contract and relies on the evidence of both Messrs Cisneros and Meier to that effect. It also puts that
Messrs Irvine and Saleh so intended and points to their outward actions.  Jireh's principal response is that whilst the parties wanted to enter into a contract, they never did so. It says that at 19 March 1996 the parties were still negotiating on price and that they never reached agreement. It identifies the following as features indicating a lack of intention to be bound: a the parties' dealings from the time at least of Mr Saleh's letter of 18
January 1996 in particular the 6 February letter in which Mr Saleh said: 
W.E.S. Agreement - Have noted that the inclusion of Point 7 to this agreement makes this matter quite clear that none of the above becomes operational until we have negotiated the numbers together and worked out what in fact is the right mix and what each product can bear for an on charge by
W.E.S. Happy to go through this in total detail when you or Steve visit
Australia.
 b the fact that Mr Saleh (as well as Mr Irvine) made it clear that the percentages being sought by WES were unsustainable and that Mr Cisneros' facsimile of 31 January 1996 referred to the figures being "subject to a final discussion anyway";  c the fact that (as it contends) WES did not respond to, but rather deliberately remained silent in the face of the 6 February letter;  d that WES' non-response to the 6 February letter induced Mr Saleh to believe that WES accepted as correct his understanding that the Letter Agreement was not to be operational;  e that if the Letter Agreement was binding, agreement to cl 7 meant that Mr
Saleh implausibly gave up Jireh's power to bargain, replacing it with a review in which it would have little, if any, bargaining power in the context of an enterprise where WES was not to have a say in the running of the business or any equity in it;  f that there is a lack of precision in the drafting of the Letter Agreement in that cl 2 and cl 3 do not define the term "ex-factory", cl 3 does not define the term "associated entity", cl 5 does not define the term "interest of Jireh
International Pty Limited" and cl 7 does not define the term "the business of the parties".
 With respect to its conduct after the Letter Agreement, Jireh puts that the parties' dealings are properly to be characterised as continuing negotiation with a view to reaching agreement on the commission percentages rather than conduct consistent with, or confirmatory of, the existence of a binding agreement.  With respect to subjective intention, Jireh relies on the evidence of
Messrs Irvine and Saleh to the effect that they (as the mind of Jireh) lacked intention to contract.  As is readily apparent, a critical question for determination is whether the conversation to the effect Mr Meier says he had with Mr Saleh on 1 March occurred.
 If it did, then WES did not, as Jireh asserts, remain silent with respect to the 6 February letter. Moreover, if the conversation occurred, Mr Saleh's assertion of a belief that the Letter Agreement was not to be immediately operational is undermined.
 A finding on this issue also has significant effect on Jireh's claims based on mistake, estoppel, misleading and deceptive conduct and breach of fiduciary duty.
 Jireh made a submission that even if the conversation did occur, its terms were not sufficiently certain so as to establish on an objective test that
Jireh intended the Letter Agreement to be binding. The difficulty with this submission (which was not developed) is that after it and in the light of it,
Jireh executed the Letter Agreement. On any view, the Letter Agreement bears all the hallmarks of an instrument which the parties intended to be binding.
 Jireh made a submission that Mr Meier had a motive for not reverting back to Mr Saleh on the 6 February letter because if Mr Meier had insisted on five per cent commission this would have had the potential to destabilise the position at a delicate stage of the negotiations (between themselves and with
Gloria Jean's).
 I am satisfied, and I find, that the 1 March 1996 conversation took place.
 Mr Meier impressed me as a completely truthful witness and I accept his evidence. For reasons which appear later I do not consider that the same can be said of Mr Saleh, and where his evidence is inconsistent with that of Mr
Meier, I prefer that of Mr Meier.
 I should say that Mr Cisneros equally impressed me as a completely truthful witness and I accept his evidence. For reasons which appear later I do not consider that the same can be said of Mr Irvine.
 Mr Meier was subjected to searching cross-examination. His credit was attacked. It was put that his evidence of the 1 March 1996 conversation was a reconstruction from the 5 March letter, which was recently invented after discussion with Mr Cisneros.  Jireh pointed to the fact that Mr Meier first deposed to the conversation in his affidavit of 14 December 2009 and had not referred to it in his earlier affidavit of 25 May 2009.
 Mr Meier entirely withstood cross-examination. Beyond that, his evidence is supported, and Mr Saleh's evidence undermined, by: a a significant body of contemporaneous material;  b the parties' behaviour over a significant period of time; and  c the inherent probabilities.  The 5 March letter is a contemporaneous record which establishes that there was a conversation between Mr Meier and Mr Saleh on 1 March 1996.
 Following that conversation Mr Saleh confirmed a belief that Mr Meier had achieved all that was necessary to proceed with the signing of the contracts.
Mr Saleh wrote in addition that the WES contract would be couriered directly as well. This was against the background that WES had repeatedly made it clear that it wanted its agreement with Jireh to be put in place prior to or contemporaneously with the other agreements (examples of this include Mr
Cisneros' facsimiles of 15 December 1995, 4 January 1996, 12 January 1996, 18
January 1996, 22 January 1996 and 13 February 1996). Mr Cisneros' oral evidence was to the same effect.
 There are copious examples of WES responding, whenever Mr Saleh raised a concern, either by way of telephone conversation or in writing. Mr Saleh's concerns about the rates of commission were dealt with by the review process provided for in cl 7. Mr Meier made it clear that he wanted numbers in the agreement which would be reviewed later. Mr Meier's evidence that he responded to the 6 February letter accords with the inherent probability that Mr Meier would not have failed to respond to the position being adopted by Mr Saleh in the 6 February letter and is consistent with WES' behaviour over a significant period of time. In my view, he had every motivation for responding and little motivation for not doing so.  Importantly, Mr Saleh did not deny the conversation in his responding affidavit sworn on 8 April 2010. The fact that the conversation was not referred to in Mr Meier's first affidavit of 20 May 2009 is of little significance. Nowhere in his first affidavit of 9 September 2009 did Mr Saleh depose directly to any belief that as at 19 March 1996 the Letter Agreement was not operational or that he took anything from any failure on the part of
WES to respond to the 6 February letter. Mr Meier's second affidavit was to this extent unprompted. Mr Meier's recollection of the conversation was prompted by reference to the 5 March letter and he may well have discussed the issue with Mr Cisneros. The submission that he recently invented the conversation is rejected.  On 9 January 1998, Mr Irvine wrote to Mr Meier in relation to the cl 3 commission, the following: 
Invoice for commissions for sale of green beans and flavours.

Nabi has spoken with me regarding the commission charge. There are several issues we would like to raise for discussion. These issues are to put Jireh's view on the table regarding Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees current profitability and ongoing profitability.
 . The original agreement with W.E.S. stated a 5% commission of the ex- factory price of the coffees, teas and other products. Nabi discussed this issue with David at the time of the agreement in 1996 and it was to be reviewed after six months. This hasn't happened as we were still in set-up phase and basically putting together a Gloria Jean's head office in Australia.
 Although this letter refers to a discussion between Mr Saleh and Mr
Cisneros (rather than Mr Meier) at the time of the Letter Agreement, it is consistent with what Mr Meier says was discussed on 1 March 1996 and entirely inconsistent with a state of mind on the part of Mr Saleh (and of Mr Irvine) that the Letter Agreement would not be operational at all until after the figures were later agreed. With justification, it was not put that on its terms cl 7 means anything other than the stated percentages in the Letter
Agreement would apply until varied by later agreement between the parties.
 Turning then to matters which go to, but also go beyond the conversation itself and are pertinent to whether there was an intention to contract. There is a significant, if not overwhelming body of material revealing conduct on the part of Mr Saleh, Mr Irvine, Mr McCullough and the internal accountant Mr
King (neither of whose authority was put in issue) spanning from the time of the Letter Agreement until disavowal of its binding effect on 27 August 2002, inconsistent with belief on the part of any of them that the Letter Agreement was not binding and consistent only with it being, and having been understood to be, binding.
 Examples include: Mr Meier's facsimile of 6 December 1997 referring to the agreement and suggesting that rather than require an accounting for all coffee roasted, seven per cent would be a fair alternative; Mr Cisneros' letter of 16
December 1997 stating that per Mr Saleh's advice, an invoice for commission on
GJ bulk would be faxed to Jireh; Mr Irvine's letter of 9 January 1998 referring to the original agreement; Mr Meier's letter to Mr Irvine of 22
January 1998 referring to the commission payable per the agreement; Mr Meier's letter to Mr Irvine of 18 February 1998 concerning invoice 4282; Mr Meier's letter to Mr Irvine dated 21 February 1998 referring to the need for WES' invoiced commission to be paid; Mr Meier's letter to Mr Irvine of 25 March referring to points discussed including for "Jireh/Nabi" to provide an accounting for all green coffee and to negotiate a mutually agreeable payment schedule; Mr Meier's letter to Mr McCullough and Mr Saleh of 9 June 1998 which included an account balance and referred to estimated unpaid GJ roasting royalties; Mr Saleh's letter to Mr Meier of 15 August 1998 saying that WES should put in its claim for roasting coffee commission and that it would be met; the parties' dealings in relation to invoice 4449 and its redirection to
Jireh and subsequent payment; the reference in Mr Cisneros' letter to Mr Saleh of 14 December 1998 to the five per cent by agreement; the statement by Mr
King in his letter to Mr Meier of 2 March 1999 that on the issue of the outstanding commissions on green coffee and flavours, Jireh would be incorporating payments on them into the WES receivables payment program outlined; Mr Cisneros' letter to Mr Saleh of 6 July 1999 referring in relation to bulk royalties that they awaited a promised outline by no later than July , and were very frustrated that Maranatha evoked a team spirit, which WES had supported without question, and Jireh delays payment to its partners of agreed-to commissions; Mr Cisneros' letter to Mr Saleh of 15 July 1999 saying that they were promised that Maranatha would organise this sales information for Mr Saleh's meeting with Mr Meier and saying: "[i]f we don't receive this information by end of July, then we will have to approximate ourselves and send an invoice. Nabi, please understand that this information is important for many reasons, both for our sales numbers/program for our transition partner, and also an important part of our compensation"; Mr Meier's letter to
Messrs Irvine and Saleh of 31 August 1999 referring, amongst others, to the agreement for royalties on green coffee and to the possibility of a bigger pay-out when their interest in Jireh or the Gloria Jean's business is transferred to another entity; Mr McCullough's signature agreeing to provide an audited report for the payment of commissions as required by Mr Meier in his letter to Mr McCullough and Mr Saleh of 23 September 1999; Mr Cisneros' letter to Mr McCullough and Mr Saleh of 14 October 1999 saying: "[o]utstanding commissions for bulk- According to our agreement, your report of bulk sold by
Brothers and Columbia/Jireh is due this week. Please ensure that it is provided. Once agreed upon, we will mutually schedule agreed weekly payments";
WES' invoice 5274 to Maranatha of 15 December 1999 claiming commissions for
Jireh roasting; Mr Cisneros' letter to Mr Saleh on 29 June 2000 in which
Maranatha signed acceptance of its agreement to fully and reasonably resolve the outstanding bulk commissions on both Maranatha and Jireh bulk, both in terms of resolving past commissions and/or license fees; Jireh's agreement to provide a full accounting of whole bean sales for it and Maranatha for the years 1998, 1999 and 2000 reflected in Mr Meier's letter to Messrs McCullough and Saleh of 5 August 2000; Mr Meier's references (not demurred to by Jireh) of WES' entitlements upon a sale or transfer in his letters dated 12 September and 9 October 2000; Mr Saleh's reference in his email to Mr Meier of 10
September 2001 to "our Letter of Agreement and our arranged agreement"; cl 4 of the proposed Letter of Understanding signed by Messrs Irvine and Saleh and sent in September 2001 stating that the original agreement provided for a commission rate of five per cent and, due to significant initial losses incurred by Jireh, the rate was to be reduced to two percent; Mr McCullough's letter to Mr Meier of 28 November 2001 setting out details of the amount due from commencement to 30 June 2001 including commission due of US$ 62,954; and
Mr McCullough's reference in his letter to Mr Meier of 13 August 2002 advising that Messrs Irvine and Saleh insisted that the commission arrangement be amended to conform with Mr McCullough's letter of understanding attached to his fax of 7 August 2002.  The first indication of a dispute concerning the terms of the arrangement was in Mr McCullough's letter to Mr Meier of 22 December 2000 which stated: 
Maranatha advises that there was no commission arrangement and Jireh advise commission would only be paid from when the business is profitable.
 
The existing invoices for commission are not presently recognised.
 Even this letter is inconsistent with Mr Saleh's avowed belief that there was no operative agreement at all until figures were negotiated. Mr Cisneros' response was to suggest that Jireh look at the agreement again. Mr Cisneros followed this up with a draft Letter of Understanding which would have provided for the provision by Jireh of a complete accounting subject to independent verification. His draft Letter of Understanding was not acceptable to Jireh, which then proffered its own, which included the Recital that WES was Jireh's partner and supply manager pursuant to Agreement dated 19 March , negotiated in Denver and the statement that the original agreement provided for a commission rate of five per cent.
 During cross-examination various documents were put to Mr Saleh as reflecting conduct on the part of Jireh consistent only with there being a binding agreement with WES. Mr Saleh is an intelligent man and he is articulate. He was to my observation acutely aware of the significance of the documents being put to him as being inconsistent with his position. No less than seven times (in some instances evasively and not responsively to the question), Mr Saleh's evidence was that the parties were continually negotiating and working towards an agreement or mutually satisfactory relationship which was never achieved. I reject this evidence. It is inconsistent with his own behaviour and with a significant body of contemporaneous objective material.
 During the course of argument I asked senior counsel for Jireh to identify documents which evidenced negotiations, counter-proposals or assertions by
Jireh after the date of the Letter Agreement and which might indicate that negotiations in respect of commission rates were ongoing or which evidenced
Jireh indicating that there was no binding agreement. Prior to Mr
McCullough'[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s22.html)
December 2000 letter (to which I have already referred), the only documents identified were: a a handwritten note (apparently by Mr Saleh to Mr Cisneros) made on or about June 1998 as follows: 
Royalties charges are not Columbia's. This will be worked out and then paid by Jireh. No action until then.
 b Mr King's letter dated 1 March 1999 to Mr Meier in which, amongst others, he said: 
With reference to the invoices for commission on green beans and flavours we understand from Nabi that this matter is in abeyance pending your discussions with him on your visit to Australia in the next couple of months.
 
This program has been calculated with reference to a reasonable forecast of cash flows of the Company over the next couple of months...Should more favourable circumstances arise, such as new franchisees being signed up to the system we will endeavour to clear these payments sooner than what has been outlined here.
 c the letter dated 23 September 1999 to Mr McCullough (to which he signed acceptance) which said: 
Outstanding commissions for bulk - McCullough will provide an audited report of Brothers and Columbia/Jireh bulk coffee sold, according to the system as outlined in our September 21 fax, by no later than October 15. We will then mutually agree as to the commission amount and payment schedule.
Thereafter, we will also establish a quarterly payment/report for payment of commissions from fourth quarter, 1999.
 
We are going to continue to work with you and Nabi to establish a more sound, long term financing capability that allows us to grow these and other businesses in an effective manner, and one that is mutually beneficial.
 
Please sign this fax and return by fax acknowledging your agreement to the above matters, so that we can proceed. Thank you.
 Senior counsel for Jireh ultimately accepted that these documents do not reflect any such proposals or negotiations. Anyway, the first document is consistent rather than inconsistent with a binding agreement. So is the second. It reflects Jireh's repeated requests for extensions of time to pay.
As to the third document, it was initially put that references to mutually agreeing the commission amount and to a payment schedule reflected such negotiations. This submission is unsustainable. What the letter envisages is agreement on a figure representing the amount owed, not negotiation of a basis for an obligation to pay it.  There are various statements in Mr Saleh's principal affidavit which are inconsistent with a belief on his part that the Letter Agreement was not to be binding or immediately operational. Examples include: a Paragraph 122 in which he says with respect to his understanding of cl 2 commission: 
The agreement to pay commissions under this Clause 2 was only intended to apply for so long as Jireh imported goods from the US under the Master
Franchise Agreement. It was always clear in my mind that there might be a time when the supply of goods from the US might stop. Although there is no reference to the Gloria Jean's US Agreement in the alleged WES Agreement, it was always my understanding that if the Gloria Jean's US Master Franchise
Agreement "fell over" for any reason, then the WES Agreement would have no operation.
 b Paragraphs 127 and 128 in which he says with respect to his understanding of cl 3 commission: 
The 5% commission which was to be imposed on the sale of these goods was not workable. I was content for it to be included in Clause 3 because I understood it could and would be adjusted, notwithstanding that supply may have been in small volumes initially.

I understood that the agreement to pay commissions for roasted coffee was only to apply for so long as the Roasting Agreement was in operation.
 c Paragraphs 129 and 130 in which he says with respect to his understanding of cl 5 commission: 
I understood the 4% payment under Clause 5 was to be made to WES for their help and assistance before, during and after closure of the Master
Franchise Agreement.

I never viewed Cisneros, Meier or WES as having an equity interest in the business. This was never the subject of discussion. I negotiated Clause 5 on the basis that it would cover the $100,000.00 value of services provided by
WES including legal services.
 d Paragraph 141 in which he says with respect to cl 7: 
I was not particularly concerned of the 6 month period elapsing without any discussion of renegotiating the commission rates because it was subject to be reviewed on an on-going basis and the commission rates could continue to be dealt with during the relationship.
 Mr Saleh's affidavit does refer to an undated alleged conversation (not communicated to WES) between him and Mr Irvine before the Letter Agreement was signed, to the following effect: 
IRVINE: I still don't see why we need to have this agreement and to execute it? 
SALEH: Peter, this is not a binding agreement. It is the foundation of a working relationship going forward. I am comfortable with David and Stephen.
We can review it afterwards and on an on-going basis.
 I am not satisfied that this conversation occurred. What was allegedly said is inconsistent with the outward behaviour of both.
 Mr Irvine was cross-examined on the letter from Mr McCullough to WES dated December 2000. His evidence was that contrary to what the letter says, he did not have a belief that Jireh was to pay commission only when the business was profitable because at that point in time he still believed that they "did not have an agreement in place which was actionable". I reject this evidence.
Not only is it inconsistent with what Mr Irvine wrote on 9 January 1998 and the significant body of material to which I have referred, it is also inconsistent with various statements he made in his affidavit sworn 9
September 2009. For example: a his statement in par 76 with respect to his understanding of cl 2 that: 
My understanding of Point 2 in the letter was that 5% commission was not "locked in", but was to be negotiated again when Nabi and I understood the operation of the business and the margins it could bear, after some period of operation. My understanding of Point 3 was that we could not commit to a percentage until we were in a position to set selling prices and understood the margins. My understanding at that time was that if we signed the Letter of
Agreement, but it turned out that it was not sustainable on these issues, then it could and would be changed.
 b his statement in par 105 with respect to his understanding invoice 3990 that: 
Invoice 3990 dated 26 March 1997 ... When Jireh paid the invoices, that payment included the commission. I understood that commission was 5% until
Jireh was able to review and renegotiate it with WES.
 c his statement in par 115 with respect to his understanding of cl 2 and cl 3 that: 
At this time, my understanding was still that the 5% WES commissions under Clauses 2 and 3 of the Letter of Agreement were open to review.
 It is difficult to reconcile these statements with what Mr Irvine said in par 17 of his later affidavit sworn less than two weeks before the hearing on April 2010 (and which I do not accept) to the following effect: 
As stated in my First Affidavit, by the time of signing the Letter of
Agreement I had formed the view that the Letter of Agreement was open to review and that signing the Letter of Agreement would not result in a final and permanently binding agreement until further negotiations took place, and the business was up and running. I based this belief on a number of things including:
My recollection of the discussions in Denver in 1995, in which Saleh said words to the effect of "we cannot agree to anything until it is all up and running" and I confirmed my agreement with Nabi's position. I said this because at the time I was not sure whether the business would be viable, or whether the products could sustain the 5% commission which was being suggested by WES.
Cisneros had given Nabi assurances in his facsimile dated 31 January 1996, which I read, that the inclusion of clause 7 in the Letter of Agreement reflected that clause 2 and 3 "would be subject to a final discussion anyway".
 . I read the letter from Nabi Saleh to David Cisneros dated 6 February
It was my understanding from reading this letter that the word "operational" meant that the agreement would not be binding until further negotiations and agreement took place.

I would not have signed the Letter of Agreement, around 19 March 1996, had
Meier or Cisneros (or Nabi) told me that my understanding (as set out in the paragraph immediately above) was incorrect.
 There is an undoubted shift in position between Mr Irvine'[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s9.html)
September 2009 affidavit and his 7 April 2010 affidavit on the question of lack of intention to create a binding agreement. This, as well as the statements made by Mr Saleh in his principal affidavit which are inconsistent with a belief on his part that there was not to be an immediately binding or operational agreement, may be explained by the fact that only by its Further
Amended Defence filed on 10 February 2010 did Jireh for the first time expressly deny that the "alleged Letter Agreement was or is, or was intended to be, a binding contract". Previously the denial was that the document constituted a contract.
 Jireh's position that the parties were still negotiating on price and never reached agreement, and that subjectively neither Mr Irvine nor Mr Saleh intended or believed that a binding agreement had been concluded is unsustainable and I reject it.
 I do not accept Jireh's proposition that by agreeing to cl 7 Mr Saleh gave up Jireh's power to bargain or that there was anything implausible in Jireh agreeing to that provision. Jireh's agreement to cl 7 enabled the Letter
Agreement to proceed in a manner which satisfied both WES' requirement for the percentages to be specified and Mr Saleh's concerns about sustainability of profit. Both parties had an interest in the enterprise succeeding. Jireh had the protection that WES would be unlikely to act so as to undermine its own interests, especially given the efforts which WES had to that point made.
Also, at the least each had an obligation of honesty and good faith with respect to the negotiations which cl 7 contemplated: United Group Rail
Services Ltd versus Rail Corporation of New South Wales <case> at 77-78. Mr Saleh had no reason to, nor did he believe (indeed the contrary) that WES would act other than honestly and in good faith. In various documents
Mr Saleh referred to the parties (or Messrs Cisneros and Meier) as partners, joint venturers and friends.
 I also do not consider that there is substance in Jireh's submission that there is a lack of precision in the drafting of the Letter Agreement which points to a lack of intention to contract. The parties did not define the terms "ex-factory", "associated entity", "interest of Jireh International Pty
Limited" and "the business of the parties", but there was no need for them to do so. None of those terms is incapable of definite or precise meaning such that the court would be unable to attribute to the parties a contractual intention: see Upper Hunter County District Council versus Australian Chilling &Freezing Co Ltd <case>; [(1968) 118 CLR 429] at 436-7; Trawl Industries of Australia Pty Ltd versus Effem Food
Pty Ltd trading as "Uncle Bens of Australia" [(1992) 27 NSWLR 326.] Of the terms concerned, it is necessary only for present purposes to determine the meaning of "ex-factory", in respect of which only two alternatives were put. I have resolved this controversy below. It is not necessary to determine the outer limits of the term "associated entity", suffice it to say that an entity such as Maranatha, owned and controlled by Mr
Saleh or his interests, and which had a relationship with Jireh for the roasting of coffee doubtlessly was an associated entity of the type which cl 3 contemplated.  In my view, the parties' dealings up to and beyond the entry into the
Letter Agreement reflect a clear and unequivocal intention to contract.
 The form and contents of the Letter Agreement itself are clearly contractual. The parties' subsequent dealings do not, as Jireh would suggest, amount to a continuing negotiation with the view to reaching agreement. They represent repeated and sustained recognition of a contractual relationship.
Moreover, far from being satisfied that Messrs Irvine and Saleh did not subjectively intend to contract, I find on the probabilities that they did so intend.
 A short summary of the law relating to estoppel appears below in the context of Jireh's contention that WES should be estopped from asserting a binding contract.  In my view the parties clearly acted on the basis that there was a contract (until Jireh denied it).  There can be little doubt that Jireh received and continues to receive the significant benefit of WES' contribution and assistance during the formative years of the enterprise. The commercial unconscientiousness of Jireh's denial of a contract is stark because it only came once the enterprise had become a significant commercial one.
 There is, however, no room for the operation of an estoppel for the reason that there was in fact no assumption of a contract. There was one.
 Additionally, both Messrs Cisneros and Meier steadfastly believed from 19
March 1996 that there was a contract because Jireh had signed one. Jireh's later conduct was consistent with what Messrs Cisneros and Meier believed, but by then they already believed there was a contract.  As it is, Jireh's conduct is no more than a breach of contract.
 
MISTAKE Unilateral mistake on the part of one party to a contract may render it void or voidable if the mistake is fundamental or material, provided there is present the additional factor, being the combination of knowledge on the part of the other party that the first is mistaken, and an element of responsibility for the mistake: see generally JW Carter, Elisabeth Peden and
Greg Tollhurst, Contract Law in Australia, 5th ed (2007) at [20-38] and [20-49] and following.
 It follows from my finding that the 1 March 1996 conversation occurred as well as from all the considerations which have caused me to conclude that the parties intended to create legally binding arrangements, that I find that WES never induced any mistake on the part of Jireh. I also find that Jireh made no operative mistake as to the binding legal effect of the Letter Agreement.  
ESTOPPEL The central principle of the doctrine of estoppel is that the law will not permit an unconscionable (or unconscientious) departure by one party from the subject matter of an assumption which has been adopted by the other party as the basis of some relationship, course of conduct, act or omission which would operate to that other party's detriment if the assumption is not adhered to.
For the departure to be unconscionable the party concerned must have played such a part in the adoption of, or persistence in the assumption, that that party would be guilty of unjust and oppressive conduct if it were now to depart from it. Cases where departure would be unconscionable include where that party has induced the assumption by express or implied representation, has entered into contractual or other material relations with the other party on the conventional basis of the assumption or knew that the other party laboured under the assumption and refrained from correcting it when it was that party's duty in conscience to do so. Estoppel by conduct does not in itself constitute an independent cause of action. The assumed fact or state of affairs (which one party is estopped from denying) may be relied upon defensively, or it may be used aggressively as the factual foundation of an action arising under ordinary principles, with the entitlement to ultimate relief being determined on the basis of the existence of that fact or state of affairs: Commonwealth versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394 at 444 per Deane J.
 It follows from my finding that the 1 March 1996 conversation occurred as well as from all the considerations which have caused me to conclude that the parties intended to create legally binding arrangements, that WES never held out, and Jireh never held or relied upon any belief or assumption, that the
Letter Agreement was not to be binding or operational until there was further agreement on the commissions, if any, which Jireh was to pay.
 In addition, I am not satisfied that by entering into the Letter
Agreement, given the benefits which Jireh obtained and retained from it, that it suffered any detriment sufficient to warrant intervention of a court of equity.
 
MISLEADING OR DECEPTIVE CONDUCT [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) ("the
Act"), which is a provision of [Part
V](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p5), provides: 
A corporation shall not, in trade or commerce, engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive.
 [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the Act provides, relevantly, that: ... a person who suffers loss or damage by conduct of another person that was done in contravention of a provision of Part ... V ... may recover the amount of the loss or damage by action against that other person or against any person involved in the contravention.
 [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the Act provides, relevantly, that: ... where ... the Court finds that a person who is a party to the proceeding has suffered, or is likely to suffer, loss or damage by conduct of another person that was engaged in (whether before or after the commencement of this subsection) in contravention of a provision of Part ... V ... the
Court may, ... make such order or orders as it thinks appropriate against the person who engaged in the conduct ... (including all or any of the orders mentioned in subsection (2) of this section) if the Court considers that the order or orders concerned will compensate the first-mentioned person in whole or in part for the loss or damage or will prevent or reduce the loss or damage.
 [Section (2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the Act provides, relevantly, that: "[t]he orders referred to in subsection (1) ... are: an order declaring the whole or any part of a contract made between the person who suffered, or is likely to suffer, the loss or damage and the person who engaged in the conduct ... to be void and, if the Court thinks fit, to have been void ab initio or at all times on and after such date before the date on which the order is made as is specified in the order The question is, whether having regard to all the relevant circumstances, there was conduct by WES which was misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive Jireh: Demagogue Pty Ltd versus Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] at 32.  Silence can be misleading or deceptive even if there is no duty to reveal relevant facts: Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Mehta [(1991) 23 NSWLR ]
at 88. Unless the circumstances are such as to give rise to the reasonable expectation that if some relevant fact exists it would be disclosed, mere silence does not support the inference that that fact does exist: Kimberley
NZI Finance Ltd versus Torero Pty Ltd [(1989) ATPR (Digest) 46-054] at 53,195. If the circumstances are such that a person is entitled to believe that a relevant matter affecting him, her or it would, if it existed, be communicated, then the failure to communicate it may constitute conduct which is misleading or deceptive because the person who ultimately may act to his, her or its detriment is entitled to infer from the silence that no danger or detriment existed: Winterton Constructions Pty Ltd versus Hambros
Australia Ltd <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 97.] It follows from my finding that the 1 March 1996 conversation occurred as well as from all the considerations which have caused me to conclude that the parties intended to create legally binding arrangements, that WES never engaged in any conduct, nor did Jireh suffer any damage by any conduct on the part of WES, which was misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the Act.
 Accordingly, no occasion arises for the making of an order declaring the contract between the parties void.
 
FIDUCIARY DUTY Fiduciary relationships are sometimes called relationships of trust and confidence. Their critical feature is that the fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act for or on behalf of or in the interests of another person in the exercise of a power or discretion which will affect the interests of that other person in a legal or practical way: see Hospital Products Ltd versus United
States Surgical Corporation <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] at 96-7.
 There are traditional or accepted categories of fiduciary relationship.
They include solicitor and client, principal and agent, and partners and company directors in relation to the company. The categories are not closed.  The scope and extent of fiduciary obligations will depend on the nature of the relationship: Kelly versus CA & L Bell Commodities Corp Pty Ltd [(1989) NSWLR 248] at 256-8. In Hospital Products versus United States Surgical
Corporation at 97, Mason J explained the relationship between a contract and a fiduciary relationship which existed with it as follows:  
The fiduciary relationship, if it is to exist at all, must accommodate itself to the terms of the contract so that it is consistent with, and conforms to, them. The fiduciary relationship cannot be superimposed upon the contract in such a way as to alter the operation which the contract was intended to have according to its true construction.
 Where fiduciary obligations arise because of a contractual relationship, the terms of the contract will affect the scope and extent of the fiduciary obligations between the parties, not the other way round. It is necessary to consider the particular circumstances to determine what particular obligations are owed.
 A well-known obligation imposed on a fiduciary is to act in the interests of the person with whom the relationship exists. An aspect of this is the cognate duty of a fiduciary to refrain from putting himself in a position where his own personal interests conflict with the interests of the person to whom he owes the duty. It is a general principle of equity that a person in a fiduciary relationship is obliged to account for personal benefit or gain obtained in circumstances where such a conflict exists: see Chan versus Zacharia <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 178] at 198 per Deane J.
 A contract entered into in breach of fiduciary duty is liable to be set aside by a court of equity.
 It was put by Jireh that Messrs Cisneros and Meier (and consequently WES) were in a fiduciary relationship with Jireh because they were in truth acting as its lawyers, particularly with respect to Jireh's position under US law.
 Jireh articulated the particular fiduciary duty as being one which required WES to disclose (or not fail to disclose) that the Letter Agreement was to be binding. It put that if (contrary to its submission) the Letter
Agreement is binding, then WES breached that duty and the Letter Agreement should be set aside.
 Jireh's submissions are unsustainable for the reason that in my view WES was not under any such duty in relation to the Letter Agreement and if it was, it never breached that duty.
 In negotiating the Letter Agreement Jireh and WES were negotiating at arm's length the terms of their commercial arrangement. WES was not (as was arguably the case with the Master Franchise Agreement and Roasting Agreement) negotiating for or on behalf of Jireh or in a position where Jireh was vulnerable to it.
 More importantly, Jireh intended (as did WES) there to be a binding contract. It was not operating under any misapprehension, and accordingly
Jireh could have been under no duty to disavow it of its belief.
 Finally and in any event, WES made it abundantly clear that the Letter
Agreement was to be binding.
 
FRUSTRATION A contract may be discharged and terminated by frustration when it becomes impossible of performance. Where a supplier's source is not available to supply the contents of a contract, the question of frustration depends on the reason the source is not available and the scope of the supplier's promise.
Where the event relied upon occurs because of the blame, fault or default of a party, the contract is not frustrated because reliance cannot be placed on self-induced frustration: JW Carter, Elisabeth Peden and Greg Tolhurst,
Contract Law in Australia at [33-14], [33-43].
 Counsel for Jireh put a perfunctory submission that the Letter Agreement was discharged by supervening impossibility when, with effect from 31 December , Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp terminated the Letter of
Understanding between it and WES. The Court was not taken to any authority.
 The submission is unsustainable because: a that event did not make the Letter Agreement impossible to perform. Gloria
Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp could thereafter just as well have supplied WES with product without any such Letter of Understanding;  b Jireh could have declined to take any products originating in the US other than through WES;  c other parts of the contract clearly remained operative, including cl 3, which did not oblige Jireh to buy via WES; and  d as Mr Saleh remarked in another context, Jireh and JIWD are "part of the same family". Clearly, GJCI is another member. WES lost its Letter of
Understanding with Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees Corp because of GJCI's acquisition of the Master Franchise in Australia. I have no difficulty in concluding that any impossibility on Jireh's side of the record was thus self- induced.
 
RECTIFICATION To obtain rectification, WES must establish that at the time of the Letter
Agreement the parties had a common intention that when executed it would include the asserted provision, but, by mutual mistake, it was omitted: see for example Muriti versus Prendergast  <case> at <case> and the authorities collected there by White J.
 It has been said that to obtain rectification clear and strong evidence is required and that a court is very wary of acting on the evidence of a single witness: see RP Meagher, JD Heydon and MJ Leeming, Meagher, Gummow and
Lehane's Equity Doctrines & Remedies, 4th ed (2002) Butterworths
LexisNexis at par 26-050.
 WES' claim for rectification was brought by way of amendment permitted during the course of the trial and affidavits by Messrs Cisneros and Meier dated 30 April 2010 were read in support of it.
 On first impression one might have concluded that the omission in the second sentence of cl 3 of the words "or an associated entity" is an obvious error. However, I do not consider that the evidence established that it was.
 By the time of the Letter Agreement, Jireh and only Jireh was to be the
Master Franchisor for Australia and the licensed roaster under the Roasting
Agreement. The parties contemplated that an associated entity might carry out the physical act of roasting and supplying (in the sense of making roasted coffee available), but it was to be Jireh who the parties contemplated was going to sell (whether directly or indirectly) to its own Franchisees. The evidence of Messrs Cisneros and Meier (both affidavit and oral) did not go so far as to persuade me that the words concerned were omitted in error.  
CONSTRUCTION OF CLAUSE 3 I have concluded that the Letter Agreement embodies a binding contract between the parties.
 I accordingly turn to the construction of cl 3.
 There are two questions of construction for determination: firstly, whether the reference to "Jireh International Pty Ltd" in the second sentence of the clause is to be construed as a reference as well to any associate of
Jireh, and secondly, whether, in the events that have occurred, the sales by
JIWD to GJGC stores are "sales by Jireh International Pty Ltd".  The second question arises because, from 11 March 2004 until now, JIWD rather than Jireh itself has supplied products directly to the GJGC stores.
Since 2005, GJCI has purchased and supplied all coffee and other Gloria Jean's branded and non-branded coffee to JIWD. There is no dispute that if the Letter
Agreement is binding, cl 3 commission became payable for sales which Jireh made directly to the GJGC stores.  The meaning of words used in the Letter Agreement is to be determined by what a reasonable person would have understood them to mean. This requires consideration of the language used, the surrounding circumstances known to the parties, the purpose of the transaction and the objects which it was intended to secure: Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd versus Alphapharm Pty Ltd (2004) 219 CLR 165 at ; International Air Transport Association versus Ansett Australia Holdings Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) and others <case>; <case>.
 A commercial contract should be given a business-like interpretation. The nature and extent of the commercial aims and purposes of the agreement or parts of it are part of the essential background circumstances: McCann v
Switzerland Insurance Australia Ltd <case>; [(2000) 203 CLR 579] at 589; Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority <case>; <case> at <case> and following.
 The whole of the instrument has to be considered. Preference is given to a construction supplying a congruent operation to the various components of the whole of an instrument: Wilkie versus Gordian Runoff Ltd <case>; [(2005) 221 CLR 522] at 529.
 If the words used are unambiguous, the Court must give effect to them. If the language is open to two constructions, that will be preferred which avoids consequences which appear to be capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unjust: Australian Broadcasting Commission versus Australasian Performing Right
Association Ltd <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] at 109.
 Recently, in Chartbrook Ltd versus Persimmon Homes Ltd <case>; [[2009] 1
AC 1101](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b2009%5d%201%20AC%201101 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 1112 <case> Lord
Hoffmann said:  
There is no dispute that the principles on which a contract (or any other instrument or utterance) should be interpreted are those summarised by the
House of Lords in Investors Compensation Scheme Ltd versus West Bromwich Building
Society <case>; [[1998] 1 WLR 896], 912-913.
They are well known and need not be repeated. It is agreed that the question is what a reasonable person having all the background knowledge which would have been available to the parties would have understood them to be using the language in the contract to mean. The House emphasised that "we do not easily accept that people have made linguistic mistakes, particularly in formal documents" (similar statements will be found in Bank of Credit and Commerce
International SA versus Ali <case>; [[2002] 1 AC ] , ; Kirin-Amgen Inc versus Hoechst Marion Roussel Ltd <case>; [[2005] 1
All ER 667] , 681-682 and Jumbo King Ltd versus Faithful Properties Ltd <case>; [(1999) 2 HKCFAR 279] , 296) but said that in some cases the context and background drove a court to the conclusion that "something must have gone wrong with the language". In such a case, the law did not require a court to attribute to the parties an intention which a reasonable person would not have understood them to have had.
 As to the first question, Jireh (and only Jireh) was to be, and became, both the Master Franchisor for Australia and the party to the Roasting
Agreement. On the plain English meaning of the words, there is no ambiguity and no warrant to read in the words "or an associated entity" in cl 3 where they do not appear.
 As to the second question, WES put that sales to Jireh's Franchisees through the medium of JIWD were sales by Jireh because JIWD was acting as
Jireh's agent and that even if this was not strictly the case, those sales fell within what a reasonable person, having all the background knowledge, would have understood the term "sales by" Jireh to have included.
 Prior to the interposition of JIWD as Jireh's preferred supplier to
Franchisees, Jireh itself sold to them. Under the Supply Agreement Jireh agreed to nominate JIWD as its preferred supplier to the Franchisees, provided it met all Jireh's requirements in relation to the products.  In support of its agency submission, WES relied on Mr Saleh's evidence to the following effect: 
COUNSEL: I see. So you'd say to his Honour that Jireh International Wholesale
Distributors is really supplying roast coffee, teas and other products as agent for Jireh. Is that correct? 
SALEH: Yes, it's part of the same family.
 This undoubtedly reflects a practical appreciation that the interposition of JIWD did not affect the contemplated operation of the Letter Agreement, but it does not, in my view, establish that JIWD acted as Jireh's agent in the legal sense.  In law the word "agency" is used to connote a relationship arising from consent which relationship exists when one person (the agent) has the authority to act on behalf of another (the principal). The relationship usually, but not necessarily, arises by contract: Halsbury's Laws of
England, 5th ed, vol 1, at [1]; GHL Fridman, The Law of Agency, 7th ed
Butterworths at 55.
 As referred to above, there were two examples of Australian Franchise
Agreements in evidence, one dated before the Supply Agreement and one dated after it. Under the first version, the Franchisee must purchase from the
Master Franchisee (that is, Jireh), all gourmet coffee and such other
Products, supplies, materials, equipment and services as specified by the
Master Franchisee from time to time in such quantities as are ordered by the
Franchisee from time to time. Under the second version (which was clearly amended to take account of the fact that by then JIWD had been appointed
Jireh's preferred supplier for the products), the Franchisee must only purchase from the Master Franchisee all products and services supplied by the
Master Franchisee and only purchase from Approved Suppliers all products and services not supplied by the Master Franchisee.
 The position under the two types of agreements may be different. Where (as in the first type of agreement) the Franchisee must purchase Products from
Jireh and JIWD is interposed, there is a stronger argument for the existence of an agency arrangement than where (as in the second type of agreement) the
Franchisee buys either from Jireh or JIWD. However, on the state of the evidence it is not possible to distinguish between the two with respect to the sales figures which have been agreed.
 The question is what the parties intended the phrase "sales by Jireh...to
GJGC stores" to mean. The requirement for there to be a sale is satisfied, and
GJGC stores is undoubtedly a short-hand expression for Jireh's Franchisees.
The sales in question were made to GJGC stores under Jireh's franchise arrangements with them.
 I do not consider that a reasonable person in the position of the parties would have understood the term "sales by Jireh...to GJGC stores" to include only sales by Jireh itself and to exclude sales to GJGC stores under Jireh's franchise arrangements where all that happens is that Jireh appoints a
Preferred Supplier closely related to it to make the sales to the GJGC stores.
Giving the term "sales by Jireh...to GJGC stores" a commercial and business- like operation, I think it comprehends sales to GJGC stores under Jireh's franchise arrangements with them by Jireh's Preferred Supplier acting where
Jireh itself (but for the interposition of a Preferred Supplier), Jireh itself would have sold.  
IMPLIED TERMS If I am correct that the sales by JIWD to Jireh's Franchisees are sales by
Jireh to GJGC stores within cl 3, it is not necessary for WES to establish the implied terms for which it contends for those sales to attract cl 3 commission. However, if I am incorrect, then, for the reasons which follow, I consider that there is to be implied into the Letter Agreement a term under which Jireh is obliged to refrain by its own voluntary act from removing from the operation of cl 3 sales which are made to its Franchisees and which would, but for that voluntary act, have attracted cl 3 commission.
 The requirements for the implication in fact of a term into a written contract which is complete on its face are well established. They are that it must be reasonable and equitable, be necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, be so obvious that it goes without saying, be capable of clear expression and not contradict any express term of the contract: Codelfa
Construction Pty Limited versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales at 347;
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 at -3.
 There is readily implied into contracts an obligation on each party to do all that is reasonably necessary to secure performance of the contract and generally it will be implied that each party agrees by implication to do all such things as are necessary on that party's part to enable the other party to have the benefit of the contract: Secured Income Real Estate (Australia)
Limited versus St Martins Investments Pty Ltd <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR 596] at 607 per Mason J. However, Mason J went on to say: 
It is easy to imply a duty to co-operate in the doing of acts which are necessary to the performance by the parties or by one of the parties of fundamental obligations under the contract. It is not quite so easy to make the implication when the acts in question are necessary to entitle the other contracting party to a benefit under the contract but are not essential to the performance of that party's obligations and are not fundamental to the contract.
 WES formulates the implied term in three alternative ways:  a that Jireh would not voluntarily remove itself as, or cease to be, the seller of Gloria Jean's, and other branded coffees, teas and other products to
GJGC stores in Australia and to GJGC Master Franchisees and GJGC Stores in other countries;  b that Jireh would not voluntarily do anything to cause or permit WES' enjoyment of the right to commission referred to in cl 3 of the Letter
Agreement to be rendered nugatory, worthless or to be undermined;  c that WES would not, by the voluntary act of Jireh, be deprived of the circumstances which entitled WES to receive a commission under cl 3 of the
Letter Agreement, namely sale of the products by Jireh.
 Jireh does not take issue with WES' formulations, nor does it put that an effective term is not capable of clear formulation.
 Rather, it puts that: a its arrangements with JIWD were and are bona fide commercial ones;  b implicit in WES' implied terms is the imposition on Jireh of a promise, which it has never given, that it would continue to sell products to
Franchisees;  c it is neither obliged to continue to sell, nor to bring about something that the contract does not require;  d it follows that WES' implied terms are not necessary to give business efficacy to the Letter Agreement.
 Whether a term is to be implied in fact (as is the case here), depends primarily on an assessment, derived from the express terms of the particular contract in the light of the circumstances against which it was made, of how the parties intended it to operate and how it will (if at all) operate without the implication. Because the assessment is contract specific, other cases are likely to be of limited assistance: Elders IXL Ltd versus National Employer's
Mutual General Insurance Association Ltd (1988) 5 ANZ Ins Case 60-847 at ,297 per Samuels JA.
 In the present case this entails a determination of what benefits Jireh promised WES and whether the term for which WES contends is necessary to give business efficacy to the Letter Agreement so that WES receives the benefit of
Jireh's promise. As the Court of Appeal pointed out in Australis Media
Holdings Pty Ltd versus Telstra Corporation Ltd [(1998) 43 NSWLR 104] at 125 "a contract may 'contemplate' many benefits for the respective parties, but each can only call on the other to provide, or co-operate in the providing of, benefits promised by that party".
 There are examples in the authorities of claimants succeeding because of an implied term that the circumstance from which the claimant is entitled to get their remuneration will not by the voluntary act of the other party be terminated. In RDJ International versus Preformed Line Products (Australia) Pty
Ltd [(1996) 39 NSWLR 417], Young J (as his Honour then was) surveyed such authorities. At 422 his Honour expressed the view that the principle applies in a wider class of cases. In that case the plaintiff sold to the defendant a business that manufactured jars and pales with lids. The contract provided for the payment of a fixed sum plus an amount equivalent to five per cent of the amount of revenue received by the defendant from sales of jars and pales during three years. His Honour found that there should be implied into that contract a term that the defendant would not do any voluntary act which would make it materially more difficult for the royalty stream to continue for the three year period.
 There are instances where a term requiring a party to go on conducting its business has been implied, particularly where the provision specified the circumstances under which the contract could be terminated: see for example
Reigate versus Union Manufacturing Co (Ramsbottom) [[1918] 1 KB 592.] Likewise, there are instances where no such term has been implied. A well-known example is Lazarus versus Cairn Line of Steamships Ltd [[1918] 106 TLR 378.] In
Rhodes versus Forwood [[1876] 1 App Cas 256] the House of
Lords considered that a contract required payment to be made in the event of a business being carried on, but did not oblige the principal to carry on business.
 In Roadshow Entertainment Pty Ltd versus (ACN 053 006 269) Pty Ltd Receiver & Manager Appointed <case>; [(1997) 42 NSWLR 462], the Court of Appeal considered a contract which did not directly oblige one side to continue their business, but contained provisions which obliged that side to take certain steps which depended upon such continuance and also gave the other side a right to a continuing benefit.
 Each case however, depends on its own circumstances. A more exhaustive review of cases which turn on their own facts would be of little value.
 Under the Letter Agreement Jireh promised to reward WES for its contribution (past and ongoing), amongst others, by paying WES a commission on sales to GJGC stores. The basal premise underlying this is a contemplation that the sales to GJGC stores would be by Jireh. For the promise to WES to be efficacious, Jireh cannot be free by its voluntary act to except from the operation of cl 3 sales made to its Franchisees (which it itself otherwise would have made) by interposing a third party to be the seller, whether or not
Jireh has other genuine commercial reasons for doing so. A breach remains a breach, irrespective of whether the breaching party has genuine commercial reasons for its behaviour. The position may have been different if the breach depended on an absence of good faith.  The term which is to be implied does not entail any obligation upon Jireh to continue in business. It entails the obligation to pay a commission on business done. It recognises WES' continuing economic interest in the enterprise which the Letter Agreement envisages.
 It is to be remembered that the Letter Agreement is still on foot and
Jireh is entitled to WES' performance under it, even if it does not require or insist upon it.
 Without the implication, the result would be that Jireh retains the benefits of the Letter Agreement and its performance, but is able to exonerate itself by voluntary step from an important corresponding obligation to remunerate WES.
 There is a respectable argument (having regard to WES having an entitlement to share in the proceeds on sale of an interest by Jireh) that the parties contemplated that Jireh would continue the business, unless and until it sold an interest which caused a cessation. There is also a respectable argument that the agreement obliged Jireh to ensure that if sales to GJGC stores took place whilst it was the Master Franchisor, it would be the seller.
But it is not necessary to decide those questions.
 I should say that there is no suggestion that Jireh's business is not profitable. To the contrary, its financial statements for the year ended 30
June 2003 reflect a gross profit of $7,671,575 and a net profit of $792,716 (after salaries and wages of $2,357,242) and for the year ended 30 June 2004 a gross profit of $11,306,101 and a net profit of $946,442 (after salaries and wages of $3,456,213). It may be assumed that its position in later years became even stronger, given its acquisition at the end of 2004 of the international franchise operation (excluding the US and Puerto Rico) for US$16 million. Later financial figures were not in evidence.  I find that there should be implied into the Letter Agreement a term (which Jireh has breached) that Jireh not voluntarily do anything which causes
WES to be deprived of the circumstances under which it is to get its cl 3 commission. Those circumstances are that sales have taken place which Jireh would, but for its voluntary act, itself have made and on which it would have been obliged to pay cl 3 commission to WES.
 Jireh did not put that the consequence of the finding of breach was anything other than damages equivalent to the commission on the sales in question.  
EX-FACTORY PRICE In my view, the term "ex-factory price" means the price charged by the physical roaster without the imposition of any further charges or mark-up by entities that have been interposed in the supply chain. Ex-factory price on its plain meaning is the price payable to the manufacturer or factory.  In my view, the construction contended for by Jireh is the correct one.  
CONCLUSION Subject to adjustments required to bring the figures up to date, including with respect to interest, there will be a verdict for WES against Jireh for $8,387,656 representing damages for the period to 30 June 2009.
 Jireh's cross-claims against Messrs Cisneros and Meier personally are dismissed.
 I will stand the matter over to a date convenient to the parties to enable short minutes to be brought in reflecting this outcome, to draw to my attention any further issues which require to be dealt with and to give an opportunity to the parties to address on costs if orders are not agreed.  
LAST UPDATED:  June 2010 * * * 
