

Lanza versus Codemo Management Pty Ltd t/as Yoogali Engineering Co and Ors
Matter No 20818/97 [1998] NSWSC 493 (11 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
LANZA versus CODEMO MANAGEMENT PTY LTD t/as YOOGALI ENGINEERING CO & ORS /97 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff brings a claim for damages arising out of personal injury. There are five defendants. There are claims for contribution between the defendants. 
There are two applications before the Court. In each application, an order for discovery is sought.

Firstly, the fourth defendant seeks discovery against the first and second defendants. The relevant categories of documents are set forth in paragraphs -8 of Annexure A to the Notice of Motion filed on 17 July 1998.

Secondly, the fifth defendant seeks discovery against the first and second defendants. The relevant category of documents is set forth in paragraph 1 of the Notice of Motion filed on 10 July 1998.

These applications fall to be determined pursuant to the provisions for discovery applicable to proceedings commenced on or after 1 October 1996 (Part ). A principal purpose of this regime has been said to be to limit unnecessary discovery. In each case, an order is sought pursuant to rule 3.

Recently, there have been two occasions on which I have had cause to give consideration to the provisions of the new regime (see GSA Industries (Aust)
Pty Limited versus Gulf Rubber (Aust) Pty Limited (15 July 1998) and Stavert v
Stavert & Anor (30 July 1998)).

As these proceedings involved both a personal injury claim and claims for contribution, the provisions of rule 5 have application. In Stavert, I made the following observations:- "It seems that the question of the proper construction of rule 5 is relatively untrammelled by authority. I was not referred to any decision which has approached the problem of the proper construction to be given to this rule.

The rule contains the words "special reasons". The meaning to be attributed to these words was not the subject of full argument. It may well be unproductive to dwell on an attempt to elaborate on the plain and unambiguous literal meaning of those words.

Each case is going to be determined having regard to its own particular circumstances. The task for the Court is to look at the material placed before it and determine whether or not "special reasons" are present in that case.

The aim of the present Part 23 is to establish a regime whereby, in the case of personal injury claims, rule 3 does not apply "unless the court, for special reasons, otherwise orders". In the case of a personal injury claim, the applicant for discovery must first obtain an otherwise order. An otherwise order cannot be made unless there are special reasons. If the Court makes an otherwise order, it then has jurisdiction to exercise the discretionary power to make an order for discovery. The onus rests with the applicant to demonstrate an entitlement to both an otherwise order and an order for discovery." 
In my view, when regard is had to the circumstances of this particular case, neither of the applicants has demonstrated an entitlement to both an otherwise order and an order for discovery.

Neither applicant has shown special reasons justifying an otherwise order. In my view, merely because a party may have some documents which are relevant, falls well short of special reasons justifying an otherwise order.

There are other reasons why the applications should fail. But for present purposes, it is unnecessary to pursue these matters. It may be of assistance to the parties to observe that the categories of documents are, at least in many instances, specified in more general terms than could be justified in the circumstances (see rule 3(2)). Also, it can be observed that, if the defendants desire to inspect specific documents, this may be achieved either pursuant to rule 2 or by otherwise requiring production of those documents.

I make orders in accordance with the handwritten document dated 11 August 1998 and signed by the legal representatives for the parties.
 * * * 
