

In the matter of Oliver Brown Pty Ltd [2012] NSWSC 1046 (16 July 2012) 
Last Updated: 8 January 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
In the matter of Oliver Brown Pty Ltd  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): July 2012  
Decision Date: July 2012  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Brereton J  
Decision: 
Application to extend order declined  
Catchwords: 
INJUNCTIONS - application to extend - appointment of administrator to defendant company  
JUDGMENT
HIS HONOUR: On 10 July 2012, on the ex parte application of the plaintiffs, I made an order as follows: 
Order that, upon the plaintiffs by their counsel giving the usual undertaking as to damages, until 16 July 2012, the Defendants be restrained from, by themselves, their servants and agents: 
Alienating, transferring, disposing of, encumbering or otherwise adversely dealing with any assets of the Third Defendant other than in the ordinary course of operating the businesses of the cafes at Shop GRD-C3000 in the shopping centre known as Top Ryde City and Shop 212A in the shopping centre known as Westfield Chatswood; 
Alienating, transferring, disposing of, encumbering or otherwise adversely dealing with lease registered number AF995202 in respect of Shop GRD-C3000 at
Top Ryde City.
The proceedings return before the court today. In the meantime, on 13 July 2012, the second defendant Jacob Kim caused the third defendant company to go into voluntary administration. The question today is whether the injunction should be continued, varied or discharged.
The ex parte injunction was granted on the basis of evidence that disclosed that there was at least a threatened alienation of a lease under which the company occupied premises in which it carried on business - although it had been originally intended that one of the plaintiffs conduct that business under a sublease. The risk was that, by such an alienation, the value of the company and its assets might be diminished, and thus the value to the plaintiffs of an order that they effectively acquire the company would be reduced.
Although a caveat had been lodged, which would have prevented registration of any transfer of the lease, it was argued, and for the purposes of the ex parte application I accepted, that if there were a pending transfer of the lease that might well be associated with an agreement for sale of the business, and that other assets as well as the lease might therefore be alienated, which alienation would not be prevented by the caveat.
This risk is affected by the appointment of an administrator. One would apprehend that an administrator would take control of both shops and of all the assets in them, at least unless and until satisfied that any of those assets were not property of the company. The appointment of the administrator means that the ability of the first and second defendants to guide or control the alienation or transfer of any assets of either business is practically at an end.
It was submitted that the injunction should nonetheless be continued or varied, in order to reinforce the position under (Cth) [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) that the directors no longer had any powers in respect of the company, all of which were vested in the administrator. However, in circumstances where it would seem that the defendants must have approached the administrator, and they would have been advised by the administrator of the consequent limitations on their powers, it does not seem to me that that is a sufficient basis to continue an injunction, which was originally granted on a quite different basis. 
In my view, there is no sufficient cause for continuing the injunction, which will therefore expire, in accordance with its terms, today.

Orders
I adjourn the proceedings to Monday 23 July 2012, in the Corporations Judge directions list.
I note that the plaintiffs do not seek any costs order against the first defendant in respect of today's application.
 * * * 
