

Regina versus Herring Matter No Cca 60634/95 [1998] NSWSC 551 (24 November )

Last Updated: 2 December 1998 
REGINA versus KEITH DAVID HERRING 
CCA 60634/95 November 1998 
McInerney J, Studdert J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and severity of sentence (Badgery-Parker J) 
FILE NO: 60634/95 
DELIVERED: 24 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: 26 and 27 March 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Keith David HERRING 
JUDGMENT OF: McInerney J, Studdert J, Simpson J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - A J Bellanto QC 
RESPONDENT - R D Cogswell SC 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Voros & Associates 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal against conviction dismissed; leave granted to appeal against sentence; appeal against sentence dismissed. 
NO. OF PAGES: 112 
REGINA versus Keith David HERRING 
The appellant was convicted by a jury of murdering his wife and sentenced to life imprisonment. He successfully appealed the conviction, was re-tried and again convicted. He was sentenced to penal servitude for twenty-two years and three months, made up of a minimum term of eighteen years and an additional term of four years and three months. He appealed the conviction and sought leave to appeal the sentence.

Early in the course of the second trial (on a Thursday), counsel for the appellant was granted leave to withdraw and was replaced the next day . On the following Monday, the appellant's new counsel sought a further adjournment of one week to familiarise himself with the material. The trial judge refused an adjournment of that length and the trial recommenced on the Tuesday.

Evidence was given in the trial of the deceased's state of mind in relation to her marriage and of the state of the marriage itself. The trial judge directed the jury that the evidence of the deceased's state of mind was relevant only to the possibility of suicide. The evidence of the state of the relationship could have had a bearing on whether the accused had killed his wife.

During the trial the judge gave directions that potential lies told by the appellant as to his whereabouts on the night of the deceased's death could be used as evidence of a consciousness of guilt.

Towards the end of the Crown case the trial judge informed the appellant that, if he chose to give sworn evidence, he would have to do so from the dock in order not unnecessarily to bring to the attention of the jury the special security arrangements the trial judge had implemented. The appellant had, in the first trial, attempted to approach the Bench with the apparent intention of attacking the presiding judge. In the second trial, the trial judge was informed that the appellant had told a Court Officer that he intended to assault the Crown Prosecutor if transport problems he had experienced were repeated. The appellant did not give sworn evidence.

After the close of the defence case, the Crown sought and was permitted to lead evidence in reply to refute certain statements made by the appellant in his unsworn statement. During the Crown case, there had been some cross- examination and re-examination of Crown witnesses touching on the issues in respect of which the Crown re-opened, sufficient to alert the Crown Prosecutor of the need to deal with those issues during the Crown case. There had also been cross-examination in the first trial concerning some of the same issues.

On appeal the appellant sought to tender an affidavit concerning conversations between jurors and the solicitor for the appellant which occurred after the trial had finished. The conversations concerned the jury deliberations and other matters.

HELD
His Honour's decision to refuse an adjournment to allow the appellant's new counsel to prepare did not deprive the appellant of a fair trial. There was therefore no miscarriage of justice. There was nothing to suggest that counsel was not able adequately to represent the appellant.
The trial judge correctly directed the jury on the use which may be made of relationship evidence and of evidence of the deceased's state of mind.
Relevance of the state of the relationship did not render admissible the hearsay evidence of the deceased's state of mind. That evidence was only relevant to the possibility of suicide: Wilson versus The Queen <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 334]; Frawley [(1993) 69 A Crim R 208] referred to.
The "lie" as to the whereabouts of the appellant on the night of the deceased's death did not involve a determination of the ultimate issue in the case and was properly left to the jury: R versus Lorenzo (unreported, Court of
Criminal Appeal, 22 May 1995) distinguished.
Where special security arrangements are required, a trial judge is obliged to see that they are made no more obvious than is necessary because of the prejudicial effect they might have on the mind of the jury: Smith <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 532] referred to. However, it is essentially a matter for the trial judge and it is proper for the judge to have regard to the accused's past behaviour in making any decision on the issue: R versus Farr [(1994) 74 A
Crim R 405] applied.
The Crown should not have been permitted to re-open in relation to the relevant issues because the cross-examination and re-examination on the issues in both trials should have alerted the Crown to the need to call evidence in respect of those issues: R versus Shaw <case>; [(1952) 85 CLR 365]; R versus Lawrence (1981) 38 ALR 1; R versus Killick <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 565]; R versus Cheney <case>; [(1991) 99 ALR 360] applied. However, in this case the re-opening caused no miscarriage of justice because any potential prejudice which might have been caused by the timing of the evidence in reply must have been subsumed in the enormous amount of material the jury had to consider and the length of the addresses and summing up.
Evidence that discloses jury deliberations is inadmissible: R versus Emmett and Masland [(1988) 14 NSWLR 327]; R v
Rinaldi and Kessey [(1993) 68 A Crim R 284];
R versus Minarowska and Koziol [(1995) 83 A Crim R 78];
R versus Slater (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 20 July 1994) referred to. Evidence of events which, even if they took place in the jury room, were extrinsic to the jury deliberations may be admissible but in this case were irrelevant and therefore inadmissible: Emmett referred to.

It is an offence to solicit information from jurors for the purpose of obtaining information about the deliberations. It is unwise for legal representatives to permit themselves to be in a position where there is a real possibility that they will encounter members of the jury.
The verdict was not unsafe and unsatisfactory.
While <case> of the Sentencing Act 1985 requires special circumstances to be found if an additional term is to exceed one third of the minimum term, there is no authority to suggest that the additional term must be one third of the minimum term if special circumstances are not found.

ORDERS
Appeal against conviction dismissed
Leave granted to appeal against sentence.
Appeal against sentence dismissed.

REGINA versus Keith David HERRING 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: On 25 November 1989 at Berowra Heights Ms Juiletta Herring died by drowning. The appellant, her husband, was charged with her murder. In 1991 after a ten week jury trial he was convicted. Slattery J sentenced him to penal servitude for life. In 1994 this court set aside the conviction and ordered a new trial: R versus Herring [(1994) 74 A Crim R 72.] On Monday 24 July 1995 he was re-indicted before Badgery-Parker J and a jury. Until Thursday 3 August, when Badgery-Parker J granted him leave to withdraw, Mr Greenwood QC appeared for the appellant. From Monday 7 August Dr Marc Gumbert represented the appellant. On 19 October 1995 the jury returned a verdict of guilty. Badgery-Parker J sentenced the appellant to penal servitude for twenty-two years and three months, made up of a minimum term of eighteen years and an additional term of four years and three months. 
The appellant appeals the conviction and seeks leave to appeal the sentence.
The appeal and application were heard on 26 and 27 March 1998. At the conclusion of the hearing on 27 March this court reserved judgment. It is necessary here to note events that then occurred. Within two weeks the appellant sought the disqualification of two members of the Bench, and sought to have the matter re-listed for the purpose of making that application.
Correspondence between the Registrar and the solicitors for the appellant ensued. Through his solicitors the appellant made several requests for delay in further proceedings on the appeal. He gave as one reason his poor state of health; another was that he had applied for legal aid to pursue his application to the Court. Ultimately, this Court granted him until 1 September to put any additional matters before it. It has received no further material from the appellant.

The Crown Case 
The Crown case was entirely circumstantial. What follows is an account of the facts and circumstances the Crown sought to establish, from which it invited the jury to draw the inference that the appellant caused his wife's death. The appellant denied some, but not all, of the facts and circumstances alleged, and denied that he was responsible for his wife's death.

In 1989 the appellant and his wife lived with her son Roland in Wideview Road,
Berowra Heights. During that year the appellant formed an association with a
Korean student who was then boarding with the Kennedy family at Haberfield.
She gave evidence under the name Ms Hyunmi. Another Korean student, Jinny
Chung, also boarded with the Kennedys. The relationship between the appellant and Ms Hyunmi became very intense and passionate. The appellant was friendly with another Asian woman, Ms Jenny Chan, who lived in a home unit at Hornsby.
On at least two occasions, while courting Ms Hyunmi, he took her to the unit, to which he had a key, while Ms Chan was absent. He led Ms Hyunmi to believe that the unit belonged to him. During the course of their relationship, and prior to 25 November, the appellant purchased jewellery for Ms Hyunmi, provided a gold Amex card for her use, and paid for a lavish birthday party for her. On the day of the party he purchased and gave to her a diamond ring valued at $3,156.

In October, the Kennedys, unhappy at the relationship between Ms Hyunmi and the appellant, and at the amount of time he was spending at their home, gave
Ms Hyunmi notice that they wished her to leave. When she failed to secure alternative accommodation, they fixed the weekend of 25 November as the date by which they required her to vacate. The appellant was made aware of this, and told both the Kennedys and Ms Hyunmi that she could live at his house.
 November 1989 was a Friday. The appellant spent the evening with Ms Hyunmi, the later part of it at the Kennedy home. He left late at night (precisely what time was a significant issue in the trial) and drove to his home at
Berowra Heights.

At 12.35 am on 25 November Mrs Herring telephoned a friend of hers, Ms Tizzy
Calautti. She spoke briefly and terminated the conversation abruptly.

At 1.41 am the appellant telephoned the family doctor, Dr Ronald Tomlins, who lived nearby, and asked him to attend his home urgently, as he had just pulled his wife from the swimming pool. Dr Tomlins arrived at about 1.45 am. He observed Mrs Herring, clad in a one piece swimsuit, lying face down on the floor of a sunroom at the back of the house. The appellant was kneeling over her, apparently trying to resuscitate her. He appeared to be distressed.

Dr Tomlins recognised that Mrs Herring was already dead. When he told the appellant this he again displayed distress. Dr Tomlins mentioned the need to notify the Coroner of the death. The appellant resisted this course, asking whether it was necessary, and whether the doctor could not simply write a certificate. He later explained this reaction by saying that he did not wish to see his wife's body disfigured or mutilated by post mortem examination.

The appellant gave Dr Tomlins, and police who later attended, false accounts of his movements on the previous evening. He told Dr Tomlins that his wife had been visited by another doctor (Dr Bingham) during the afternoon, had taken some anti-depressant medication and had slept until about 9.00 pm when they had together gone out for dinner; that they had returned home and watched television; and that about half an hour before he called the doctor his wife decided to go for a swim. After about fifteen minutes he went to look for her, and found her underwater in the pool.

The appellant was interviewed by police on 27 November. He said that he had been concerned about his wife's health during the day and had called Dr
Bingham. The appellant and his wife had gone out for lunch, the appellant had a prescription written by Dr Bingham for his wife filled and she had slept until about 10.30 pm. She then showered and decided to have a swim to help ease a muscular ache in her leg. At about 1.00 am, while he made a cup of tea in the kitchen, she went to the pool. He then lay, half dozing in bed for a time, until something caused him to wake and he went to the kitchen and called his wife. He saw her floating in the water in the pool, pulled her out, lifted her onto the decking and tried to pump the water from her body. He carried her indoors, laid her on the floor and tried again to pump the water from her. He called Dr Tomlins and continued his efforts to revive her.

Between 7.00 and 7.30 am on 25 November the appellant telephoned Mrs Kennedy and told her, and shortly after, Ms Hyunmi, a different false story to those he had already told. He said that, on his return to his home the previous evening, he had received word from England that his wife, from whom he had long been separated or divorced, had been killed in a motor vehicle accident.
It was necessary for him to make urgent arrangements to bring his son, who had lived with his mother, to Australia, and to make arrangements about his wife's property. To Mrs Kennedy and Ms Hyunmi he sounded upset and he asked the
Kennedys to accommodate Ms Hyunmi for another week. They readily agreed and Ms
Hyunmi remained in the Kennedy household for that time.

One week later, on 2 December, Ms Hyunmi moved into the appellant's Berowra
Heights home. The appellant was maintaining the fiction that his wife had died in England. Notwithstanding their relationship, he installed Ms Hyunmi in a separate bedroom in the house. He asked her not to mention his wife to Roland, as it would upset him, and he introduced her to neighbours as a housekeeper he had engaged to look after the boy. Ms Hyunmi learned the true circumstances of
Mrs Herring's death when relatives of Mrs Herring called at the house while the appellant was out and told her that Mrs Herring had drowned in the pool.

Ms Hyunmi left Australia to return to Korea on 8 December 1989. Although the appellant had earlier persuaded her to defer her departure, after police began making enquiries he actively encouraged and assisted her to leave on that date, and offered to pay for her flight. After she returned to Korea the appellant telephoned her almost daily. On one occasion, shortly after her return, he told her that police might contact her and that, if she wished, he could make arrangements to avoid her becoming involved in the investigation.
He suggested that, if she did not wish to become involved, she could go away for a time where police could not contact her.

At some time after Ms Hyunmi returned to Korea, the appellant forged and sent to her a document purporting to certify that his marriage had been dissolved.

The appellant stood to gain financially from his wife's death. He was apparently in financial difficulties with a considerable debt to the bank. The
Berowra Heights home was held in a joint tenancy in the names of the appellant and his wife with the consequence that, on her death, he would acquire sole title to the property. A number of insurance policies covered Mrs Herring's life, the total value of which was about half a million dollars, in respect of each of which the appellant was the beneficiary. Nevertheless, the day after her death the appellant told her relatives that no such policies were in existence. Later, when interviewed by police, he confirmed that some policies did exist but understated their value.

The appellant told his wife's relatives that she had expressed a preference (contrary to her family's cultural traditions) for cremation rather than burial in the event of her death and said that he wished to have this done quickly. When he learned that police were interviewing his wife's relatives, the appellant threatened her brother-in-law, Roger Terlich, that he would "get even with everybody who had made a statement against me".

Mention should be made here of certain other circumstances of which there was evidence in the Crown case. The swimming pool, at its deepest, was about four feet, substantially less than Mrs Herring's height. The evening of 24 November was cold. Only tiny quantities of water were observed by police on the timber surrounds of the pool, where the appellant claimed he dragged his wife, and in the sunroom, where her body was seen by Dr Tomlins. The appellant's clothes were not wet. There was undisturbed grime on the floor of the pool and its surface was covered with a scum or froth. Two bruises were observed on Mrs
Herring's head. There was some evidence that at least one of them may have been caused prior to death. There was expert evidence suggesting that the fluid in Mrs Herring's lungs was tap water and not pool water. The Crown invited the inference that it was unlikely that Mrs Herring had gone swimming; that, even if she had, it was unlikely that, absent some external force or injury, she had drowned in such shallow water; and that it was unlikely that the appellant pulled her, as he described, from the pool to the timber deck and to the sunroom without leaving water on the deck or floor, and without becoming wet himself.

There was evidence that Mrs Herring was aware of her husband's relationship with Ms Hyunmi, had confronted him with it and was contemplating divorce; that the appellant was aware, not only of her thoughts in this regard, but also of her entitlement to make a claim for a share of the jointly owned property; and that the appellant had expressed an intention to thwart any such claim she made.

A significant part of the Crown case concerned the appellant's motive to kill his wife. A number of motives were suggested: * the appellant's commitment (as alleged by the Crown) to accommodate Ms Hyunmi in his Berowra Heights home, accommodation which by reason of the deadline imposed by the Kennedys she needed by 25 November. (The appellant denied that he had committed himself to providing accommodation for Ms Hyunmi at Berowra Heights, saying that he had offered unspecified help in finding alternative accommodation for her); * the appellant's worsening financial predicament together with his prospect of financial gain from his wife's death (by his inheritance of the whole of the title to the matrimonial home and from the proceeds of the insurance policies); * the appellant's infatuation with Ms Hyunmi, evidenced by his purchase of jewellery, by giving her an expensive birthday party, and by giving her an American Express card. 
Of these, the first and last are of considerable significance in relation to various of the grounds of appeal argued.

The appellant made an unsworn statement. He denied that he had been involved in the death of his wife and asserted that he had lied about his whereabouts because of shame and guilt at his infidelity. He claimed that his relationship with Ms Hyunmi was short term and casual, destined to end by Christmas when she intended to return to Korea. He maintained that it was only one of a series of affairs he had had with young Asian women during the course of his marriage and asserted that his marriage was intact and that he deeply loved his wife. He said that he and his wife had been participating in an infertility programme in an endeavour to conceive children of their own. He spoke of renovations that they had undertaken to their home and said they had been considering selling it and purchasing another. He denied that he was in financial difficulties.

He answered the Crown allegation that he had committed himself to providing Ms
Hyunmi with accommodation at Berowra Heights from 25 November. He acknowledged that he had agreed to find accommodation for her, but denied that he had offered, or intended, to accommodate her at Berowra Heights, saying that he had made enquiries of a local motel and also had in mind that she might share the Hornsby unit with Ms Chan.

He called a number of witnesses in response to various aspects of the Crown case. The evidence of two witnesses from the first trial was read to the jury.
The most significant evidence called on behalf of the appellant was medical evidence rebutting the suggestion that the bruises on Mrs Herring's head may have been caused by a blow inflicted before her death.

The Appeal against Conviction 
Initially, fifteen grounds of appeal against conviction were pleaded. Of these, four were abandoned prior to hearing. It is convenient to depart from the sequence in which the various grounds appear in the notice of appeal.
Since, to some extent, the tenth ground is intertwined with the first, the factual underpinnings of the two grounds may appropriately be dealt with together. As pleaded they read as follows: "1. His Honour erred in not granting the adjournment sought to allow new counsel to properly prepare the defence, consequent upon change of counsel.
There was a miscarriage of justice caused by the Crown being granted leave to re-open its case for the purpose of allowing Sergeant Fry to give evidence regarding the appellant's defence at the first trial, and Ms Slack to give evidence of the deceased's burial dress." 
In order to explain Ground 1 it is necessary to state in more detail the sequence of events as they occurred at the trial.

The appellant was indicted on Monday 24 July. He was then represented by Mr
Greenwood QC. A jury was empanelled on that day and, after being given some general directions, released until Wednesday 26 July. The remainder of 24 July and 25 July were taken up with argument concerning, and resolution of, certain preliminary evidentiary and procedural matters. On Wednesday 26 July the Crown
Prosecutor opened the case to the jury and the first witness was called that day. The trial proceeded on Thursday 27 July. The court did not sit on Friday July and the trial resumed on Monday 31 July and thereafter. On the morning of Thursday 3 August (that is, the sixth day of evidence) Mr Greenwood sought and was eventually granted leave to withdraw. He cited as his reason, without specification, an ethical problem that precluded his continuing to represent the appellant. Leave was granted a little after 2.00 pm and the jury was then released for the remainder of that and the following day. The appellant's solicitor, Mr Voros, sought an adjournment until the following Monday, 7
August, to enable him to brief alternative counsel. In acceding to that application his Honour made it clear that, absent some quite new ground that was not then apparent, he would not be disposed to extend the adjournment beyond that date and expected the trial then to proceed. He expressed the view that any competent counsel, if briefed on that or the following day, could be ready to proceed by the Monday. He later said that, in taking the attitude he did, he had acted on three then unstated assumptions. These were, first, that any counsel newly briefed would have the opportunity of consulting Mr
Greenwood before the trial resumed and from time to time as it proceeded, and would receive the benefit of Mr Greenwood's familiarity with the material contained in the brief; secondly, that the Crown would be able to re-schedule its witnesses for the sitting days in the first week of resumption to call only witnesses whose evidence was principally uncontentious, or whose evidence in chief was expected to be lengthy, so as to minimise the demands of cross- examination cast upon the new counsel; and, thirdly, that the new counsel would have the assistance of an instructing solicitor or solicitor's clerk who was already familiar with the brief and who had been in court throughout the trial to that date.

On Monday 7 August Dr Marc Gumbert announced his appearance for the appellant.
He said that he had been briefed on Friday 4 August. He was instructed by the solicitors who had retained Mr Greenwood.

Dr Gumbert sought an adjournment of one week, to Monday 14 August, in order to familiarise himself with the brief, which contained not only the statements of all the Crown witnesses, and, presumably, of the appellant and proposed defence witnesses, but also the extensive transcript of the previous trial which had run for more than ten weeks. Badgery-Parker J refused the application and directed that the trial recommence at 10.00 am the following morning, Tuesday 8 August. He gave reasons for his refusal of a longer adjournment. In doing so, he expressly accepted that Dr Gumbert, in good faith, held the professional opinion that an adjournment of one week was necessary to permit him to prepare himself adequately to represent the appellant. One factor in his decision was that it was not intended that the court sit on Friday 11 August, and that day would be available to counsel for preparation. Another was his express finding that the three assumptions previously made (when he stated his then intention that the trial proceed on the Monday) had in fact proved to be correct. Another was the anticipated length of the trial (13-16 weeks) for which court time had been set aside, together with the consequent potential disruption to listing arrangements for other matters already made by the court should the trial have extended beyond the time allocated for it. Another was the lack of continuity with which the trial had already been characterised. (It had had a delayed start due to the two days of legal argument, and suffered several interruptions up to Thursday August when Mr Greenwood withdrew.) 
Badgery-Parker J considered the alternative of discharging the jury then empanelled and fixing a new date for trial. He rejected this alternative for three principal reasons. The first was that, having regard to the trial's estimated length and the other commitments of the court, it was unlikely that a date could be allocated before the middle of 1996. As this was a re-trial, the appellant had then been in custody for five and a half years and his
Honour considered any extension of that length of custody while the appellant remained unconvicted to be unacceptable. The second reason was the dependence of the Crown case on the evidence of three overseas witnesses (one of whom was
Ms Hyunmi) who were willing to attend at the time the trial was listed, but on whose continuing willingness the Crown could not depend, and who could not be compelled to attend at a later date; and also on other local, professional witnesses who had made time available for the trial as then scheduled and who would be inconvenienced by its rescheduling. The third and final reason was the loss of court time that would be occasioned by adjournment and which would not be able to be filled at short notice.

The trial therefore recommenced on Tuesday 8 August and continued to verdict on 19 October.

The next relevant event, for the purposes of Grounds 1 and 10, occurred on 28
September, the forty-first day of the trial. After the close of the defence case, during which the appellant had given an unsworn statement, the Crown
Prosecutor sought leave to call evidence in reply in relation to six separate matters. After hearing argument, Badgery-Parker J granted leave to the Crown to call evidence in reply on three of those matters. Two only of these are the subject of appeal. Each arose out of matters asserted by the appellant in his unsworn statement. One concerned his response to the Crown allegation that he had committed himself to providing accommodation for Ms Hyunmi at Berowra
Heights by which he raised the possibility that she might live in the Hornsby home unit with Jenny Chan; the other concerned an assertion made by him that his wife had been buried with jewellery. The significance of these matters will be explained below. In relation to each matter, the Crown Prosecutor asserted that the appellant had made no mention in the first trial of the facts he subsequently stated and the Crown sought to lead evidence in reply to that effect. It was an essential part of the Crown argument, (consistent with the proper approach to an application for leave to call a Crown case in reply), that signals of the defence case, sufficient to alert the Crown to the need to adduce the evidence in question during its case in chief, had not been given either during the course of cross-examination of the Crown witnesses, or at any time prior to the close of the Crown case.

It is necessary at this point to elucidate the context and the significance of each of these pieces of evidence and it will then be logical to deal with
Ground 10 before moving to Ground 1.

The appellant's proposals for Ms Hyunmi's future accommodation were a very important, if not pivotal, part of the Crown case on motive. The Crown
Prosecutor invited the jury to accept the evidence of the Kennedys and of Ms
Hyunmi that the appellant had promised Ms Hyunmi that she would live at his home at Berowra Heights, she being quite unaware that his wife and her son were living there with him. From this fact the Crown invited the jury to infer that, by 25 November, the disposal of his wife was a pressing need of the appellant. The appellant's response in his unsworn statement that his intention in that regard did not depend on the availability of accommodation at Berowra Heights but that his obligations could readily have been met by accommodating Ms Hyunmi at Hornsby, therefore constituted potentially a considerable inroad into the Crown case in this respect. Conversely, the evidence adduced in reply by the Crown constituted potentially a serious blow to the defence case, giving the Crown ammunition to address the jury on the basis that what the appellant said in his statement was a recent fabrication, and demonstrative of a consciousness of guilt.

Another important part of the Crown case on motive was the proposition that the appellant was infatuated with Ms Hyunmi. The Crown sought to prove this, in part, by tendering evidence that the appellant had spent lavishly on Ms
Hyunmi, including purchasing jewellery for her, amongst which was the $3,000 ring to which reference has earlier been made. A Ms Sellen, who sold the ring to the appellant, gave evidence. The appellant denied that he had purchased the ring for Ms Hyunmi and said that he had purchased such a ring for his wife and had given it to her. The Crown responded to this by the tender of a photograph of the jewellery itemised among Mrs Herring's property for probate purposes. No ring answering the description of the ring in question could be seen in the photograph. From the absence of the ring in the photograph the
Crown sought to have the jury draw the inference that the appellant's account of his disposal of the ring which he had purchased from Ms Sellen was false.

In his unsworn statement the appellant said: "When my wife died we, I don't know, I should not say a weird custom - it was a custom I was not aware of or used to and when I went to see my wife's body I took my mother-in-law with me, she came with me and my son and my mum's saying to me `you've got to do this, it's our custom' and you know, I don't know whether it's an Asian custom, I had to put money in my wife's pocket so that she had money for the journey. She had to be dressed properly, jewellery - my wife was buried with jewellery - that came out before and my wife was buried with certain things. You know my son, I sat down with my son, he wrote a letter that he put in his mum's pocket." 
The Crown argued that this material was put before the jury by the appellant for the purpose of suggesting to the jury that the burial of Mrs Herring with jewellery provided the explanation for the absence of the ring from Mrs
Herring's jewellery valued for probate. The jury might well have thought that the $3,000 ring was amongst the jewellery that the appellant said was buried with his wife. Accordingly, the Crown Prosecutor sought (and was permitted) to call the evidence of Ms Slack, to show that jewellery had not been buried with
Mrs Herring, and the evidence of Detective Fry, to show that this, like the evidence about accommodation at Hornsby, was something the appellant had invented since the previous trial, and could not be believed, and was demonstrative of a consciousness of guilt. There was no cross-examination of the detective.

On 4 December Badgery-Parker J gave reasons for his decisions. It is clear that, in each case, one reason that he permitted the Crown to call evidence in reply was his acceptance of the fact, as asserted by the Crown Prosecutor, that in the first trial the appellant had not mentioned the burial of jewellery with his wife's body or his claimed plans for accommodating Ms
Hyunmi at Hornsby.

This issue is complicated by the unfortunate circumstance that Detective Fry's evidence in one respect was simply wrong.

On the next sitting day Dr Gumbert drew attention to a passage in the transcript of the first trial that clearly indicated that Detective Fry's evidence in relation to the jewellery was incorrect, and that, in sworn evidence in the first trial, the appellant had clearly stated that his wife was buried with a necklace and a ring. Accordingly, the detective was again recalled to correct the evidence he had previously given in reply on that issue. He acknowledged that in the first trial the appellant had said that a necklace and ring were buried with his wife's body, but added that the appellant had not identified which ring he was referring to.

Ground 10 
It is well established that, in a criminal trial, the Crown is permitted a case in reply only in exceptional circumstances: R versus Shaw <case>; [(1952) 85 CLR 365]; R versus Lawrence (1981) 38 ALR 1. Where the issue to which the evidence in reply is directed ought reasonably to have been foreseen by the Crown at a point before the close of the Crown case, the application will be refused: R versus Killick <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 565.] The rule is an important rule of fairness: Killick;
Lawrence; R versus Chin <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 671.] One reason for its existence is the undue emphasis that may be placed upon evidence called in reply, having regard to the time when it is adduced: Killick; R versus Cheney <case>; [(1991) 99 ALR 360.] A principal question in all such applications is whether the
Crown ought reasonably to have foreseen that the evidence would be necessary in time to include it in its case in chief.

The decision to permit the Crown to call evidence in reply is essentially a discretionary one to be made in accordance with the principles referred to above.

The rule demands that a Crown Prosecutor be alert for indications that a particular matter may be raised in the defence case and prepare to meet that matter before the end of the Crown case. This may necessitate rulings from the trial judge, and may call for disclosure by defence counsel as to whether it is intended to raise that matter, or disavowal by defence counsel of a matter that may fairly be seen to arise from the conduct of the defence, or from other prior indications before the close of the Crown case. That the defence might raise a particular matter may be foreseeable, not only from the conduct of the trial itself, but from antecedent communications or dealings between the parties. An obvious example is correspondence in which the legal representatives of an accused signal an intention to rely on a defence of diminished responsibility. The signs may, however, be less direct but nevertheless sufficient to put the Crown on notice that such a matter will or might be raised. The Crown Prosecutor may be put on notice by the conduct of committal proceedings that a particular matter of defence may be raised. It may be expected, if it is not clear what course an accused proposes to take, that clarification will be sought by the Crown Prosecutor from defence counsel, with obvious implications where correct information is not forthcoming: Killick, p 571. In each case where a Crown Prosecutor seeks the leave of the Court to call evidence in reply, it will be necessary to examine the conduct of the trial itself, as well as all pre-trial communication, to make an assessment whether, in the relevant circumstances, the Crown ought reasonably to have anticipated the evidence to which it subsequently seeks to reply. If it ought to have done so, the application will be refused. In all such cases, the judge is heavily dependant upon counsel to inform him or her of any relevant circumstances.

A complication may arise in a case, of which the present is an example, where the trial is a retrial. Indication of an intention to raise a matter sufficient to require the Crown to deal with the issue in its case in chief may emerge from the conduct of either trial. The complication is that the conduct of the second trial may suggest that a certain line of defence adopted in the first trial has been abandoned. In such circumstances it may reasonably be expected that a Crown Prosecutor would make enquiries of defence counsel.

The first argument advanced on behalf of the appellant was that, contrary to the argument of the Crown and to one of the assumptions on which the decision was based, there were clear pointers in the cross-examination of the Crown witnesses that the appellant's position was that his plans for the accommodation of Ms Hyunmi included the possibility of the Hornsby home unit.
This included evidence elicited from Mrs Kennedy in cross-examination (of which more detail will emerge when consideration is given to ground 5, below) that, on the evening of Friday 30 October, Ms Hyunmi had arrived at the
Kennedy home distressed and enquiring about the cost of a taxi to Hornsby.
From her cross-examination, it was argued, the Crown should have deduced that the defence case in this respect was that Ms Hyunmi associated the appellant's living arrangements with Hornsby and not with Berowra Heights and that that was where she expected that he would have her accommodated. A careful reading of this cross-examination does not reveal any clue that the defence would seek to answer the Crown case by the suggestion that his proposal was that she would live not at Berowra Heights, but at Hornsby. By far the most significant cross-examination in relation to this question was that of Ms Hyunmi which should here be reproduced.
 "Q. Isn't it the case in fact if you did not know it was because Keith did not make it clear whether he was going to try and find accommodation for you either in a house in Berowra or some accommodation in Hornsby, isn't that the situation? 
A. No, he told me I was moving into his place in Berowra.

Q. I put it to you that he suggested that as one of the possibilities, it was vague, but left open the question of the Hornsby one? 
A. No.

Q. You certainly did not know where the Berowra house was? 
A. No, I didn't know.

Q. But you certainly had been, whether you could find it again or not, to the unit in Hornsby? 
A. I'm sorry? 
Q. You had certainly been to a unit with him in Hornsby? 
A. That's correct.

Q. You had been there on a couple of occasions? 
A. Yes.

Q. Was there any discussion with him that he would have you with him or as a room mate with Mrs Chang (sic)? 
A. No.

Q. Or maybe not told you the name, but a lady who lived - are you sure he did not talk in terms that there might be accommodation at a unit in Hornsby? 
A. No." 
That Ms Hyunmi denied the propositions is, of course, quite immaterial. The question is whether this cross-examination was adequate to signal to the Crown that the appellant would or might suggest that his proposal was to accommodate her in the Hornsby home unit with Ms Chan. His Honour thought not. In his reasons he said: "Cross-examination of Ms Hyunmi had raised the question whether there had been conversation between the accused and her in which, among other things, the suggestion was made that she might go to a home unit (unspecified) at Hornsby or that he might arrange for her to be Miss Chan's room mate (both of which suggestions were denied), but it was never put to her in terms of any firm suggestion that she should live with Miss Chan; nor was any such suggestion put to Miss Chan when she was giving evidence. The Crown sought leave to prove through the evidence of Detective Fry, that at the first trial the accused said nothing about moving Ms Hyunmi into Jenny Chan's flat on 25 November
The fact that nothing had been said on that question at the first trial meant, in my view, that it was not to be expected by the Crown that the accused would make such a claim in this trial; so that the way was, in part at least, open, to allowing the Crown to give that evidence in reply. Had the matter been put with more specificity to Ms Hyunmi or had it been put to Miss
Chan, the Crown would have been clearly alerted to the fact that that was the case the accused was now seeking to make, and would have been required to deal with the matter, if at all, in the Crown case in chief. However, in my view, the matter, not having been put at all to Miss Chan, was put to Ms Hyunmi in such a way as not reasonably to alert the Crown that it was now being put as a positive allegation on the part of the accused, that some such arrangement was in contemplation." 
The view taken by his Honour about the import of the cross-examination was not entirely in accord with that apparently taken by the Crown Prosecutor when he re-examined Ms Hyunmi. The following passage of the transcript is relevant: "Q. Do you remember the other barrister here asking you this at page 1401, `Q.
Was there any discussion with him' - that's Keith - `that he would have you with him or as a room mate with Mrs Chan?' and you said `No.' Do you remember being asked that and giving that answer? 
A. Yes, I remember that.

Q. Do you remember giving evidence at the first trial? 
A. On that part? 
Q. About a number of things? 
A. Yes.

Q. Was it ever suggested to you at the first trial by Mr Herring's barrister that Keith had said to you something to this effect, that he might be able to get you a room with Mrs Chan, something like that? 
A. No." 
This extract, and the last question in particular shows clearly that the Crown
Prosecutor did, at the stage of re-examination, recognise as a distinct possibility that the appellant might take something like the course he did when he came to make his statement and recognise the need to meet that course before the end of the Crown case.

A reading of the cross-examination to which his Honour referred shows that the view taken by the Crown Prosecutor was amply justified. In addition to those questions and answers already quoted, it contains the following, over a number of pages: "Q. You thought, in fact, that the accommodation he was going to find for you at first was, in fact, the Hornsby house, didn't you? 
A. That's correct.
. .

Q. And he told you something, well, maybe we could find some accommodation for you at Hornsby? 
A. No.

Q. He left the matter open - maybe I could find you accommodation in Hornsby, maybe I can see if I could get you into my house, and so on and so forth - he left it pretty vague? 
A. I think when he said - - . .

Q. Throughout that week after the death of Mrs Herring, as we now know until you moved, you didn't really know if you were going to a house in Berowra or to a house in Hornsby? 
A. I understood at that moment I was moving to Berowra.
. .

Q. Of course, the unit that you had first met Mr Herring at was in Hornsby? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Did you have a conversation with Mrs Kennedy on Friday, 1 December 1989, concerning going to Hornsby? 
A. I can't remember that? 
Q. What I put to you is that from 25 November when you found you weren't going to move into the new premises, wherever they were - either Berowra - I'm not suggesting Berowra was not suggested to you as well as a possibility, but
Hornsby was another one - but I am suggesting to you that after you had heard this news on 25 November, for the following week you were in a very upset state? 
A. That's correct . .

Q. What I'm suggesting to you is that Keith Herring had left it open to you and he had suggested that you might be moving into the Berowra house or somewhere, or maybe Hornsby - it was up in the air - it wasn't really defined where you would be moving into. At all stages he talked about accommodation that he would afford you? 
A. I understood I was going to move to Berowra.
. . " 
There was, therefore, in our view, material that could have put the Crown
Prosecutor on notice that the possibility of putting Ms Hyunmi up at Ms Chan's
Hornsby unit might be part of the appellant's answer to the Crown case on motive and therefore was a question which should have been dealt with, if at all, in the case in chief. Whether that material was sufficient to alert the
Crown to such a degree that it ought call its evidence in rebuttal of the proposition during its case in chief or lose its opportunity to do so is a matter of judgment on which opinions will differ.

We consider that what emerged in the second trial was sufficient to disentitle the Crown to a case in reply. In reaching this conclusion, we are particularly influenced by the clear indication given by the Crown in the last question contained in the extract of re-examination of Ms Hyunmi quoted above. There can have been no point to this question other than to rebut the suggestion, which the Crown Prosecutor clearly saw, that the appellant would adopt the line of defence that he ultimately did.

However, there is more. It seems plain that there was also such material in the first trial, the transcript of which was not in evidence in the appeal, but extracts of which were quoted in the written submissions of both the appellant and the Crown, without objection by either as to accuracy or as to the use which may be made of them. They include the following.

In the cross-examination of Ms Hyunmi: "Q. I suggest that Mr Herring said something like `Well, if you move out, you could move to Hornsby'? 
A. We already talk about moving out and move into his place.

Q. I put it to you that he suggested Hornsby to you? 
A. No.

Q. Never suggested Hornsby? 
A. No.

Q. Are you sure about that? 
A. Yes.

Q. I suggest to you that you are mistaken about that? 
A I am sorry? 
Q. You have made a mistake? 
A. What mistake?" and in the cross-examination of Ms Chan: "Q. At one stage you said to Keith `I want to get someone in to share my unit with me' 
A. No.

Q. And you asked Keith to put an ad on the notice board in the shopping centre? 
A. No.

Q. Did you ever say to Keith `I want somebody to help me in the house'? 
A. No.

Q. I put it to you that you are mistaken when you say that you did not ask him about someone moving in with you? 
A. No. I didn't need someone to live with me. I always by myself because I'd be so working - I no time to do the cleaning - I just want to be by myself." 
Such suggestion as did appear from the cross-examination of the Crown witnesses in the first trial was not in that trial taken up by the appellant in his unsworn statement. There he concentrated on his assertion that he had made enquiries of the availability of accommodation at local motels and asserted positively that she was going to stay in "that bloody hotel".

Counsel for the appellant also relied upon a passage of the appellant's evidence in chief at the first trial (in that trial the appellant both gave evidence and made an unsworn statement) as supporting the proposition that the issue had then been raised. In this passage the appellant said that he had suggested to Ms Hyunmi that he owned or had an interest in another property and that he had made this suggestion when he was thinking about giving Jenny
Chan money for the unit. He noted that he had taken Ms Hyunmi to the property at Hornsby on two or possibly three occasions.

It is true that, in this material, there is some hint of an intention to attempt to rebut the Crown case on motive by showing that accommodating Ms
Hyunmi at Berowra Heights was not the only alternative being considered by the appellant, but, alone, it is not strong. The issue became far more focussed in the second trial. When the two are put together there was, in our view, enough to warrant the conclusion that the Crown should have foreseen the possibility of the issue arising (and in fact did so) and should therefore have taken steps to meet it before the end of the Crown case. That may have entailed a direct enquiry of counsel for the appellant. If counsel had confirmed that the appellant did propose to say something to this effect in his statement, or that counsel proposed to address the jury on that possibility, the Crown
Prosecutor would have been in a position to call Detective Fry in its case in chief to give the evidence he later gave in reply denying that the appellant had said anything about the subject at the first trial. That, in turn, would have enabled the appellant to meet that suggestion by showing that, even if he had said nothing directly in his statement or his sworn evidence at the first trial, the issue had not come entirely out of the blue in the second trial.

Another argument was raised on behalf of the appellant. That was based upon what was asserted to be a principle of law that a Crown case in reply would not ordinarily be permitted on a matter which is not directly related to the issues in the case other than the credit of the accused and that both of these matters went solely to the appellant's credit. Counsel relied upon the decisions of the Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal in Brown versus R <case>; [[1980] Tas R 61] and of the Queensland Court of Criminal Appeal in R v
Korwin-Drazynski [[1963] Qd R 362.] Whether the proposition on which counsel relied is a correct statement of the law need not immediately be considered. The first question is whether the issue on which evidence in reply was permitted was indeed an issue relevant only to the appellant's credit. It is the same question in relation to both matters the subject of the present ground of appeal.

At first blush, it might appear that evidence from which an inference may be drawn that what the appellant said in his statement was a recent fabrication or a lie, is evidence relating only to credit. On closer inspection, however, we think this is wrong. The Crown's evidence in reply was that the appellant had not, in the first trial, mentioned either his plans to accommodate Ms
Hyunmi at Hornsby, or the burial of his wife with jewellery. The inference the
Crown sought to have the jury draw from this evidence was that each of those was something he had invented since the first trial, that the appellant could not, therefore, be believed on those issues, and that the fact that he had invented these asserted facts pointed to a consciousness in his own mind that he was guilty of the murder of his wife. In truth, the evidence concerning accommodation went, perhaps indirectly, to the important question of motive.
It was intricately tied up in the case the Crown sought to make and which the appellant sought to rebut that, by reason of the commitment he had made to accommodate Ms Hyunmi at Berowra Heights, he had a motive and a need to have his wife removed. A similar analysis applies to the evidence about the ring.
The evidence in each case, therefore, while relevant to the appellant's credibility, was not solely relevant to that question but was tied up with the very important issue of motive. It is therefore unnecessary to decide whether a more stringent test is applied to evidence sought to be called in reply where that evidence goes only to credit. We are satisfied that the evidence adduced in reply went not only to the appellant's credit but also to an issue in the trial.

As to the evidence about the burial of Mrs Herring with jewellery, the evidence of the first trial discovered by counsel after Detective Fry had given his evidence in reply demonstrates beyond question that neither
Detective Fry's evidence nor Ms Slack's evidence in reply should have been permitted. The issue which the Crown sought to meet had been clearly signalled during the course of the first trial and should have been met by the Crown, if it were to be met, in its case in chief. However, in our opinion Detective
Fry's evidence on the subject could not, in the end, have done any real damage to the appellant. It was corrected at the first available opportunity, (on the first sitting day after it was given) and his Honour reminded the jury of it by reading the correction in full to them at a relatively early stage in the summing up. At the same point in the summing up his Honour reminded the jury of the evidence given by Ms Slack. This evidence had potential to be far more significantly damaging to the appellant's position than that of Detective Fry after its correction. The question is whether Ms Slack's evidence, which would have been admissible in chief, gave rise to any miscarriage of justice by reason of it having been given at the time in the trial at which it was given.
Her evidence was treated in the summing-up as just another piece of evidence in the Crown case.

The undue prominence that evidence in reply can acquire has been a significant reason for the strength of the rule against such evidence in criminal cases other than in exceptional circumstances. The point was made perhaps most clearly in the joint judgment of Gibbs CJ, Murphy and Akin JJ in Killick at p 569, where their Honour's referred to the "inflated importance" that a piece of evidence given at that late stage may assume and the significance of the fact that the last piece of evidence which is given is evidence given in contradiction of the defence case.

That being an important part of the rationale for the rule, it is, in our view, appropriate to consider whether, in this case, the evidence given by Ms
Slack could have assumed that "inflated importance". This was a trial which ran for fifty-three days. The Crown Prosecutor's address spanned three days and is recorded in one hundred and forty-three pages of transcript. The defence address took place over four days but was punctuated by debate in the absence of the jury. The summing-up took place over five days and was similarly punctuated by argument in the absence of the jury. In these circumstances, it is less likely that Ms Slack's evidence would have assumed greater importance than it warranted, or greater importance than it would have been given by the jury had it been called during the Crown case in chief, when it should have been called.

Despite the irregularity of the evidence called in reply in relation to the burial of jewellery, we are satisfied that it occasioned no miscarriage of justice.

We have reached the same view in relation to the evidence concerning the appellant's proposal for Ms Hyunmi's accommodation. That the appellant did not raise that (at least with equal clarity) in the first trial was in our view evidence that could and (again in our view) should have been given in the
Crown case in chief. The case in reply should not, therefore, have been permitted. But any potential prejudice must have been thoroughly subsumed in the enormous amount of material the jury had to consider and in the lengthy and comprehensive addresses and summing-up. There was no appreciable risk that that piece of evidence could have assumed undue importance by reason of the timing of its being given. It must be carefully born in mind that it is not the content of the evidence that is here in issue, but its timing. We are satisfied that no miscarriage of justice was occasioned by the reception of either piece of evidence or by the time and the circumstances in which each was given.

It follows that Ground 10 fails.

Ground 1 
That logically leads back to Ground 1, which is concerned with the judge's refusal to grant a longer adjournment to enable Dr Gumbert fully to familiarise himself with what must, on any view, have been a complex and voluminous brief.

Counsel for the appellant pointed out relevant circumstances that may well have persuaded the judge that more time was reasonable and necessary if the appellant were to be adequately represented. The trial was estimated to occupy thirteen weeks of hearing time. Fifty-four witnesses were called by the Crown and the evidence of another two from the previous trial was read. It was a retrial following an earlier trial which had taken more than ten weeks. The charge was the most serious the appellant could face. We have already referred to the considerations that moved his Honour to rule as he did. Those considerations included not only a concern about the appellant's continued custodial status whilst unconvicted but also questions of the efficient use of the court's time, the possible disruption of listing arrangements in other cases, and inconvenience to, and unavailability of, Crown witnesses.

The decision to refuse the application for a lengthier adjournment was a discretionary one and may only be disturbed on the well known principles relating to discretionary decisions: House versus R <case>; [(1996) 55 CLR 499.] The principles are so well known as not to require re- statement. On behalf of the appellant it was argued that his Honour gave undue weight to the factors that related to the efficient use of his and the court's time and the convenience of the court and witnesses, and wrongly allowed those considerations to outweigh questions of fairness and justice to the appellant.
He referred to the judgment of the High Court in The State of Queensland v
J L Holdings Pty Limited <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 146] in which the High Court reminded first instance judges that considerations of efficiency and court management give way to the attainment of justice between the parties. That was a civil case; the principles stated clearly have added impact where the litigation in question is criminal.

At the time Badgery-Parker J made the decision he did there were good reasons why he may have taken a more benign course and allowed counsel more time to prepare himself for what was set to be a long and difficult trial. There was a great deal of material in the witnesses' statements and in the transcript of the first trial and there were voluminous exhibits. It was necessary for counsel to become familiar with all of this in a very short time. To require counsel to master all that material in whatever time he had after receiving the brief on the Friday, over the week-end and during the remnants of the
Monday after the (relatively short) appearance of that day had potential to be productive of injustice. However, given that the trial proceeded to its conclusion, this Court is not concerned with potentialities but with actualities. In saying this, we have not overlooked an affidavit sworn by the appellant on 26 February 1998, in which he expressed his own perceptions of the disadvantage he suffered as a result of the change of counsel or the pressure with which Dr Gumbert was operating. Those concerns are natural and, in the circumstances, unsurprising. But the weight that can be attributed to them is very limited indeed. The merits of this ground are to be evaluated not on the basis of what, hypothetically, might have resulted from the decision, but in the light of what did in fact happen and not on the basis of the appellant's understandable but highly subjective perception, but from a proper evaluation of what the transcript discloses.

What lies at the heart of this question can be stated simply. It is whether, by reason of the refusal of the trial judge to grant the adjournment sought, the appellant was deprived of a fair trial: R versus Dietrich <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 292]; R versus Sandford [(1994) 33 NSWLR 172.] 
Certainly, on the face of it, counsel was placed in an unenviable position. He was undoubtedly labouring under a significant handicap. There were some clear indications that this was so. On the day that he first appeared he told his
Honour that he had worked as much as he could on both days of the weekend but that he felt that the appellant was at a disadvantage because he did not have a full appreciation of the case. He said he had had to rely on the transcript of the Crown Prosecutor's opening to give him a general understanding of what the case was about. His Honour accepted that he genuinely held the views then expressed.

In an effort to demonstrate that the appellant had been deprived, counsel pointed to various events and incidents from the trial itself indicative, they argued, of unfairness brought about by the need for counsel effectively to prepare the case on the run. For example, on Wednesday 9 August Dr Gumbert complained that although the very large brief was generally held in a room made available to him in the court complex, that room was not open to him at weekends. On the same day he asked that the court not sit on the following day, Thursday, or alternatively that it take the evidence of only one witness, to enable him to catch up. Both requests were refused. He again stated that he considered the circumstances constituted a hardship to his client and said that there was a great deal of evidence that he did not know but which he thought he should be cross-examining about. He complained that he was inappropriately forced to rely upon the Crown Prosecutor to alert him to features of the evidence that were significant for the defence case. In this respect he relied upon the observations of Deane J in Dietrich as follows: "While the prosecution has a duty to act fairly and a part of the function of the presiding judge is to seek to ensure that a criminal trial is fair, neither prosecutor nor judge can or should provide the advice, guidance, and representation which an accused must ordinarily have if his case is to be properly presented. Thus, it is no part of the function of a prosecutor or trial judge to advise an accused before the commencement of a trial about the legal issues which might arise on the trial, ... nor is it consistent with the function of prosecutor or trial judge to conduct, or advise on the conduct of, the case for the defence at the trial." (pp 334-335).

These remarks were made in the context of an unrepresented accused facing a trial but they are equally apposite to the present circumstances.

That counsel was forced into the position of relying upon assistance from the
Crown Prosecutor is evidenced by another discussion on 9 August when an issue arose about the admissibility of certain evidence. His Honour, concerned about the large periods of time the jury was spending out of court while questions of admissibility were debated, invited both counsel to nominate a day to be devoted to the resolution of matters of that kind in preference to dealing with them piecemeal as they arose during the course of the trial; he noted that, in the circumstances, defence counsel might need some assistance from the Crown to identify matters requiring a ruling.

On 8 August, in the examination in chief of a witness called McCreath an issue arose as to the relevance of a particular piece of evidence. During the discussion that took place in the absence of the jury the Crown Prosecutor made the following remark: "I don't know whether my friend, and I say this with respect, appreciates at this stage whether or not that is part of his case. Frankly, I thought it was or it would have been and I am trying to explain the evidence that has been given ... it is not of significance in the Crown case but in the overall picture we should be allowed to lead it." 
Counsel for the appellant replied that he was disadvantaged, that he had some idea of the evidence, but did not know how far it was to be taken.

The issue in respect of which that comment was made by the Crown never assumed any importance in the case. The point made in the appeal is not that the fact that trial counsel lacked a familiarity with that material at that point caused any specific injustice, but that the remark made by the Crown
Prosecutor is itself indicative of the situation in which Dr Gumbert found himself.

On another occasion, also on 9 August, a witness was asked if she knew another person who was also expected to be called as a witness. Although the question was innocuous, counsel objected, on the ground that he was not aware of the evidence the second witness would give. The court adjourned for a short time to enable counsel to familiarise himself with the evidence of the second witness as given in the previous trial.

The following day, 10 August, Ms Chan was under cross-examination. Counsel sought and was allowed a few minutes to confer with the appellant. The trial judge specifically said that he was to be allowed that time because of the recency of his involvement in the trial. However, in order to see this remark in its proper context, it is also apposite to have regard to what counsel said next. He told the judge that the problem that caused him to seek the adjournment would not have been cured if he had been in the case for three months or four or five days. There then followed a discussion from which it emerges with relative clarity that the reason counsel needed to confer with his client was not related to any lack of any preparation on his part or lack of familiarity with the papers, but to instructions concerning the content of the cross-examination which the appellant was then giving him and which he declined to accept. In fact, after that interlude counsel announced that his cross-examination was complete and asked no further questions.

On Thursday, 24 August, the nineteenth day of the trial, there was a discussion about the sitting arrangements for the following day during the course of which counsel expressed the view that any additional time he could be given would be very helpful to him. However, he made no particular complaint about any specific matter on which he found himself in difficulty.

On Friday, 8 September, the twenty-ninth day, counsel sought to recall for further cross-examination a witness who had earlier given evidence but to whom he had not put some questions which a greater familiarity with the transcript of the first trial would have alerted him should have been put.

On Monday, 18 September, the thirty-fourth day, as the Crown case neared completion, counsel applied for an adjournment of three clear days in order to prepare himself to present the defence case. He then said he had not had sufficient time to read the transcript or make other preparation and had not been able to deal with what he described as the incredibly complex matters necessary for the preparation of his case. He also stated that he anticipated making a similar request for a similar length of time at the conclusion of the defence case to enable him properly to prepare his final address. His Honour deferring ruling on this application until the close of the Crown case at which time counsel withdrew the application.

Counsel for the appellant referred to legal argument which occurred during the cross-examination of Ms Chan. It is sufficient to say that there is nothing in that argument that persuades this Court that it illustrates any difficulty Dr
Gumbert had as a consequence of inadequate time to prepare for the trial.

Although the transcript, and the incidents to which we have referred, demonstrate that counsel remained conscious of the deficiencies of his initial preparation and brought these to the attention of the judge when the opportunity presented itself, there is nothing in all that has been recounted to date that demonstrates any cause for concern that counsel was not able adequately to represent the appellant.

The final matters to which reference was made were the matters which provided the substance for Ground 10 - the assertion made by the Crown Prosecutor that neither the subject of Ms Hyunmi's future accommodation or the burial of Mrs
Herring with jewellery, had been raised by the appellant during the course of the first trial, with the result that the Crown was permitted to call evidence in reply. The argument was that, had counsel had an adequate opportunity to master all of the material from the first trial, the errors which have been identified would not have occurred and counsel could, as was his duty, have drawn to the judge's attention the cross-examination and the evidence from the first trial that contradicted the assertion made by the Crown Prosecutor and would, in all probability, have led to a different ruling on the admission of the evidence in reply.

This would be a telling point if the fact that evidence in reply was called had been productive of any injustice. However, the conclusion we have reached in relation to Ground 10 has the inevitable consequence that these matters cannot strengthen the appellant's case in relation to Ground 1. Neither independently, nor as support for Ground 1, can the circumstances in which a
Crown case in reply was permitted be shown to have given rise to any miscarriage of justice.

In support of various grounds of appeal argued in this Court, counsel for the appellant provided written submissions which ran to 191 pages. The specific arguments advanced in support of Ground 1 cover more than 11 pages. It is quite apparent that counsel have carefully combed through the transcript and have brought to light every possible indication of disadvantage, however faint, that was occasioned to the appellant as a consequence of the short time his counsel was given to master the complex and lengthy brief. Notwithstanding the effort that has plainly been put into this exercise, whether this ground is viewed in isolation from, or in conjunction with, Ground 10, we remain unpersuaded that the appellant suffered any real prejudice. Indeed, when the trial judge came to sentence the appellant he commended counsel for the skill with which he had cross-examined the major witnesses and the diligence with which he applied himself to the mastery of the brief. He specifically observed that counsel "was able to represent the accused very effectively and competently indeed".

Ground 1 fails.

Grounds 2 and 3 were abandoned.

Ground 4: That his Honour erred in admitting Exhibits AN, CO, and BV and the evidence of Mr Randerson as to the circumstances in which the appellant came to hand over these documents.

These documents were admitted over the objection of counsel for the appellant.

Exhibit AN was a certificate as to the appellant's decree absolute following divorce proceedings between the appellant and his first wife, Elizabeth Anne
Herring. Exhibit CO was a photocopy of Exhibit AN edited so as to omit names and details recorded on Exhibit AN. Exhibit BV was a forged photocopy of
Exhibit AN and this showed the petitioner as the deceased second wife,
Julietta Herring. It also showed 1985 as being the year of the making of that decree absolute.

The insurance investigator, Mr Randerson, said that when he attended the appellant's home on 31 January 1990 the appellant gave to him a copy of the post mortem report but there was handed over with that report Exhibit BV. It appeared to be "stuck" to the back of the post mortem report and in handing over the documents the appellant made no comment about the forged document. In cross-examination the investigator said that it was his impression that it was handed over accidentally.

The appellant did not dispute having forged the document but he gave an explanation for it which was in conflict with the significance suggested by the prosecution. According to the appellant in his unsworn statement, the document was created to help him to obtain housekeeping assistance. He told the jury that he changed the document to enable him to say to a potential housekeeper that the person who died in his house was not his wife. The appellant claimed that he deliberately gave a copy to Mr Randerson (T 2294).

The Crown submitted that the forged document was relevant evidence in that it afforded evidence as to the length to which the appellant was prepared to go to maintain a relationship with Ms Hyunmi. Before Mrs Herring died the appellant was maintaining to Ms Hyunmi that he was not married but when Ms
Hyunmi met with Mrs Herring's sister and brother-in-law on 3 December 1989, she was told by them that the appellant's wife had died in the pool. When confronted by Ms Hyunmi, the appellant said that the person who drowned was his ex-wife. Shortly thereafter, on 8 December 1989, Ms Hyunmi returned to
Korea after travel arrangements made on 4 December 1989.

It was an important feature of the Crown case to establish that the appellant's feelings for Ms Hyunmi were more than casual and the creation of
Exhibit BV, it was submitted, showed the length to which the appellant was prepared to go to persuade Ms Hyunmi that he was not married. The trial judge had earlier ruled the forged document inadmissible but he permitted its tender after Ms Hyunmi gave evidence that the appellant told her he had "a divorce paper" and that he would send it to her in Korea if she wanted to see it.

Mr Bellanto has submitted the forged document and the other two documents were irrelevant and therefore inadmissible. That submission is rejected.

In hearing argument on the tender of the document, his Honour said (at p 1330) that it was "one thing to tell somebody you are divorced to foster a relationship; it is a much more powerful thing to forge a document to confirm it." His Honour admitted the document as evidence that tended to prove that the appellant was "continuing to maintain his longstanding deception of Ms
Hyunmi." In our opinion the trial judge was correct.

Exhibits AN and CO were not relevant in themselves but they were relevant as affording evidence as to how Exhibit BV came into existence. That document, in our opinion, had relevance and probative value in the respects advanced by the prosecution. Once Exhibit BV was admissible, so too was the evidence Mr
Randerson gave about it, to prove how it came into his possession.

The alternative submission was that the documents ought to have been excluded by the trial judge in the exercise of his discretion having regard to their prejudicial effect.

The probative value of the forged document was significant in the fabric of the circumstantial case which the prosecution was advancing. Whilst it is put that the tender of the evidence alerted the jury to the fact that the appellant had forged the document and it was thus prejudicial, there was much other evidence to the effect that the appellant was deceiving Ms Hyunmi about his marriage. There was also evidence that the appellant deceived his wife and the immigration authorities so that the prejudicial effect of the tender is to be assessed against this background. The discretion of the trial judge did not miscarry in admitting Exhibit BV into evidence.

This ground has not been established.

Ground 5: His Honour erred in inviting the jury to speculate that the "taxi incident" might have happened at a time earlier than indicated by the evidence. 
This issue was also concerned with the Crown case that the appellant had arranged for Ms Hyunmi to live with him at Berowra Heights from 25 November and, accordingly, needed to have his wife out of the way by that date. There was a conflict in the evidence concerning events of Friday 1 December, six days after Mrs Herring's death and the day before Ms Hyunmi ultimately moved into the appellant's home. Mrs Kennedy gave evidence that, on that evening, Ms
Hyunmi arrived home from work in a distressed state and enquired about the cost of a taxi fare to Hornsby. She then travelled to Hornsby by taxi but did not take her possessions with her. Ms Hyunmi gave evidence that, on that evening, she had dinner with the appellant who picked her up, presumably from the Kennedy home at Haberfield, and later drove her home to the same address.
Both versions could not be correct. Mrs Kennedy's evidence on this subject was elicited in cross-examination and was drawn from a statement she had earlier made to police. It was important to the defence case because of the inferences the defence sought to have the jury draw from it. Those inferences were that, by as late as Friday 1 December, Ms Hyunmi was distressed because she did not know where she would be living, tending to negate the Crown case that firm arrangements had been made; and that she enquired about travelling to Hornsby, not Berowra, because Berowra was not a place she associated with the appellant to which she would, or could, flee, tending to negate the Crown proposition that she understood that Berowra was where she was going to live. Accordingly,
Mrs Kennedy's evidence lent support to the appellant's case that he had not made any commitment to accommodate Ms Hyunmi at Berowra and thereby undermined the Crown case on motive. Moreover, if the jury accepted Mrs Kennedy's version in preference to that of Ms Hyunmi, Ms Hyunmi's credibility, which was very much in issue, would or might have been damaged. This was extremely significant to the defence.

The judge directed the jury in the following terms: "It may be perhaps, you might think, that the taxi incident did happen but did happen at some earlier time. Perhaps that the journey which she made by taxi, if she made one, had nothing to do with where she was going to live, but was a journey undertaken in order to meet the accused and his son to go out to dinner, and she is in error in saying the accused picked her up. There may be some other explanation of it, but there is none that occurs to me if both witnesses are telling the truth, and it is a matter for you to resolve the issue." 
Counsel for the appellant argued that the direction should not have been given because it had no factual foundation in the evidence and amounted to an invitation to the jury to reach a conclusion on a matter of fact which was at no stage part of the evidence, nor of the submissions for the Crown or the defence.

This argument cannot be sustained. The direction was a perfectly proper one in the circumstances. No point in this regard was raised at the trial and this is not an appropriate case for leave to be given now to raise the argument.
Accordingly leave is refused.

Ground 6: His Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that they could not convict the appellant unless they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt he was at the Berowra Heights premises at the time of drowning. 
The trial judge did not give the direction, the absence of which is complained of in this ground, but he was not asked to do so. Indeed, at T2537 there is recorded something of the discussion with counsel prior to the commencement of the addresses. In the course of that discussion, the following is recorded: "His Honour asked Dr Gumbert whether it came to this: that there is no fact which he asks him to direct the jury which is a fact which must be established beyond reasonable doubt before they can convict him. Dr Gumbert said that was correct." 
However, before this Court it has been submitted that the necessity to establish the appellant's presence at his home at the time of the drowning was an indispensable intermediate fact calling for a suitable direction. Reference was made to Shepherd versus The Queen <case>; [[1990] 170 CLR 573.] 
We are not attracted to this submission. We consider the Crown's submissions to the contrary to be correct.

Early in the summing-up (T29) the jury was instructed that one of the elements that the Crown had to prove was that it was an act of the appellant that caused the death of the deceased. That direction was followed (T30) by the jury being directed: "The principal issue in the trial is whether the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt that it was an act of the accused which caused her death." 
The jury was given a similar direction shortly afterwards (T37): "The fact that the Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt is that it was an act of the accused which caused her death." 
The jury was carefully directed that the Crown was relying in this case upon circumstantial evidence and the jury was given appropriate directions as to the nature of such evidence. The summing-up contained an extensive review of the evidence. The jury was reminded (T275) that there was "a very substantial issue as to the times at which various events occurred, and a substantial issue as to the time when [the appellant] arrived home and, of course, as to what then took place." 
The jury was further reminded (T275) of "the very important question of what time [the appellant] in fact left the house".

His Honour then, at T376-380, summarised the principal directions of law which had been given before reminding the jury of the topics to which the evidence was directed. The topics included: "Sixthly, the time of death. Seventhly, the accused's account of his movements on the evening of Friday 24th November. Eighth, his movements in fact as shown by the evidence..." 
That the jury had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was at home when the deceased was drowned must have been plain to the jury, having regard to the nature of the Crown case and to the directions given in the summing-up.

In Shepherd versus The Queen (supra) Dawson J, with whose judgment Toohey and
Gaudron JJ agreed, said at 579: "It will generally be sufficient to tell the jury that the guilt of the accused must be established beyond reasonable doubt and, where it is helpful to do so, to tell them that they must entertain such a doubt where any other inference consistent with innocence is reasonably open on the evidence." 
Earlier his Honour had said in a passage to which the Crown referred in its submissions: "...with most crimes it is a necessary fact that the accused was present when the crime was committed. But it may be possible for a jury to conclude that the accused was guilty as a matter of inference beyond reasonable doubt from evidence of opportunity, capacity and motive without expressly identifying the immediate fact that the accused was present when the crime was committed." 
From the exchange between counsel and the trial judge as recorded, it is apparent that counsel at the trial did not consider it necessary to have the further direction to which this ground of appeal relates. In our opinion there was good reason for that because the further direction here sought simply was not required.

Because the direction was not sought at the trial, Rule 4 applies, and in the circumstances leave to rely upon this ground is refused.

Ground 7: His Honour erred in the manner in which he directed the jury through the course of the trial on the use which they could make of evidence of the deceased's state of mind, knowledge of the appellant's affairs, and the "background" of the relationship.

A considerable amount of evidence was introduced during the trial going to the relationship between the appellant and the deceased and the latter's state of mind.

Before addressing the ground of appeal it is necessary to consider not only the directions given but the evidence to which those directions related.

The first witness to give evidence relevant to this ground was Dr Bingham who was called to the deceased's house on 24 November 1989. Dr Bingham gave evidence, to which no objection was taken, that her professional diagnosis of the deceased on that date was that she was hysterical, and in urgent need of psychiatric care, and that the appellant was the main problem. Dr Bingham told the jury about the deceased's assertions made to her on that date that she believed the appellant was having an affair and that she knew of two jewellery purchases he had made. That evidence was given without objection and after it was given the judge directed the jury as to its evidentiary value. At pp -221 of the transcript his Honour gave this direction: "So you wonder why the evidence was allowed to be given. It is allowed to be given for this reason: the state of Mrs Herring's mind and the state of the relationship between her and her husband are material matters. It would be quite unreal and artificial for the Crown to present to you the events of 24 and 25 November 1989 in a vacuum and separate from anything that has gone before. And the relationship between the accused and his wife is relevant to show the context in which her death occurred. There being a question as to whether her death was accidental or was caused by some act of the accused, you may be assisted in knowing what was the nature of the relationship between them.

The fact that Mrs Herring spoke to the doctor in the terms that she did about that relationship and about her husband provides some material which you may think throws light of the nature of the relationship between them, gives you some indication of how far that relationship had deteriorated perhaps. There may, as the trial goes on, be other evidence that bears on the nature of that relationship and the Crown is, as I say, entitled to place the nature of that relationship before you and to place before you Mrs Herring's view of it as part of the relationship itself.

It is very important however that you clearly understand that that is the only purpose for which the evidence is there..." 
After a submission by counsel for the appellant (then Mr Greenwood), the judge added: "I did say to you members of the jury that the evidence was relevant as to her state of mind in terms of the relationship and it is in relation to the relationship that the Crown relies upon it. But I would, of course, remind you that you may ultimately take it into account also, as Mr Greenwood has reminded me, as evidence of the deceased's state of mind directed particularly
I imagine to the question whether you might ultimately believe there is a reasonable possibility that her death was suicide." 
Mr Greenwood sought no other direction. Later the trial judge gave the jury a further direction about the significance of Dr Bingham's evidence at p 292: "I should remind you of the directions I gave you about that. What Mrs Herring said to Dr Bingham about the accused's behaviour is not evidence that the accused in fact behaved in the way that she said, but the fact that she said it and was so distressed about it is part of the body of evidence that the
Crown may lead to show the state of the relationship between the accused and his wife by way of putting it in context in which you are able to view the evidence about the circumstances of her death. You may not however reason directly from the fact if you find it so that the relationship was bad to a conclusion that he killed her. Reasoning like that would be invalid and it is forbidden [sic]. Nor if the evidence leads you to think less of the accused, you must not allow it to prejudice you against him." 
Mrs Grindon Ekins, who was a nursing sister at the nursing home where the deceased worked prior to her death, gave evidence that the deceased had said to her "I am going to get a divorce", that she was going to see a solicitor, and that she had been through the appellant's papers. Counsel had objected to that evidence being given but having allowed the evidence the trial judge gave the following direction (at 375): "Members of the jury, in relation to the evidence that was given by Dr
Bingham, I explained to you that where a witness gives evidence of something that Julietta Herring said to that witness about the behaviour of the accused, that does not stand as evidence that the accused in fact behaved himself in that fashion. That same comment applies to some of what you have heard from the last witness.

The evidence of things that Julietta Herring said, for example here about her belief that her husband was having an affair and in fact she was investigating as it were his activities and had formed the intention to apply for a divorce, is given because it is able to tell you something about the two people.

At some stage you may need to consider whether this was a happy marriage unlikely to end up in a murder, or at least a normal marriage with the normal ups and down of marriage and unlikely to end in that way, or whether on the other hand it was a marriage that had gone seriously wrong. You may find that you are assisted in that by knowing what the deceased was saying and doing, not because of what she said to her friends or others is evidence of the truth of what she said, but because you may find some significance in the very fact that she was prepared to discuss her relationship and say things like that about it..." 
It was submitted that the above direction was erroneous but no application was made by counsel to the trial judge to withdraw or vary that instruction.

The next witness in point was Edith Terlich, the sister of the deceased. Mrs
Terlich gave evidence about two telephone conversations which she had had with the deceased in the two weeks immediately before her death. She said that the deceased had sounded distressed, that she said she was having problems with the appellant and that he was not coming home until 4.00 am and that she could not take it any more. She said she was taking Valium because she could not sleep. All that evidence was elicited without objection. The witness was asked during cross-examination whether there had been a general lessening of the deceased's apparent happiness in the last year of her life and whether this unhappiness had increased dramatically in the last two or three weeks. She was asked whether the deceased was greatly concerned at the fact that she could not conceive and whether the deceased had reported having lost a stone in weight in the month before her death. She was also asked whether one of the things that was worrying her was that the appellant was seeing other women.
Those questions addressed in cross-examination elicited affirmative answers.

No instruction to the jury followed immediately upon the evidence of Mrs
Terlich.

Rowena Virveste gave evidence, inter alia, that the deceased had told her that she believed her husband was having an affair with another woman and she wanted to find out who it was because she wanted a divorce. Counsel for the appellant indicated before the witness was called that he objected to her giving evidence of those matters although during the course of argument he indicated that he did not object to evidence limited to the deceased's saying that she wanted a divorce. Counsel seems to have regarded that evidence as being properly admissible as affording evidence as to the then state of mind of the deceased.

His Honour gave a ruling as to why he admitted the evidence in point and that is contained in the appeal book after p 786. We do not propose to set out an extensive reference to that ruling but it is plain from what his Honour said that he admitted the evidence for the limited extent that it was "direct evidence or original evidence of the deceased's state of mind." 
Finally Tizziana Calautti gave relationship evidence. This witness had known the deceased for some two or three years and had developed a very close friendship with her by July or August of 1989. Her evidence was that she noticed changes in the deceased and the deceased told her that the appellant had been having an affair with a Taiwanese woman. The deceased showed her photographs of the appellant with another woman. Some three weeks before the death of the deceased, this witness said that she went to her home and was shown dockets for jewellery and for meals which Ms Calautti was asked to photocopy. Then she gave evidence of being present in the deceased's home when the appellant was present. On that occasion she heard the deceased say to the appellant: "How's your lady friend, or should I say your slut?" to which the appellant responded that the deceased should keep her nose out of his business or "I'll kill you." In the last week prior to the death of the deceased, according to Ms Calautti, the deceased discussed going to see a solicitor to file for divorce. All that evidence from Ms Calautti was admitted without objection, although it is submitted that the witness was cross-examined effectively and that Ms Calautti's evidence was "completely undermined during cross-examination." 
In the summing-up directions relevant for present purposes began at p 44 where his Honour invited the jury to consider the relationship between the appellant and the deceased as one of the circumstances on which the prosecution case rested. His Honour instructed the jury that "Evidence was allowed to be given of her [the deceased's] state of mind and of the accused's awareness of it because it casts light on the state of their relationship and the state of their relationship is one of the circumstances that you may take into account..." 
The jury was reminded (SU 46) that the deceased's state of mind, including the extent of her distress, on the appellant's case sufficed "to raise as a very real possibility that she eventually decided to end her own life." 
His Honour then directed the jury at p 47: "You may well be satisfied that at least from Julietta's viewpoint this had become a very unhappy marriage. That she was unhappy, however, would not, of itself, throw any light on the issues in this case other than the suicide issue. If the accused continued to believe that all was in order, despite his infidelity because of the pains he had taken to conceal his activities from his wife, then you would have to conclude that her perception of the marriage as unhappy, unsatisfactory or under strain could have had nothing to do with her death unless by suicide...

If all that you knew was that was she unhappy, that would throw no light on that issue at all. However the Crown case is that the accused was well aware that because of his infidelity the marriage was under strain and his wife was unhappy." 
His Honour then went on to remind the jury of evidence which pointed to the awareness of the appellant (Mrs Robin Cousins SU 47, Mr Roger Terlich SU 49,
Ms Calautti's evidence SU 50 and following).

Counsel appearing for the appellant at the trial took no objection to the manner in which the trial judge directed the jury on the evidence of relationship and its relevance. Plainly such evidence was relevant and the jury was properly instructed in the summing-up as to why and how it assumed relevance.

In Wilson versus The Queen <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 334] Menzies J, with whose judgment McTiernan J and Walsh J agreed, said (at 344): "Any jury called upon to decide whether they were convinced beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant killed his wife would require to know what was the relationship between the deceased and the accused. Were they an ordinary married couple with a good relationship despite differences and disagreements, or was their relationship one of enmity and distrust... To shut the jury off from any event throwing light upon the relationship between his husband and wife would be to require them to decide the issue as if it happened in a vacuum rather than in the setting of a tense and bitter relationship between a man and a woman who are husband and wife." 
When the evidence of Ms Virveste was objected to, the Crown Prosecutor informed the judge that at the first trial the appellant had said "that the marriage was a happy one and that there was no talk of divorce between he and his wife." Plainly the jury was entitled to evidence dealing with the considerations addressed in the passage above cited from Wilson.

It has to be recognised that the relevance of the proof of the relationship between husband and wife did not render admissible evidence which was essentially hearsay evidence. Evidence of a wife's feelings towards her husband is not evidence of the husband's feelings towards the wife. What a wife may say to a third person about her husband or her attitude towards the marriage may not be admissible. Thus the note the daughter of the deceased found in Frawley [(1993) 69 A Crim R 208] was not admissible although relevant because its content was hearsay evidence.
Its content did not afford direct evidence of some fact relevant to a fact in issue.

However this jury was not directed in the passage in the summing-up to which reference has been made to use the relationship evidence in any impermissible way. The jury was told, correctly, that the deceased's state of mind was relevant in itself in considering the possibility that she took her own life.
The jury was told that the deceased's unhappiness of itself was relevant only to the issue of suicide. If, however, the appellant was aware all was not well, then the deceased's unhappiness assumed a broader significance, as recognised in Wilson and Frawley.

The relationship evidence was an issue upon which the trial judge correctly instructed the jury in the summing-up. At the nub of the appellant's submissions on this ground is that in the earlier instructions to the jury during the trial it should have been directed that the deceased's state of mind was relevant only to the possibility of suicide and that evidence only of the deceased's state of mind did not prove the state of the relationship between the appellant and the deceased. That complaint was not made at the trial and [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) applies. We are not disposed to give leave to rely upon this ground and we regard the relevance of the relationship evidence as having been made clear to the jury in the summing-up.

Accordingly this ground fails.

Ground 8: His Honour erred in allowing the Crown to lead evidence that the deceased's phone call to Tizziana Calautti on the night of her death ended abruptly. 
One of the pre-trial rulings made by the judge concerned Ms Tizziana
Calautti's evidence of the telephone call she said Mrs Herring had made to her. The evidence the Crown sought to adduce was that Mrs Herring had rung Ms
Calautti at about 12.35 am on 25 November. The conversation of which Ms
Calautti would, if permitted to do so, have given evidence was very brief indeed. According to Ms Calautti's statement, Mrs Herring said "I can't sleep", and then added some words in such a mumbled fashion that Ms Calautti could not understand them. Mrs Herring then said "Oh shit, my husband's coming" and hung up.

The trial judge ruled that the evidence that the telephone call was made could be given, as it established that Mrs Herring was alive at 12.35 am. He rejected the evidence of the content of the conversation but permitted the
Crown to elicit from Ms Calautti that the call had ended abruptly. One reason he gave for excluding evidence of the content of the conversation was that it was, properly characterised, hearsay evidence in respect of the content of which the speaker, Mrs Herring, may have been mistaken, or which may have been a conclusion or inference based upon an inadequate foundation and which was not able to be tested by cross-examination. Even apart from the strict application of the law of evidence as it then existed, these factors would have demanded the rejection of the evidence on the basis of the well-known discretion to exclude evidence the probative value of which is outweighed by its prejudicial effect.

However, his Honour held that the evidence that the call had ended abruptly was in a different category. There was, he said, no element of hearsay warranting its exclusion and it was a relevant fact to place before the jury; with other material available to the Crown, it would permit the jury to draw an inference that it was about 12.35 am that the appellant arrived home. The time at which the appellant left Haberfield and the time it could be inferred that he arrived at Berowra Heights were matters of considerable importance in the trial.

We are satisfied that his Honour's ruling was correct. The evidence that the call ended abruptly alone would, no more than the evidence of what Mrs Herring had said to Ms Calautti, have warranted an inference that it was the appellant who arrived on the scene at that time. Alone, the most that evidence justified was an inference that somebody arrived at the home and interrupted the call, or even that it was Mrs Herring's assailant who did so. The evidence did not identify the appellant as the person who arrived at the home or as the assailant. However, put together with other evidence, the evidence that the telephone call ended abruptly was capable of giving rise to an inference that the appellant arrived at the house and that it was a little after 12.35 am that he did so.

Extensive submissions were directed to this ground of appeal. The submissions are more appropriate to argument before the jury as to whether or not they should accept Ms Calautti's evidence, either about the phone call itself, or the manner in which it terminated. They do not go to the question of admissibility of that single piece of evidence.

No error has been shown in his Honour's reasoning, or in his decision to admit the evidence. This ground of appeal fails.

Ground 9: His Honour's directions to the jury identifying the appellant's account of his whereabouts on the night of 24 November given in his unsworn statement as potential lies which could be taken into account by the jury as displaying a consciousness of guilt were erroneous 
There were two groups of lies in respect of which the trial judge gave directions to the jury: the first group concerned accounts that the appellant gave to many witnesses about the night of 24 November, involving his being present at the home throughout the evening, being aware that his wife went for a swim and then later going out to discover her body in the pool; the second "lie" was the appellant's account in his unsworn statement as to the time at which he left the Kennedy residence.

No complaint is made on this appeal about group (i). Mr Bellanto conceded that it was open to the jury to regard the false version of these events as reflecting a realisation of guilt of the offence charged and that the directions that the trial judge gave as to the conditions to be satisfied before it could do so were properly explained to the jury in the summing-up, consistently with R versus Lucas [(1981) QB 270]; R versus Heyde <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193.] 
This ground of appeal relates to the appellant's account as to the time at which he left the Kennedy residence. Mr Bellanto has addressed this ground fully in his written submissions but the complaint is really two-fold: that the issue should not have been left to the jury at all; that even if it was proper to leave the issue to the jury, the directions the jury were given were inadequate.

Mr Bellanto submitted that whilst lies must relate to a material issue, lies that involve a determination of the ultimate issue should not be used as evidence of a consciousness of guilt: see R versus Lorenzo (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 22 May 1995) and R versus Perera <case>; [(1982) VR 901.] 
The Court does not accept that this "lie" could properly be categorised as involving a determination of the ultimate issue in the case. It was a "lie", if the jury found it so to be, about the time that the appellant set off on a journey from Haberfield to his home at Berowra Heights. It differs from the sort of lie, for instance which the Court of Criminal Appeal considered the trial judge was correct not to leave to the jury in Lorenzo. In that case, the lie which the trial judge determined should not be used as evidence of guilt was the accused's statement in a letter to the effect that he was not involved in the killing. The significance of the "lie" in the present case, assuming it could be so categorised, was to place the appellant as being away from his home at what on the Crown case was a material time.

Mr Bellanto also submitted that the "lie" should not have been left for the jury's consideration as evidence of a consciousness of guilt, because the independent evidence to prove the "lie" was insufficient. It was submitted that the evidence of the Crown witnesses, if accepted, did not satisfactorily fix the time of departure, and the appellant in his unsworn statement did not commit himself to a precise departure time.

This submission calls for scrutiny of the evidence which was left for the consideration of the jury. It involved in particular the consideration of the evidence of Ms Chung, Ms Hyunmi, Mr Travis and Mrs Kennedy. It also involved consideration of what the appellant said in his unsworn statement. We return to refer to this evidence in closer detail when considering Ground 14. His
Honour reviewed all that evidence and the unsworn statement for the purposes of the directions here complained of, and that review is to be found between pages 249 and 305 of his summing-up. Ms Chung received a telephone call from
Korea and the records of OTC and the evidence of Mr Travis fix that call as having been received by Ms Chung some seconds after 11.19 pm. Ms Chung and Ms
Hyunmi placed the appellant's departure as having occurred before that telephone call was received, and indeed up to half an hour before. The jury was entitled to regard the appellant as asserting in his unsworn statement that he did not leave the Haberfield house until some time after midnight. In context the jury was entitled to find that the appellant's statement to that effect was not only wrong but that it was deliberately false. The evidence relied upon by the prosecution warranted the issue about which Mr Bellanto here makes complaint being put to the jury for its consideration.

We turn to consider the directions which the trial judge gave. Once again counsel at the trial took no point as to the appropriateness of the directions in the summing-up on this issue but Mr Bellanto submitted that in contrast with the directions given for the first group of lies about which no complaint could have been or was taken, his Honour in his directions concerning the "lie" in question said: "You may think it pretty clear that if he did lie about the time he left
Haberfield there could be no explanation for that other than his awareness, if he gave a truthful account of it, that would be inconsistent with his innocence." 
It was submitted that this direction was not only prejudicial but erroneous in that the jury should have been warned that there were other reasons why he may have lied.

It is not considered that his Honour's directions were erroneous. The directions on the whole issue of lies, and this includes the directions as to group (i) and group (ii), have to be considered in their entirety. The directions were very detailed. They began at p 241 of the summing-up and, including a review of the relevant evidence, extended to p 305. His Honour began at pp 241-242 by identifying the two groups of "lies". He then gave these general directions (at 242-243): "The law allows lies told by an accused person to be used against him in this way, that is to say as part of the circumstantial evidence from which an inference of guilt may be drawn, only if the jury are satisfied, and that means in this case you eleven people, are satisfied that the accused did say the things which are said to be lies.

Secondly, as to each statement alleged to be a lie you must be satisfied that it was a statement made by the accused intentionally, it was not accidental or inadvertent, not a slip of the tongue, it was a deliberate considered statement by him.

Thirdly, that lie relates to a material issue in the case. Clearly his whereabouts at the time of his wife's death is a most material issue in this trial. The telling of lies about that matter, if he did tell lies, clearly relates to material issues.

Fourthly, the falsity of any statement made by the accused and said by the
Crown to be a lie must be independently demonstrated. It is not sufficient for you to say, we do not believe him therefore he must have lied. You cannot find that he has lied unless you find there is evidence which you accept which itself establishes the falsity of what he said.

Finally you may not rely upon lies told by the accused as a circumstance adding to those from which an inference of guilt may be drawn unless you are satisfied that the telling of the lie was motivated by a realisation of guilt and a fear that the truth would come out, the fear of what the truth would show if it did come out. That is to say, you would have to be satisfied that the only reasonable explanation for the accused having told lies was an awareness of his guilt and a consequent desire to conceal the truth. It will be obvious to you that people may lie for various reasons. Sometimes, for example, in an attempt to bolster up a cause, perhaps out of shame, perhaps out of a wish to conceal some disgraceful behaviour from other people. There may be many other reasons.

You may not use lies told by the accused as part of the circumstantial evidence from which an inference of guilt can be drawn unless you are satisfied that his motivation for lying was his awareness that to tell the truth would tend to reveal his guilt, because the truth is inconsistent with his innocence." 
Having given those general directions, his Honour then went on to analyse the application of those principles to the matters relied upon by the Crown in the first group of lies.

His Honour then went on to deal with the "lie" about the time that the appellant claimed to have left the house at Haberfield and directed the jury's consideration again to the five tests: "Again let us look at that in terms of the five tests that must be satisfied before the Crown can use a lie as part of the circumstantial case; the jury must be satisfied that the accused did say the things which are lies.

In relation to his time of departure from Haberfield you yourself heard the accused in the course of his long statement to you refer to that matter. I shall a little later read to you the specific passages in which he describes the events of that night and in which you may think it is abundantly clear he is maintaining that he left the premises only after midnight.

Secondly, you must be satisfied that the lie was deliberate, intentional, not accidental. As to his statements in respect of the second lie, if it was a lie, being his statement made to you as part of this trial, you may think there is no doubt whatever that what he said was said deliberately and after very careful consideration.

The materiality of it is the third matter and that is clearly satisfied because his whereabouts is a most material issue. Fourthly, the falsity of what he said must be independently demonstrated and I remind you it is not enough to say, `We do not believe him therefore he must have lied.' You cannot find that he has lied unless you find there is evidence which you accept which itself establishes the falsity of what he said.

In relation to that matter you will need to consider very carefully the evidence of Miss Chung and Ms Hyunmi and in connection with that the evidence of Mr Travis from OTC and you will need to consider also what was said on that subject by Mr and Mrs Kennedy.

Whether or not you are persuaded that the accused lied about his time of departure from that house will obviously depend upon the view that you take as to whether the evidence of those witnesses is credible and reliable. The accused's case is that although he had earlier lied about the general subject matter of his whereabouts and about the circumstances in which his wife entered the pool, he has not lied to you about the time he left Haberfield.

Finally, you must consider, in relation to this second matter also, if you find it to be a lie, what the motivation for it was. The accused has not attempted to explain it because the accused's stance is that what he has told you in this trial is truthful and not a lie. You may think it pretty clear that if he did lie about the time that he left Haberfield there could be no explanation for that other than his awareness, if he gave a truthful account of it, that would be inconsistent with his innocence." 
Those directions were followed by the lengthy analysis of evidence to which reference has already been made. In the course of that analysis his Honour reminded the jury again (at p 273) that it could "in no case use a lie against him as part of the circumstantial evidence unless you are satisfied that the only reasonable explanation for his having lied was an awareness of his guilt and a consequent desire to conceal the truth." 
His Honour then again reminded the jury that people may lie for various reasons.

His Honour told the jury (at pp 274-275) of the need for the Crown to establish by independent evidence the falsity of what the accused said: "It is, however, also this evidence on which the Crown relies to satisfy you that the accused lied in his statement to you in the course of this trial as to the time at which he had left Haberfield. I remind you that you may not use the lies as part of the circumstantial case unless the falsity of what the accused said is independently demonstrated..." 
The further review of evidence which followed was accompanied by reminders to the jury of counsel's submissions.

Viewing the directions given by the trial judge in their entirety, they were careful and comprehensive. They were also, in our opinion, correct.

We would add that counsel at the trial did not submit that the issue of the second "lie" ought not to have been put to the jury, nor did he complain about the directions given to the jury. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) applies and the Court refuses leave to rely upon Ground 9.

Ground 10 we have already considered. Grounds 11 and 12 were abandoned, so we turn to Ground 13.

Ground 13: The trial miscarried in that in all the circumstances undue pressure was placed upon the appellant not to give sworn evidence 
The submission made by the appellant is that security measures taken by the trial judge were excessive and likely to prejudice the jury's perception of the appellant. In particular it was submitted that the appellant was dissuaded from giving sworn evidence because of his apprehension of the effect those measures would have upon the jury should he opt to give sworn evidence.

It is necessary to heed what occurred both at the appellant's earlier trial and during the course of the subject trial.

The first trial took place in the former Banco Court in St James Road. During the course of that trial the appellant became very agitated, leapt from the dock and approached the bench, seemingly intent upon attacking the presiding judge. He was intercepted and eventually restrained.

Early in the second trial, on 1 August 1995, it was drawn to the attention of the presiding judge that on the evening before, because of transport problems, the appellant did not return to his place of confinement until about 9.00 pm.
It seems that the appellant was angry about that and became very agitated and he informed an officer that if that was to happen again he intended to leap out of the dock and assault the Crown Prosecutor. In an affidavit read to this
Court the appellant denied having threatened the Crown Prosecutor, but of course the trial judge had not been told that any threat had been made directly to the prosecutor but rather to an officer through whom information was relayed to the trial judge.

Having been informed of the threat, the trial judge decided that security would best be met by transferring from No. 5 to No. 1 court, the latter court affording a better physical layout from a security viewpoint as it could allow for the more effective placement of security officers. His Honour explained what prompted the movement of the trial in the absence of the jury in remarks which are recorded at pp 259-260 of the transcript.

As the Crown case was moving towards conclusion, the trial judge raised the question of the place from which the appellant would give evidence should he choose to do so. The judge, in the absence of the jury, stated his belief that there would be a major problem if the appellant went into the witness box and that he would not permit that course unless there was a security officer placed between the appellant and the jury and a security officer between the appellant and the court reporters and a further security officer on the bench.
Because the judge was concerned, presumably, with the effect the placement of those officers might have upon the jury, he stated that he regarded the preferable course to be for the appellant to give evidence from the dock if he elected to give sworn evidence. Counsel for the appellant indicated he would seek instructions as to what the appellant wanted to do, but it is recorded (at T 2087) that counsel felt it would be the accused's request that he remain in the dock because all his paperwork was there. In the affidavit sworn by the appellant for the purposes of this appeal, he has deposed that he did not give instructions to any legal representative that if he gave evidence he would prefer to do so from the dock and that indeed he was against giving evidence in that way because of his perception that his case would be prejudiced by his doing so.

In any event after the trial judge had raised the question at the end of proceedings on 18 September 1995 as to where the appellant might give sworn evidence if that was his choice, it would seem from the transcript that the matter was next raised towards the end of proceedings on the following day.
Then the trial judge informed counsel in the absence of the jury that if the appellant did give evidence he would have to give it from the dock and not from the witness box. The judge stated that if the appellant gave evidence from the dock the jury would not see anything untoward in that and by giving it there the necessity for having the appellant closely surrounded by security officers would be avoided.

On the following day counsel for the appellant informed the judge in the absence of the jury that the appellant intended to make a statement.

This prompted the judge to instruct the appellant before the jury was brought into court on what his options were. The appellant was told that he could say nothing, give sworn evidence, or make an unsworn statement, or make an unsworn statement and give sworn evidence. The terms of the instruction are recorded in the transcript at pp 2181-2183 and the instruction given properly alerted the appellant to his options. In the course of the instruction the appellant was told that if he gave evidence on oath "for the reasons discussed earlier about the security problems we have had to deal with you will do that from where you are, rather than from the witness box, in order not to bring unnecessarily to the jury's attention the special security arrangements that I have implemented." 
The judge instructed the appellant that it was his choice, although in making it he had the advantage of advice from his counsel and his solicitor. However, his Honour said: "Ultimately it is not their decision, it is your decision and it is a decision you will have to make yourself when the time comes." (T 2183) 
The transcript records no objection having been taken to the course proposed by the trial judge in the event that the appellant decided to give evidence on oath. Further, the transcript does not record that the trial judge was ever alerted to there having been any denial by the appellant that he had told an officer of his intention to assault the Crown Prosecutor.

It was the responsibility of the trial judge to determine what security arrangements were called for during the trial and what security arrangements would be necessary in the event that the appellant decided to give sworn evidence.

Where special security precautions are required, a trial judge is obliged to see that they are made no more obvious than is necessary because of the prejudicial effect that special precautions might have on the mind of the jury: see Smith <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 532] at 534. However it is essentially for the trial judge to determine what precautions are necessary with an appreciation of the layout of the court, and what would be required to protect those in court if the accused elected to go into the witness box. It is proper for the judge in doing so to have regard to the accused's past behaviour. The Crown referred to the judgment of McPherson JA in R versus Farr [(1994) 74 A Crim R 405.]
The appellate court there had to address the issue of very strict security arrangements which had been imposed by a trial judge. McPherson JA said in a passage at 408: "Without, however, finally holding that persons likely to be affected by administrative directions are always entirely without remedy, it is obviously proper to approach the question raised here with a powerful predisposition in favour of the correctness of the directions given by the judge who is to preside at the trial. It is, after all, not the safety of members of this
Court that is at stake, but that of the presiding judge and others who will be involved in or attending the trial. We ought therefore not to be minutely critical of measures adopted to reduce the danger. Prima facie the decisive say over the precautions to be taken must be left with the person who carries the responsibility and bears the risk. It is not for us to be unduly courageous about risks that do not threaten us personally." 
The Court is in complete agreement with the above dicta. The trial judge here had a difficult problem to address. His Honour addressed it paying due regard to the position of the appellant. This ground fails.

Ground 14: The verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

In respect to this ground of appeal, it is important to note that the appellant did not give evidence on oath. He made an unsworn statement from the dock which was not subject to cross-examination. Further, in the unsworn statement he accused various witnesses of lying.

The jury were entitled to take into account the appellant's making of an unsworn statement and failure to lead evidence contradicting the witnesses who gave evidence for the Crown, not to draw any inference against them, but in order to evaluate the strength of the evidence of those witnesses.

The absence of such evidence given by or on behalf of an appellant will frequently prove to be a serious obstacle to the success of the "unsafe and unsatisfactory" ground of appeal: Gordon & Gordon [(1991) 57 A Crim R ] per Hunt CJ at CL. See also Blade (unreported, Court of
Criminal Appeal, 1 May 1991). As Hunt CJ at CL pointed out in Gordon (at ): "... the right of an accused to give evidence is well known to jurors. ...
Because of the prohibition contained in <case>, it is simply left to juries to draw whatever inference may arise in their minds from an accused's failure to give evidence, without any guidance being allowed to be given as to how they should approach the situation. ... Common sense, however, dictates that it could hardly escape the attention of a jury that a challenge by an accused to the evidence of a complainant has not been backed up or supported by sworn evidence which has been tested by cross-examination. The absence of such evidence given either by or on behalf of an appellant will frequently prove to be a serious obstacle to the success of the increasing popular `unsafe and unsatisfactory' ground of appeal." 
In our view, the principle enunciated above by Hunt CJ at CL has particular application in this case. In particular, it should be noted that most of the witnesses who gave evidence were strongly attacked by Dr Gumbert. It was frequently suggested that they were telling lies or were biased against the appellant or that they had tailored their evidence to strengthen the Crown case. There are many examples of this in the evidence and we will refer to some of them in the course of this judgment.

At the close of the Crown case, Dr Gumbert made an application for the trial judge to direct the jury to acquit the appellant as he did not have a case to answer. In support of that application, it was submitted that the post mortem examination revealed no cause of death that could not be attributed to either suicide or accident. Secondly, he submitted that the Crown case was defective in so far as it failed to establish a motive for murder. It was submitted that it was not open to the jury to convict the appellant of murder unless they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of certain primary or intermediate facts, namely that the injuries to the deceased's head were caused before death.

His Honour, correctly in our view, stated the question he had to decide was whether, taking the Crown case at its highest, the jury could draw the inference that the appellant killed his wife. His Honour rejected the application, and, in so doing, referred to the fact that it was open to the jury to conclude that the injuries suffered by the deceased were suffered before death; that the jury could find that the appellant had the opportunity to commit the crime; that he had a motive, namely his passion for Ms Hyunmi and his desire to have her live with him at Berowra, which undoubtedly would not have been consented to by the deceased; the appellant's difficult financial situation and the fact that he would receive a substantial benefit if his wife were to die.

A number of matters are relied upon in support of this ground of appeal.
Firstly, that the jury should have had a reasonable doubt concerning suicide and accident. The appellant has argued that this ground of appeal has been made out on the basis that either the deceased committed suicide or accidentally drowned whilst exercising in the swimming pool. It should be pointed out that in order to consider these aspects supporting this ground of appeal the jury would have to have accepted that the statement of the appellant and the surrounding circumstances raised in their minds a reasonable possibility that either the deceased drowned herself deliberately or that she drowned accidentally.

In our view, the jury were entitled to reject entirely any statement made by the appellant in the light of his serious deception in relation to where he was that night and when he arrived home. The jury were also entitled to take into account whether they accepted his version of the affair with Ms Hyunmi.
It is ridiculous to suggest that the jury should have accepted that the appellant regarded Ms Hyunmi as a sexual object. The jury would have been entitled to accept that he had formed a very close relationship with this woman and that he was very deeply in love with her, as will be seen later in this judgment.

There is also the evidence of Mr Randerson, the insurance investigator; the fact that the appellant would benefit substantially from the deceased's death; and the allegation by the appellant that Mr Randerson was biased and telling lies.

On the question of whether the deceased committed suicide, the jury were entitled to reject that as a reasonable possibility. Whilst it is conceded that for a period on the morning of her death she was depressed, it is little wonder in the light of the behaviour of the appellant who was carrying on an affair with Ms Hyunmi which meant (if one accepts the evidence of Mrs Kennedy,
Ms Hyunmi's landlady, and other witnesses) that he was absent from the home until the early hours of most mornings.

There is no evidence that at any time the deceased expressed that she was thinking of taking her own life. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that she had contemplated taking her own life. It must be borne in mind that she had a son, Roland, to whom she was very deeply attached. It is unlikely that she would take her own life, leaving Roland to be looked after by the appellant. There is no evidence of a note being left to indicate that the deceased had committed suicide. It is difficult to understand how, in four feet of water, the deceased could have committed suicide. When one considers the totality of the evidence in this case, the jury were clearly entitled to reject that the deceased committed suicide.

Similarly in relation to the question of accident. Once again, this must depend to some extent upon the statement by the appellant (not on oath) that he found the deceased floating in the pool. In the light of his deception to the investigating authorities, the jury were fully entitled to reject that the deceased drowned accidentally.

There was a great deal of evidence concerning the significance of the injuries observed on the deceased's body after death. Dr Little who performed the post mortem and who it was acknowledged had an advantage over the other witnesses in that she was able to observe the injuries at the post mortem, concluded that the injuries were suffered prior to the death of the deceased. This was an important part of the Crown case. The medical evidence was lengthy, both in examination-in-chief and in cross-examination. It is not necessary to examine it in detail.

Dr Duflou, a very experienced pathologist, was also of the opinion that the injuries were suffered prior to the deceased's death. Dr Oettle, called for the defence, could not determine whether the injuries were suffered ante mortem or post mortem. He did, however, agree in cross-examination that it was more likely that the injuries were suffered at the time of death or immediately after death. He also agreed in cross-examination that it was more likely that more than one force of application caused the injuries having regard to the separated distance between the areas of haemorrhage on the scalp. He also agreed that the two areas of bruising within injury number 1 were probably separate traumas. He agreed that the most obvious cause of that trauma was a fist. Dr Little was also of the view that both head injuries were caused by blunt trauma and that there were two separate impacts. Her evidence was (as was the evidence of Dr Oettle) that injury number 1 was consistent with two blows, she having observed two distinct areas of bruising under the scalp. Dr Duflou had a similar view.

Both Drs Little and Duflou agreed that injuries 1 and 21 were probably caused by separate impacts for two reasons. Firstly, injury number 1 was so much deeper. Secondly, because of their location in relation to the curvature of the skull.

On the question of accident, Dr Oettle did not believe that the injuries could have been caused by the deceased falling into the swimming pool and hitting the side of the pool decking because the distance apart would have to be equivalent to the distance between the side of the pool and the decking. Dr
Oettle believed the injury was consistent with hitting something like a slate floor or "a flat force, a flat surface on a round thing". He said it was "not likely" that knuckles were the cause of the injury but he qualified that by saying that the fist/knuckle scenario was but one of many possibilities.

A number of scenarios were advanced by these witnesses, but clearly the jury were entitled to accept that injuries 1 and 21 were caused by the application of force to the head of the deceased at a time before death.

In any event, on the evidence, it is extremely unlikely that the deceased died an accidental death. Even assuming in favour of the appellant that injuries 1 and 21 were suffered after death, the medical evidence conclusively seems to be that those injuries would not have been sufficient to render her unconscious. We consider that the only basis upon which this could have any credibility at all is that somehow or other the deceased slipped and fell and struck her head on part of the planking, that she was knocked unconscious, and fell into four feet of water. In our view, this is a highly unlikely scenario.
There is no evidence that the injuries were caused by such means. The jury were entitled to reject accident as a reasonable possibility.

A number of submissions were made about the state of the pool and matters of that nature. Photographs of the pool were taken the next morning. In favour of the appellant it should be pointed out that the water appears to have been quite clear but there were leaves in the bottom of the pool. The photographs disclose something on top of the pool, said to be scum. Unfortunately, this was not capable of being analysed.

Whilst the Crown put forward a scenario that the drowning occurred other than in the pool, it is equally open, in our view, that the appellant was responsible for drowning the deceased in the pool.

It was clearly open to the jury to accept that injuries 1 and 21 were suffered by the deceased before her death. That being the case, the jury would have rejected other possible causes, including her head being struck when she was carried from the pool by the appellant or that it was struck on the surrounds of the pool or in some part of the house. It would also rule out injury having occurred whilst the body of the deceased was being transported from the house to the mortuary and being handled in the mortuary.

It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the Crown case was disproportionately based upon inflammatory evidence regarding the cause of death, the time of death, and the appellant's connection with the death. The
Crown submits that this was a very powerful circumstantial case, even allowing for the fact that some of the witnesses were effectively cross-examined by Dr
Gumbert on behalf of the appellant. The Crown made a number of submissions: 
The appellant had the opportunity to murder his wife.

There was a poor relationship between the appellant and his wife who had knowledge of his extra marital affairs.

The appellant was, according to his own submissions, "involved in a relatively consuming affair with Ms Hyunmi".

Ms Hyunmi moved into the appellant's home about a week after his wife's death when there were other options available.

The appellant maintained his communication with Ms Hyunmi after she had returned to Korea including communicating on such topics as a false assertion about a divorce from his deceased wife and the option of not returning to give evidence in his trial.

There were injuries consistent with violence having been inflicted upon the deceased before her death.

The appellant lied about two very material issues. These lies had the potential to indicate a consciousness of guilt.

It is necessary to examine these matters in some detail.

One of the witnesses who came under heavy attack from Dr Gumbert was Miss
Calautti who worked with and was friendly with the deceased. One of the matters in issue was whether the deceased was aware of the appellant's relationship with Ms Hyunmi. The evidence is overwhelming that she was aware.

Miss Calautti gave evidence that she and the deceased went to the deceased's home after work three weeks before her death. On the way they collected
Roland. They had a discussion about credit card dockets. A document was given to Miss Calautti by the deceased to photo copy. The document (Exhibit Y) contained references to Ms Hyunmi and her address in Korea. This document was found in the appellant's home after the deceased's death.

Miss Calautti alleged that the appellant arrived whilst she was at the house and that the deceased said to him, "How's your lady friend or should I say your slut?" The appellant ordered Miss Calautti out of the house and the deceased said, "She's staying". The appellant said, "You can't call her a slut, she is only a friend". He then pointed his fingers at the deceased's nose and said, "Keep your nose out of my business or I will kill you". Miss
Calautti said, "You won't get away with it". This is a window into the state of the relationship between the appellant and the deceased at that time.

The appellant in his statement to the jury denied any such conversation. He denied that he had ever seen Miss Calautti at his home. This is somewhat in conflict with the evidence of the deceased's son who called Miss Calautti "Aunty Tiz". It should be pointed out in favour of the appellant that Roland gave evidence that he had never been driven home in a car in which Miss
Calautti was a passenger.

In any event, Dr Gumbert put to her that her evidence was fabricated. There was a great deal of cross-examination designed to suggest that she had made up this incident. The jury therefore had to consider her evidence in the light of other evidence which they found established and they could have concluded that the deceased knew of the affair and that the relationship between the appellant and the deceased was strained. It was important evidence because it pointed to two aspects of the case against the appellant. Firstly, that his wife knew of his association with Ms Hyunmi. Secondly, that she strongly disapproved of it, and, in accordance with other evidence, that she was seriously considering divorce which could have resulted in the appellant having to vacate the matrimonial home. We consider that the evidence of this witness that the deceased knew of this affair is very strong, despite the attack on her credibility.

In addition, there was direct evidence that the deceased was aware of this affair. Miss Grindon-Ekins, a nursing sister who worked at Ku-ring-gai Gardens
Nursing Home with the deceased and who had a good working relationship with her, had conversations with the deceased relating to her marital problems. The deceased told Miss Grindon-Ekins that she wanted to file for a divorce and that her husband was having an affair with a Korean girl.

Miss Virveste, who lived near the appellant and who apparently had sex with him on five occasions at a unit in Hunter Street, Hornsby, in evidence said that the deceased had asked her to help her to obtain a divorce and to find out more about the lady living in the Hornsby unit. They tried to enter the unit on 21 November 1989 without success. The deceased wanted to view the papers concerning the unit to see if the lady's name was mentioned anywhere.
She asked Miss Virveste to keep an eye on her husband to see if he mentioned the unit or the lady to anyone.

Dr Bingham who attended the deceased on the morning prior to her death gave evidence that at one stage the deceased asked the appellant to leave the room.
Dr Bingham said the deceased spoke angrily and that she almost spat at the appellant which drew the doctor to the conclusion that whatever was upsetting her concerned the appellant in some way (T198). She said the deceased was hysterical and that she told the doctor that her main problem was that her husband was having an affair. She told the doctor that she had discussed it with him and asked him about his girlfriend which made him angry. She also told Dr Bingham about jewellery purchased by the appellant and said, "Why else would he buy jewellery, not for his wife?" (T199). The deceased told Dr
Bingham that the appellant had been staying out regularly until midnight or 3 or 4 am and that she saw very little of him at weekends and she said, "Why would he be staying out so late and not with his wife?" (T199). This evidence supports the observations of Miss Calauzzi.

Mrs Kennedy in her original statement to the police stated that she heard the appellant's car drive away from her premises on the night of the deceased's death some time between midnight and 1 am. She stated in evidence she believed that was the time he left because there was a pattern to his behaviour. She stated he was present at the house almost every day and towards the end he was there pretty well every day. He would come in the morning on his way to work and he would take Ms Hyunmi to work and bring her home. He often waited at the house whilst Ms Hyunmi got changed and if they went out they would return to the house at about midnight. Sometimes he would leave as early as 8-8.30pm but this did not happen often. If he stayed there was a pattern to it. Mrs Kennedy is to be taken as saying that as there was this pattern she concluded that he left that night between midnight and 12.30am.

In addition, the morning after the deceased's death the appellant told a neighbour, Mrs Cousins, that his wife had been very upset because he was having an affair with a woman from Berowra. He made a remark about the female's husband being after him and the deceased being frightened that she would lose her home. If this was true it was an additional affair.

Mr Terlich, the brother-in-law of the deceased, gave evidence that he was aware in the twelve months prior to the deceased's death that there were problems in the marriage. He was told things by his wife and he made observations of the deceased when he visited from time to time. He could see she was under stress. The main problem he was aware of was that the appellant was having affairs with a number of women. Mr Terlich spoke to the deceased on the telephone just before her death. She said she had problems but that it was not money. He gave evidence that on an occasion a couple of months before the death of the deceased the appellant told him that he could not understand why the deceased could not understand his affairs.

Mrs Terlich, the sister of the deceased, gave evidence of a conversation with the deceased over the telephone about two weeks before her death. She said she could not take it any more. She had taken some Valium because she could not sleep. She said there were financial problems and that the appellant was not coming home until about 4 o'clock in the morning. When she asked him where he had been he told her he had been sleeping at his boss's house. She said she had gone through his papers and found some photographs of a Chinese or
Japanese girl. She confronted him and he told her they were photographs of a person just passing by.

On another occasion Mrs Terlich spoke to the appellant when she telephoned her sister. The deceased came on to the phone and quietly said, "Keith didn't get home until 4 o'clock in the morning again". The deceased said she would ring her sister back at a later time but she never did. The next thing Mrs Terlich heard was that the deceased was dead.

Thus, the jury would have had all this evidence which went to the question of the deceased's awareness of the affair which was taking place and the affect it was having on the marriage.

Mrs Calautti also gave evidence that on the morning of her death the deceased telephoned her at 12.30 am but put the telephone down quite hurriedly. The trial judge apparently disallowed as hearsay material what was said on the telephone, but the Crown relied on this as evidence that the appellant was present at the home by at least 12.30 am. Miss Calautti was extensively cross- examined because her evidence was to the effect that that morning she had a discussion with the deceased at a coffee shop in Hornsby. Quite clearly she was mistaken about that because the evidence is that Dr Bingham came to see the deceased that morning and prescribed certain tablets for her. It is quite obvious that Miss Calautti mistook the day, although she was quite adamant initially that she remembered the day particularly because she had been out with her fiance. There had been an argument between them and their engagement was broken off. No doubt the credibility of this witness was compromised in that respect, but the jury were entitled to accept her evidence of the telephone call and the strange manner in which it was terminated.

In addition, the Crown relied on the evidence of a number of witnesses to establish that the appellant had been at the premises for a longer period than he claimed before allegedly finding his wife floating in the pool. A number of problems with the evidence of these witnesses have been highlighted.

One thing is clear, however, and that is that the appellant rang Dr Tomlins at about 1.41 am. The police evidence is that on a test run from the Kennedy residence at Haberfield at about the same time it took some fifty minutes to drive to Berowra. If we take that as a basis for comparison, the appellant would have had to have left Haberfield at 12.50 am or thereabouts.

The appellant gave a lengthy, and as we assess it, an untruthful explanation to the jury, about what time he left Haberfield and what he did thereafter.
The trial judge pointed out in his summing-up that the appellant had said nothing specific about what took place at Haberfield during the evening of 24
November 1989 but that he clearly agreed there was some conversation between himself, Ms Hyunmi and Miss Chung. His Honour then referred to the very important question of what time the appellant left Haberfield (SU275). The appellant made no reference to when he first saw Ms Hyunmi that night.

In his statement to the jury the appellant persisted in putting himself forward as a solicitous husband. He said that when he left his wife she was asleep and that he was hoping to get home before she woke.

The appellant did not state any precise time when he left Haberfield. He said in his statement to the jury: "I have spoken to doctors, because some doctors think I am near a nervous breakdown, and they have thought me to sit down, relax, close your eyes and recall, and I have gone over instances with my solicitor in long sessions of what happened and what I have done - if you have got a sheet of paper there - what I have done I have worked backwards from the times we know of." 
He said that if he was running late it was his custom to telephone his wife so that she would not be concerned that he may have been involved in an accident.
He referred to an occasion when he had come home at 3 am and his wife was crying. She thought he had been in an accident and she had rung various hospitals. She said to him, "For goodness sake, if you are going to be late please tell me what time you are going to be home". He then went on to say: "Because most times if I was late she would know where I was, or if I was at the Terlichs she knew where I was. So what I used to do, I used to phone and say to my wife, `I will be home in about an hour's time' and the night I left
Miss Eim I done the same." 
Pausing there, the jury were entitled to disregard that statement. Indeed, they were entitled to conclude that the appellant was telling lies. The evidence of the Terlichs was that they had been told by the deceased that on occasions the appellant would come home at 4 am. It is obvious that the appellant was carrying on an affair and that the deceased was aware of it. The jury were entitled to reject the likelihood of him ringing his wife to tell her that he was running late as no doubt she would have concluded that he was visiting his female friend.

The appellant gave the following account to the jury in his unsworn statement :
 "I was still trying to resuscitate my wife when Dr Tomlins came and what I have allowed there is, I took my wife into that back room laying her down, as about twenty minutes, trying to resuscitate, because I would have tried hard, and I think that becomes clear from what you have heard, I wanted my wife to be alive. If you then deduct that twenty minutes from the 1.41 time - sorry, deduct the fifteen minutes I have allowed myself from that 1.41 you are back to about 1.26am.

The next part of the process I had gone through is I would have had to have gone out into the garden and although my wife told me on the phone she was going to use the pool, take a swim, because you look over and you don't see anyone standing up, you can't see anyone floating in the pool from the rear of my garden. So there is no reason for me to have rushed over to that pool. The next thing why I went out there was she's feeding Pepsi - we used to feed
Pepsi late at night and she loved the dog, it was my son's dog but she loved him like we all did. If you allow four or five minutes there for me to go out, go to the garage, check these things, go to the pool and lift her out, okay I will have to get her out and get her back to the house. This brings us down to around to 1.21 time.

When you look at I arriving at my home and I was pretty standard in what I would do, I would you know like you would be taking your time as you go through the door but, you know I would lock the car, go in kick your shoes off - I never used to wear my shoes in the house - take my tie off, take my jacket off, undoing my shirt and I would generally make my way towards the office first to drop my briefcase in and I would check if there is anything there for me, you know any message on the desk or anything like that.

Every night used to be the same, it never never altered. ... I always look into my son's room and I would take him to the toilet and put him back to bed.

I myself you know would use the toilet, clean my teeth - the normal things a person would do who is retiring to bed.

If you go through you know these stages how long it would take you and then I would have gone off to the main bedroom, I would have allowed myself 15 minutes there so we are down to about 1 am, six minutes past one.

In the main bedroom I see that my wife is not in bed that is why later I go out into the garden as I explained but before I would have done because I had gone through the rest of the house I would have checked - I am 100 per cent certain I would have done that, checked if she was in any of the other rooms, in the dining room, the back room, maybe out in the laundry doing something, we had a lounge there, I would have checked these rooms to see if my wife was around or doing something and I would not have hurried because remember I knew in my mind she said to me, `I will be using the pool'. There was no urgency, there was no urgency at all.

I can remember putting the jug on, some cups, because Dr Tomlins used the cups when he came to my home, he went and used the cups I had got out for myself and my wife to make coffee.

So that when you take this in, you know, I have allowed myself five or six minutes there, you are back around the 1 am time. We are told for the very first time in this trial that Mr Donaldson and Mr Fry done this journey from
Haberfield to Berowra and they said about 50 minutes if I remember right.

I always said it takes me over an hour. 1995 compared to 1988, I don't know -
I drove a Magna at that time, I was driving and it was a couple of years old;
I don't know what size they had. I can't tell you because I've been in prison ever since, whether the road conditions have changed or whether there's been any improvements or anything like that. I don't know.

Whether there was any accidents on the road or road works going on - you know, the time space between '89 and '95 is as different as chalk and cheese, and also you know I can recall when I got to, like Hornsby, at the beginning of
Hornsby and the Pacific Highway - I don't think the new motorway was open then. You know I certainly never used that section.

So maybe the traffic on that old Pacific Highway going up was more heavy then that it is when Mr Tripp does his - Mr Fry and Mr Donaldson done his trip, because mostly it would be the flow of this new highway. I know it used to take me over an hour, which is why I know, because I've done this journey many times.

Another thing, maybe someone would drive slightly faster than the other; maybe if they thought it was a policeman, no one's going to stop him, maybe they went across the orange lights, I don't know, but my time was about an hour. So if we stay on their timing, 50 minutes, okay, you are back to about 12.10, okay, ten past 12 at Haberfield.
 ...

Eim also stated, and I know what we used to do - we used to go downstairs and
I could never clean up in the Kennedy's place because the bathroom - I don't know if you recall the evidence - the bathroom is on the ground floor and it's near the Kennedy's bedroom, and out of respect you don't go in there flushing chairs and running water because there's a very very important thing I used to have to do. Any man that's aware of affairs, the things we do, we clean up. We make sure that there's no trace on us that we are taking home to our wives, and I used to check very carefully.

Now, you don't rub it into their nose you know, the affair - so I couldn't do that at Eim's house, and we used to speak maybe ten minutes on the door step and we may have spoke a good ten minutes that night you know, because she wanted to move the following day. So there we are about the midnight time there." 
There is no evidence from Ms Hyunmi that they spoke for any length of time on the door step. The jury would have been entitled to reject all these statements made by the appellant.

He said he telephoned his wife from a telephone box "some time gone midnight" . He continued: "If the phone call took five minutes, okay. I told you, and every night was the same, I used to call in a garage on the Parramatta Road and I used to check - I used to go to the gents, I used to buy drinks because I didn't want nothing on my breath. I used to go to the gents toilet, I used to check everything - my collar, the bottom of my shirt tail if there's nothing on it, because once I had a tremendous problem with a stain that got on my shirt, and
I even used to, you know, lock the door and wash myself. I don't want no smell of a woman on me. I used to hide it that much.

I used to get petrol there if I needed it so you know, for the clean up and buying drinks and stuff like this, stopping and starting in the end, if you allow 15 minutes for that, you've got five minutes for the phone call, 15 minutes for the cleaner, you've got about 20 minutes there. If you then allow that 10 minute on the door step, there's your 30 minutes difference." 
He stated (T2291): "I've got home at 1.30-ish".

In the light of the lies told by the appellant, the jury were clearly entitled to reject that as a made-up version and an attempt by the appellant to put himself in a situation where he could satisfactorily explain what time he arrived home and so exculpate himself from being at the home at the relevant time.

A number of witnesses gave evidence on behalf of the Crown as to the time the appellant left Haberfield that night. There is one undeniable fact, namely, that Miss Chung's mother rang her from Korea at 11.18.42 pm which was answered at Haberfield some 24 seconds later. One of the issues the jury had to consider was whether the appellant was still at Haberfield when that telephone call occurred. There was considerable dispute about this matter, although we repeat there is no sworn evidence by the appellant that he was there at that time.

The appellant submits that the witnesses relevant to this question of time altered their original accounts of the time he left Haberfield in order to assist the Crown case. In other words, there was a conspiracy in effect between Mrs Kennedy, Miss Chung and Ms Hyunmi to have him convicted.

There are some aspects of their evidence which it must be conceded is unsatisfactory. On the other hand, there is no sworn evidence to dispute their evidence. The appellant's version of events, as has been set out, could well have been rejected by the jury. The jury could have concluded that the appellant was incapable of giving a truthful answer about anything.

These witnesses were subject to a strong attack by Dr Gumbert which, in our view, highlights the failure of the appellant to give sworn evidence in rebuttal. One of the vital witnesses was Miss Chung, who would appear to have had no particular axe to grind in respect to the appellant. There does not seem to be any dispute that she spoke to the appellant and Ms Hyunmi when she and the appellant came home that night, which Miss Chung believed was at about pm.

It must be borne in mind that these witnesses were not expecting that they would be required to give evidence as to times when times were not of any concern to them. It is quite clear that Miss Chung (even accepting her evidence) was in error about the times which she referred to in her original statement. She said she looked at the clock at 11 pm and the appellant was still in Ms Hyunmi's room. At 11.30 pm Ms Hyunmi came into Miss Chung's room by herself. They then went downstairs because they heard cats fighting. She said at this point there was no-one around the house. She received a telephone call from her mother at about midnight. She later saw Ms Hyunmi in her room.

Miss Chung was criticised by Dr Gumbert because in her first statement to the police she made no mention of the telephone call nor the time that the appellant left the premises. Once again, it is submitted, she was making her evidence fit into the Crown case. We see no basis for attacking Miss Chung because she failed to mention the telephone call in her first statement to the police. Whatever may be the situation, quite clearly there was a telephone call which occurred at about 11.19 pm. Allowance must be made for a witness's recollection not being precisely accurate as to times, and one would not expect a witness's recollection to be precise. The fact that Dr Gumbert put to
Miss Chung in cross-examination that she had no idea what time the appellant left can be no legitimate criticism of her.

Dr Gumbert referred to the telephone call as a routine call which Miss Chung received every Friday evening. The question is whether the jury accepted her evidence that the appellant had left the premises by the time the telephone call was received.

It was submitted by Dr Gumbert that her final version was unsustainable. It was submitted that if the appellant was still present at the premises at 11 pm it is inconceivable, if the telephone call was received at about 11.19 pm, that Ms Hyunmi had time to talk to the appellant on the steps of the house for some ten to fifteen minutes. It was put in submissions that they both said that. In fact Ms Hyunmi's evidence was, "I think I showed him off at the door" . There was no suggestion in her evidence that they had a conversation on the steps which lasted for ten to fifteen minutes.

Miss Chung then spoke to Ms Hyunmi in her room. They then spent some time investigating the cats and talking in the television room and then the telephone rang. If the starting time of 11 pm is correct then obviously what is submitted is correct. But, of course, it is equally open to the suggestion that the appellant left earlier. It was open to the jury to accept Miss
Chung's evidence, certainly in preference to the barely credible version of the appellant. As was pointed out by the trial judge in his summing-up to the jury, the appellant did not state what time he left Haberfield except by his round-about method of calculating what he would have done.

The jury were fully entitled to reject the appellant's statement that he telephoned his wife. The deceased could hardly have been unaware that he was having an affair. In those circumstances, he knowing that, it is unlikely that he would have telephoned his wife to tell her that he would be home late.
Likewise, the attempt to remove any evidence of his association with a woman could have been rejected by the jury.

The jury could also have accepted the evidence of Miss Calautti that the deceased rang her on the night of her death at 12.30 am. It seems unlikely that she could have been mistaken about that, bearing in mind that she heard the next day that the deceased had drowned in the swimming pool. But she, like all other witnesses who gave evidence which did not suit the appellant, has lied. It appears the only person who did not lie at the trial was the appellant whose assertions remain untested and whose credibility must have ranked very low in the minds of the jury, if it ranked at all.

In her original statement to the police, Ms Hyunmi stated that the appellant left Haberfield at about midnight, which of course was favourable to the appellant. In her evidence before the jury she gave a description of her movements. She said the appellant took her to a restaurant after which they went to a park where she agreed (in answer to a leading question) that they were intimate. They returned to Haberfield at about 8.30 pm. They went to her room where they were joined by Miss Chung. She said the appellant stayed for an hour or so. She was in the middle of packing. The appellant said he had something to do at home. She believed that he stayed for thirty minutes to one hour.

She frankly acknowledged in her evidence-in-chief, "I can't remember". Quite obviously, on that evidence, it would not be possible that the appellant was still at Haberfield at about midnight. She said that when he left "it was late at night, 11, 12 around midnight late at night" (T1189). It is quite clear that Ms Hyunmi was very vague about the time the appellant left.

Ms Hyunmi gave evidence that after the appellant left she went back upstairs and spoke to Miss Chung. As they were talking they heard the noise of the cats. They went downstairs and talked in the television room. When the telephone rang she went back upstairs. Quite obviously, if that version is to be accepted, she is woefully out in her assertion that the appellant left at about midnight.

It was suggested to Ms Hyunmi (as it was to other witnesses) that she was fabricating and that she wanted the appellant to be convicted. It was incorrectly put to Ms Hyunmi in cross-examination that she had told the court that she had sex with the appellant. We have referred earlier to her agreeing that they had been intimate. It must be acknowledged that Ms Hyunmi gave her evidence in English and not in her native tongue. The word "intimate" has meanings other than sexual intercourse. She denied they had sex in the car; she meant they were intimate friends and they had touched and caressed .

Ms Hyunmi agreed that she told the police in Korea that the appellant left
Haberfield at about midnight. When she spoke to the Australian police in Korea in July she again said he left at about midnight. She was roundly criticised by Dr Gumbert when she said in evidence before the jury that the appellant had left at "11, 12, around midnight" (T1339).

It was then put to her that she had fabricated her evidence about the telephone call. She had to agree (and it is a matter of some concern) that she made no mention of the telephone call in her evidence at the first trial. At that time she agreed that she could not remember the telephone call. She went on to say that her memory in 1995 was better than in 1991. As we understand it, she had not been reminded of the telephone call. It must be understood that she had been through a traumatic experience discovering that she had been deceived and that the appellant's wife had been drowned in the swimming pool and her hasty return to Korea. Ms Hyunmi agreed that when she was asked in the first trial whether she had heard any cats' noises she said she could not remember.

It was put to Ms Hyunmi again that she was a totally biased witness who was prepared to fabricate her evidence in order to assist the Crown to obtain a conviction against the appellant. It is this sort of situation where a jury's assessment of a witness is of the utmost importance. It is impossible for this court to determine the issue of credibility in a case such as this by reading the bare bones of her evidence.

In re-examination Ms Hyunmi said that in the first trial she had not been asked about the telephone call. She was asked (T1454): "Q. ... You said that you are able to remember now that you heard the telephone ring downstairs on the Friday night? 
A. I remember because you ask me questions that nobody ask me before, like one of the questions was, did I ever remember any phone call that night or that day. I remember that Jinny answer the phone and then I remember that we were trying to find out what happened to the cat and I remember that and the sequence, yes." 
She said she believed her English was "much better" in 1995 than it was in (T1455).

It was submitted that if Ms Hyunmi's evidence is accepted that the appellant left Haberfield at about midnight he could not have been at Berowra at 12.30 or 12.35 am. It is not clear what Ms Hyunmi meant when she said "about midnight". It was submitted by Mr Gumbert that the Crown case was dependent upon the jury accepting Miss Chung and Ms Hyunmi and that their evidence was untenable. It is clear (as one would expect) that Ms Hyunmi's evidence was vague and to some extent inconsistent. It must be said, however, that the jury could have rejected her evidence and accepted the evidence of Miss Chung, bearing in mind the unsatisfactory nature of the appellant's statement.

It was also submitted that Ms Hyunmi said that the appellant had arrived at
Haberfield between 8 and 8.30 pm but that in the first trial she said she could not remember. It would have assisted the jury if the appellant had stated what time he arrived at the premises, but curiously he remained silent.

In her statement to Sergeant Fry on 19 July 1990, however, Ms Hyunmi said that they arrived back at the house at 8.30 pm. Therefore there can be little support for the suggestion that her evidence that they arrived back at that particular time was recent invention.

The evidence of Mr Travis from Telecom, to say the least, is confusing as a result of an involved cross-examination by Dr Gumbert. Exhibit DO is the
Telecom record of the particular telephone call. It was received on 24
November 1989 at the Broadway exchange at 11.18.42 seconds (referred to as "Seize AEDT"). The call was answered at 11.19.06 ("Answer AEDT"). On a pure mathematical calculation there were 24 seconds between these two times. It was the defence case that the telephone rang for 24 seconds before it was answered, and thus it was unlikely (as the telephone was nearby to where Miss
Chung and Ms Hyunmi were talking) that both witnesses were in the television room when the telephone rang.

As it turns out it is by no means as simple as that. The seizure time is the time at which the Broadway exchange at that point of time (the technology having now changed) received the call from Korea. To establish a connection the call went to the next exchange in the network which was the North Sydney exchange. The North Sydney exchange then transferred the call to the Ashfield local exchange where the call was then connected. In other words, the telephone call was first received at Broadway, it was then transferred from
Broadway to North Sydney and from North Sydney to Ashfield, and from Ashfield to the Kennedys' actual telephone number. A number of signalling processes had to take place before the telephone began to ring at the Kennedy number.

At first Mr Travis said that under the older technology it possibly took between 10-12 seconds to complete the connection. Then the Ashfield exchange would have to make a connection to the customer's line before ringing commenced which would take an additional 2-3 seconds. He estimated, based on his experience, that 12-15 seconds would have elapsed before the telephone started to ring after the call was received at the Broadway exchange. He said the telephone would have rung for approximately 9-10 seconds before it was answered and he estimated that to be about five rings.

Mr Travis was cross-examined at some considerable length (as were all the witnesses) which only tended to confuse the issue. He made it clear that .18.42 was the time at which the Broadway exchange received a request call from Korea and attempted to set up a call path to North Sydney and then to
Ashfield.

This matter, in our view, was unnecessarily complicated. However, Mr Travis was further recalled and examined-in-chief by the learned Crown Prosecutor. He made it clear that the time 11.18.42 was the time of the first signal arriving from Korea into the Broadway exchange rather than leaving the Broadway exchange to North Sydney as he had indicated earlier in his evidence. The time between seizure in and out was some 4-8 seconds which in those circumstances would reduce the time to approximately 19 seconds before the telephone commenced to ring. Mr Travis concluded that the time between the seizure at
Broadway and the telephone being answered was 19 seconds and not 24 seconds and that it would have rung for 13 seconds maximum or as little as 9 seconds.

This evidence, whilst confusing, did not support the contention of the defence that the telephone rang for 24 seconds before it was answered, thus tending to confirm that there was nobody in the room at the time the telephone rang. In any event, there is no evidence as to the distance from Miss Chung's room to the telephone and how long it would have taken to traverse that distance.

In the submission that Ms Hyunmi's credit was under attack reference was made to her filling out a visa application to go to New Zealand, thus enabling her to return to Australia and her stating that it did not worry her if the application was true or not. It is true that she gave that evidence. However, even accepting that, it was the appellant who provided certain of the information quite falsely, stating amongst other matters that she was a friend of the family and that she would be staying with him.

Mr Fretin, the Manager of Traveland at Leichhardt, gave evidence that the appellant attended his office with a Korean girl on 13 October 1989 and booked a ticket for her to travel to Wellington for the purpose of her being able to extend her visa. The appellant showed Mr Fretin a letter in which it was said that the appellant was supporting Ms Hyunmi. The trip was paid for with an
American Express credit card from which the jury would have inferred that the trip was paid for by the appellant in order to have Ms Hyunmi remain in
Australia. It was suggested in cross-examination that the person in attendance with the appellant that day may have been someone other than Ms Hyunmi. In our view, that was an absurd suggestion and the jury would have rejected it.

Mrs Kennedy in her original statement to the police gave very favourable evidence for the appellant, which, in our view, would probably have been rejected by the jury. She said she and her husband went to bed at about 9.30 pm and that during the night she heard a car drive away. She gave this evidence which not unnaturally was seized upon by Dr Gumbert: "I recognised the car as being Keith Herring's white Magna with JH number plates" (T1586).

The relationship of her bedroom to where the car was parked is not clear. The following evidence shows how inaccurate her assessment was (T1586): "The reason I remember it being after midnight was because the following morning, which was Saturday, 25 November, I received a phone call from Keith
Herring at about 7 to 7.30 am and I remember thinking at the time he had only left our place a few hours later".

That was not a very convincing way of assessing what time the appellant left the premises. Under cross-examination, Mrs Kennedy said she assumed the appellant left the premises between midnight and 1 am as that was the usual time he left.

She was extensively cross-examined about her statement, especially her reference to the number plate "JH". It was suggested that she had got out of bed and looked at the vehicle. She denied that. She, of course, had seen the appellant's vehicle on many occasions before this night as he was a regular visitor. She was familiar with the vehicle and with it being driven from the premises in the early hours of the morning.

Mrs Kennedy's evidence seemed to be that she woke up and heard the car being driven away and assumed it was between midnight and 1 am, which in itself is a very wide range of time. In any event, it is unlikely that she would have bothered to get out of bed. She woke up and made an assumption and she did not look at a clock.

It was suggested that when she made her second statement on 11 December she did not change her evidence as to the time she heard the vehicle drive away.
She said, however, that when she made her second statement she was mainly concerned about the blue bag which Ms Hyunmi had to abandon at the airport.

In the first trial Mrs Kennedy gave evidence that Ms Hyunmi went up to her room at 8 or 8.30 pm, and there is nothing to dispute that evidence.

It was put to Mrs Kennedy that Miss Chung had attempted to convince her of the times. In respect to this, she said that Ms Hyunmi and the appellant arrived back after dinner before she and her husband went to bed and they went to bed at 9.30 pm.

We believe the value of Mrs Kennedy's evidence as to the time the appellant left the premises is summed-up by her answer to the following question which she was asked in re-examination (T1643): "Have you ever at any time said that Keith Herring left your home on that
Friday night earlier than the 12 to 1 am that you mentioned in that first statement? 
A. No, I can't say what time he left." 
We believe that it would certainly have been open to the jury to have rejected
Mrs Kennedy's assessment of what time the appellant left her premises.

In the light of the appellant making no precise reference as to when he arrived at the premises and when he left the premises, it was open to the jury to accept, having regard to the totality of the evidence, that the appellant left in sufficient time to arrive at Berowra and carry out the murder of the deceased and then telephone Dr Tomlins at about 1.41 am.

Whilst some of this evidence is unsatisfactory, it is the type of evidence which you would expect from witnesses who were attempting to give reasonably accurate evidence. In our view, it is not suggestive of any conspiracy to get together in order to have the appellant convicted of murder.

The Crown case was that the appellant had a motive to kill the deceased, namely his infatuation with Ms Hyunmi and his financial situation. The appellant's case was that he was not in love with Ms Hyunmi, and in effect he described her as a sex object. There is overwhelming evidence of his passion for Ms Hyunmi in addition to the evidence which Ms Hyunmi gave.

At the conclusion of the Crown case it was submitted by Dr Gumbert on behalf of the appellant that there was no evidence of motive. His Honour the trial judge correctly rejected that submission. He pointed out there was clear evidence of motive, namely the existence of a passionate relationship with Ms
Hyunmi (see judgment on application for verdict by direction, 21 September , Appeal Book No. 7). His Honour went on to say: "It is open to the jury to conclude that the relationship meant a great deal to the accused, and that he was anxious to continue it, but that his wife's presence rendered that not possible." 
In the appellant's statement to the jury, he attempted to justify his relationship with Ms Hyunmi after his wife's death. He grieved, he said, by finding comfort in another woman (T2262). He said: "I can swear I never had sex at my home with Miss Eim. I never never had sex at my home with her during that few days because of my reaction to finding out what had happened, you know, what the Terlichs told her. There was always in the back of her mind a hostility...".

It is interesting to note that despite the cross-examination to suggest otherwise, the appellant stated that he had sex with Ms Hyunmi on the night of the deceased's death, but he omitted to say where (T2263).

The appellant went on at great length to describe his technique of placing advertisements in the Sydney Morning Herald for the purpose of finding women with whom he could have sexual relationships (T2263 et seq).

If one accepts the appellant, one can only conclude that his sexual appetite was gigantean. He said (T2264): "I used to see three girls a day you know at 10, 12 and 2 o'clock and as one girl got out of the car, I used to meet them at Hornsby Station, as one got out of the car the other one would be waiting there ...".

He told all these women that he was divorced. He said (AB2265): "... people like Hyunmi, they are here in a strange country without their family, they are feeling low, they are feeling lost, lonely and maybe they want a relationship to get over this loneliness and maybe I exploited them." 
The appellant tried to suggest that Ms Hyunmi was just one of his many women whom he used only for sex and that she was no different. He conceded that when he met Ms Hyunmi he liked her as a person. He said Ms Hyunmi was compliant because they had sex twice on the first day they met. He went on to describe the costs of massage parlours, as we understand it for the purpose of showing that his method was a cheaper way of obtaining sexual favours than visiting such institutions. He said (T2268): "... every time I met Hyunmi there was sex. There was no other purpose of meeting her because if there wasn't going to be sex you go on to the next person. It wasn't meeting Hyunmi or purely company." 
He said (T2269): "... I used to try to keep fairly plain girls, so you can't fall in love you know, and they were there for six months, most of these girls, most of these are on tourist visas and student visas, so there's no involvement." 
He said that rather than giving Ms Hyunmi money he would give her gifts. The majority of the jewellery he bought her was "in the cheaper price range" .

The appellant went on to vehemently deny that he had ever given Ms Hyunmi a $3,000 ring. He said (T2270): "I know I never gave her a $3,000 ring - that's utter bullshit. I never ever given her a $3,000 ring, and the first time I have ever ever heard about the
Goldmark $3,000 certificate for Miss Eim is in this trial here. ... No one has ever picked this supposedly $3,000 ring out from Miss Eim's collection of jewellery.
 ... If someone gave you a $3,000 ring a certificate, would you destroy that certificate? ...

This is why I can't understand all of a sudden, for the very first time, a $3,000 - and I did buy a ring, I did. It didn't go to Miss Eim. I know who had that ring - my wife. That ring never went to Miss Eim, and that's the first time I ever heard, as I said, that certificate being mentioned by Miss Eim.
I've never told her to destroy any certificates like that, I've never asked her to destroy any Christmas cards I've sent her, I never asked her to destroy any letter I'm alleged to have sent her." 
In our view, there was evidence which the jury could have accepted that the appellant did give Ms Hyunmi the ring. In July 1990, Detective Sergeant Fry interviewed Ms Hyunmi in Korea. Detective Fry photographed the jewellery which had been given to her by the appellant. In evidence she was shown Exhibit BA, the photograph taken by Detective Fry. She indicated that the sapphire ring and the diamond ring shown in that photograph were rings given to her by the appellant. She stated that the appellant gave her the diamond ring together with a certificate of warranty when they were on the Showboat. She said she did not have the warranty which valued the ring at about $3,000. There is evidence, however, that the ring was so valued.

There is also evidence of the appellant purchasing other jewellery. Mr David
Keirs, the Managing Director of Denel Jewellers Pty. Ltd., gave evidence that he knew the appellant as a customer over a four year period. He gave evidence of the purchase of jewellery. In particular a pendant with the numbers "831" on it which the appellant told Mr Keirs meant "I love you" was purchased by the appellant at a cost of approximately $600.

Miss Bain, an employee of Denel Jewellers Pty. Ltd., gave evidence that between 1987 and 1989 she sold items of jewellery to the appellant which were given to Ms Hyunmi, namely a sapphire and diamond bangle valued at $700, a sapphire and diamond ring valued at $1,300, a Citizen watch, and opal and diamond earrings.

Miss Sellen, the Assistant Manager of Goldmark at Hornsby, gave evidence that she sold a 9 carat diamond tennis bracelet to the appellant on 11 October 1989 which was reduced from $1,690 to $760.50. Miss Sellen issued a certificate of valuation for the bracelet (Exhibit AT).

Many cards (which are contained in various Exhibits) were given to Ms Hyunmi by the appellant which expressed his love for her.

Mr Randerson, an insurance investigator, also spoke to the appellant on a number of occasions. On one occasion, in January 1990, he said to Mr
Randerson: "Some time before my wife's death I met a Korean student who I regard as something special. She is very pretty and I was going to move her into a unit at Hornsby so I could have closer access to her, she was special but not special enough to leave home for." 
In addition to the evidence which has been referred to, there was evidence before the jury (despite the appellant's protestations to the contrary) that he had promised Ms Hyunmi that she would be able to live with him in his home at Berowra and that she was told this on the night of the deceased's death.
Miss Chung was present during the conversation and she said the appellant said to her that she was welcome at his home at Berowra. Originally he had said that they wanted to move in together in January which is consistent with Ms
Hyunmi's desire to go to New Zealand to renew her visa.

Mrs Kennedy, however, said that Ms Hyunmi had to leave her premises and consequently it was agreed that Ms Hyunmi should move in with the appellant the next day. The appellant told Mrs Kennedy that he wanted to go home early on the night of 24 November because he wanted to write a letter. He said he wanted to finish the renovations before Ms Hyunmi moved in.

Mrs Kennedy gave evidence that she asked Ms Hyunmi how she had met the appellant. Ms Hyunmi told her that she had replied to an advertisement for a live-in housekeeper which read "must be a young Asian woman". Mrs Kennedy said that Ms Hyunmi was suspicious and she did not go to the interview. She gave evidence, however, that the appellant kept ringing Ms Hyunmi and eventually she made arrangements to meet him in August.

Mrs Kennedy said that over the next few months she saw the appellant at her house on numerous occasions. Sometimes he would pick Ms Hyunmi up in the morning and take her to work. He would also ring and talk to her on the telephone for hours on end. He would bring her home from work in the afternoon. He would go out with her at night and often sat in the house for two or three hours waiting for Ms Hyunmi to get ready. When they were out at night they frequently did not return until after midnight.

Mrs Kennedy and her husband eventually decided to ask Ms Hyunmi to leave in late October but Mrs Kennedy said it was apparent to them that Ms Hyunmi did not make any efforts to find alternate accommodation. It was finally decided that she should be told that she would have to leave by the weekend of 25
November. There was supporting evidence of Mr Kennedy to the same effect.

Mr Kennedy stated that by the time Ms Hyunmi left their residence the appellant was taking her out on a daily and nightly basis. He recalled attending a birthday party for Ms Hyunmi on a floating restaurant with twelve guests including he and his wife which was paid for by the appellant. He became aware that the appellant had a wife and son but he was told that they were separated and living in England.

Mr Kennedy told Ms Hyunmi in October shortly after her birthday that she had to find other accommodation. He said she must have told the appellant about this because the appellant spoke to him in late October and told him that Ms
Hyunmi could live at his home. The appellant asked Mr Kennedy why Ms Hyunmi had been told to leave and Mr Kennedy told him it was because they wanted to renovate the property.

Then there is the evidence of Mrs Kennedy when the appellant lied to her and informed her that he had received a telephone call from England and had been told that his wife had been killed in a car accident and that although they had been separated for years he was still terribly upset. He said he had to make arrangements for his son and property and he asked Mrs Kennedy if Ms
Hyunmi could stay for another week to which Mrs Kennedy agreed.

Once again, the appellant's ability to tell lies for his own benefit is highlighted.

The undisputed fact is that within one week Ms Hyunmi was occupying the appellant's home unaware that he was not separated from his wife and certainly unaware that she had died from drowning in the swimming pool. Prior to her moving into the premises, the appellant showed Ms Hyunmi a photograph of
Roland and told her that he lived in England and that he missed him a lot.

Ms Hyunmi gave general evidence of the appellant taking her out to restaurants, to the movies, shopping centres, and the beach. The appellant, she said, took her out to dinner on the floating restaurant and gave her a lavish birthday party and presents. She gave evidence of telling him that she had to move from the Kennedys' residence by 25 November 1989. He told her that he had another house at Berowra and that she could move into that house. He said he was renovating the bathroom. The conversation about the bathroom being renovated has some support because in fact the bathroom at Berowra was being renovated at the time by Mr O'Donnell.

Ms Hyunmi moved into the premises one week later. She referred in evidence to the fact that on the morning of the deceased's death she spoke to the appellant and he told her that his wife had died in an accident in England.
She said he sounded like he was crying. He said he had been divorced for four years but that he still loved his wife. She said her stay at the Kennedy residence was extended for one week. He came over that afternoon looking tired and exhausted and fell asleep and when he woke up he left.

During the following week she talked to the appellant. He told her that he had to make arrangements for his son. On the following Saturday she went to dinner with him and Roland when she was enjoined by the appellant not to mention his wife's death because Roland was upset. Ms Hyunmi moved the next day to Berowra and the appellant helped her move. She was introduced to the neighbours as the housekeeper.

The appellant's version of how Ms Hyunmi came to move into his home was that after he had told her of his wife's death it was her idea to move in with him.
The jury would have been entitled to reject his version and accept the version of Ms Hyunmi. In all likelihood they would have done so in the circumstances.

After Ms Hyunmi moved into the premises, she spoke to the Terlichs who told her about the deceased living in the house and drowning in the pool which shocked and confused her. When she spoke to the appellant about the matter he agreed that his wife had drowned in the pool. Ms Hyunmi, not unnaturally, wanted to know how the deceased had drowned. The appellant gave a very strange answer which the jury could have regarded as being of some significance. Ms
Hyunmi asked the appellant, "How come she died in that depth of water?" She was asked by the learned Crown what the appellant told her and she said :
 "He said that if you try to kill - if you try to choke her there will be bruise around her neck. If you poison her the police will find it all. If you kill her in the house in the bathroom, carry her to the pool, the police will collect the water in the pool and the water in the house and compare it and they will find out so it could not be him, that's what he said." 
Ms Hyunmi telephoned Miss Chung and told her what she had learned and asked her to book her a flight to Korea because she did not want to stay in the house. That was confirmed by Miss Chung who said she spoke to Ms Hyunmi who seemed to be upset. She confirmed that Ms Hyunmi asked her to book a flight to
Korea on 8 December 1989. Ms Hyunmi said that the appellant calmed her down a lot and she thought about it and changed her mind. She said he loved her "special or something like that". She said Miss Chung stayed the night at the appellant's home the night before she left. Miss Chung told her the next morning that the police had interviewed her and wanted to interview Ms Hyunmi.
Ms Hyunmi then asked the appellant what was going on and he said that if she did not want to get involved she should leave.

It appears that the appellant then rang a travel agent and the booking for 8
December was still available. Ms Hyunmi flew out of Australia on the evening of 8 December. The appellant offered to pay her fare but she paid her own fare. Before she left the appellant replaced her supplementary American
Express credit card and told her that she could use it at any time. It is quite obvious that at that point of time the appellant contemplated further contact with Ms Hyunmi.

As stated earlier, the appellant alleged that Ms Hyunmi offered to live at his house and help out when she heard that his wife had died. That is not a credible explanation as Ms Hyunmi understood that his wife had died in
England. The jury would have been more likely to accept her evidence.

We have referred to how Ms Hyunmi came to be at the house. The appellant said that he had always stressed to Ms Hyunmi that his house was unavailable because he was renovating. He said she always had his address at Miss Chang's unit at Hornsby. He alleged that Ms Hyunmi asked Mrs Kennedy to call her a taxi to go to Hornsby as she had no idea of his address at Berowra. This was of course disputed by Ms Hyunmi.

In his statement to the jury the appellant purported to adopt what Mrs Kennedy had said but put a favourable interpretation on it, "My wife has died, can she stay on another week?" He said he knew it was only a matter of three to four weeks and Ms Hyunmi would be returning home to Korea. The jury could have inferred that he wanted Ms Hyunmi to stay.

He said he knew that Miss Chang who owned the unit at Hornsby wanted someone to live with her in the unit and pay rent because she wanted the money and that he told Ms Hyunmi, "That is where you are going, no ifs or buts". He went on to say he knew he could find her a place and "it wasn't going to be my home at Berowra". He said that Ms Hyunmi was the first girl he had given an
American Express card to. He said, "I suppose I was big noting myself".

The appellant never explained how Ms Hyunmi came to live at Berowra other than saying it was her idea. The jury were clearly entitled to reject his unsworn version and accept the version of the Crown. Indeed, having regard to his inability to tell the truth, it would have been difficult for the jury to accept anything he said.

In addition, there was the evidence of the appellant sending Ms Hyunmi $1,000 and telling her that if she did not want to speak to the police she could go on a holiday. Ms Hyunmi said she sent the money back to him. The appellant agreed that he got the money back. He said that Ms Hyunmi telephoned him in
January and told him that she had spent all her money paying her university fees. He said that whilst she did not ask for the money he thought "is she hinting she is broke".

If she had returned to Korea and it was unlikely that she would return to
Australia in the foreseeable future, why did the appellant give her a supplementary American Express card and on top of that send her $1,000 and make arrangements for her to be represented by his solicitors? 
Analysing the evidence, we are not satisfied that the jury should have had a doubt about the guilt of the appellant. The trial judge, Badgery-Parker J, who was one of the most experienced trial Judges in this court, stated in his remarks on sentence, in our view correctly, that there emerged in the case three very specific and substantial issues which were resolved in favour of the Crown. His Honour concluded, firstly, that the jury accepted that the appellant left the Kennedys' residence before 11.19 pm before Miss Chung received the telephone call from Korea. We have analysed the evidence relating to this matter in some detail, and we are satisfied that it was open to the jury to accept that evidence.

His Honour concluded that the jury, by their verdict, accepted the evidence of
Miss Calautti that the deceased was alive at 12.30 am. We have dealt with this evidence in some detail.

His Honour went on to conclude that those issues having been resolved in favour of the Crown would have established to the jury's satisfaction that the appellant had lied as to the time he left Haberfield and when he claimed to have telephoned his wife from a telephone box near Haberfield between midnight and 12.30 am. His Honour stated that it was clearly open to the jury to regard those lies as evidence of a consciousness of guilt in the absence of any other rational explanation.

His Honour concluded that the jury would have found that injuries 1 and 21 were sustained before death.

His Honour referred to the appellant's relationship with Ms Hyunmi as a "very intense and passionate love affair". His Honour stated that the evidence had established that the deceased was aware that her husband was having an affair with another woman, although she did not know all the details. He stated that the deceased was very distressed and had made known to many of her friends, but more particularly to the appellant himself, that she was proposing to seek a divorce.

His Honour also referred to the fact that the appellant stood to gain substantially from a number of insurance policies upon the deceased's death, namely, almost $500,000.

His Honour stated that the Crown had relied upon the parlous state of the marital relationship, the intensity of the appellant's relationship with Ms
Hyunmi and his desire that it should continue, and his prospect of financial gain from the death of his wife as providing motives for the murder.

The last matter is that it is contended by the appellant that the chloride ion evidence of Dr Duflou was unsatisfactory. It is submitted that the lengthy examination-in-chief and cross-examination of Dr Duflou on this issue and its ostensible "scientific validity" had the potential to inappropriately and dangerously impress the jury and divert the jury's attention to a matter upon which the evidence was completely unsatisfactory. It is further submitted that the unsatisfactory evidence of Dr Duflou as it was before the jury may have become a very relevant circumstance in the jury's consideration of the whole case, and consequently the verdict is unsafe.

The Crown, on the other hand, submits that the evidence of Dr Duflou did have the appearance of complexity, but once analysed into its components its strengths and weaknesses became apparent and were able to be commented upon clearly by the trial judge.

The only common ground as to the theory postulated by Dr Duflou concerns the basic proposition of a dilution theory. In the appellant's submissions (paragraph 14.78) there is set out the basic proposition that the chloride ion level in both swimming pool and tap water is less than the chloride level in the blood of a living person. Further to the dilution theory, if the chloride level of a particular sample of water has a chloride level reading close/similar but not equal to the blood chloride level of a living person, then the dilution theory dictates that for there to be an apparent reduction in the blood chloride levels of the person, a great or large volume of water will need to be ingested by that person. Alternatively, if a particular sample of water has a low chloride level, significantly below that of the blood chloride level, then to produce an apparent reduction in the chloride level in the blood of a living person, only a small amount/volume of water need be ingested by that person to realise an apparent reduction in the blood chloride level of that person.

The Crown and counsel for the appellant accept the basic dilution theory and counsel for the appellant submits that it is "not particularly controversial".

The appellant takes issue with the evidence of Dr Duflou shortly after Dr
Duflou outlined the theory of dilution. In 1991, Dr Duflou developed his formula based on the scientific theory of dilution. The formula was developed from data extracted from the medical records of the Institute of Forensic
Medicine and can be applied to provide basic indications as to the volume of water a drowning victim may have ingested, and what type of water.

The appellant submits that at the trial Dr Duflou's theory was harshly criticised by both Drs. Little and Oettle in its application to the case in hand. The appellant takes issue with the variables employed by Dr Duflou that made up the figures upon which the formula was calculated. The variables which were employed in the formula were: * The volume of blood in the body. * The chloride ion level in the body before drowning. * The chloride ion level in the body after drowning. * The chloride ion level in the water the deceased potentially drowned in. 
The appellant relies on the evidence of Dr Duflou at T1873.12 where he agreed with the suggestion that any shift in the figures he used in the formula would substantially alter the result. Further, Dr Duflou stated that he had attempted to show that if the variables were altered there would be a substantial alteration of the result.

The appellant, in furtherance of this appeal point, makes submissions as to each of the four variables outlined above. The Crown submits that the impact which variations in those four components had on the results were graphically illustrated by the Crown Exhibit AO and the defence Exhibit 16, and the Court accepts the correctness of that proposition. It was made clear to the jury that any change in the variables of the formula would alter the result. We see little merit in specifically addressing each variable, but for the sake of completeness we will do so.

As to the volume of blood in the body, Dr Duflou agreed that his initial figure of five litres, used in the first trial, was not correct, and he consequently reduced the figure to 3.5 litres of blood to accommodate the diminutive stature of the deceased. Counsel for the accused, Dr Gumbert, made much of this fact, despite it making perfect sense. Dr Duflou stated that the average volume of blood in a person was 4-5 litres. Yet it is clear that the deceased was not average; she was a small woman of Asian extraction who weighed 43 kilograms. Various figures were put to Dr Duflou as to the approximate volume of blood of the deceased. Dr Duflou agreed in cross- examination that the deceased's blood volume could have been as low as 3 litres. When pressed for a figure on the basis of the Geigy Tables, he agreed that her blood volume, calculated according to the Geigy Tables, may have been .8 litres. All of this evidence was before the jury, and it was open to them to accept or reject it.

As to the chloride ion level in the blood after drowning, the defence expert witnesses, Drs. Little and Oettle, expressed their own opinions as to the chloride levels found in a person after death. Dr Little stated that her laboratory no longer employed the test because the results could not be interpreted. Dr Little expressed the view that if the samples were taken immediately after death, any reading for chloride may have more efficacy in the formula postulated by Dr Duflou. Further, Dr Oettle expressed criticism of the post mortem chloride level due to the fact that the samples were taken three and a half days after the deceased drowned. The evidence of Dr Duflou at
T1916.50 is diametrically opposed to that of Dr Oettle on the question of post mortem blood chloride levels. Dr Duflou stated that the figure he used was valid. His opinion was that "there appears to be no correlation between the drop in whole blood chloride or raising and the post mortem interval".

As to the chloride ion level in the body before drowning, Drs. Little and
Oettle stated that the deceased vomiting in the morning would have had the effect of decreasing her blood chloride levels. Dr Duflou stated that if a person was to vomit a couple of times he would not expect chloride levels to decrease significantly, and that for there to be any significant reduction in blood chloride levels the vomiting would have to continue for some days, and then chloride levels could quite possibly go down. Dr Duflou rejected the proposition that once a person has vomited and expelled the stomach acid there will be a drop in chloride levels.

As to the chloride ion level of the pool water, the appellant contends that the pool water sampled was no guarantee that the sample taken was representative of the chloride level of the whole pool, or the water inhaled by the deceased. The appellant submits that Dr Duflou agreed with that contention, yet at T1880.35 Dr Duflou stated that the amount of chloride in the pool was "within broad parameters, probably fairly close throughout the pool". The only concession made by Dr Duflou was that if the method of chlorination of the pool was by way of a floating pellet device there would certainly be areas where the concentration of chloride would be higher, i.e.
the area of pool water immediately surrounding the floating chloride dispensing device.

The appellant questions the reliability of Dr Duflou's formula generally, and focuses upon the different results that can be obtained by altering the input variables. We would have thought that this was rather uncontroversial. It is clear that there are four input variables in the formula of Dr Duflou. It seems that the appellant is placing too much emphasis and reliance upon this formula. Dr Duflou and the learned Crown Prosecutor stated numerous times that the formula and the opinion of Dr Duflou were to be taken and considered no higher than an indication that Dr Duflou was prepared to express that it was more likely than not that the drowning occurred in tap water as opposed to pool water. Dr Duflou said that he had never stated definitely that the deceased drowned in pool or tap water and that he could only give an indication of which was more likely (T1916.27).

As to the attitude of the learned Crown Prosecutor, in his address to the jury he made it clear that Dr Duflou had never elevated his opinion higher than an indication that in his opinion it was more likely than not that the deceased drowned in tap water rather than pool water (T2677). Further, the learned
Crown Prosecutor invited the jury not to attempt to resolve the matter if they thought the expert evidence was intractable (T2680). The learned Crown acknowledged that the formula and the opinion of Dr Duflou was a small part of the case against the appellant and one of the many circumstances of the case and that the evidence of Dr Duflou, put at its highest, was an indication.

The appellant seeks to establish that the formula and the methodology employed by Dr Duflou was not reliable. The appellant seeks to rely on the fact that, in the first trial, Dr Duflou was wrong in the application of his formula and the methodology he used. Dr Duflou agreed that this methodology had been "sloppy" in the first trial. Dr Duflou agreed that his formula had not been subject to empirical testing and general peer review.

In the second trial, Dr Duflou did not shrink away from the application of his formula, and was at times at pains to highlight the shortfalls and variables in the application of the formula to this particular case. Dr Duflou made it clear in his evidence that any results from the application of his formula were indications only, and, that by their very nature, indications serve only to suggest or point out and are not definitive in application.

Further, Dr Duflou's evidence as to his methodology and application of the formula was subject to extensive and critical review by Drs. Little and
Oettle. Further, admissions by Dr Duflou himself as to the limitations of his expert evidence, the limited reliance placed by the Crown upon the formula, and the clear and balanced directions by the trial judge on the strengths, weaknesses and reliance to be attributed to the evidence and formula of Dr
Duflou, were all before the jury for their consideration and evaluation.
Accordingly, in our opinion, the evidence of Dr Duflou is not such that it is cast in the dark shadow of unreliability.

The trial judge explained to the jury the theory and formula of Dr Duflou and the challenges presented to it by the defence (SU-208-217). The trial judge summarised the two conflicting points of view (SU-216). After the initial direction as to this evidence, Dr Gumbert sought further directions and the trial judge reiterated the significance of the expert evidence for the defence as it was then contained within defence Exhibit 16 (SU-221-222). The trial judge made reference to the evidence of Dr Duflou and expressed the opinion that he viewed the evidence that the deceased was not drowned in the pool as "tenuous". On a general level, the trial judge did not find the evidence of Dr
Duflou "highly persuasive". Such remarks are indicative of the fact that the minds of the jury were alerted to and cognisant of the limitations and deficiencies in Dr Duflou's evidence.

The Crown submits that the evidence was based upon an agreed sound scientific theory, and this was clearly acknowledged by the Crown in its limited reliance upon it. The Crown concedes that the evidence was controversial in areas and that it was clearly explained by the trial judge. Accordingly, it is submitted, there is no risk that it could have contributed to any unsafe or unsatisfactory verdict.

In conclusion, the directions by the trial judge, in our opinion, appraised the jury of the inherent dangers of the expert evidence, and appropriately allowed the tribunal of fact to properly consider the significance of the evidence in such a light, so as not to allow the evidence to poison or inadvertently divert the attention of the jury to the extent that it may have indeed become a very relevant circumstance for the jury in their consideration of the whole case. We do not consider that the jury's focus or attention was clouded or retarded by the expert evidence, and any ostensible scientific validity that may have been attached was properly and clearly ameliorated by the directions of the trial judge in his summing-up to the jury.

It was for the jury to assess the witnesses in this case and to determine whether they accepted their evidence or not. The paramount position of a jury must always be borne in mind in determining guilt or otherwise in a criminal trial. In M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at 493, the court stated: "Where, notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain a verdict, a court of criminal appeal is asked to conclude that the verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question which the court must ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. But in answering that question the court must not disregard or discount either the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses. On the contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations." 
It was therefore the province of the jury to assess the credibility of the witnesses who were under attack in the Crown case.

To highlight this advantage in the present case, it is interesting to note the words of the trial judge when he said in his remarks on sentence (at 5): "Nothing in what I have said thus far should be taken to suggest that I have the slightest doubt about the propriety of the verdict. Having had the opportunity myself to assess the witnesses, and in particular the three whose credibility was most severely challenged, Miss Hyunmi, Miss Chung and Miss
Calautti, I am satisfied that it was clearly open to the jury to find each of the three of them to be a witness of truth, as was indeed my own very clear impression. I formed that impression notwithstanding the very skilful, sustained and potentially devastating cross-examination of each of them by Dr
Gumbert on behalf of the accused." 
In considering this matter, we refer to the High Court decision of Plomp v
The Queen <case>; [(1963) 110 CLR 234] where the facts are not entirely dissimilar to the facts in this case. Plomp was found guilty of drowning his wife in the surf. The Chief
Justice, Dixon CJ, said (at 241): "In the conditions described by the evidence it was not likely that a fairly good swimmer not unfamiliar with the surf would have been lost unless his or her efforts at recovery were in some way obstructed; but if the facts had rested there it would be indeed difficult to find that the drowning of the swimmer was caused in any way by the person with whom she was swimming. But the facts do not rest there. It was proved that Plomp had formed a liaison with another woman whom he had promised to marry, that he had represented himself as a widower and that he was continuing the liaison. In the circumstances, proved by apparently credible evidence, it was open to conclude that Plomp had the strongest reasons to be rid of his wife. It is unnecessary to traverse all the circumstances in detail. They were placed before the jury and doubtless considered by them. It is enough to say that on the whole case I think it was reasonably open for the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased had been drowned as a result in some way of the conscious agency of the applicant Plomp. I therefore think the verdict of wilful murder is sustainable on the evidence." 
Dixon CJ went on to say: "It is objected that Plomp's motives cannot be taken into account until it is shown by evidence that in some physical way his actions were responsible for his wife's death. There is nothing, it is said, to show that anything he physically did impeded her emerging from the surf or recovering her equilibrium. Until that is shown, evidence of motive cannot be used, so it is said, to prove guilt. There is, in my opinion, no legal doctrine to that effect. All the circumstances of the case must be weighed in judging whether there is evidence upon which a jury may reasonably be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the commission of the crime charged. There may be many cases where it is extremely dangerous to rely heavily on the existence of a motive, where an unexplained death or disappearance of a person is not otherwise proved to be attributable to the accused; but all such considerations must be dealt with on the facts of the particular case. I cannot think, however, that in a case where the prosecution is based on circumstantial evidence any part of the circumstances can be put on one side as relating to motive only and therefore not to be weighed as part of the proofs of what was done. In this case the word `motive' was used during the argument and no doubt at the trial to cover much material. But is not clear to me whether some of that material did not go somewhat further than what is ordinarily comprised under that word. In the course of the summing up the learned judge who presided at the trial said to the jury: `You must remember that before you can use evidence of motive, there must be a sufficiency in the evidence to establish to you that this death was not an accidental death, to establish to you that he did something in order to get his wife into the water, and having got here there, he wilfully murdered her.' This appears to me to go too far in the accused's favour. I think that if the whole of the evidence is read and what the accused said and did both before and after his wife's drowning is considered with all the circumstances of her drowning a reasonably strong circumstantial case is made against him, but I cannot think that this is so if you omitted from it all the detailed circumstances of his dealings with the other woman. It is said that the ordinary rule relating to circumstantial evidence has been ignored or departed from in convicting the accused, namely the rule that you cannot be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on circumstantial evidence unless no other explanation than guilt is reasonably compatible with the circumstances." 
We believe that the remarks of Dixon CJ in Plomp are particularly apposite to the circumstances in this case.

The fact is that the deceased was drowned in circumstances where, in our view, the jury were entitled to reject suicide or accidental death as reasonable possibilities. Furthermore, it was proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had formed a liaison with another woman. He wished to continue that liaison and he wanted Ms Hyunmi to live in his home at Berowra. Quite obviously, that could only be done if the deceased was not living in the home.
The appellant represented to Ms Hyunmi that he was divorced. In the circumstances, proved by the credible evidence, it was open to the jury to conclude that the appellant had the strongest reasons to be rid of his wife.
In our view, it was reasonably open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased was drowned as a result in some way of the conscious agency of the appellant.

In those circumstances therefore this ground of appeal must fail.

Ground 14 A: There is reasonable apprehension that the verdict has been affected by an improper extra curial communication on the part of a juror.

In relation to this ground evidence was tendered in the form of an affidavit sworn by the solicitor for the appellant, Mr Voros. He deposed that, at the conclusion of the trial on 20 October 1995 (in fact, the jury returned their verdict on the afternoon of 19 October; part of the sentencing proceedings took place on 20 October), he and Dr Gumbert spoke to the appellant in the cells and then went to a nearby hotel where he saw a large number of members of the jury sitting at a table drinking with the Crown Prosecutor and his instructing solicitor. Mr Voros and Dr Gumbert joined the group. He had a conversation with the man who had been the foreman on the jury. The foreman said that, prior to the appellant making his unsworn statement, "he had most of the female jurors on side" (paragraph 4). Another juror who was part of the conversation then said that he had previously been employed as a political reporter with the ABC and that it had struck him as unusual that the appellant was allowed to make an unsworn statement in the light of recent amendments to the relevant provisions of the Crimes Act. He said that he had at some stage spoken to somebody he described as a "barrister friend" who had explained that the matter was an old trial (paragraphs 5 and 6).

After hearing argument this Court declined to admit the affidavit evidence. It is appropriate now to state our reasons for that decision.

There is a long line of authority relating to the admissibility of evidence concerning the conduct and deliberations of a jury in criminal and civil trials. The first principle that emerges is that any evidence that discloses jury deliberations is inadmissible. Recent authorities in this court, which refer to the origin of and explanation for the rule include R versus Emmett and
Masland [(1988) 14 NSWLR 327]; R v
Rinaldi and Kessey [(1993) 68 A Crim R 284];
R versus Minarowska and Koziol [(1995) 83 A Crim R 78] and
R versus Slater, unreported, CCA, 20 July 1994. In Emmett this court drew a distinction between disclosure of jury deliberations and disclosure of events which, even if they took place in the jury room, were extrinsic to the jury deliberations. Evidence of the latter will, in an appropriate case, be admitted. These principles, developed and enunciated in cases that pre-date the commencement of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), have been expressly preserved by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s9.html) (2)(a) of that Act.

Given the distinction drawn in Emmett, it is necessary to analyse the evidence tendered on behalf of the appellant and to identify the purpose sought to be achieved by its tender. If that exercise demonstrates that the evidence was tendered as evidence of the jury deliberations, it was inadmissible. If it were tendered to prove matters extrinsic to the jury deliberations, it was not necessarily excluded by the principles to which we have referred and may, subject to other rules of evidence, have been admissible.

It is clear that the evidence in paragraph 4 in which Mr Voros deposed that he had been told that, prior to making his unsworn statement, the appellant had most of the female jurors on side, had no purpose other than to disclose the deliberations of the jury and could not be admitted. Senior counsel for the appellant in fact accepted that this was so.

The second substantive part of the affidavit was that in which Mr Voros deposed to the conversation with a male juror about the entitlement of the appellant to make an unsworn statement. It is not apparent from the affidavit that he communicated his curiosity, or the information he received from his barrister friend as a consequence of his curiosity, to other members of the jury. It is therefore not apparent that this evidence goes to the deliberations of the jury as a whole. Nor is it clear from the affidavit when he received the information he did from his barrister friend. It has not previously been necessary to refer to an affidavit filed by the Crown in response to that of Mr Voros. That was an affidavit sworn by Ms Ilardo, a solicitor who instructed the Crown Prosecutor in the trial. Ms Ilardo's evidence, if it had been admitted, would have shown that the discussion with the members of the jury took place at about lunchtime on 20 October 1995, following the sentence proceedings. The verdict had been returned at 3.30 pm the previous day, 19 October. Even if the evidence of what the juror said were otherwise admissible, it would not show that the communication with the barrister took place prior to the delivery of the verdict. The communication either took place before or after verdict. If it occurred after verdict, it can have no possible relevance in this appeal. If it occurred prior to verdict, then evidence that it occurred can have been tendered for no reason other than to disclose something of the reasoning process of this particular juror. Hence it is properly to be regarded as part of the deliberations of the jury. References in the authorities to deliberations of the jury are not confined only to such matters as are stated orally in the presence and hearing of the whole of the jury, but include the manner in which individual jurors, as well as the jury as a whole, arrive at a verdict. That is what this proposed evidence is about.

The consequence is that this passage was also inadmissible, either as entirely irrelevant (if the communication occurred after verdict), or as contravening the principle concerning jury disclosure (if it occurred before verdict).

The affidavit contained nothing else of substance; what remained had to be rejected on grounds of relevance.

Objection to the evidence was taken by the Crown also on the ground that it was hearsay. In part, this question may have turned upon, or been affected by, the question whether evidence tendered in the appeal (unlike evidence tendered in the trial) was governed by the provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Given the decision of this Court on the argument of substance, it is unnecessary to determine this issue.

It is appropriate again to remind members of the legal profession who have been involved in a criminal trial of the undesirability of engaging in discussions with individuals who have served as members of the jury. Such an observation was made in Rinaldi and attention was there drawn to the provisions of [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s68a.html) of the [Jury Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/). Those provisions then prohibited any person soliciting information from jurors for the purpose of obtaining information on the deliberations of the jury for the purposes of publication. By recent amendment (Jury Amendment Act 1997 No.15) which commenced 1 July 1998 the words "for inclusion in any material to be published or any matter to be broadcast" have been deleted. It is an offence to solicit information from jurors for the purpose of obtaining information about the deliberations. Practitioners who engage in discussions with former jurors expose themselves to the risk of contravening the section. Although in this regard it is appropriate to take into account the description of events given by Ms Ilardo that the gathering in the hotel took place the day after the verdict was delivered, it remains unwise for the legal representatives of the parties to permit themselves to be in a position where there is a real possibility that they will encounter members of the jury. Where they do so unintentionally or unexpectedly, they should refrain from being drawn into discussion about the trial.

It follows from the rejection of the evidence that this ground of appeal must fail.

Application for leave to appeal sentence: 
We turn now to the application for leave to appeal the sentence imposed.

As mentioned above Badgery-Parker J imposed a sentence of penal servitude for twenty-two years and three months, made up of a minimum term of eighteen years and an additional term of four years and three months. The sentence was deemed to have commenced on 19 March 1990, the day the appellant was taken into custody. In arriving at this sentence his Honour took into account, bearing in mind the principle of totality, a sentence of imprisonment for two years imposed on the appellant after his conviction for contempt of court, an offence committed during the first trial. That sentence commenced on 3 October and expired on 2 October 1993.

Two arguments were advanced in support of the application for leave. The first was that the overall sentence was manifestly excessive. The second was that, as a proportion of the total sentence, the minimum term was excessive and that the appellant should have been sentenced in accordance with "the statutory ratio" provided by <case> of the Sentencing Act 1985.

The appellant called no evidence relevant to sentence. His Honour made all relevant findings of fact. A number of issues that had arisen on the evidence he found favourable to the appellant. Included in these were such important findings as a finding that he was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant's act of killing his wife was premeditated. This finding had a significant impact on the sentence he imposed which, he said, would otherwise have been one of penal servitude for life.

The appellant was born on 10 June 1946. He was forty-three years of age at the time of the murder, forty-nine at sentence. His Honour took into account that, at his age, a lengthy sentence would make greater inroads into what remains of his life than the same sentence would on a younger person.

The principal matter argued in relation to the total sentence is that his
Honour began on a false premise, that is, that had he found premeditation proved beyond reasonable doubt, a life sentence would have been required. It was submitted that this was erroneous because such a sentence is not appropriate except for the worst class of cases into which the present case does not fall and would not, even if premeditation were found proved: R v
Twala (unreported, CCA, 4 November 1994); R versus Fernando (unreported, per Abadee J, 21 August 1997). It may be accepted that the sentence of penal servitude for life on a charge of murder is a sentence to be imposed only in the worst category of case; but the fact that a case even more reprehensible may be conjured up in the imagination does not mean that a particular case does not fall into that category.

Counsel pointed to the judgment of Kirby P (as he then was) in his decision in the appellant's previous appeal: R versus Herring [(1994) 74 A Crim R ] at p 73. Slattery J had found beyond reasonable doubt that the offence was premeditated and imposed a life sentence. Kirby P considered the challenge to the sentence "distinctly arguable". Because that court allowed the appeal against conviction and ordered a new trial it was unnecessary to reach a concluded view on the application for leave to appeal the sentence.

The argument advanced on behalf of the appellant was simply that his Honour started with the proposition that, if premeditation had been proved beyond reasonable doubt a life sentence would have been called for, and worked backwards from that; if the foundational premise was wrong, the calculations that followed were also wrong. In our opinion, had this offence been premeditated, an appropriate sentence - not necessarily the only appropriate sentence - would have been one of life imprisonment. We do not think it is correct to say that his Honour began with a notional sentence of life imprisonment and worked backward to the sentence at which he ultimately arrived, and certainly not correct to say that he started with the proposition that in that event a life sentence was the only sentence available. Having not found premeditation proved, his Honour appropriately went about the task of examining all relevant mitigating and aggravating factors, deriving such assistance as he could from sentences in other cases which might be described as broadly comparable and, in the proper exercise of his sentencing discretion, arrived at the sentence he imposed. In our opinion no error has been shown in this process and the sentence is one within the range available.

The second limb of the argument in relation to sentence was that the total sentence of twenty-two years and three months should have been broken up, in the conventional fashion, into a minimum term of 75 percent of the total and an additional term of 25 percent. This would have resulted in a minimum term of a little over sixteen and a half years, and an additional term of a little over five and a half years.

Counsel acknowledged that, while special circumstances have to be found before the additional term may exceed 25 percent of the total sentence, it is not necessary for the sentencing judge to make such a finding where the additional term is to be less than 25 percent of the total term. Nevertheless, counsel argued that, absent special circumstances, sentences should ordinarily be constructed in that way. There is no authority for this proposition and it is not warranted by the provisions of the Sentencing Act. We see no error in the way in which his Honour constructed the sentence. We see no error in the way in which his Honour constructed the sentence. We consider that leave to appeal against the sentence imposed should be granted but that the appeal against sentence should be dismissed.

Therefore the formal orders of the Court are as follows:
The appeal against conviction is dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence is granted but such appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
