

Davies versus Uratoriu; Davies versus Residential Tenancies Tribunal and Anor Matter
Nos 2233/94 [1995] NSWSC 2 (18 May 1995) 
Last Updated: 12 January 1999 `DAVIES versus URATORIU` `2233/94` `DAVIES versus RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL & ANOR` `2927/94` `18 May 1995` `Hodgson J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: Before me are two proceedings concerning the property 32 Chaleyer Street, Rose Bay, a property which is registered in the name of Luciano Uratoriu (who I will call either the defendant or Mr.. Uratoriu) and occupied by John Davies (who I will call the plaintiff or Mr.. Davies) together with his wife and family. 
In proceedings No. 2233 of 1994, Mr. Davies seeks orders which will secure to him some share in the proceeds of sale of the property. In proceedings No.
 of 94, Mr. Davies seeks orders quashing orders made on 3rd May 1994 by the Residential Tenancies Tribunal of New South Wales, having the effect of giving possession of the property to Mr. Uratoriu.

I will start with a brief outline of the facts. The plaintiff and the defendant have known each other for about twenty years, and prior to 1982 had had some personal and business dealings in Western Australia, where the defendant still resides. The plaintiff was in the United Kingdom in the years to 1985, and kept in contact with the defendant during those years. The plaintiff met his wife in the United Kingdom, and they were married in Sydney on 3rd April 1986. The defendant and his family came from Western Australia for this wedding, and the defendant was the best man.

At around the time of the wedding and thereafter, there were conversations between the plaintiff and the defendant concerning a proposed purchase of property, and ultimately concerning the purchase of this particular property in Rose Bay which was, at that time, in a very run-down condition. There are different accounts of these conversations, but certain matters, which were substantially agreed upon in these conversations, are common ground. Firstly, that if this property could be purchased for $120,000.00 or less, it should be purchased by or in the name of the defendant, with the defendant providing the purchase money. Secondly, that the plaintiff would renovate the property at an estimated cost of around $30,000.00, living in the property while this was being done. Thirdly, that while this was happening, the plaintiff should pay to the defendant an amount intended to cover interest on finance obtained by the defendant for the purchase, an amount ultimately agreed at $1,500.00 per month, and should also pay rates and taxes. Fourthly, that after renovation, the property should be sold and the proceeds divided equally.

The property was auctioned on 24th April 1986. The plaintiff bid at the auction, pursuant to an authority to bid on the defendant's behalf, and the plaintiff's bid of $113,500 was accepted by the auctioneer. Bray Jackson &
Co, solicitors, acted for the purchaser. The purchase was completed on 11th
July 1986. The whole of the purchase price and legal expenses was provided by the defendant, having been borrowed by him from his company Winmarley
Properties Pty. Ltd., and in turn funded from that company's overdraft facility with Westpac Banking Corporation.

Prior to completion, the plaintiff sent the defendant sketch plans for proposed extensions and an itemised estimate of their cost, totalling just under $30,000.00. The plaintiff said in evidence he did not believe he sent this estimate, inter alia because it was typed; but I think it is clear that it was sent by him. Certain items in the list are expressly stated as not including labour and this, in my view, confirms that the arrangement was that the plaintiff was to provide his own labour for the renovations, without charge to the venture.

There is some dispute in the evidence as to whether there was some delay after completion before vacant possession was obtained. The defendant, in his affidavit, said that he was informed by the plaintiff and believed that completion was effected with the tenant still in occupation; but at the hearing, through his counsel, relied on the solicitor's file to support a contention that vacant possession had, in fact, been given on completion, as required by the contract. The plaintiff claimed that he did not obtain possession until about September 1986.

There is also a dispute as to whether the amount to be paid by the plaintiff to the defendant to cover finance expenses was described as rent. It is asserted by the defendant that it was, and this is denied by the plaintiff.
Following completion of the purchase, on the instructions of the plaintiff,
Bray Jackson & Co. in fact prepared a lease of the property for twelve months from the defendant to the plaintiff and his wife at a rent of $1,650.00 per month. That lease was never executed.

The defendant also claims that the plaintiff agreed that the renovations would be completed within six months.

In about October 1986, the plaintiff sent the defendant a copy of a plan of the proposed alterations as they were then contemplated. This plan showed more extensive additions to the property than the earlier sketch plans. The council apparently required some alterations to the plans initially proposed by the plaintiff, and it appears that council consent to the extensions to the property was not obtained until towards the end of 1987 or the beginning of
However, internal renovations of that part of the existing house which was to be retained were commenced about the end of 1986 and proceeded with.

Between December 1986 and August 1988, the plaintiff sent to the defendant a total of $29,500.00, on account of the $1,500 per month which had been agreed would be paid.

In late 1987, the plaintiff asked the defendant for a letter confirming that the plaintiff had an interest in the house, in order to assist the plaintiff to obtain credit. In response to that request, the defendant sent the plaintiff a letter dated 19th January 1988 in the following terms: "Dear John, re: PROPERTY AT 32 CHALEYER STREET, ROSE BAY 
I hereby formally acknowledge our gentleman's agreement made on 23rd April, concerning the above property.

I agreed to buy the house and on 23/4/86 paid the required deposit to
Bradfield & Prichard. The property was settled on 11/7/86 and was financed by a first mortgage loan of $90,000.00 and the balance in cash was provided by myself personally.

Your participation in the deal and the basis of our agreement, was that you would reside in the house and that you would pay me rent of $1500.00 per month to cover the interest on the mortgage loan and that you would pay the rates and taxes pertaining to the property. This arrangement was to begin on the settlement date. It was agreed between us that over a period of six months following the settlement date you would spend approximately $30,000.00 and perform additions and renovations to the house as planned. Upon completion of the work it was agreed that the property would be sold and that the proceeds of the sale would be used to repay the mortgage loan, reimburse each of us the moneys we contributed to the purchase and improvements respectively and the remaining balance to be equally divided and shared between us.

The purpose of our agreement was that both of us benefit in equal shares from the net profit arising from the eventual sale of the property.

Yours faithfully, 
L.A. URATORIU" 
Between 13th October 1988 and 3rd February 1989 the defendant remitted to the plaintiff money totalling $20,000.00 in order to enable the work on the property to be finished.

In about February 1989, the plaintiff sent a letter to the defendant making a proposal for obtaining additional finance on the security of the property, the letter clearly assuming that there was only $90,000.00 owing on the security of the property, as suggested by the letter of 19th January 1988.

However, the defendant then advised the plaintiff that no more money could be borrowed on the property because it was mortgaged to Westpac, as security for moneys owing by Winmarley Properties. The Westpac mortgage over the property was, in fact, stamped to over one million dollars as at early 1988. It is common ground that, until this advice from the defendant to the plaintiff following the letter of February 1989, the plaintiff did not know that the property had been used to finance anything other than the purchase of the property itself.

On 26th May 1989 a valuer, instructed by the defendant, valued the property.
He reported that some finishing work was required to complete the refurbishment, but nevertheless valued the property at $550,000.00. The plaintiff said in evidence that the renovations and also the extensions contemplated by the plans of October 1986 were in fact complete at around this time, and I accept that evidence.

Notwithstanding the completion or substantial completion of the renovations and extensions, neither party took any steps towards selling the property until about May 1991. In February 1991 the defendant obtained a further valuation from the same valuer, the valuation then given being $460,000.00.
There was no suggestion in that valuation that the refurbishment of the property was not complete.

In May 1991, the defendant instructed a real estate agent to sell the property, and in August 1991 he instructed other agents to do so. In fact, it appears that an auction of the property was proposed for 31st October 1991.
However, in May 1991 the plaintiff put a caveat on the title claiming, in effect, a half interest in the property; and it appears that it was substantially for this reason that the auction did not go ahead.

I note that the caveat, a copy of which is in evidence, bears a date stamp th May 1990; but having regard to the other dates on the caveat and the circumstances, I consider that that is simply a mistake and that, for some reason, that particular date stamp used by the Registrar General showed the wrong year.

On 1st October 1991, solicitors acting on behalf of the plaintiff wrote to the defendant offering the plaintiff's agreement to the sale of the property, provided the plaintiff received $150,000.00 on completion. There was no written response to that letter although, according to the plaintiff, the defendant told him that he would pay the plaintiff $150,000.00, not on completion of the sale but when he was able to. This is denied by the defendant.

On 16th October 1991, the plaintiff's solicitors wrote offering to purchase the defendant's interest in the property for $300,000.00. There was no written response to this or, so far as the evidence goes, any verbal response.

On 6th January 1992, Westpac wrote to the plaintiff advising that it had, on November 1991, demanded payment of the amount due under its mortgage, that the mortgagor had failed to comply and was therefore in default, and that the bank wished to sell the property. The letter went on to require the plaintiff to vacate it. The plaintiff's solicitors responded to this by a letter dated th January 1992. It appears that Westpac did not proceeded to seek to sell the property; and it appears that in late 1992 or early 1993, the National
Australia Bank refinance Winmarley Properties Pty. Ltd. and discharged the mortgage over the subject property to Westpac. The defendant, at this time, apparently executed a mortgage over the property in favour of the National
Australia Bank.

It appears that on about 23rd January 1994, the defendant was advised by the
National Australia Bank that it was unable to register its mortgage on the property because of the plaintiff's caveat. The defendant wrote to the plaintiff requesting immediate withdrawal of the caveat and requesting the plaintiff to vacate the premises by 22nd March 1994. The plaintiff did not comply with these requests. The defendant commenced proceedings in the
Residential Tenancies Tribunal, and those proceedings gave rise to the orders made in May 1994 to which I have referred.

As the case has been conducted, it seems to me convenient to consider the issues under the following headings. Firstly, what was the nature of the transaction between the parties and what were its terms? Secondly, what, if any, breaches were there by the parties and what were the consequences of those breaches? Thirdly, what contributions had been made by the parties and what were their respective rights in about mid 1989? And fourthly, what adjustments to this are required by the events which occurred between about mid 1989 and the present? 
Before proceeding to deal in turn with those issues, I need to say something briefly about the credit of the two main witnesses in the case, that is, the plaintiff and the defendant. It does not appear that any question arises as to the credit of any other witness.

Mr. Dupree, for the defendant, submitted that I should not give weight to the evidence of the plaintiff. He pointed to the complete lack of documentation in relation to the plaintiff's claimed expenditure on the property, and also to the claim, made on the plaintiff's behalf by his solicitor and upon his instructions, that $80,000.00 which the plaintiff claimed to have spent on the property was fully documented. He pointed to the plaintiff's failure to disclose in his case the contribution of $20,000.00 by the defendant towards the renovations. He submitted that the plaintiff was less than frank in admitting financial difficulties which led to the winding up by the court of his Western Australian company Kitchen World. He submitted that the plaintiff's evidence concerning obtaining vacant possession only in September could not be accepted, having regard to the contents of the solicitor's file. He pointed to the plaintiff's denial that the plans of October 1986 were obtained at that time and sent to the defendant at that time and he pointed to the plaintiff's allegation, in his affidavit, that the instalments of $1,500.00 a week had been paid from September 1986 to August 1989.

In my view there is force in those submissions, particularly the submissions about lack of documentation and lack of explanation for the lack of documentation in relation to the work done on the property, particularly when associated with the claim made in the solicitor's letter. I do find that I am unable to rely on the details of conversations given in evidence by the plaintiff, and I am unable to rely on his unsupported assertions about how much was spent on the property.

As regards the credit of the defendant, I note that in his evidence the defendant steadfastly maintained that the plaintiff had no interest in the property itself, but only an interest in receiving half the ultimate profits of the venture; and that subject to that, the defendant could do whatever he liked with the property without discussion or disclosure to the plaintiff. It will be apparent from what I say later that I believe the defendant is wrong in that view; but it may be that this was a view, bona fide held by the defendant, and it is not a matter which I can weigh significantly in relation to his credit. However, the defendant also claimed in evidence, as I understood him, that he always intended that the plaintiff receive one half of the profits on sale of the property. In my view, I should not accept that assertion.

When the property was to be auctioned in October 1991, the plaintiff's solicitor wrote to the defendant proposing that the plaintiff receive $150,000.00 on completion and that the sale could proceed on that basis. The defendant denies that he made any offer at all in response to that letter. If that denial is true, then it seems to me impossible to believe that he was truly willing that the plaintiff receive a share of profits from the sale. Had he been truly willing that that happen, then surely he would have made a proposal to that general effect in response to that solicitor's offer.

According to the plaintiff, the defendant's response to this letter was to the effect that the plaintiff would be paid $150,000.00, not on completion of the sale but when the defendant was able to pay him. In my view that evidence has strong support from the terms of the letter from the plaintiff's solicitor, and notwithstanding my hesitation about accepting the details of the plaintiff's evidence, I believe that on that matter, what the plaintiff says is correct.

The circumstance that I am unable to accept the defendant's assertion that he was always willing that the plaintiff be paid his proper share from the proceeds of sale, means that in his case also I cannot rely on the details of his evidence concerning conversations. One other factor that supports that view is to be found in the terms of the letter of 19th January. In the second paragraph it contains an assertion as to how the purchase of the property was financed, namely, by a first mortgage loan of $90,000.00 and the balance in cash provided by himself personally. It is quite apparent that that assertion was simply untrue. I would not place major weight on that in relation to credit, because I do not believe it was specifically the subject of cross- examination; but it is another factor which, in my view, supports the conclusion that I have drawn for the other reasons.

It follows, I think, from my view of the credit of these parties, that in attempting to ascertain the terms of their arrangement I have to rely much more on documents and on the probabilities suggested by the circumstances, than on their evidence as to the actual conversations.

The next matter that I deal with is the nature of the arrangement between them and the terms of that arrangement. Mr. Dupree, for the defendant, submitted that the arrangement was essentially one of contract, with the terms being those set out in the letter of 19th January 1988. He submitted that I should accept that it was contemplated that there be a true relationship of landlord and tenant between the defendant and the plaintiff. He submitted that such right as given by the contract to the plaintiff in the proceeds of ultimate sale did not give rise to any interest in the land, and in support of that he referred me to Epple v. Wilson <case>; [(1972) VR 440.] He submitted that it made no difference that the interest in these proceeds developed from a project to develop the land in question, and he referred me to Simons v. David Benge Motors Pty. Limited <case>; [(1974) VR 585.] He referred to Hospital Produce v. United States Surgical at pp.68, 70, 72 and 122 in support of the submission that there was not, in this transaction, indicia that a fiduciary relationship was intended. He referred me to Falcke v. Scottish Insurance Company in support of the proposition that doing work on property did not give rise to an interest in the land, even if the work was consented to by the owner of the property; and he submitted that insofar as the work done departed from the plans originally submitted, it was not even consented to. Mr. Dupree also referred me to
Griffith v. Hodge (1979) 2 BPR 9474.

He submitted that the documentary evidence strongly supported the position that the property was absolutely owned by the defendant. He pointed to the authority given by the defendant to the plaintiff to bid on his behalf. He pointed to various documents in the solicitor's file, indicating that the client was the defendant alone, and he pointed to the terms of the plaintiff's letter of February 1989 as confirming that the transaction contemplated that the defendant would be the sole owner of the property and that the plaintiff should be merely a tenant.

He also referred me to Muschinski v. Dodds <case>; [160 CLR 583] for the proposition that an interest in land couldn't be founded simply on considerations of fairness. He submitted that the transaction did not amount to a partnership, referring me to Higgins & Fletcher, Law of Partnership in Australia and New Zealand, pp.28-33.

On behalf of the plaintiff, initially Mr. Kelly contended that an express trust was constituted by the letter of 19th January 1988. In my view, that letter does not amount to an express trust of the property. However, I do consider that the transaction between the parties did amount to a partnership in the venture, with mutual fiduciary obligations. In my opinion, in this venture the plaintiff and the defendant were carrying on business in common with a view to profit.

The principal factors which, in my view, support a finding of partnership may be summarised as follows. Firstly, there was an agreement between them to share the profits of the venture equally, and I would imply an agreement that if there were losses, the losses were also to be shared equally. Secondly, what was proposed was a business venture, but was a business venture between persons with a history of personal, as well as commercial, dealings. Thirdly, the rights and obligations were not spelled out in detail, as one would expect if what were contemplated was merely a contractual arrangement between arms- length contracting parties. Fourthly, the fact that the business involved a single venture only does not negative a partnership, although it may to some extent, point against it: see United Dominion Corporation v. Brian <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 1.] Fifthly, the venture did involve the business activity of renovation and sale of the premises. Finally, the sharing of profits which was contemplated is not explicable in terms of co-ownership of the property, as it is in some cases: see Commissioner of Taxation v. McDonald [(1987) 15 CR ] at -4.

A finding that the venture was a partnership may not, in itself, give the plaintiff any caveatable interest in the property. However, in my opinion, subject to what I say about breaches, the plaintiff did have a caveatable interest in the land, at least when the renovations had been substantially completed, because, in my opinion, the plaintiff then had a right to have the land sold and to have the proceeds divided, a right of which the plaintiff could have obtained specific performance.

In the Victorian case of Eple, in which Gowans, J. decided that a right to share proceeds of sale did not give a caveatable interest, his Honour noted that the agreement in that case gave the caveator no right to require a sale.
In this case the agreement and the partnership clearly entitled the plaintiff to require sale of the property. It could be argued that the plaintiff did not have any equitable interest in the land initially, because there could not be specific performance of the agreement to renovate the property. But, in my opinion, once the renovations had been completed, the plaintiff did have a right, which equity would enforce, to have the property sold and proceeds divided. In my view, that does amount to an interest in land which would support a caveat. The Victorian case of Simons is also distinguishable, in my opinion. The question of caveatable interest in that case arose at a very early stage when, in my opinion, the court would not have ordered specific performance of the contemplated development.

Turning to the particular terms of the arrangement, in my opinion, although a period of six months was discussed, there was no firm agreement that the work be completed within six months. However, in my view, there was an implied term, at least, that the renovations be completed within a reasonable time.
Certainly, a figure of $30,000.00 was mentioned for the renovations. However, in my view, it was clear that the renovations contemplated in October 1986 were more extensive than those for which the estimate of $30,000.00 had been given, and that, had the defendant wished to restrict the renovations to $30,000.00, he should have done something at that stage.

As regards the payment of $1,500.00 per month, in my view that was not intended to be a rent in the sense of a landlord and tenant relationship. It was intended to cover, at least, the defendant's costs of financing the purchase. The most difficult question concerning that payment, in my view, is whether that should be included as part of the plaintiff's expenses in ascertaining what the profits of the venture were. Mr. Dupre submitted that the terms of the letter of 19 January 1988 indicated that the plaintiff was not to have the benefit of that payment as part of his expenses because, in that letter, what was to be reimbursed to the plaintiff was only funds contributed to the improvements. Mr. Dupree submitted that that contention was supported also by the plaintiff's own letter of February 1989.

I would not give very much weight to that detail of the letter of 19th January
I have already indicated one respect in which that letter is plainly inaccurate. It seems to me that it was drafted with a view to presenting the matter as favourably as possible to the defendant, although I do give some weight to the circumstance that the only response to the letter in evidence is the plaintiff's letter of February 1989.

In my view, a better basis for inferring the intentions of the parties is the circumstances of the transaction. In the transaction the plaintiff was providing his labour for no payment, and he was not to receive any repayment for that labour in the ultimate accounts. The plaintiff was to have accommodation in the property while it was being renovated, but, having regard to the initial state of the property and the amenity of living in a property while it is being renovated, the value of that accommodation would be nothing like $1,500.00 a month. $150.00 a week has been suggested, and in my view that would be a very generous estimate.

In my view, it would be wholly unreasonable if this monthly payment should not merely cover completely the defendant's financing expenses so that, in effect, the defendant would be making no cash contribution towards the project whatsoever, but also should not even be taken into account as a contribution by the plaintiff.

Accordingly, although I cannot find the detailed terms of the conversations which took place, for the reasons I have indicated I infer that, from the conversations and the circumstances, it was clear that the $1,500.00 per month was to be treated as an expense by the plaintiff for which the plaintiff should be given credit in working out the money to be returned to each party and in working out the profits of the venture.

The next topic I deal with is the question of breaches. Mr. Dupre, for the defendant, submitted that the plaintiff was in breach of the arrangement in failing to complete the renovations within six months; failing to bring the job in at around $30,000; in unilaterally changing the design; in bad workmanship; in seeking further funds from the defendant; and in failing to keep proper records. Although this was not specifically referred to by Mr.
Dupree, I would take it that he also submitted that it was a breach of the arrangement by the plaintiff to place a caveat on the title.

In my view, the plaintiff was in breach in failing to complete the renovations within a reasonable time and I think there was very minor bad workmanship in the job. However, that latter aspect can be taken into account in assessing the plaintiff's contribution; and insofar as there was any failure to complete the building within a reasonable time, it seems to me clear that no loss was caused to the project by that. The valuation as at May 1989 confirms that property values were rising substantially up to that time, and certainly there is nothing to suggest that the venture would have been better off if the work had been finished and the property sold before that time. The failure to keep records is a matter that can also be taken into account in dealing with the plaintiff's contribution.

For the reasons I have already given, I consider that the plaintiff was entitled to lodge a caveat, and that the lodging of the caveat could not, in any way, be regarded as a breach of any obligation of the plaintiff.

For the plaintiff it was submitted that the mortgaging of the property to support other ventures of the defendant and his companies was a breach of the arrangement. Mr. Dupree submitted that this was not so, that there was no evidence that this put the property or the plaintiff's interest in it at any risk, and that if the plaintiff wished to assert a breach of this nature there needed to be evidence. In any event, Mr. Dupree submitted that what the evidence does show is that Westpac was paid out.

In my opinion, the mortgaging of this property for other projects of the defendant without the consent of the plaintiff, or even disclosure to the plaintiff, was a clear breach of the defendant's fiduciary duty to his partner. In my view, this is supported by United Dominion Corporation v.
Brian, to which I have already referred. Even if it were the case that the defendant could have obtained a discharge of the mortgage to enable sale of the property and to enable the payment to the plaintiff of the plaintiff's share, in my opinion what was done in mortgaging the property to secure a million dollars in relation to other ventures, notwithstanding that there may have been other security also, did put the property at risk.

I would also add that I am not satisfied by the defendant's assertion that he was always in a position to discharge this mortgage so as to enable payment of the plaintiff's share. Although the plaintiff's complaint was clear on the evidence in this case, the defendant made no effort whatsoever to lead any evidence of matters peculiarly within his knowledge, to suggest that he was in this financial position. There were in fact defaults under the Westpac facilities leading to demands being made by Westpac of the plaintiff, and in my view, the circumstances of the aborted auction of October 1991 also confirms that the defendant was not in a position to pay out the plaintiff's share at the time of that proposed auction.

Furthermore, although it seems to me that at no time did the plaintiff take appropriate steps towards bringing about the sale of this property, which should have taken place pursuant to the original arrangement, the principal reason why no sale has taken place, particularly in October 1991 and thereafter, has been the defendant's breach of fiduciary duty and the defendant's failure to make any appropriate attempts to co-operate with the plaintiff to bring about a sale which ensured the appropriate payment to the plaintiff.

The next matter I deal with is the contributions of the parties and the position as it existed in about June 1989. Broadly, it seems to me that by that time the defendant had contributed about $115,000.00 to the purchase and the $20,000.00 towards the renovations. I think there is to be added to this a further notional amount. The plaintiff should have paid $1,500.00 per month to cover finance costs until the property could be sold. It is not possible for me to make a firm finding as to when that payment should have started, because
I am not able to be satisfied whether the plaintiff obtained vacant possession in July, August or September 1986. However, if one takes the period during which that money should have been paid as 33 or 34 months up to about June , there should have been a total of about $50,000.00 paid. Instead, just under $30,000.00 was paid, so during the period of the renovation, up to the time when the house could be sold, the defendant had to bear around $20,000.00 of finance costs which it had not been contemplated that he would bear. I think that should be added to the figures I have mentioned, making a total contribution by the defendant, as at around June 1989, of $155,000.00.

The plaintiff contributed the $29,500.00 I have mentioned. The contribution by the plaintiff in relation to the renovations I have decided to put at $35,000.00. The plaintiff's Quantity Surveyor valued the work at $110,000.00.
From that has to be deducted $7,500.00 overhead, around $5,500.00 profit, $20,000.00 contributed by the defendant, the plaintiff's own labour, an allowance for work effected cheaply because the plaintiff had workmen working on other jobs at the same time, and I think also some small allowance for minor defects. The defendant's builder put the value of extensions at $75,000.00; and if I accepted that, there would have to be deducted, I think, $2,000.00 for overheads, perhaps $3,750.00 for profit, again the $20,000.00 contributed by the defendant, and some allowance for the other items I have mentioned. Coupled with that, there is the circumstance that the onus of proving the plaintiff's contribution is squarely on the plaintiff. The plaintiff should have had proper records, or at least should have had some records. The plaintiff has failed to produce any records whatsoever, and has given no satisfactory explanation of this.

Taking all those matters into account, and doing the best I can, I assess the amount actually expended by the plaintiff, which can be credited in his favour, as $35,000.00. That makes the total contribution of the plaintiff, at that time, $65,000.00. If the land had then been sold, as it should have been, the first $90,000.00 would have gone to the defendant and the balance would have been divided equally.

The final matter I have to deal with is what adjustments to this should be made, having regard to the lapse of time from mid-1989 to the present and the events that occurred in that period. Over that period, the renovations having substantially been completed, the plaintiff has had the benefit of rent-free accommodation. The value of that accommodation, it seems to me on the evidence, over that period is around $140,000.00. I would give credit against that for about $10,000.00 paid over the whole period in respect of rates and taxes, giving a figure of $130,000.00.

Mr. Dupree, for the defendant, submits that that $130,000.00 should be deducted from the plaintiff's share of the profits, and then paid to the defendant. In my view that is clearly wrong. By mid-1989, in my opinion, the plaintiff and the defendant were, in substance, equitable co-owners of the property, subject to the $90,000.00 additional contribution made up to that time by the defendant, referred to previously.

In my view there is no basis for the suggestion, where the defendant had made no appropriate attempt to have the property sold, that the arrangement for covering his financial expenses for providing the finance should continue in the same way as it had been in force for the time until which the property could have been sold; since by that time, in my opinion, the property was, in substance, owned by the parties equally. The worst result for the plaintiff would be simply to debit the $130,000 to the plaintiff without also, in effect, crediting it to the defendant.

Mr. Kelly has submitted that since by that time the parties were, in substance, equal co-owners, since the plaintiff is making no claim for improvements made during this period, and since the failure to sell the property was, in substance, the defendant's fault rather than the plaintiff's, there is no reason why I should not apply the usual rule which applies in relation to co-owners. That is, that there should be no notional debiting of the co-owner in residence.

The existence and continued application of that rule in relation to co-owners was recently confirmed by a majority of the Court of Appeal in Forgeard v.
Shanahan, a judgment delivered on 11 October 1994. Mr. Kelly also submitted that the defendant has had a benefit from the property over that period in having it as security for his other projects, which should be set off against any benefit that the plaintiff has received, if the plaintiff is somehow charged with that benefit. Mr. Kelly also pointed to the evidence that the accommodation in this property was not accommodation which the plaintiff wished to have and that, accordingly, it may not be appropriate to charge the plaintiff for the full commercial rental.

Although I have said that, in substance, the parties were equal owners of the property by this time, in that both parties were entitled to have the property sold and, after payment of $90,000.00 to the defendant, the proceeds are divided equally, the parties do have to be treated, I think, as partners rather than strictly co-owners. In trying to reach an equitable result between partners, I think the co-ownership principles are relevant; but I do not think
I can disregard some additional factors, namely, that it was always contemplated in the arrangement that the plaintiff would reside in the property until it was sold, and that this was a benefit which the plaintiff was receiving and the defendant would not receive, and also the circumstance that the plaintiff was, to some extent, at fault in the matter in never taking appropriate steps, as at mid-1989 or thereafter, to try to have the property sold.

On the whole, I think the appropriate adjustment would be to regard the plaintiff's obligations in respect of the rental value of the property as cancelling out the $65,000.00 which I previously found was the plaintiff's contribution, but not as going any further than that.

For those reasons, I think the appropriate result is that the property must be sold. The first $155,000.00 should be paid to the defendant and the balance should be divided equally. As part of this process, the defendant must promptly obtain a letter from the National Australia Bank to the effect that it will remove the caveat on payment to it of such amounts of the defendant's share of the proceeds as is, pursuant to my decision, available to be paid to the National Australia Bank. It is necessary that that be obtained so that the sale arrangements can go ahead with confidence that they won't be aborted by the National Australia Bank refusing to remove its caveat.

It follows from my reasons that the arrangement between the parties cannot be regarded as a residential tenancy. In my view, the relationship was one of partners, not of landlord and tenant. I also accept Mr. Kelly's submission that, at the time the arrangement was made, the premises couldn't be regarded as residential premises, but could more fairly be regarded as a development site.

In the result, I would find in the plaintiff's favour in both cases. Unless there is some reason that can be advanced to the contrary, the result of that would be that the defendant should pay the plaintiff's costs of both proceedings. It also seems to me that, in the circumstances of this case, it would be appropriate that a part of the defendant's share of the proceeds of sale, perhaps $50,000.00, be set aside as a fund from which the plaintiff may satisfy some or all of the order for costs. I would not propose that the sale be held up until costs can be taxed; but I think it is appropriate that some part, and my present suggestion would be $50,000, be set aside for that purpose.
 * * * 
