

Delpin Pty Ltd and Ors versus Nargol Holdings Pty Ltd Matter No 3815/97 [1997]
NSWSC 348 (29 August 1997) ` 
Delpin Pty Ltd & Ors versus Nargol Holdings Pty Ltd` ` 3815/97` `29 August 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 DELPIN PTY LTD & ORS versus NARGOL HOLDINGS PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Earlier this afternoon, I dealt with an ex parte matter, being a squabble between two groups of doctors at Castle Hill. The matter was difficult for the court because it has been brought before the court on the last business day before Armageddon, so far as this practice is concerned. Accordingly, there is not the time to give the matter the consideration it deserves. 
I thought, when looking at the plaintiffs' case, that there was a barely arguable case, but enough to get over the test that has been laid down by the authorities. I then turned my mind to the balance of convenience and thought that, particularly in the interests of the sick, ill and maimed at Castle
Hill, the court should freeze the position as it is at the moment until next
Tuesday, when the matter can be looked at in proper detail with affidavits from both sides. When I gave that indication, Mr Biscoe QC and Mr Climpson of counsel for the defendant, indicated that they wished to be heard. I then took in a series of documents including some minutes of a meeting at which some members of both groups of doctors attended on 1 September 1996.

Mr Biscoe QC made an offer in seven parts which I assume was only open until I gave my decision: 
The defendant would grant to the plaintiffs a licence to occupy a substantially similar area until 27 September 1997 on the same basis as at present; the defendant would pay the plaintiffs' removal cost to the new premises; the defendant would attend to the removal by 8 am on 1 September 1997; the defendant would post prominent notices on the existing premises as to the relocation; the defendant would locate a person at the old premises to direct prospective patients to the new premises between 8 am and 6 pm, up to 27
September 1997; if the plaintiffs elected to return to the present premises on 27
September 1997, the defendant would pay the costs of removal back to the present premises and attend to the removal; and that, for the next month, the defendant would return to the pre-June 1997 accounting arrangement.

Mr Meek for the plaintiffs was not able to get instructions as to whether to accept this offer or not, there being two reasons: that there were a large number of plaintiffs. (Evidently the plaintiffs have not taken the precaution, as normally happens, in this sort of case of authorising one or more of their number to instruct the lawyers); and one of the plaintiffs is holidaying somewhere in the Pacific Ocean on a cruise ship.

The situation, thus, is that an offer which may or may not have put an end to the proceedings cannot be dealt with and when that is added to the great inconvenience caused to the court by an application at the last moment, it does not make the court feel very favourably disposed towards the plaintiffs.
On the other hand, the court has to put out of its mind questions of its own feelings and deal with the matter as one of justice.

Commercially the situation is that the doctors can no longer agree with each other. It is in the interests of the plaintiff doctors to remain where they are, so that they can retain the goodwill of the existing centre, which is beneficially vested in the whole lot of them and then open their new centre in the existing premises on 27 September 1997 under a new lease.

The defendant, who wants to open a medical centre down the road, is interested in having the whole practice move down the road, even for a short period of time so that the goodwill will attach to the new premises and then the plaintiffs will have to return to the old premises without some of the goodwill. The parties have been sparring with each other for about a year and, as I say, Armageddon approaches.

The court is put in a very awkward position, but I cannot see any particular damage that is going to be caused by postponing the move over the weekend.
Accordingly, even after taking into account what Mr Biscoe QC has put, it seems to me that I should still, on the balance of convenience, make the orders that I contemplated earlier.

I have not overlooked the submission that the plaintiffs have not put forward to the court all of the relevant material when seeking an ex parte injunction.
I am not convinced that this is so. It seems to me that there is very great difficulty in working out who double-crossed whom and that any change of position, in any event, that the parties have taken since either September last year (on the defendant's tale) or January this year (on the plaintiffs' tale) may be a result of their commercial relationship deteriorating as much as anyone really wanting to double- cross the other.

Accordingly, I make the orders 3(a), 3(c) and 3(d) in the short minutes up to and including 2 September next upon the plaintiffs, by their counsel, giving to the court the usual undertaking as to damages. I stand the matter over into the Duty Judge's list at 10 am on 2 September 1997.

Exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
