

Boshell and Anor versus Marjanac and Anor Matter No 55033/96 [1998] NSWSC 181 (1 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
BOSHELL & ANOR versus MARJANAC & ANOR /96 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division Construction List 
Name of Case: BOSHELL & ANOR versus MARJANAC & ANOR 
Proceedings: 55033/1996 
Date of Hearing: 24 April 1998 
Date of Judgment: 1 May 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr M J Fordham 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Trevor Fowler & Co 
Counsel for Defendants: Mr M M Macrossan 
Solicitors for Defendants: Benetatos White 
Proceedings commenced in the District Court.

Plaintiffs then assert a claim in excess of its jurisdiction and matter transferred to the Supreme Court by consent.

Plaintiffs recover a judgment for approximately $33,000.

Defendants oppose an order for costs on the basis of Part 52A rule 33 and in the exercise of discretion.

Held Part 52A rule 33 not applicable and no reason to exercise discretion adversely to the plaintiffs.

Observations on needs for referee's reports to be provided expeditiously.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
In March 1996 the plaintiffs, Dr and Mrs Boshell, commenced proceedings numbered 1841 of 1996 in the District Court against Mr Marjanac, who carried on business as a builder, designer and construction manager, and his wife, who apparently carried on business in partnership with him. The plaintiffs had entered into a contract with the defendants for the supervision of work involving the demolition and reconstruction of part of their existing home at Martin Place, Linden in the Blue Mountains, and the construction of a new garage, for a fee of $40,000 inclusive of all project management costs, office work, site meetings, supply of hand tools and the like, and the defendants' costs in engaging all contractors. The plaintiffs' claim was for damages for failure to carry out the agreement properly.

Several months after the proceedings were commenced in the District Court the plaintiffs were advised by Mr N.J. King of Kriton Constructions Pty Limited, an expert retained by them in the proceedings, that the quantum of their claim "may be in excess of $280,000". On 12 June 1996 their solicitor wrote to the solicitors for the defendants stating that the claim was in the order of $283,000 and that as that amount exceeded the jurisdiction of the District
Court consent was sought to the jurisdiction of that Court being extended. The letter stated that if that consent was not forthcoming an application would be made to transfer the proceedings to this Court "with costs on the Summons".

On 20 June 1996 the solicitors for the defendants responded advising that their clients would not consent to increase the jurisdictional limit of the
District Court and:- "If your client wishes to have the matter transferred to the Supreme Court please advise and we will seek our clients' instructions on whether they will consent to this. We anticipate such consent would be forthcoming as it is submitted that your clients will not succeed on their claim and the risks of a costs order being made against your client if the matter is to proceed in the Supreme Court is substantially greater than in the current jurisdiction.

We are also instructed to propose to you that the parties submit the current dispute to mediation by a qualified mediator. This will save both sets of parties significant costs and time if the matter is resolved." 
As I understand the first paragraph I have quoted, what the solicitors for the defendants were propounding was that their clients were confident of success, so that if the matter went ahead in this Court the plaintiffs would be exposed to a larger order for costs than if the matter went ahead in the District
Court. The plaintiffs' alternative was to abandon the excess over the District
Court's jurisdictional limit.

Prior to the institution of the District Court proceedings there had been certain correspondence between Mrs Boshell and the solicitors for the defendants seeking to resolve the matter. In a letter of 7 January 1996 Mrs
Boshell, who holds a degree in law from the University of New South Wales, stated that the plaintiffs would consider settling the matter for $30,000. It was not suggested that this was relevant to any issue before me.

On 8 August 1996 a Summons was filed in this Court seeking an order that the proceedings be removed into it, and, on 17 October 1996, Bainton J made an order by consent that that should occur. The substantive proceedings were commenced and, on 3 June 1997, an order was made appointing Ms Janet Grey as the Referee, pursuant to Part 72. Unlike most building disputes there was no cross-claim by the defendants and Ms Grey furnished her report on 2 April
She determined that the plaintiffs were entitled to damages in the sum of $33,841.40.

On 17 April 1998 the matter was mentioned before me so that consideration could be given to the adoption of the report. I was informed that it was likely that the parties would agree to the report's being adopted, but that there would be argument as to costs. The matter was stood over to 24 April when the parties confirmed that they sought the adoption of the report and that the matter in issue was the costs of the proceedings.

The Report And Its Adoption 
Notwithstanding that the substantive claim was made in this Court on 18
October 1996, the parties did not present an Order for Reference until shortly before 3 June 1997, and when that was made the portion providing for the date by which the Referee should report was struck out. The reference, however, was to commence on 12 June 1997. On 11 July 1997 I re-listed the matter as there was no date provided by which the Referee was to report. I was informed that the matter would not be heard, notwithstanding that the order for reference was made on 3 June 1997, until 20 October 1997. I have said on a number of occasions, and I repeat, that the purpose of referring matters out for report is to have them heard expeditiously so that the Referee can report promptly to the Court. A period of some five months between the date the Order for
Reference is made and the date for the hearing of the reference does not comply with the type of expedition I expect in a matter of this type. I directed the Referee to report to the Court on 10 November 1997, and I stood the matter over until 14 November 1997 for mention.

On 24 October 1997 I was informed that the Referee had sought an extension until 12 December 1997 "so that she can confer with experts on the site and in conclave and consider her reasons". As the parties consented to this course I extended the time to report to 12 December 1997, and stood the matter over for mention to 19 December 1997. On 19 December 1997 I again extended the time for furnishing the report to 18 February 1998.

On 20 February 1998 the matter came before me again because the parties wished to serve written submissions, notwithstanding the time which had already elapsed, and, by consent, I extended the time for the Referee to report, on this occasion to 3 April 1998.

I have mentioned this chronology because, as I have said, an essential reason for referring matters out is to commit them to the determination of an expert in the field who, because of his or her expertise, will be able to report to the Court in a timely fashion. In order for a referee to be able to do so it is necessary that he or she receives co-operation from the parties and their representatives in relation to the fixing of hearing dates and the furnishing of evidence and submissions. I hope, in the future, that in the absence of special circumstances, which do not appear to have prevailed in this case, there will be a greater urgency shown by the parties in furnishing evidence and submissions to the Referee.

The report is closely reasoned and, for the purposes of determining whether I should accede to the parties' request that it be adopted, I have read it. I see no reason at all why it should not be adopted. It fulfilled the requirements for such a report, and I am satisfied that the parties were correct in seeking its adoption. The way in which the report deals with the details of various building matters shows the great advantage the Court derives from having a referee with expertise in this field determine such matters.

Costs 
The defendants submitted that notwithstanding that the plaintiffs had a measure of success there should be no order for costs. I shall come to the basis for that submission in a moment. The plaintiffs submitted that, notwithstanding that their success had been limited, they were entitled to an order for costs. The plaintiffs' application was supported by the affidavit of
Mr Trevor John Fowler, their solicitor, sworn 22 April 1998, in which he deposed to the receipt of the report from Mr King and the circumstances leading to the application to increase the jurisdiction of the District Court and, thereafter, to the transfer of the proceedings to this Court. On behalf of the defendants the affidavit of Mr Anthony Benetatos, sworn 23 April 1998, was read. That did not, if I may say so with respect, assist in the resolution of the present problem.

Section 76 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) provides that subject to the Act and Rules, and subject to any other Act, costs shall be in the discretion of the Court, which shall have full power to determine by whom and to what extent they are to be paid and the basis upon which they are to be assessed. [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52a) rule 4(1) provides that the powers and discretions under s.76 "shall be exercised subject to and in accordance with this Part".
 [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52a) [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s11.html) provides:- "If the Court makes any order as to costs, the Court shall, subject to this Part, order that the costs follow the event, except where it appears to the Court that some other order should be made as to the whole or any part of the costs." 
The submissions for the defendants were based, essentially, on [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52a) [rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s33.html)
The submissions for the plaintiffs seemed to assume the relevance of this rule. Sub-rule (1)(b), however, provides:- "This rule ...
 does not apply ...
 where the proceedings can only be brought in the Court; to proceedings remitted, removed or otherwise transferred to or into the Court.
 ..." 
In the oral submissions both parties paid attention to sub-rule (2), which provides, relevantly for present purposes:- "Where ...
 in proceedings commenced after 30 June 1993, but on or before 1 June 1997, a plaintiff recovers a sum not more than $75,000; ...
 the plaintiff shall not be entitled to payment of his or her costs of the proceedings unless, it appearing to the Court that the plaintiff had sufficient reason for commencing or continuing proceedings in the Court, the Court makes an order for payment." 
That sub-rule is only relevant if [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s33.html) applies, which, in my opinion, it does not by reason of sub-rule 1. However most of the submissions revolved around whether it appeared to the Court that the plaintiffs had sufficient reason for commencing or continuing these proceedings in this Court. It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiffs that having received the report of Mr King, and in the absence of any consent from the solicitors for the defendants, the proper course, unless the plaintiffs abandoned their claim over $250,000, was to have the proceedings transferred into this Court.

Sub-rule (3) provides that without limiting the generality of sub-rule (2):- ".. it shall be taken to be a sufficient reason if the plaintiff had reasonable grounds at the relevant time for expecting that he would recover an amount in excess of the amount prescribed by that sub-rule." 
It seems to me that sub-rules (2) and (3) do not apply because the proceedings were transferred or removed into this Court. If that is not correct, I am satisfied on the evidence that the plaintiffs had sufficient reason for commencing or continuing proceedings in the Court because, on the unchallenged evidence, they had the report from Mr King, and there was no challenge to their entitlement to rely on it.

However, for the reasons to which I have referred, I do not consider that [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s33.html) applies and, accordingly, it is not necessary to consider sub-rules (4) and . I should add that there was some discussion before me as to the consequences flowing from sub-rules (4)(e) and (f), although they are not relevant, because it appeared there is an omission from Ritchie's Practice.
There is. Amendment 4 in Bulletin 318 corrects the position by adding the words:- "be only one half of the whole amount." 
The question then becomes whether there are any discretionary reasons why, having regard to the amount recovered, a special order for costs should be made.

There was no dispute that the amount the plaintiffs wished to claim was in excess of the jurisdictional limit of the District Court, and it was not submitted that the proceedings should not be transferred to this Court.
Rather, as I have indicated, the solicitors for the defendants, by their letter of 20 June 1996, simply warned the plaintiffs of the risk as to costs.
Subsequently the defendants consented to the transfer. On the evidence there can be no doubt that the plaintiffs had reason to believe that they were entitled to recover an amount in excess of the District Court's jurisdiction.
This was not challenged by the defendants by opposing the transfer to this
Court.

As I read [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52a) [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s33.html) it is intended to penalise a party, who or which commences proceedings in this
Court and receives an amount falling within the various categories referred to in the rest of the rule. Thus parties, who or which commence proceedings in this Court, without reasonable cause, will be penalised. The reason for not making the rule applicable to cases removed or transferred to this Court is that, in making the transfer, either the Court thought it was appropriate that the matter should be dealt with in this Court in the face of opposition from a party, or the Court considered it appropriate to transfer the matter into the
Court having regard to the consent of the parties. Thus there is no such basis for imposing a costs' penalty.

There is no other rule providing for a diminution in costs, which is applicable to the present case. The defendants submitted that I should exercise a discretion to reduce the costs because of the small amount recovered, or that I should remit the matter to the Referee for her view as to the costs. I am not disposed to take either course. There is no suggestion in reading the Referee's report that the plaintiffs brought forward any of the claims improperly, in the presently relevant sense, such that they should be penalised by a special costs' order. Rather they were claims, which were prosecuted and, in the ordinary course of litigation, did not find favour with the Referee. I do not think it appropriate, in those circumstances, to refer the matter back to the Referee to make any further findings. The case strikes me as one where although the plaintiffs have enjoyed limited success that is sufficient to entitle them to their costs.

The matter should be approached on the basis that the parties consented to the proceedings being transferred for hearing in this Court. [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52a) [rule (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s33.html) provides that that rule, i.e. [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s33.html), does not apply to proceedings removed or otherwise transferred into this
Court. The defendants thus took the risks applicable in consequence of the operation of the rule. In the result I am of the view that not only are the plaintiffs entitled to their costs of the proceedings, but that there are no discretionary reasons for reducing the quantum of such costs.

Orders 
I order:- that the report of the Referee, Ms Janet Grey, dated 2 April 1998 be adopted; judgment for the plaintiffs in the sum of $33,841.40; the defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs.
 * * * 
