

Accord Pacific Holdings Pty Limited versus Accord Pacific Land Pty Limited (in liquidation) & ors [2011] NSWSC 707 (8 July 2011) 
Last Updated: 11 July 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Accord Pacific Holdings Pty Limited versus Accord Pacific Land Pty Limited (in liquidation) & ors  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): , 27 June 2011  
Decision Date: July 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Ward J  
Decision: 
Application to set aside examination summonses and orders for production dismissed. Amendment to be made to scope of orders for production.  
Catchwords: 
CORPORATIONS - application for access to confidential affidavits filed pursuant to [section
C(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596c.html) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) - application to set aside examination summonses and orders for production -
HELD - arguable case of improper purpose and access necessary so as fairly to dispose of application - access to confidential affidavits granted - plaintiff failed to establish that predominant purpose of liquidator in issuing examination summons and orders for production is an improper purpose - application to set aside examination summonses and orders for production dismissed - orders for production to plaintiff and others read down  
Legislation Cited: [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) 
Uniform Civil Procedures Rules 2005  
Cases Cited: 
Alternative Business Solutions Deputy Commissioner of Taxation versus Alternative
Business Solutions (Aust) Pty Ltd (in admin) <case> 
Brooks versus Heritage Hotel Adelaide Pty Ltd [(1996) 20 ACSR 61] 
Castlereagh Motels Ltd versus Davies-Roe (1966) 84 WN (Pt 2) 182 
Commonwealth of Australia versus Sheahan, in the matter of Markethaven Pty Ltd (subject to a deed of company arrangement) <case> 
DCT versus Portinex <case>; [(2000) 156 FLR 453]; <case>; <case> 
In the matter of Mendarma Pty Ltd (in liq) <case> 
Lam Soon Australia Pty Ltd versus Molit (No 55) <case>; <case> 
Meteyard & ors versus Love & ors <case> 
NAB versus Market Holdings Pty Ltd (in liq) <case> 
New World Alliance Pty Limited, Sycotex Pty Limited versus Baseler <case>; [(1994) 51 FCR 425] 
O'Brien versus Wily <case> 
Re BPTC Ltd [(1992) 7 ACSR 291] 
Re Excel; Worthley versus England [(1994) 52 FCR 69] 
Re Hugh J Roberts Pty Ltd (In liq) [[1970] 2 NSWR 582] 
Re Laurie Cottier Productions Pty Ltd (in liq) [(1992) 9 ACSR 513] 
Re New Tel Limited (In Liquidation); Evans versus Wainter Pty Ltd <case>; [(2005) 221 ALR 331]; <case> 
Southern Cross Petroleum Sales (SA) Pty Ltd (in liq) versus Hirsch <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1994) 122 ALR 531] 
White Industries (Qld) Pty Limited versus Flower & Hart <case>; <case> 
Young (as representative for the Australian partnership known as Accenture) v
Sherman <case>; [(2002) 170 FLR 86]  
Texts Cited: 
Austin and Black's Annotations to the [Corporations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) 
Ford's Principles of Corporations Law  
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Accord Pacific Holdings Pty Limited (Plaintiff) 
Accord Pacific Land Pty Limited (in liquidation) (First Defendant) 
Bruce Gleeson (Second Defendant) 
Chuan Thye Patrick Kho (Third Defendant) 
Steven Gargano (Fourth Defendant) 
Choon Keng Kho (Fifth Defendant) 
Wilton Warren (Sixth Defendant) 
George McDonald (Seventh Defendant) 
Gavin Lloyd (Eighth Defendant) 
Alexander Lee (Ninth Defendant) 
Accord Pacific Properties Pty Ltd (Tenth Defendant) 
James Lee Pty Ltd (trading as James Lee Solicitors) (Eleventh Defendant) 
CB Richard Ellis Pty Limited (Twelfth Defendant) 
James Teh (aka Cheok Ching The) (Thirteenth Defendant)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
Counsel 
M Aldridge SC with L Gor (Plaintiff) 
S Golledge (First and Second Defendants)  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors 
Colin Biggers & Paisley (Plaintiff) 
Gillis Delaney (First and Second Defendants)  
File number(s): /085485  
Publication Restriction: 
Judgment 
HER HONOUR : Before me for hearing on 23 and 27 June 2011 was an application by Accord Pacific Holdings Pty Limited (APH) seeking relief pursuant to [ss 596A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596a.html), [596B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) and [1321](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s1321.html) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) by way of orders setting aside various examination summonses and orders for production of documents issued on the application of the liquidator of its wholly owned subsidiary, the first defendant (Accord Pacific Land Pty Limited (APL)). The summonses and orders for production were directed not only to APH but also to another of its subsidiaries (Accord Pacific Properties Limited, the 10th defendant, APP), various directors and officers of the Accord Pacific group companies (the 3 rd to 9 th defendants), and two firms who have acted for APL as real estate agents/solicitors respectively (the 11 th and 12 th defendants).  
The second defendant (Mr Bruce Gleeson) was appointed as liquidator of APL in March 2011 by unanimous resolution of the creditors of the company following the retirement at that time of the liquidators initially appointed to the company in December 2010, Messrs Hancock and Hird. APL had earlier been placed in voluntary administration by its directors in November 2010.  
The basis on which APH seeks to have the summonses and orders set aside is that they are an abuse of process. The liquidator maintains that the orders are not an abuse of process but, rather, a legitimate exercise of his power to investigate the examinable affairs of APL (and, in particular, to investigate two issues - first, whether the company was engaged in insolvent trading in the period leading up to its placement in external administration and, second, whether the directors of the company acted in breach of their fiduciary duties in committing APL in 2007 to a lease of a commercial car park in Sydney at an unsustainable rent).  
Both parties emphasise that this is an unusual winding up in that there are only two creditors of APL: Hyperion Syndicates Limited (which is the lessor of the car park in question and which has issued a proof of debt totalling $9,445,046.45 - for rent outstanding as at the time the APL went into administration in the sum of $204,523 and for unpaid rent for the unexpired term of the lease in a much greater sum) and APH, for financial support given to its subsidiary over a four year period (totalling some $4,282,519). (Hyperion's claim cannot at this stage be finally quantified as it will depend upon its ability to locate an alternative tenant or otherwise satisfactorily to mitigate its loss. Nevertheless, it maintains that it is a substantial creditor of APL.) The position is complicated by the fact that it was APP (also a subsidiary of APH) that sold the car park to Hyperion in the first place.  
The position seems to be that Hyperion is of the view (somewhat ironically, since it is the car park lessor) that the rent was, and should have been realized to have been, so excessive or unaffordable as to lead to the suspicion that the directors of APL had agreed to it (in breach of their duties to APL) in order to produce a benefit for a related company (the vendor, APP) in the way of an increased sale price (since higher rent meant that the capitalized yield on which the purchase price may have been based would be greater than it otherwise may have been) and also of the view (the logic of which is criticised as flawed) that APH provided financial support for APL in order knowingly to permit it to trade whilst insolvent. Those are the matters that it wishes to fund the liquidator to investigate (and that, in turn, the liquidator is now seeking to explore by means of the examination summonses and orders for production).  
For its part, APH takes the view that it cannot possibly be said that APL was engaged in insolvent trading and therefore there is no utility in the proposed investigations and they must be an abuse of process. In essence, APH contends that the examination summonses and orders were sought by the liquidator not for the benefit of APL (the company in liquidation) but, rather, for the benefit of Hyperion in an attempt to put commercial pressure upon APH (to settle a potential claim by Hyperion against APH or its officers) or to obtain information as to a potential claim by Hyperion against APP (in relation to representations made at the time of the sale by APP to Hyperion of the car park).  
Background 
APH is the Australian holding company of a group of companies based in Singapore (the Lian Huat Group of Singapore). APP and APL are its subsidiaries. There are common directors of each of APH, APP and APL: those being two directors based in Singapore (Mr Choon Keng Kho and his brother Mr Chuan (Patrick) Thye Kho) and one based in Australia (Mr Steven Gargano). From Mr Gargano's evidence in an examination that has already been conducted by the liquidator, his role in the management of the company was very limited. The regional head of APL in Australia is Mr George (Will) McDonald. According to Mr McDonald (in his evidence on cross-examination in the present application), APL is a Singaporean family company and decisions in relation to APL are made by the directors in Singapore (to whom he makes recommendations only).  
On 20 October 2006, APP sold the property known as the "One Dixon Car Park" to Hyperion for the sum of $9.2m. Hyperion is a property business in which two accountants carrying on business in the accounting firm R&G Consulting (Mr Ian Greenwood and Mr Steven Higgins) have an interest. R&G Consulting had from time to time referred work to Mr Gleeson.  
The purchase transaction involved the lease back from Hyperion to APL of the car parking station for a ten-year term expiring in 2017. A lease commencing in March 2007 was entered into for that purpose. The only business of APL (albeit unbeknownst apparently to its resident local director, Mr Gargano) was the operation of the car parking business from the leased premises (in respect of which it had entered into a car park management agreement with a third party).  
It is not in dispute that APL was never able to meet its rental obligations under the lease based on its trading income alone. Over the period from 2007, in each financial year it had a net trading loss and a deficiency of assets over liabilities. There is no doubt that substantial funds were provided by APH to APL in order to enable it to meet its rental obligations and other debts. According to a document prepared by Mr McDonald by way of an overview for the liquidator (a copy of which was included in the Court Book), the provision of this financial support was by way of inter-company loan repayable on demand. No contractual agreement under which APH assumed an obligation to provide such funds to its subsidiary has been produced to the liquidator, nor has any finance agreement as such been identified as having been in place in that regard.  
On 4 November 2010, APL was placed in voluntary administration. Messrs Hancock and Hird were appointed as administrators. Prior to the second meeting of creditors (held on 9 December 2010), the administrators prepared a Report to Creditors in accordance with the requirements of [Part 5.3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p5.3a) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) . In that report, which was in due course tabled at the second creditors' meeting, they noted the historical trading losses that had been incurred by APL and concluded that there was a "prima facie" argument that there had been insolvent trading (though also noting that evidence of the related parties' support might be relevant to such a claim). Reference was made to the need for further investigations into the company's affairs in the event of a winding up. (Mr Hancock has since sworn an affidavit, which was read by APH on the current application, in which he now expresses the view that the company was not insolvent at the relevant time. Seemingly fortified by that view, the position of APH (by reference to the communications from Mr Patrick Kho and Mr McDonald) has been stridently to assert that the company was at the relevant time solvent and that any inquiry into insolvent trading would be of no utility.  
As noted, the second meeting of creditors was held on 9 December 2010. Prior to that meeting, Messrs Greenwood and Higgins had consulted with Mr Gleeson as to the position of Hyperion having regard to the entry of the company into administration. (Whether they did so as members of R&G Consulting on behalf of Hyperion or as principals of Hyperion is perhaps a moot point, although issue was taken in passing during the course of the submissions before me as to whether there had been a sufficiently complete declaration of independence by Mr Gleeson when he later took on the role as liquidator, having regard to the previous referrals of work to him from R&G Consulting.)  
The first meeting in this regard seems to have taken place on 2 December 2010 (as recorded in a brief file note taken by Mr Gleeson). By letter of that date, Mr Gleeson wrote to Messrs Greenwood and Higgins at R&G Consulting referring to the meeting to discuss the administration of the company, confirming his preparedness to act as liquidator in any ensuing winding up, and seeking confirmation as to whether the administrators had reviewed the financial position of APH to be able to comment on the applicability of the voidable transaction provisions and the position of directors in the context of insolvent trading claims.  
Following that meeting Mr Gleeson reviewed the Report to Creditors (describing it to Messrs Greenwood and Higgins on 3 December 2010 as a "fairly plain report and not surprisingly misses some very important aspects") and arranged a telephone conference with Gillis Delaney, the solicitors in due course retained first by Mr Hancock and then Mr Gleeson to conduct the examinations and presently acting for the liquidator on this application. (Mr Higgins' interim comments on the report, as provided to Mr Gleeson, had taken issue with the fact that it had put Hyperion's claim only at the actual rent outstanding "even though we have supplied a proof of debt at millions".)  
Mr Gleeson, providing the 'relevant background' to Mr Hayter of Gillis Delaney by email on 3 December 2010, noted (presumably on the basis of instructions obtained from Hyperion) that:  
The issues are that the lessee company has been insolvent for some years and is a wholly owned subsidiary and in turn there is an ultimate holding company for it. Both entities upstream have significant assets it is believed ...
On 8 December 2010, Mr Gleeson wrote to Mr Hancock, advising that he had been approached by one of the creditors (Hyperion) to be appointed as liquidator and attaching a declaration of independence that stated that he had had no prior relationship with the company.  
Mr Gleeson attended the second creditors' meeting with a signed Consent to Act as liquidator, which, in the event, was not tabled as there was no contest to the appointment of Messrs Hancock and Hird as liquidators following a discussion between Mr Hancock and Mr Gleeson as to the former's willingness to conduct public examinations of the company's directors. (This early involvement by Mr Gleeson in the matter, at the behest of the principals of Hyperion, is relied upon by Senior Counsel for APH, Mr Aldridge SC, as a matter going to what inference should be drawn from Mr Gleeson's later conduct in seeking the issue of the respective orders/examination summonses against APH and associated parties.)  
The minutes of the second creditors' meeting refer to the tabling of the report of the joint and several administrators at the 9 December 2010 meeting and record that Mr Greenwood (of Hyperion) had raised concerns at the meeting regarding the company's losses and had requested examinations by a liquidator against the directors of APH and APL. The minutes note that "the public examination will be funded by Hyperion". They conclude by recording that Mr Gleeson had requested "confirmation of the discussion taken with Hyperion ... before the meeting"; had raised (and if the report is accurate he would seem to have echoed Mr Greenwood's position in this regard) concerns regarding the company's losses and had requested that examinations commence against the directors of the holding company (APH) and APL by Mr Michael Hayter, solicitor of Gillis Delaney, to which request Mr Hancock had agreed. (Mr Aldridge points to this as evidence that Mr Gleeson was acting in the interests of Hyperion at the time of this meeting and it does not seem that this could be disputed.)  
By letter dated 9 December 2010, Mr Gleeson reported to Messrs Greenwood and Higgins on that meeting of creditors, referring to Mr Hancock's willingness to conduct public examinations and, after setting out various comments, said:  
The above aspect (and action points) do not mean that you cannot and should not have ongoing communication with relevant parties in the context of trying to advance and deal with the position that Hyperion is in. However, as has been discussed with you, I believe it is appropriate to continue to keep pressure on APH and the directors in order to give Hyperion the best possible chance of achieving a good commercial outcome (my emphasis) (Pausing there, Mr Aldridge points to the references to there being pressure on APH and/or its directors which can be found in correspondence over the course of the relevant period as indicating an improper purpose. Mr Golledge, on the other hand, submits that what was referred to in that context was the pressure to attend and submit to an examination. While that may be the case for later such references, in this early communication the pressure there urged to be continued must relate to pressure to resolve Hyperion's claim(s) on a commercial basis. Of course, at this stage Mr Gleeson is advising Hyperion and not speaking in the capacity he later assumed of liquidator.)  
As to the funding of the proposed examinations, Mr Hancock's understanding as at 16 December 2010 (as set out in a letter to Mr Greenwood of that date) as to the funding of the then proposed examinations was that he would contribute $15,000 from funds realized out of company assets for the cost of the proposed examinations and Hyperion would underwrite the balance. There was no response from Hyperion suggesting that this understanding was mistaken.  
Not long after their appointment as liquidators, Mr Hancock and Mr Hird retired (apparently as a consequence of a concern arising as to a potential independence issue, the detail of which was not before me). On 21 February 2011, there was a creditors' meeting at which they resigned. They were replaced by Mr Gleeson by unanimous vote of the creditors. The fact that Mr Gleeson had previously been providing some advice or assistance to Hyperion must then have been known to APH (if not from the fact that this had been made clear to Mr Hancock prior to the 8 December 2010 meeting, then from the fact that the minutes recorded Mr Gleeson as having attended at that meeting and having advocated that public examinations of the (common) directors of APH and APL take place, as Hyperion's representative had also done).  
It seems that there was some pressure from Hyperion for urgent steps to be taken in relation to the proposed public examinations since, on 4 March 2011, Mr Gleeson sent an email to Messrs Higgins and Greenwood assuring them that "we are giving this urgent attention".  
On 9 March 2011, the first set of orders for production of documents and examination summonses were issued against a number of people. Mr Aldridge characterises the orders so sought as going to the heart of the company's examinable affairs (on the basis that they related to an investigation into the company's financial history) and points out that no objection was taken to this use of the compulsory examination process. That is so. However, as will be apparent from the events that followed the issue of those orders, it could equally be said that there was not a particularly co-operative response (at least from the Singaporean directors) to the processes being invoked by the liquidator and it is this attitude that seems to have fuelled a somewhat confrontational atmosphere between the liquidator and those acting for the liquidator on the one hand and APH and its representatives on the other.  
In particular, although (by letter dated 25 March 2011) Colin Biggers & Paisley had initially written to Gillis Delaney advising that they acted for the "directors" of APL (who they expressly noted included two directors resident in Singapore) and taking issue with whether leave had been obtained for service of the process outside the jurisdiction, when the solicitors were pressed to seek instructions to accept service for those overseas directors (and it was not unreasonably put to them that this would minimize expense and avoid the incurring of unnecessary costs in the liquidation) they ultimately responded (by letter dated 20 April 2011) that having "revisited" their first letter it had been an "oversight" and that they did not act, and had no instructions to accept service, for those directors.  
This elicited a response by letter dated 20 April 2011, from Mr Hayter to Colin Biggers & Paisley that it would appear the overseas directors had breached their statutory obligations in Australia referring to the possibility of a report to ASIC and requesting information from the resident director as to current email addresses and telephone numbers and questionnaires from the directors and information as to when the overseas directors would next be in Australia.  
Requests by the liquidators for the provision of a report as to the company's affairs from the overseas directors were met with a similar lack of co-operation (and when one of the Singaporean directors, Mr Patrick Kho, did ultimately engage in email communications with the liquidator on this topic his answers were largely non-responsive and sought to interrogate the liquidator as to the basis for those enquiries).  
In any event, the upshot of the resistance apparently encountered by the liquidator from the overseas directors to co-operation with and participation in the liquidator's enquiries led the liquidator to seek substituted service of the orders on the overseas' directors and (on more than one occasion) to threaten to report them to ASIC for failure to comply with their statutory obligations. It also seems to have had the result that there was some initial delay in the liquidator calling on the first set of Orders for Production and in the holding of the first round of examinations.  
Some documents were produced in answer to the Orders for Production prior to the holding of public examinations of 5 individuals in May 2011 (including, two persons who are now the subject of the further examination summonses, Mr Gargano and Mr McDonald). There has since then been an ongoing dispute between the solicitors acting for the APH interests and those acting for the liquidator as to whether there has been full compliance with the Orders for Production (and this is said in part to be what has led to the need for further Orders for Production to be issued, for more abundant caution, even though the liquidator contends that certain of the documents he is seeking should already have been produced in answer to the initial Orders for Production).  
Of the list of examinees now proposed to be examined, there are a number, including the Kho brothers, who have not previously been examined (and hence it could not be said that there is any oppression by reason of those examinees being required to attend twice). As far as Mr Gargano and Mr McDonald are concerned, it is said that had there been proper production in the first place it might not have been necessary for them to be re-examined.  
In June 2011, a second set of orders for production and examination summonses were issued on the application of Mr Gleeson. It is those that APH is now seeking to have set aside as an abuse of process.  
As to the documents now sought to be produced, Counsel for Mr Gleeson (Mr Golledge) maintains that they are obviously relevant to a matter properly the subject of a liquidator's examination. The Orders for Production issued to APH and APP are in substantially the same form and seek four categories of documents, which may broadly be summarised as follows:  correspondence and internal memoranda passing between any of series of named individuals (including Mr McDonald, Mr Gargano, Mr Patrick Kho, Colin
Biggers & Paisley "and any third party"), for the period from 1January to date, referring to any of a number of topics, including: (a) the sale and proposed sale of the car park in 2006; (f) the intention to appoint an administrator or liquidator to APL or a recommendation to do so; (i) the examination being conducted or to be conducted by the liquidator; and, in very general terms, (k) "any matter relating to the Company" ; emails and correspondence produced to Colin Biggers & Paisley in respect of the previous Order for Production served on the addressee; all documents prepared "or taken into account by" APL in respect of the company entering into the lease of the car park (and particularly a report prepared on behalf of APL prior to entering into any such lease and referred to by Mr McDonald in his evidence in these proceedings on 11 May 2011); and any laptop computer or hard drive "used by employees or your company to forward or receive any of the emails referred to in any of the above paragraphs".
I consider in due course the complaints made as to the breadth and/or relevance of what is now sought to be produced.  
The first Orders for Production served on APH covered a larger field - including minutes of meetings over a considerable period; loan agreements; budgets, cash flow forecasts and management accounts for APH and APL; employment records; financial reports provided by APL to APH on a monthly basis; funding agreements or letters of comfort; budgets and cash flow forecasts referring to the financial performance of the car park business (during the period 1 January 2005 to date); invoices from accounts and correspondence with the managing company of the car park. Also included in the initial Orders - and the focus of much of the complaint as to alleged non-compliance with the orders - was item 4 (correspondence and internal memoranda passing between employees of the parent company and/or the parent company's accountant referring to various topics, those being more limited range of topics than the present orders) and item 9 (emails, correspondence or other documentation referring to the circumstances in which the parent company intended to or did in fact withdraw its financial support or funding from APL during the period 1 January 2006 to date).  
I note that Orders for Production have also been served on the real estate agents who acted on the sale/lease of the car park on behalf of the Accord Pacific entities (CB Richard Ellis) and on the solicitors who acted on the lease transaction (James Lee solicitors). Documents produced by those firms have been the subject of restricted access orders pending the determination of the present application and any subsequent claim for legal professional privilege that there may be depending on the outcome of the present application.  
The examination summonses have now all been stood over to a date in September this year.  
I was taken in some detail through the correspondence passing between the liquidator, his solicitor (Mr Hayter) and representatives of Hyperion, as well as the correspondence between the liquidator and his representatives on the one hand and persons associated with the Accord Pacific companies and their legal representatives on the other, on which reliance is placed by Mr Aldridge for the assertion that the present orders are an abuse of process and/or which Mr Golledge submits set the context for various of the statements on which Mr Aldridge relies for his assertion that there has been an abuse of process. It will be necessary for me briefly to summarise that evidence in considering the abuse of process allegations but I turn first to the identification of the issues raised on the present application and the legal principles relevant thereto.  
Issues 
As a precursor to its application to set aside the various summonses and orders for production, APH sought access to the confidential affidavit (or, as it turned out to be, affidavits - since there were three of them) filed on behalf of the liquidator in support of the application for issue of the summonses.  
The issues for determination arise therefore in the following order:  
Is there an arguable case of non-disclosure or abuse of process by the deed administrator so as to establish a basis for access on the part of the applicants to the confidential <case> affidavits(s) and, if so, should access be granted? 
Should the examination summonses and orders for production be set aside?
As the first issue before me, logically, had to be determined before proceeding to consider the substantive application, I considered the evidence to which I was taken in the course of submissions and ruled on that application during the hearing. I gave brief ex tempore reasons, which I indicated I would supplement in my written judgment.  
I granted access to the confidential affidavits in question (restricted to the legal representatives of APH). They were subsequently tendered as Confidential Exhibit F, solely as to the fact of what was communicated to the Registrar at that time. I then heard the substantive application.  
I now publish my reasons in relation both to that initial application and to the substantive application.  
Access to confidential affidavits 
An affidavit required, pursuant to [s 596C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596c.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/), to be filed in support of an application under [s 596B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) is not to be available for inspection unless the court orders. Such an order will not be made unless the court is satisfied both that there is an arguable case to set aside the determination and that the court would not be able fairly and properly to determine that case if part of the relevant evidence was not available. (See generally the cases cited in Austin and Black, Annotations to the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) [5.596]).  
When considering the test as to whether access should be granted to a confidential [s 596C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596c.html) affidavit, Barrett J in O'Brien versus Wily <case>; [(2009) 74 ACSR 145] (at [27]), noted the threshold question as being whether there is an arguable case that the issue of the summons exceeded the Court's power:  
In a case such as the present, the court considering the application for review may or may not have before it the [s
C(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596c.html) affidavit filed in support of the application for the issue of the examination summons. In Meteyard (above) at [140] and [141], Basten JA made it clear that a person seeking to have an examination summons set aside does not, merely by mounting the challenge, place an evidentiary burden on the liquidator to reveal the content of the [s
C(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596c.html) affidavit. If the person who has initiated the challenge wishes to the affidavit to be before the court for the purposes of its review, that person must first show that there is an arguable case that the issue of the summons exceeded the court's power under [s
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) and that access to the affidavit is likely to assist in determining the correctness of the challenge: see also Ariff (above) at [25] and [26]. In other words, if that person wishes to ensure that the [s
C(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596c.html) affidavit is before the court upon the review, the person must independently negotiate the [s
C(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596c.html) hurdle. (my emphasis)
The ground on which access to the confidential affidavits was sought in the present case as indicated in my introduction to these reasons was that there was an arguable case that the application for the examination summonses was for an improper purpose or involved an abuse of process.  
At the outset I note that in the correspondence to which I was taken, a challenge was made as to the utility of the examinations, to which Mr Gleeson had responded simply by expounding the view that there were matters that might appropriately be the subject of investigation. Insofar as it is submitted by Mr Aldridge that support can be drawn from the fact that the liquidator did not then articulate (and has not later articulated in evidence) the reason for seeking the examinations, I note that the evidentiary burden does not lie on the liquidator in this regard ( Meteyard & ors versus Love & ors  <case> at <case>- <case>; O'Brien versus Wily at [27]). White J, in In the matter of Mendarma Pty Ltd (in liq)  <case>, expressly disagreed with a submission there made that improper purpose could be inferred from the fact that the liquidator had not responded to certain correspondence and had not sworn a further affidavit responding to matters raised with him, saying:  .... In my view, there was no occasion for [the liquidator] to do so. The applicants cannot establish he had an improper purpose merely by making a wide range of allegations which were patently without substance, and then relying on his not responding to those allegations as a basis for inferring that he had an improper purpose.
I draw no inference of improper purpose from the fact that the liquidator has not engaged in debate as to his purpose in seeking the issue of the examination summonses (I suspect, from the tone of the correspondence to date, that any such response would be likely to have proved inconclusive in resolving the dispute as to whether the examinations should now proceed in any event.)  
It is accepted by both parties that the legitimate purpose of an examination under [s 596B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) is to elicit information for the benefit of the corporation, its contributories and creditors. Here, the position is complicated by the fact that there are only two creditors and one of those is the company's only contributory. Moreover, the examination appears to be intended, at least in part, to elicit information relevant to a claim against one of those two creditors (or its officers) and the examination is to be funded to an extent by the other creditor.  
The improper purpose suggested by Mr Aldridge is that the procedure has been invoked in order to provide Hyperion with an advantage - either by placing pressure on APH to reach a commercial settlement with Hyperion (the latter wishing to be made good by APH for its losses of entering into the lease transaction) or to obtain information to assist in a claim by Hyperion against APP in relation to entry into the sale transaction or against the directors of APL (or APH) in relation to insolvent trading and voidable transactions.  
Reliance is placed by Mr Aldridge in this regard on the fact that there has been a second round of Orders for Production seeking a broad range of documents (some of which are said to have no relevance to the examinable affairs of APL or which have already been the subject of an order for production); on the breadth of the requests so made; on what is said to be the weakness of any claim of insolvent trading of the kind now said to be the subject of investigation; on the flavour of what has emerged from the private correspondence between the liquidator, his solicitors and the Hyperion interests; and on what is alleged to have been said (and not denied) by Mr Greenwood at the time of the initial examination of Mr McDonalds to the effect that Hyperion would pursue the matter while funded or refer it to ASIC unless Hyperion was made good.  
Thus the complaint, as I understand it, is not so much a complaint of the kind considered in Mendarma (that this is a 'dress rehearsal' for proceedings that are pending or that the liquidator might be contemplating bringing on behalf of the company in liquidation or an attempt to obtain an impermissible forensic advantage in such proceedings) but, rather, that this is an attempt to procure information to support a claim that the creditor may seek to make against a third party (APP) related to the company in liquidation or to put commercial pressure on APH to settle Hyperion's claim(s).  
In Hong Kong Bank of Australia Limited versus Murphy (1992) 28 NSWLR 512 Gleeson CJ said (at [518] - [519]) that:  ...the fact that current proceedings are pending makes it necessary for the court to be alert to the possibility that a proposed application might be used for an improper purpose.
There is general authority that the use of court process to secure a collateral advantage by way of a commercial settlement or compromise of a claim before trial, where it can be said that the proceedings are not instituted to vindicate a genuinely asserted right, may be an abuse of process ( White Industries (Qld) Pty Limited versus Flower & Hart <case>; [(1998) 156 ALR 169).] (at [252) in a passage referred to by White J in Mendarma , summarized the relevant principles in relation to improper purpose in the context of other proceedings that the liquidator has brought or is contemplating bringing, including that:  
If an eligible applicant applies for an order for the examination of a person for a purpose unconnected with the purposes authorised by the legislation that will be an abuse of process and the order, if obtained, will be set aside.
The procedure may not be used to allow a party to obtain a forensic advantage and, if it is, any order obtained will be set aside.
The procedure may not be used as a dress rehearsal for the cross- examination of a person in a pending or subsequent action. However, it is not improper to seek an order of the court to summon a person for examination while litigation is pending against that person or entities connected with that person.
The question whether in any particular case the applicant has used the procedure abusively will depend upon the applicant's purpose in seeking the order and all of the surrounding circumstances. It will not be an abuse unless an offensive purpose is at least the predominant purpose.
In Mendarma , White J emphasised that what was necessary was that the improper purpose be the dominant purpose.  
Evidence of purpose 
Does the evidence reveal an arguable case of improper purpose or abuse of process in order to satisfy the first part of the test in O'Brien versus Wily ? This requires a review of the correspondence on which reliance was placed by Mr Aldridge.  
There is no doubt that, prior to Mr Gleeson's appointment as liquidator, he was party and/or privy to communications between Hyperion and Gillis Delaney as to how to pursue an examination into the financial affairs of the company and the circumstances in which the company had traded. There is also no doubt that a view (or at least a preliminary view that formed the basis of their advice) had been reached by the lawyers advising Hyperion that it was likely that a primary issue in those examinations would be whether the directors and the parent company would be liable for an insolvent trading claim.  
Mr Hayter's letter of 21 December 2010 to Mr Hancock notes that this "raises some interesting issues in that the principal debt incurred by the subsidiary during the relevant period was in fact the debt payable to the parent company as opposed to the usual insolvent trading claims pursuant to this section where the debts are usually incurred to various third parties" and expressed the opinion that there was "little doubt" that the company was insolvent at the relevant times by reference to its balance sheet. That letter noted that a crucial matter to investigate would be whether the debt due to the parent company was legally postponed and, if so, on what terms and said that as well as investigating the insolvent trading claim and possible breaches of fiduciary duties "we will also investigate the circumstances in which" the parent company failed to provide a renewal bank guarantee to Hyperion in 2009 and its reasons for its failure to do so and whether the parent company and or the directors knew at the time the property was entered into and the lease was sold hat it was unlikely that the subsidiary would be in a position to service the future lease payments and the entry into the lease by the subsidiary as an inducement and incentive for the sale to proceed. (Of course, that letter was written at a time when Mr Hayter was retained by Mr Hancock, as is evident by reference to the last paragraph.)  
There is also no doubt that Hyperion's representatives had input into the identification of the kinds of documents that might be sought in relation to the proposed examinations and as to the issues to be explored in those examinations, (see, for example, letters dated 13 December 2010 and 18 January 2011 from Mr Hayter to Mr Greenwood). (Mr Aldridge relies on Mr Greenwood's response by email to the latter, in which Mr Greenwood suggested that the financials from the date of incorporation should be sought "seeing the parent company loan was in existence prior to the lease", as evidence that the orders for production are "fishing" for information for the benefit of Hyperion.)  
Mr Greenwood also later had involvement in the preparation for the examinations (see letter dated 5 May 2011, from Mr Hayter to Mr Greenwood seeking assistance in terms of preparation for the examinations and clarification of various matters, all of which Mr Aldridge notes related to the circumstances of the sale).  
By letter dated 10 February 2011, Mr Hayter wrote to Mr Greenwood noting that "As part of the Examinations it will be important for me to show that Accord had reason to believe when it entered into the lease that the company would not be able to satisfy lease payments from normal trading."(emphasis in original). Mr Aldridge says that this shows that the present enquiry is not to assist the liquidator to form a view but, rather, is trying to demonstrate that these are the facts having already formed the view. It should be noted, however, that this was an expression of opinion not by or to the present liquidator (and would be consistent with Mr Hayter advising Hyperion, independently of the liquidator, what it is that would ultimately need to be established for there to be a finding of insolvent trading as suspected). As Mr Golledge submits, the very purpose of examinations in this context is to ascertain whether any view as to likely insolvent trading is correct - it cannot be the case that having formed a view that there may have been, or even that it is likely that there has been, insolvent trading, a liquidator then cannot properly enquire into this, using the coercive powers available under [s 596.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596.html)  
The response from Mr Steven Higgins was to raise issues as to the basis on which the purchase decision had been based (suggesting a claim against the vendor for misrepresentation of some kind) and noting "Good to see 588V getting a mention. Parent companies cannot simply hide behind subsidiaries and think their liability is limited". (Similarly an email from Mr Higgins to Mr Hayter's assistant, Ms Jane Montague, expresses the opinion that APL could never cover the rent and outgoing and could not sign the lease knowing the company was solvent but "need hard evidence on this" and suggested that pre sale figures "may only be available under examination if you are able to request them from the Parent (APL)" and suggesting that what was being sought was evidence that the common directors were fully aware that APL was doomed from the very beginning.) Again, these indicate Hyperion's concerns but do not necessarily indicate the purposes of the liquidator in pursuing the investigations.  
Reliance was placed by Mr Aldridge on various letters from Mr Hayter copying to Mr Greenwood his communications with Mr Gleeson (to show a three way communication between Hyperion, Gillis Delaney and the liquidator) - 4 March 2011, 14 March 2011, 17 March 2011, 14 April 2011, 29 April 2011, 2 May 2011, 4 May 2011, 5 May 2011); a communication from Mr Higgins to Mr Gleeson about court dates on 4 March 2011; as well as communications from Mr Hayter to Colin Biggers & Paisley, copied to Mr Greenwood (20 April 2011).  
Mr Aldridge also refers to a letter from Mr Hayter to Mr Gleeson which noted that "Ian and Steve are anxious to arrange the Examination as soon as possible" but commenting that there was no pressing requirement and it might be better first to review the books and records. (Mr Golledge, in turn, relies on this as showing the independence of the advice given to the liquidator.)  
By letter dated 15 March 2011, Mr Hayter wrote to Mr Gleeson noting that at this stage he would not have expected that any of the employees would have retained documents (yet Mr Aldridge notes that he continues in the Orders for Production to press for them).  
On 11 March 2011, Mr Gleeson emailed Mr Higgins about the examinations and referred to a concern Mr Higgins had raised as to "dissipation of assets from the holding company". That email said:  
The other ace as well don't forget is the personal trading whilst insolvent action against the directors [and shadow directors] of which it would seem Will McDonald may have some explaining to do - note he signed appointment documents for the company to be placed into voluntary administration. (my emphasis) 
One of the critical documents on which reliance is placed by Mr Aldridge is an email that was sent by Mr Gleeson to Mr Higgins on 6 April 2011 (in terms of the overall chronology this is before Gillis Delaney were advised that Colin Biggers & Paisley, despite their earlier advice to the contrary, did not in fact act for the overseas directors of the respective companies, and after the issue of the first set of Orders for Production and examination summonses but before any examinations had been held).  
That email referred to a letter from Colin Biggers & Paisley in which that firm had raised the fact that Mr Gleeson had been consulted by Hyperion ahead of the change of liquidators - a matter which should already have been apparent from what was said at the second creditors' meeting and by reference to the minutes; had stated that Hyperion was 'agitating' about examinations; and had, by reference to Lewis versus Doran  <case>; <case>) expressed the view that as it was clear that external funding was being provided there was no utility in the expenditure of funds for the purposes of conducting an examination as to potential insolvent trading claim. Colin Biggers & Paisley also stated that:  
It appears that the potential dividend to the ordinary unsecured creditors is being eroded for the purposes of pursuing the wishes of one creditor only in circumstances where there is no utility in that course of conduct.
Mr Gleeson's reaction to this letter was to comment to Mr Higgins that "I think the pressure is now starting to become apparent for them" (my emphasis). He said that there was nothing that concerned him with any of the issues raised in the letter.  
The 6 April email, referring to the pressure on the directors, is one of a number of communications that appear to acknowledge that the effect, if not the purpose, of the steps taken in relation to the investigation of the company's affairs is to put pressure on its overseas directors. That, of itself, is not the issue - it is whether the predominant purpose of the liquidator was to put improper pressure on the overseas directors.  
By letter dated 4 May 2011, there was a further reference (this time by the liquidator's solicitor) to the pressure on the overseas directors. Mr Hayter in that letter advised Mr Gleeson of the examinations schedule noting that it was 'inevitable' that the sum of $19,423 (a payment made to APH after the company went into administration) would have to be repaid by APH (as a preference) and also noting that the payment of $30,000 made to APH in the month before the administration was after a 'strong demand' from Hyperion. (Mr Aldridge points to the various demands by Hyperion as indicating a preference claim would lie against it, and that no steps appear to have been taken by the liquidator to investigate such a claim.) The letter also noted that at that stage there were 5 parties for examinations (Steven Gargano; Peggy Yeung, George McDonald, Irene Wang, Colin Grady) and that the balance of the summonses would be adjourned balance to enable service upon the rest of the examinees. Mr Hayter then concluded:  
I confirm that we are putting pressure on the overseas Directors who will no doubt be concerned that reports may be lodged at ASIC concerning their non-co-operation and I will be asking various questions of the Australian Director as to the overseas Directors' whereabouts contact details visits <case> Australia etc with a view to requiring their presence on a further date (my emphasis) 
Mr Golledge says that this puts in context what is meant by "pressure" in the earlier communications, namely pressure on the overseas directors to attend for examination and to comply with their statutory obligations (in particular to respond to questionnaires and provide information requested by the liquidator). (I accept that this appears to be the case for most of the communications in which that word appears, though as noted earlier it is hard to read the 9 December 2010 communication in that way.)  
As to what was contemplated to be the subject matter of the examinations, Mr Hayter, writing on 5 May 2011 to Mr Greenwood, advised in relation to the forthcoming examinations that:  
I suspect that the other parties will focus upon the possibility of an insolvent trading claim being pursued against them and feel confident that the parent company's history of financial support will overcome that difficulty.
However there are a number of alternative claims which I will discuss in more detail after the first set of Examinations such as the preferential payments in respect of the 3 payments received prior to liquidation and additionally and more importantly the breach of fiduciary duties if the Directors of the company appear to have preferred the interests of the parent company over the interests of the subsidiary in entering into the transactions. It is important for us to link the sale and lease arrangement. It is also important for me to rebut any suggestion that the Directors reasonably believed that the company may achieve a profit from March 2007 based on its trading figures up to March .
Also on 5 May 2011, Mr Hayter wrote to Colin Biggers & Paisley and asserted that Mr Gargano had breached his statutory obligations by failing to provided information sought in letters of 18 and 20 April 2011 and asserting that there had been a failure to comply by him, and by APP and APL, with the Court orders for production (in Mr Gargano's case as to paragraphs 3,4,6,9,11 and 12 of the Orders; in the companies' cases those as well as paragraph 8). The letter asserted a breach of the overseas directors' obligations by failing to provide a report as to affairs or details of their current addresses. The letter noted that Mr Gargano and possibly some of the other employees would be examined next week and anticipated that they might shortly thereafter again be examined "when we have the opportunity to review all documents which should have been already produced to date".  
With the background set out above in mind, what then happened (as deposed to by Mr McDonald) seems only to have inflamed the suspicions of APH (and, depending on one's point of view, provided it with a legitimate basis to continue its resistance to the investigations or else provided it with a convenient excuse to do so). Mr McDonald says that he had a conversation with Mr Greenwood (wrongly referred to as a Mr Ian Norwood in a letter sent on 17 May 2011 by Colin Biggers & Paisley, in which this conversation was relied upon as evidence of the improper purpose of Hyperion in relation to the examinations).  
In that conversation Mr McDonald says that Mr Greenwood acknowledged (after Mr McDonald had indicated that he did not think the claim would succeed) that the trading whilst insolvent claim "was not the main issue" and said that they (presumably Hyperion) would continue pursuing the action while funded and then the matter would be handed over to ASIC for criminal action against the directors. It is said that Mr Greenwood indicated that Hyperion wished to be placed in the position it was in before its transaction into the acquisition of the property was completed and that if it was then the foreshadowed action against the directors would not be pursued. (It is not clear whether by that it was being suggested that the whole sale should be set aside or simply that the lease losses should be made good - later discussion as to a potential settlement range suggests the latter.)  
There has been no denial of that conversation by Mr Greenwood (the conversation being admitted in evidence simply as to the fact that the words were said not as to their truth).  
In their 17 May 2011 letter to Gillis Delaney, Colin Biggers & Paisley intimated that this was conduct by Hyperion designed to leverage off a threatened ASIC prosecution for the purposes of attempting to achieve a commercial outcome. The response from Gillis Delaney, acting for the liquidator, was that this did not reflect their client's thinking (and there is nothing to suggest that it was). (Though for completeness I note that there have been a number of references to the reporting of breaches to ASIC, there is no suggestion in the correspondence that this is anything other than a proper response to perceived inattention by the overseas directors to their statutory obligations.)  
Another reference to pressure on the directors was contained in Mr Hayter's letter dated 12 May 2011 to Mr Greenwood (the day after the examination of Mr McDonald, Mr Gargano and others), namely that:  
You would be aware with reference to the letter to Colin Biggers & Paisley that the contents of that letter will put considerable pressure upon the overseas Directors to accept service and appear at the new Examination date . (my emphasis)
Again, the reference to "pressure" in that letter was clearly in the context of pressure to attend the examinations and to respond to the liquidator's requests. Mr Hayter enclosed with his letter to Mr Greenwood a copy of his communication to Colin Biggers & Paisley of that date as well as a letter to Mr Gleeson, requesting that they be kept confidential. In the former letter, he had demanded an explanation from that firm and its clients as to various matters arising from Mr Gargano's evidence (that the management decisions were all made by the Messrs Kho; that he was not aware that the company's sole business as a car park business; that he had no information as to the financial affairs of the company; and that he had had no input into the report as to affairs and directors' questionnaires provided to the liquidator). The letter referred to the fact that the examinees had met with Mr Chuan (Patrick) Kho in the solicitors' offices in advance to discuss the examinations and as to the alleged failure to produce documents (including emails, the due diligence report and recommendations by McDonald). It again demanded contact details. It also demanded an explanation of the failure to provide Mr Gargano with correspondence that the liquidator had sent.  
Relevantly, in that correspondence Mr Hayter asserted the belief that emails passing between employees of any of the Accord Pacific companies and the prior administrators, as well as the independent report obtained by the company as to car park revenue in 2006, were part of the books and records of the company. Whether or not that be correct, there is nothing to suggest that this was not a view genuinely held by those advising the liquidator or that the liquidator's purpose in pressing for those documents was not a proper purpose.  
The suggestion that what Hyperion was seeking was a commercial settlement to recoup its losses from the lease transaction gains some support from an email exchange on 9 May 2011 between Mr Hayter and Mr Gleeson, the former seeking a comment from Mr Gleeson as to whether, if one could assume the claim was about $1.5m, considering the loss of Hyperion, they would be "looking at" a "settlement range" of about $300,000 to $500,000". Mr Gleeson's response was that the parent company could always put up a deed of company arrangement which would resolve the fiduciary duties issues. On balance, I consider that this sheds not much light, if any, on Mr Gleeson's purpose in the examinations (though it does support the conclusion that Hyperion's motivation throughout has been to achieve the make good of its losses, whether through litigation or a settlement, and that Mr Hayter continues to have some informal advisory role for Hyperion in that regard).  
Of more concern to me was an email of 17 May 2011 from Mr Gleeson to Higgins and Mr Greenwood (copied to Mr Hayter), commenting on the outcome of the examinations and correspondence thereafter and stating:  
As we suspected from the start the resident director is the stooge for the overseas directors and the upcoming examinations on 28 June 2011 will be an attempt to flush them out. At this stage, whilst there are other examinees on that day it remains to be said whether they will attend this date. However, we will continue to keep immense pressure on them. I will be attending the June examinations 
We are quite happy with the position that some of the lack of information/responses provided so far has afforded us as we now have some leverage points. 
We will shortly be despatching a report to creditors discussion the status of the matter, albeit for obvious reasons we will not be going into the depth of our actions in any great details.

I am satisfied with where the matter is at currently and obviously aware your desire to get a significant recovery in same.... (my emphasis)
I accept that the reference to "immense pressure" again appears to be in the context of pressure on the overseas directors to attend the examinations (not necessarily pressure to compromise a claim in order to avoid the examinations, for example) but what concerns me is the reference to "leverage points" - since it is by no means clear to what the perceived leverage points were thought to relate. (In submissions, Mr Golledge speculated that this might have meant leverage arising in the examinations or subsequent proceedings from the fact that the proposed examinees had not proffered an explanation of events at an earlier stage. However, as he made clear, this was no more than speculation.)  
Mr Higgins' email of 18 May 2011 to Mr Gleeson, responding to the 17 May communication sheds little light on that point, other than suggesting that Mr Higgins was assessing the evidence as to whether it would assist an insolvent trading claim (rather than any separate claim Hyperion might have against the vendor of the property, APP), he saying:  
Very happy with the outcome of round 1. If garcon [presumably a reference to
Mr Gargano] was the only director I believe we would have them on toast. I also think the other two will drop themselves in our lap also. There appears to be no evidence that APL did any due diligence re the lease and therefore I am confident they entered a contract which would reasonably lead to an insolvent event and therefore liability to directors and holding company.

Note also we don't have to prove insolvency at the time, just a reasonable chance it would lead to insolvency. Given what we heard in court I feel confidence of our chances.
In late May, there was an exchange of communications between APH and Mr Gleeson in which (by letter of 27 May 2011) APH asserted its position (that it had lent "real money" to the company for it to meet its external liabilities; that the company's independent auditor's view was that there was no insolvent trading (which is consistent with the directors' view); that it should have been obvious that there were no insolvent trading issues and that the liquidator's actions were an abuse of process) and Mr Gleeson's response (of 31 May 2011) in which he confirmed that he had not received and would not accept instructions concerning the external administrators' conduct of the affairs of the company from Hyperion representatives; had not made a final determination on any creditor's claims; and would require further information from Hyperion to support its claim. Mr Gleeson stated that the purpose of the examinations was to gather appropriate information to assist in the investigation into the financial affairs of an insolvent entity and expressed the view that the sale and lease were interdependent and therefore relevant. He raised the fact that no report had been provided going to the reliance of the company on an independent real estate agent's report (of the kind to which Mr McDonald had referred during his examination).  
The response from APH (via a letter from Mr McDonald on 6 June 2011) was simply to make the bald assertion that there was clearly no trading whilst insolvent and to allege oppression.  
Submissions 
Having gone through the above correspondence in some detail, the submission by Mr Aldridge (put at the time of the application for access to the confidential affidavits and remaining as the submissions on the substantive application) was that there was an arguable case for the setting aside of the examination summonses on two grounds - first that the summonses were being used for the commercial benefit of Hyperion and second (which he seemed to accept was the converse of the first) that they were not for the benefit of the company in liquidation. He emphasized that a large number of financial documents had already been provided and that a number of examinations had taken place. (Mr Aldridge submitted that the failure to question the company's auditor as to his audit analysis was relevant in this regard - although the correspondence seemed to suggest that without the full documentation further examinations of at least some of the examinees might be necessary, in which case I doubt that I can take much from the extent of questioning to date, and in any event I was not taken through the transcript of the examinations to date to be able to form a concluded view on the significance of this).  
In response, Mr Golledge noted that there was no obligation on the liquidator to articulate in advance to those would be the subject of the examination process the purpose for it or the lines of enquiry that might be pursued. Secondly, the suggestion that the enquiry was solely for the purpose of establishing insolvent trading was met by Mr Gleeson's evidence that the purpose was to ask a broad range of questions to assist the investigation of the insolvent entity and to provide a report on those matters. Reliance is placed on the matters that Mr Hayter had raised in his advice to Mr Hancock in December 2010 as to the claims that might possibly be available and could properly be investigated.  
The two claims that Mr Golledge identified as claims that the liquidator wishes to investigate are the insolvent trading claim and a claim for breach of directors' duties in relation to what is said (by the lessor of the car park premises) to have been a "spectacularly unprofitable" lease (or a lease at a "wildly inflated rental rate"). In relation to the latter, Mr Golledge submits that if this was simply a bad decision after reasonable due diligence then that would be one matter but that if this was a decision deliberately to commit the company to an arrangement that the company had not reasonable prospect of being able to service and without firm guarantees in place to ensure that the debt could be met then there would be a reasonably compelling case for breach of duty. Moreover if this was for the benefit of another related entity (APP) then it is said that this amounts to preferring the interests of a third party over the interests of the company. (It is in this context that the circumstances of the sale transaction are said to become relevant - in determining whether the sale price was inflated by reason of the capitalization of increased rent at the "wildly inflated" rate.)  
Mr Golledge also submitted that the mere fact that Mr Hancock now says that in his view there was no insolvent trading does not foreclose a proper investigation of that matter by the liquidator - since the examination powers are granted to liquidators to investigate that very issue.  
As to the communications with Hyperion during the course of preparation for the examinations, it is said that this is not remarkable in circumstances where Hyperion is the only creditor (apart from the very creditor who is the subject of the enquiries) which has an interest in the investigation and where it has expressed a willingness to fund the investigation. Reliance was placed on Re Laurie Cottier Productions Pty Ltd (in liq) [(1992) 9 ACSR 513] (to which I will refer in due course) in this regard.  
Mr Golledge submitted that a selective quotation from various of the communications, when read in context, did not give the examinations the colour of improper use or resort to the liquidator's power of examinations.  
Was there an arguable case of improper purpose or abuse of process? 
As to the first part of the test in relation to the claim by APH for access to the confidential affidavits, I formed the view that there was an arguable case as to improper purpose in relation to the allegation that the examinations were being pursued in effect to put commercial pressure on APH to settle the matter. I formed that view, having regard to the breadth of the Orders for Production (in particular, that they seemed to go beyond what seemed to be relevant to the issue of insolvent trading, or even as to the commercial wisdom of entry into the lease agreement, and be likely to trespass upon the conduct of the vendor in relation to entry into the sale agreement; and they also extended over a broad range of matters, such as the request for documents in 1(k) and the demand for the laptops used by employees). I also had concerns as to the references in the communications that had passed between the liquidator and Hyperion and its lawyers, suggesting that the pursuit of the examination process may have been to force a commercial settlement of Hyperion's claim. In particular, as to the question of improper purpose, I considered that an inference could be drawn as to the existence of an improper purpose in relation to the application for the issue of the examination summonses by reference to the pressure/leverage sought to be obtained from that process.  
Is access necessary fairly to determine the application? 
The second part of the test to be satisfied in order for access to be granted to the examination summonses is that it must be established that the court would not be able fairly and properly to determine the application to set aside the summonses if part of the relevant evidence was unavailable. Thus, in Re Excel; Worthley versus England [(1994) 52 FCR 69], it was said that if one cannot fairly deal with an application in the absence of reference to the confidential affidavit then reference can be made to it. (The corollary of this is that if access to the affidavits would make no difference to the outcome of the case, then it would not be necessary to grant access to them.)  
I was inclined to the view that, unlike the position where a claim is made of non-disclosure in the confidential affidavits, it would be unlikely that there would be anything in the affidavits in this case that would shed light on whether the liquidator had the alleged improper purpose. However, Mr Aldridge submitted that there was some assistance that might be gleaned from an inspection of the affidavits - that being that if there were to be no more than a bland generalization contained in the affidavit as to the reasons for the examinations then that would assist in giving rise to the inference that the purpose for the examinations was the improper purpose of seeking a commercial advantage for Hyperion.  
Thus it was submitted that if all that was put forward (as the best record available of the liquidator's reasons) was a broad generalization as to insolvent trading, then that would be consistent with the documents referring to pressure being put on APH in relation to the examinations.  
If access to the affidavits would make no difference to the outcome of the case, then arguably it would not be necessary to grant access to them.  
After consideration of the above, I formed the view that it would not be possible fairly to decide the application without reference to the confidential affidavits. In so doing, I had regard to the argument by Mr Aldridge that the more bland and generalised the explanation of the reasons the more support for an inference that there was an improper purpose - and hence it would be necessary to refer to what was in fact disclosed (and what was not) in the affidavits themselves as to the reasons for the examinations then being sought.  
Emmett J in Commonwealth of Australia versus Sheahan, in the matter of Markethaven Pty Ltd (subject to a deed of company arrangement)  <case> (in considering whether the confidential affidavit was before him in evidence on the hearing of the application to discharge the orders there challenged) said (at [67]):  
The affidavits are on the file in which the application for discharge of the
Challenged Orders has been brought. I consider that it is open to the Court to have regard to the affidavits in order to determine the extent of the disclosure made by Mr Sheahan to the Court when applying for the Challenged
Orders.
At [71], his Honour said:  
I consider that, to the extent that it is relevant, the Court may have regard to the contents of the affidavits for the purposes of determining the matters that were disclosed to the Registrar. That does not involve treating the affidavits as evidence of the truth or otherwise of the statements made in them.
Those passages in his Honour's judgment in Markethaven followed the finding that there was at least an arguable case that the dominant or principal purpose of the liquidator in obtaining the challenged orders was an improper purpose (which, if sustained, would entitle the applicant to a discharge of the orders).  
Having formed the view that there was an arguable case of improper purpose, I followed the practice that emerges, as I understand it, from Re Excel and Markethaven and inspected the confidential affidavits. Having done so, I then formed the view that it was appropriate to make access available to APH (on the basis that it could not fairly make submissions as to the inferences to be drawn from the level of detail contained in the affidavits unless reference was made to those affidavits for that purpose). However, having regard to the fact that one of the policy matters underlying the restriction of access generally to such material is that examinees, faced with an examination summons, should not be put on notice of the intended content of the examination (and notwithstanding that the lines of examination had already to an extent been revealed in the course of this application and the examinations already held) I made orders for access restricted accordingly. I will come in due course to what emerged from the inspection of those affidavits. No submissions were made on this issue by Mr Aldridge when addressing the substantive application other than to invite me in due course to take their contents into consideration on the substantive application.  
Application to discharge summonses/orders for production 
I turn then to the application for discharge of the examination summonses and orders for production, which was made in the context of access to the confidential affidavits having by then been granted on a confidential basis to the plaintiff's legal advisers.  
Basis of review 
The approach on an application such as this is for a review of the Registrar's decision to issue the summonses and not as a hearing de novo , ( O'Brien versus Wily [(2009) 74 ASCR 145). (Though]  
Thus the burden lies not on the party who had applied for the summonses (here, the liquidator) but on the party seeking their discharge (here, APH).  
Grounds relied upon for discharge of summonses 
The application to discharge the summonses was based on the same broad ground as the application for access to the confidential affidavits, namely that there was an improper purpose on the part of the liquidator in seeking to pursue the examinations and the orders for production and thus that the issue of the summonses was an abuse of the court's process.  
As noted above, three affidavits were sworn in support of the application for the issue of the examination summonses and orders for production. One was sworn by Mr Gleeson and two by Mr Hayter. Those affidavits identified the persons sought to be examined (and the documents sought to be produced) and the reasons for this by reference to the various issues the liquidator was seeking to investigate. Without going into the detail of the affidavits, I consider them to contain more than bland generalizations of a desire to investigate issues of insolvent trading. Certainly, the liquidator indicated that he wished to investigate possible insolvent trading claims. He also referred to the particular circumstances he wished to investigate in relation to entry into the lease agreement and the financing of the company by its parent. The particular focus of the orders sought for production was explained by reference to correspondence passing between the respective lawyers and the absence from the documents already produced of email correspondence of the kind to which Mr McDonald in his examination had referred.  
On balance I do not consider that the content of the confidential affidavits warrants or strengthens any inference as to there being an improper purpose on the part of the liquidator in applying for the examination summonses and orders. Rather, the affidavits seem to me to be consistent with an appreciation by the liquidator of the purposes for which the powers under [s 596B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) may properly be invoked. Further, I note that ordinarily, the statement of purpose contained in the [s 596C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596c.html) affidavit will be accorded weight.  
As made clear in Excel , if this is in truth a private interest being pursued and is not in the interests of the corporation, its contributories and creditors, then the exercise of the power in the present case would be improper and an abuse of process. In Excel ( at p 92), the distinction between the pursuit of private interests and interests for the benefit of those contemplated in [s 596B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) was discussed and the Court distinguished the case there before it from that considered by Waddell CJ in Eq in Laurie Cottier.  
In Laurie Cottier , the court was considering the case of an examination being conducted by a liquidator who was funded by a substantial creditor in circumstances where the creditor alleged that the examinee had been party, as a director, to the incurring of the creditor's debt when there were no reasonable grounds to expect that the company would be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due and therefore liable for damages in relation thereto. Waddell CJ in Eq noted that the liquidator had no funds (there being no assets in the company) and that there was no likelihood at that stage that the liquidator would continue with proceedings against the director unless, in the light of the examination, the creditor considered it in its interests to fund those proceeding. His Honour noted the submission made for the examinee that as the purpose of the examination was to advance the interests of only one of the creditors of the company this was an improper purpose and the examination order should be set aside. His Honour said:  
However, it may be that as a result of information gained from the examination other creditors may wish to take [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s592.html) proceedings or to fund the Equity proceedings to try and recover some of the assets transferred. It does not follow that, because the motive of Macquarie
Print [the creditor funding the examination] in funding the examination is to advance its own interests, the liquidator is seeking to conduct the examination solely in the interests of that company and not in the interests of other creditors or not in the interests of finding out what were the circumstances which led the company into its financial difficulties and liquidation which circumstances might reveal breaches of the Corporations Law . (my emphasis) 
It would, of course, be of assistance to the liquidator to be able to examine the other directors who, as already mentioned, are all bankrupt. But it appears that none of the creditors is prepared to fund such an examination.
Generally speaking, it seems to me that the course taken by the liquidator is the result of not having funds to take any other. It does not seem to me that any inference adverse to the liquidator should be drawn from the fact that the creditor that is supplying the funds for the examination may have better prospects of recovering its debt than the other creditors who have taken no steps to recover theirs . (my emphasis)
His Honour noted the two important public purposes that such an examination is designed to serve as identified by Mason CJ in Hamilton versus Oades <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 486] at 7 by Mason CJ, those being:  ... One is to enable the liquidator to gather information which will assist him in the winding up; that involves protecting the interests of creditors.
The other is to enable evidence and information to be obtained to support the bringing of criminal charges in connection with the company's affairs.
Waddell CJ said:  
It is clearly established that it is legitimate for a liquidator to use an examination to enable him to decide whether proceedings already commenced should be continued: Re Hugh J Roberts Pty Ltd (in liq) [[1970] 2 NSWR ]
at 585. In this case, on the evidence, the liquidator needs information as to the availability and likelihood of being able to realise the assets transferred if these are recovered. This is not information which he could gain reliably by discovery or interrogatories. Re Hugh J Roberts has been approved in a number of cases including by the Court of Appeal in Hongkong
Bank of Australia versus Murphy (1992) 8 ACSR 736 at 740 ; [10 ACLC 1573] at 1576 per Gleeson
CJ, with whom the other judges agreed.
His Honour referred to In Re BPTC Ltd [(1992) 7 ACSR 291] and rejected the view there expressed that the obtaining of evidence in support of actions by individual shareholders against the directors of a company in the course of being wound up necessarily lies outside the proper ambit of such a provision. Waddell CJ expressly agreed with McLelland J's vies that "Facilitation of the accountability to individual creditors or contributories, as well as to the company itself, of those who participated in the conduct of its affairs prior to the winding up should nowadays be regarded as sufficiently related to the winding up to fall within the scope of the section." and said:  ... In my opinion, even if the prime purpose of the examination were to assist
Macquarie Print recover its debt, this would not be an ulterior purpose which would justify the court in setting aside the examination order. However, on the facts, as appears above, I do not regard this as the prime purpose.
Reference was also made in Laurie Cottier to the submission that an inference that the liquidator was there acting only in the interests of the funding creditor was supported by the fact that both were represented by the same solicitor:  ... It is said that there is necessarily a conflict of interest so far as that solicitor is concerned because matters might arise where they would owe a different duty to each of their clients. No example has been proposed. It is not unusual for the petitioning creditor's solicitor later to act for a liquidator. This is, in general, not desirable because a liquidator should be seen to be independent and to represent only the body of creditors. However, sometimes it may be unavoidable and there may be no conflict of interest. Each case must depend on its own circumstances. In the present case there are, I think, no consequences which are adverse to the liquidator. (my emphasis)
In Excel , the court made it clear that it was necessary to distinguish between the purpose of the creditor funding the examination, its motives being to advance it own interests, and the purpose of the liquidator in conducting the examination on the other. That is the critical distinction to be made in the present case. I have no doubt that the motivation of Hyperion in funding the examinations and in providing encouragement and assistance in relation thereto is to seek to recover the losses it claims to have suffered under the lease transaction into which it entered in 2007 (as part of the obligations it undertook in the sale transaction in late 2006). However, I am not convinced that this is the motivation or predominant purpose of the liquidator.  
True it is, there are particular communications in which the liquidator has referred to (or been apparently prepared to countenance) the application of pressure on the overseas directors as a result of the coercive processes available to the liquidator under <case> of the Act. However, I accept Mr Golledge's submission that the pressure sought to be applied was (at least in the communications since the time of Mr Gleeson's appointment) that of forcing the overseas directors to attend for cross-examination, to produce the documents that the liquidator considers relevant for that purpose, and to provide information as to the company's affairs (to enable the liquidator to assess - or even to confirm the liquidator's present views as to - whether the company was engaged in insolvent trading at the relevant time and whether there was any breach of director's duties giving rise to a claim on behalf of the company). The use of such language suggests to me a level of frustration on the part of the liquidator at the lack of co-operation he perceived he was receiving and to which he considered he was entitled.  
My conclusion in this regard is reinforced by the fact that the correspondence from Gillis Delaney made clear a willingness to cooperate with the overseas directors as to the proposed timing of the examinations - and foreshadowed that if all the documents were produced then not all of the examinations might need to take place - as well as a preparedness to consider any reasonable request to narrow the Orders for Production (see, for example the letter dated 9 June 2011 from Gillis Delaney to Colin Biggers & Paisley, in which letter they made the clear the basis on which it was asserted that the financial affairs of APH were closely intermingled with APL).  
Reading the correspondence as a whole, it seems to me that the most likely explanation for the breadth of the current Orders for Production is the desire to ensure that the relevant material is covered (having regard to the dispute that had arisen as to whether particular documents were caught by the previous Orders for Production and having regard to the apparently uncooperative attitude of the overseas directors), rather than any attempt at fishing or to oppress the recipients of the orders.  
I note that in Excel , the Court referred to what had been said by Street J (as his Honour then was) in Re Hugh J Roberts Pty Ltd (In liq) [[1970] 2 NSWR 582] at 585 (quoted with approval by the Court of Appeal in the HongkongBank case (at 518) and by Mason CJ in Hamilton versus Oades (at 497), to the effect that a liquidator needs information concerning the company in liquidation just as much in connection with current or contemplated litigation as in connection with other aspects of its affairs and that the use of the statutory machinery of private examination to gather such information is an ordinary and legitimate use of this procedure. In Excel , it was said:  
Whether there will be, in a particular case, a use of the process or an abuse of it will depend upon purpose rather than result . The consequence of an examination may well be that the examiner has conducted a "dress rehearsal" of cross-examination which may take place in a subsequent trial. The fact that the trial has commenced, or is contemplated, may throw light upon the purpose. But merely because other proceedings had been commenced or are contemplated would not involve, of itself, an abuse of process. This follows having regard to the nature of the investigative process which could throw light on the question, inter alia, whether there was evidence which would warrant a liquidator, for example, proceeding against an examinee. But it may be quite a different question where proceedings contemplated or instituted are not proceedings to be brought by the company, but proceedings brought by some other party for the advantage of that party rather than the company. For example, it would be an abuse of process for a creditor approved by the Commission for the purposes of [s 597(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s597.html) to obtain an examination summons to conduct an examination for the purpose of obtaining evidence in proceedings which the creditor proposed to bring against the examinee for defamation. That would be a purpose completely foreign to the power of examination which is ultimately in aid of the company itself and not the personal advantage of the person seeking to conduct the examination. 
Similarly, as to the question of purpose, in Meteyard at [44], Basten JA said:  
There is, in addition, an established line of authority to the effect that an eligible applicant under [s
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) may examine a potential defendant, or an existing defendant, in relation to proposed or actual litigation, in order to determine whether the defendant has sufficient assets to meet an adverse judgment, if unsuccessful in the litigation. On the other hand, the authorities draw a line between those possible topics of inquiry and use of the examination process to determine the strength or weakness of the corporation's case, or its opponent's case, in relation to the dispute. In the recent decision of the Full Court of the
Supreme Court of South Australia, Re Normans Wines Ltd (Receivers and
Managers appointed) (In Liq); Harvey versus Burfield <case>; <case>,
Mullighan J quoted without criticism, the following statement of the trial judge: " '[41] The authorities establish that an improper purpose includes a purpose of using the examination as a dress rehearsal for cross-examination, or for the purpose of destroying the credibility of the examinees or witnesses who might be called for the examinee in substantive proceedings, or for the predominant purpose of obtaining a forensic advantage not available from ordinary pre-trial procedures, or simply to cause undue inconvenience or embarrassment to the examinee or to inflict costs'."
Again, this raises the question as to the predominant purpose of the examinations and whether that was impermissibly to obtain a forensic advantage. In Excel at (90-91):  
The Australian jurisprudence eschews the English distinction in favour of the more useful test of whether the person seeking the examination order has the purpose of obtaining a forensic advantage not otherwise available: see per
Gleeson CJ in HongkongBank of Australia Ltd versus Murphy (1992) 28 NSWLR 512 at
However, as Gleeson CJ also points out: ... the possibility that a forensic advantage will be gained does not mean that a making of an order will not advance a purpose intended to be secured by the legislation. (my emphasis)
It is clear that as to the objective purpose, it has to be the predominant purpose and that the mere fact that there may be a collateral advantage or by-product from the course sought to be adopted that works in the examiner's favour is not sufficient. In Excel at p 89, the Court said:  
It is apparent that the question whether there is, in a particular case, an abuse of process will be a question which will depend upon the purpose of the applicant seeking the order of the court and the circumstances of the case.
For an abuse to be found it will be necessary that the offensive purpose be, at the least, the predominant purpose : see Burns Philp & Co Ltd v
Murphy (supra) at 732 and Williams versus Spautz (supra) at 529. (my emphasis)
The aspects of the matter that have caused me concern are the reference in the liquidator's email of 17 May 2011 (after the initial examinations) to "leverage points" and the fact that the liquidator is represented by the same solicitor as the funding creditor (who has seemingly advised the funding creditor from the outset of the administration as to the claims it seeks to make for recovery of its losses) in circumstances where this is a liquidation in which there are only two creditors and the proposed lines of enquiry can only ultimately be for the benefit of one of those creditors to the disadvantage of the other.  
As to the first, while I accept that the meaning of 'leverage points' is uncertain, it seems to me that it cannot logically refer (as the word 'pressure' seems to have done) to gaining leverage in order to force the overseas directors to attend for examination. It must refer to leverage either in other proceedings or in some form of settlement negotiations. If the reference is to proceedings for the benefit of the company (say, in relation to insolvent trading) then this may not necessarily be inconsistent with the liquidator having a proper purpose. If this were a reference to leverage in negotiations to compromise a claim by Hyperion then it would be an improper purpose.  
It seems to me (as I indicated in the course of submissions) that this email is the high point of the case raised by APH of improper purpose. It requires enormous weight to be placed on the choice of language in that short expression for a conclusion to be drawn that the predominant purpose of the liquidator in later seeking the issue of the second set of examination summonses and orders was an improper purpose. The wording of the communications in general does not suggest a carefully considered choice of words in this regard. After considerable thought, I am unable to conclude that this email, read in the context of what had by then become increasingly contentious correspondence between the parties (and where it is clear that there is suspicion and distrust on both sides and references to 'hectoring emails' which suggest that emotions were running high even between the legal representatives), can bear such weight. Infelicitous as the language of the email seems to me to be, I do not consider that it warrants the inference that the liquidator is acting for the predominant and improper purpose of seeking to put pressure on APH to resolve a dispute with Hyperion or of seeking information to assist Hyperion in the conduct of a separate claim it may have against APP.  
As to the second matter, I note that in Laurie Cottier , Waddell CJ expressed some concern at the potential for conflict where the same solicitor acted both for the liquidator and the funding creditor (and expressed the opinion that it was not the preferable course) but considered that in the circumstances of that case there was no inference adverse to the liquidator to be drawn. That was a case where there were a number of creditors. Here, the position is quite different - the battle lines are clearly drawn between Hyperion and one or more of the Accord Pacific group and the benefit of any litigation which produces a recovery for the company in liquidation is in practical terms a benefit for Hyperion (even if it may share only pro rata in any such recovery). That seems to me to bring the matter much closer to the situation where the liquidator might be said to be acting, in effect, for the benefit of the creditor and not the benefit of the company. Moreover, the scope for conflict has been highlighted by the complaint by APH that no attention has been given to alleged preferential payments to Hyperion during the period under investigation.  
However, while the investigations now being sought to be carried our may ultimately be only for the financial benefit of one of the two creditors (and against the interests of the other) that does not necessarily mean that the proper administration of the winding up of the company does not warrant an investigation into matters such as the potential breach of directors' duties as being in the public interest. Focus on the dispute as between the two creditors seems not to take into account the public interest rationale for the examinations power (as identified in Hamilton versus Oades ).  
It has been said that the possibility of recoveries for insolvent trading or otherwise in a winding up should not be lightly overlooked ( Young (as representative for the Australian partnership known as Accenture) versus Sherman [(2002) 170 FLR 86], at [101] and [126]).  
Further, the purpose for the imposition of directors' statutory duties is said to involve public expectations of corporate governance. In Castlereagh Motels Ltd versus Davies-Roe (1966) 84 WN [(Pt 2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s2.html) [182](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s182.html), Wallace P stated (at [184]) that it is not the prevention of financial loss to the company which appears to be the main or direct object of statutory duties, but that of ensuring that companies are benefited by the proper and devoted discharge by directors of their fiduciary duties. Therefore, it would seem to be a proper purpose for a liquidator, even if funded by a creditor who may benefit therefrom, to enquire into such matters.  
While the interest of creditors in an insolvency has been recognized in general to be a monetary one (in Alternative Business Solutions Deputy Commissioner of Taxation versus Alternative Business Solutions (Aust) Pty Ltd (in admin)  <case>, Lindgren J referring to the expression "interests of creditors" in the context of a winding up application as the creditors' interests in recovering what is owed to them), there has also been increasing recognition that, in discharging their duty to act in good faith and in the interests of the company, directors must have regard to the interests of the company's creditors, particularly where the company is nearing insolvency (see Ford's Principles of Corporations Law at [8.100]; The Bell Group Ltd (in liq) versus Westpac Banking Corporation (No 9) [(2008) 70 ACSR 1], Young J (as his Honour then was) considered that where inferences were open to be drawn as to the partiality and bias of the person appointed as liquidator of an insolvent entity, then that person would not be an appropriate person to act in that capacity (see paras [241]-[251]). That said, the factual circumstances underpinning those inferences in that case included that the putative liquidator had had an interest as a 'packager' of the funding arrangements for the litigation in question (and had been entitled, though he was not then pressing, to a success fee in relation to the matter). Nothing of that kind was raised on the present application. At most the evidence here seems to suggest that Mr Gleeson approached the liquidation with the view that there was a prospect (or even a likelihood) that there had been insolvent trading and that this merited investigation.  
As to the suggestion that an inference can be drawn as to improper purpose from the perceived weakness of the insolvent trading claim, I note that reference was made to Lewis versus Doran . There, at [112]-[116], Palmer J held that a company could be considered to be solvent on the basis that it had available to it, as a resource from which debts could be paid, ongoing support from related entities or the directors and which had historically resulted in those creditors actually being paid. It was not necessary that there be a legally enforceable "guaranteed" source of funding.  
It is said that the court must look to "commercial reality" ( Lewis versus Doran , at [106]-[112] and [119]). In Brooks versus Heritage Hotel Adelaide Pty Ltd [(1996) 20 ACSR 61] where there was "financial support" from the parent company.)  
I accept that the provision of financial support from a parent company, even where that is not pursuant to a binding contract, may be sufficient to preclude a finding of insolvency. However, it is not for me in the present proceedings to determine issues as to the solvency or otherwise of the company at the relevant time(s). It is sufficient to note that this is an issue which would need to be tested on the evidence before the court at the relevant time and I am not satisfied that the fact that the liquidator seeks to conduct examinations for the purpose of ascertaining whether there is evidence to support an insolvent trading claim is an impermissible forensic purpose.  
I note that the power to compel for examination, which is otherwise unfettered, must be exercised judicially ( Southern Cross Petroleum Sales (SA) Pty Ltd (in liq) versus Hirsch <case>; [(1998) 70 SASR 527], per Lander J at 536). In that case, his Honour noted that in exercising the discretion to issue an examination order, the court may have regard to a number of matters. Those include the seriousness of the matters into which enquiry is to be made; the use to which the information obtained on the examination might be put; the possibility of an advantage to the eligible applicant which he or she would not otherwise enjoy and the concomitant disadvantage to the prospective examinee; the availability of the information from other sources; the cost to the prospective examinee in attending for examination; whether the information sought is so peripheral to make the attendance of the prospective examinees oppressive; and the wider public interest in investigating the affairs of the corporation (at 536-537).  
As to those matters, it seems to me that in circumstances where the information sought has not been able to be obtained from the local directors/employees and where the overseas directors appear from time to time to travel to this country (and one did so at the time of the previous examinations) such that the cost to the prospective examinee seems to me not to weigh against the orders; where the information sought is not peripheral to the question of insolvent trading and where there is a public interest in such an investigation, the balance lies in favour of the exercise of direction to permit the examinations to take place.  
The onus of satisfying a court that there is an abuse of process lies on the party alleging it and the onus is a heavy one. It is for APH to demonstrate that the predominant purpose in seeking the examination is improper. I am not satisfied that it has done so. The permissible purposes for the conduct of examinations include the determination as to whether proceedings are sufficiently meritorious to warrant them being commenced or continued and their likely prospects of success; to demonstrate the viability of a proposed proceeding; and to gather information to assist in the administration of a corporation. I am satisfied that the predominant purposes of the liquidator in the present case fall within these purposes.  
Therefore, do not consider that the basis has been established for the examination summonses to be set aside. While, I have some doubts as to whether some of the issues sought to be examined upon, in particular the circumstances of the sale (at least from the perspective of the vendor, APP), are strictly part of the examinable affairs of APL (and to the extent that the examinations seek to focus on that aspect of the matter then I am inclined to think that there may be a reasonable basis for objection to that line of questioning), that is a matter for debate at the time of the examinations. Mr Golledge emphasized the dangers to which Meteyard points of seeking to determine this in advance of the examinations and I accept that it may well be that the relevance of that matter to the examinable affairs of APL can be established at that point.  
Orders for Production 
An order for production for the purposes of an examination under [s 596A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596a.html) or [s 596B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s596b.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) may be issued provided that the order is for the purposes of a particular examination and the court is satisfied that there is sufficient connection between the production of the documents sought in the order and the particular examination (per Onefone Australia Pty Limited versus One Tel Limited  <case>  
It was, in effect, submitted that even if the orders for production are not set aside, they should be read down. Mr Aldridge pointed to various items sought, the relevance of which to the examinable affairs of APL was said not to be apparent. Mr Golledge pointed out that the liquidator had offered to consider any reasonable request for the narrowing of the orders and none had been made. I accept that this is the case. However, in the interests of the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in dispute, I consider that it is appropriate to review the orders and to narrow those that, as presently framed, seem to me to be too wide.  
To the extent that the orders for production require that which has already been done then there would be a basis for finding that they should be set aside as oppressive and an abuse of process. However, if, as I understand to be the case, any overlap is a product of the non-production of such material in answer to the earlier Orders, then the re-phrasing of the Orders to ensure that such material is produced can hardly be said to be oppressive.  
There are, however, specific areas in which I consider that the orders should be narrowed.  
First, I am not satisfied that the basis has been established for the need for production of the laptops and hard drives sought by the liquidator. There is nothing to suggest that there has been any intentional deletion of material from the electronic records of the companies and I accept Mr Aldridge's submission that the order would operate in effect as an Anton Pillar order without the usual procedures put in place in those circumstances. The dispute as to production of email communications between the local employees/director and the overseas director has been as to whether the documents in question were covered by the Orders for Production. The persons on whom those orders were served were entitled to take a strict view of what it was that they were required to produce. (Indeed, the evidence of Mr McDonald suggests that documents were produced to the solicitors and the decision as to whether those documents or all of them fell within the Orders for Production was left to the solicitors. That seems to me not necessarily to be indicative of any view having been formed by the recipients of the orders that the documents were required to be produced or as to any lack of co-operation on the part of the recipients but, rather, that anything that might have fallen within the description was collected and the recipient then relied on legal advice as to what was required in order to comply with the Orders.)  
Second, in relation to the documents sought as to compliance by the recipients with the earlier orders for production cannot be relevant to the examinable affairs of the company since this occurred after the company was placed into liquidation (and Mr Golledge, to be fair, seemed to concede that this was the case).  
Third, I am concerned that the orders seeking production of documentation in relation to the sale (while said to be relevant in considering the argument that the sale price was inflated by the capitalization of a wildly inflated rental rate) seem to be most relevant to a claim in relation to representations made by the vendor (APP) prior to the sale and therefore that the seeking of these documents is very close to obtaining an impermissible forensic advantage for a claim that Hyperion might make in separate litigation against a third party. In the exercise of my discretion I think it appropriate to exclude the production of that material from the operation of the Orders for Production.  
Finally, and this is perhaps a minor point, I have some concern as to whether the recipient of the Orders would necessarily be in a position to determine on the face of documents held by the companies what was or was not "taken into account by" the company in entry into the lease and I think it appropriate to limit the orders by the deletion of that phrase.  
I therefore consider that the Orders for Production to APP and APH should be read down by excluding the documents or items presently sought in 1(a), (f), (i), and (k), 2 and 4 and by deleting the words "or taken into account by" in 3. Similar amendment may need to be made to others of the Orders for Production. In that regard, I direct the parties to prepare a minute of the orders to be made to reflect these reasons.  
Orders 
I dismiss the plaintiff's application to set aside the examination summonses and orders.
I note that the Orders for Production are to be amended in accordance with short minutes to be prepared by the parties.
I will hear the parties as to costs.  * * * 
