

Roggenkamp versus Estate Monica June Bowd No. 111394 of 1992 Wills Probate and
Administration [1995] NSWSC 120 (31 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
PROBATE DIVISION
HODGSON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 11 August 1995 #DATE 11:8:1995 #ADD 31:10:1995 
Counsel for the Applicant   Mr. M. Gorrick 
Instructed by Wilkinson Throsby and Edwards
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
HODGSON J On 20th June 1995, a Deputy Registrar made an order to the effect that the late Monica June Bowd intended an informal testamentary document dated 20th July 1989 to constitute her will. This is an application brought pursuant to Pt.78 r.6 and Pt.61 r.3 to review that order.
The deceased died on 14th April 1990. She left a net estate of about $136,000.00, mainly consisting of cash. She was a widow when she died, and she left two children: a daughter who is the plaintiff in these proceedings; and a son who, the evidence indicates, is a spastic quadriplegic, and whose affairs are being managed by the Protective Commissioner. No formally valid will has been found; and if her estate passes on intestacy, it will be shared equally between the two children. However, the plaintiff found among the deceased's papers a document bearing date 20th
July 1989, and bearing the heading "Interim Will", signed by the deceased and witnessed by one Bruce Hodge. A photocopy of the document is annexed to this judgment. (Document omitted)
The parties who would benefit by this informal document, in particular the deceased's son through the Protective Commissioner, and three charities, have been notified of these proceedings; and none of them have sought to propound the document or offered any evidence. The only substantial evidence before me, as it was before the Deputy
Registrar, is evidence given by the plaintiff, and a short affidavit from Dr. Hodge who witnessed the document.
Dr. Hodge's evidence was to the effect that, at the time he witnessed the document, he was a medical practitioner in practice at the Royal Prince
Alfred
Hospital. He recalls the deceased asking him to witness her signature whilst he was making his rounds, but he recalls no statements made by the deceased concerning the document. He did not see the deceased writing out the document or see her alter it.
The plaintiff's evidence about the circumstances of her mother, around the time of the making of the document and some time before, and in relation to the period between the making of the document and her mother's death, is extremely sketchy. That seems to be explained by the circumstance that the plaintiff is referred to in the document as residing at Cairns in Queensland and, according to her affidavits, she was in August 1992 residing in Kuranda,
Northern Queensland, and she was still residing there in August 1994.
According to her
August 1994 affidavit, between the time of the informal document and the death of the deceased, she was in regular telephone contact with the deceased. I would infer that that was the only direct contact the plaintiff had with the deceased over this period, and that this was because the plaintiff was living in Northern Queensland, while the deceased was living in the Sydney region.

The plaintiff's evidence is to the effect that the deceased was an alcoholic. That evidence is not given in satisfactory form; but there is documentary evidence supporting this, including a document signed by the deceased herself, and a postmortem report about the deceased from the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital. It appears that she was in that hospital, on the occasion when she made the document, for a colectomy for colonic ulcers. Her clinical history, as recorded in the postmortem report, includes a reference to being admitted to hospital in 1989 for depression and suicidal tendencies, and to being admitted a week before her death in a state which included being somewhat confused, extremely depressed, and suicidal. The postmortem report included a diagnosis of acute Wernicke's encephalopathy.
That is described in
Gould's Medical Dictionary as being a disease of acute onset, characterised, among other things, by mental confusion and, in patients who recover, by amnesic psychosis; and the dictionary also records that the disease is usually found in alcoholics and is due to nutritional deficiency, more specifically a deficiency of thiamine. The postmortem described the imminent cause of death as being probably this condition against a background of severe alcoholic liver disease.
Other documents found by the plaintiff among the deceased's papers included a document signed by the deceased which, among other things, contained the following statements: "I agree to take 4 Toluon tabs. twice a day until reviewed by a psychiatrist". "I agree to a daily visit by crisis team".
"I will not drink alcohol". Another document among a list of items which needed to be done included "Contact to agoraphobia centre".
In his reasons for his decision, the Deputy Registrar considered whether the heading of the document "Interim Will" suggested that the document was merely intended to be deliberative; but he came to the conclusion that the terms of the document, coupled with the fact that the deceased had taken the trouble to have the document witnessed, indicated that the deceased did intend the document to be operative, and did intend that the document, without more, operate as her will. The Deputy Registrar referred to Godman v.
Godman [(1920)
P 261] at 278, Estate of Perram, Santow J, 4th April 1995, and Public Trustee v. Commins, Powell J, 19th June 1992.
The Deputy Registrar then dealt with submissions concerning testamentary capacity. He expressed the view that, where a prima facie case has been established in favour of a will, the onus of proof of incapacity rests on the person seeking to impeach the document. He said that the will appeared to be in clear and rational terms, and that therefore a prima facie case existed in favour of the document. He reached the view that, on the bare evidence submitted, he did not think the deceased lacked testamentary capacity. He referred to Banks v. Goodfellow [(1870) LR 5 QB 549], Bailey v. Bailey [(1924) 25 CLR ]; and also to Perpetual Trustee Co. Ltd. v. Fairlie-Cunninghame, Powell J, th June 1993, Re Crooks, Young J, 14th December 1994, and Gorey v.
Lightfoot, Santow J, 11th October 1993.
The Deputy Registrar also considered a further submission that no application had been made to prove the document; and held that administration simpliciter would not be granted where the deceased left a will which affects property within the jurisdiction.
For the plaintiff, it was submitted that the informal document lacked rationality; so that either there was no presumption in favour of testamentary capacity, or alternatively, any such presumption was weak and easily displaced. It was submitted that the evidence of alcoholism, and the evidence that the deceased was suicidal and depressed, both before the document and afterwards, and also material suggesting that the deceased had disappeared after discharge from the hospital in late July 1989 when she was admitted to a psychiatric hospital, threw such doubt on the testamentary capacity of the deceased that the Court would not find that testamentary capacity was established. It was submitted that the Deputy Registrar was in error in assuming that the ultimate onus of proof lay on the party seeking to dispute testamentary capacity.
Next, it was submitted that, even if the Court was satisfied of testamentary capacity, the form of the document did not justify a finding that the deceased intended the document to be her will. Reference was made to the word "Interim Will", and to an alteration to the document made in different ink which, it was submitted, indicated that this was a matter of work in progress, rather than being intended to be a final expression of intention.
Although the circumstance that the document had been witnessed was some indication to the contrary, it should also be considered along with the circumstance that the document was not shown to anyone else.
In my view, the informal document can be described as appearing rational, even though some confusion is indicated by the documents and it is not well expressed. It is true that, having purportedly given the whole estate to the deceased's son, the document then qualifies that in a number of ways.
The first qualification is a gift of three particular items to the plaintiff. The next qualification is that, upon the son's demise, the residue of his estate is divided among three charities. Such confusion and unclarity as is involved in those matters, would not, in my opinion, of itself suggest irrationality.
Furthermore, the selection of the deceased's son as substantial beneficiary of the deceased's entire estate would not suggest irrationality, having regard to the circumstances of the deceased's son.
The document does contain the words "Should Martin's demise be early or late, the residue of his estate has to be equally divided between the following". Those words are certainly unclear, and do suggest some confusion of thought. I suppose that the word "early" is probably intended to refer to the possibility that the son may die before the deceased, and the word "late" to refer to a circumstance where he dies after the deceased; but again, I would not regard that as of itself suggesting irrationality. There is reference to provision of an appropriate memorial without any specification of what the memorial is of, and there is a somewhat curious reference to embalming.
Those matters on their own, I would not regard as indicating irrationality.
However, putting all the matters together, in my view, it is a fair conclusion that the form and content of the document is not such as to provide a strong indication of testamentary capacity; although, in my opinion, if there was no material casting any doubt on testamentary capacity, it could be enough to discharge the onus of proof.
However, there is some evidence creating doubt as to testamentary capacity. The evidence of alcoholism and suicidal tendencies, both shortly before and relatively shortly after the will, and the condition causing death, coupled with some provisions of the document to which I have referred, do in my view raise a doubt as to testamentary capacity. In those circumstances, in my opinion, the evidentiary onus does pass back to the party, if any, seeking to uphold the document. In order to pronounce in favour of the document, the
Court has to be positively satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that there was testamentary capacity.
It puts the question quite wrongly to say that the Court has to be satisfied that there was not testamentary capacity.
If this were a contested case, with both interests represented, one would have expected there to be more evidence concerning the appearance and conduct of the deceased around the relevant times, and medical notes concerning the deceased's admission to hospital at the relevant time, and possibly evidence from her medical practitioners.
In my opinion, it is not up to the plaintiff to call that kind of evidence, because she does not bear the onus of proving lack of testamentary capacity. Furthermore, for the reasons I have indicated, the plaintiff does not appear herself to have been in a position to give evidence of actual observations of the deceased around the relevant time.
In all those circumstances, I do not believe that the evidence does justify a finding in favour of this will.
That view would be to the substantial disadvantage of the plaintiff's brother. I think the appropriate course would be for this judgment to be sent to the Protective Commissioner so that the Protective Commissioner could decide whether, on behalf of the deceased's brother, he would wish to put before the Court evidence of the kind
I have indicated which may enable a positive finding of testamentary capacity to be made.
Turning to the question of whether the inference would be drawn that this document was intended to be the will of the deceased, in my opinion, if one assumed full testamentary capacity, that inference would be drawn. The reference in the document to "Interim Will" does not, in my opinion, negative the effect of the words of the document, which are words appropriate to indicate a present testamentary intention. I think this view is confirmed by the circumstance that the deceased went to the trouble not only of signing the document herself, but of having her signature witnessed. I do not think the circumstance that she did not give the document to anyone militates against that conclusion. However, I would add that, in circumstances where there is doubt about testamentary capacity, the reference to "Interim Will" does give an additional reason for the Court not to be affirmatively satisfied that this should be considered a valid will.
For those reasons, the course I propose is this: to direct that a copy of this judgment be sent to the Protective Commissioner; to stand the matter over for say eight weeks.
I declare that I am not satisfied that at the time the deceased made the informal document of 20th July 1989, the deceased had testamentary capacity.
I refer the matter to the Registrar for the purpose of a grant of administration to the plaintiff subject to the Registrar being satisfied with formalities.
I stay the operation of these orders for eight weeks.
I direct that a copy of this judgment be provided to the Protective
Commissioner by 18th August 1995.
I direct that if the Protective Commissioner wishes to lead evidence in support of the document, he may list this matter for the purpose of further evidence and argument and for a further stay of the operation of these orders, on any Friday within that eight week period, on two days' notice to the plaintiff.
I order that the costs of the plaintiff of this application be paid out of the estate. That order is stayed in the same way as the other orders.
 
ADDENDUM
TO JUDGMENT
Tuesday 15th August 1995
Having read the transcript of the judgment which I delivered orally on th August, it seems to me that it might be helpful if I make a few additional comments.
Firstly, the circumstance that, despite being served, the Protective
Commissioner did not, on behalf of the son of the deceased, seek to propound the informal document would not of itself have justified the Court in finding against the document. Probate litigation is interest litigation, but in my opinion, if material before the Court shows that there is a valid will which is not being propounded by any person, the Court will not make a grant of probate or administration which is inconsistent with that will.
In the case of duly executed and apparently rational wills, there is a presumption of testamentary capacity and knowledge and approval of the contents. In the case of informal testamentary documents, it seems to me that inferences of testamentary capacity, knowledge and approval, and testamentary intention may be drawn from the document itself; but I do not think there is precisely the presumption which arises in the case of duly executed documents.
Because the formality required by the law has not been followed, in my opinion satisfaction as to testamentary capacity, knowledge and approval, and testamentary intention must be based on what the Court regards as appropriate material; so that, except in clear cases, if evidence as to the circumstances of making the document is available, such evidence should be led by the person propounding the document. For that reason, I am doubtful if it is appropriate to say that there is, in the case of informal testamentary documents, the same presumption as in the case of duly executed documents. In some cases, the appropriate inferences may be drawn from mere production of the document, if other evidence is not available, or if it is a clear case. Otherwise, however, the document itself may not be sufficient, and the Court will need to have evidence of the circumstances of its preparation in order that inferences may be drawn.
In the present case, there is some evidence of mental problems and some slight confusion in the document itself, and probably evidence of the circumstances of its creation would be available; at least from the witness
Dr. Hodge, and from medical records. There is no onus on the person challenging the document to call this evidence. For reasons I gave, I was not satisfied without that evidence; and, in that sense, the lack of a propounder of the document, and the lack of evidence called in favour of it, led to the result that I was not satisfied as to testamentary capacity.
It may be that if the Protective Commissioner does seek to propound the will on behalf of the son, evidence from Dr. Hodge and the medical records of the deceased's admission on the occasion when she made the document would be enough to discharge the onus of proof. If the medical records suggest capacity, and Dr. Hodge supports it, and if no stronger evidence is led by the daughter against capacity, it may be that the onus would then be discharged.
It is for that reason that I have directed that the judgment be sent to the
Protective Commissioner, so that he will have the opportunity to see the reasons I have applied and decide whether it is appropriate to seek to propound the document on behalf of the son of the deceased.
Finally, I should add that I have not directed that this judgment be sent to the three charities. In my opinion, it is clear that, in the events which have happened, the purported gift to the three charities would fail. It is not expressed in terms which would confer a gift to the son of a life estate: the reference to the division of "the residue of his estate" makes that clear. In those circumstances, the gift to the three charities would fail as being repugnant to the absolute gift to the deceased's son, and as being an attempt to exercise a testamentary power on behalf of the deceased's son.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/120.html  
