

Director General of Department of Community Services versus G and Anor Matter
No 12000/97 [1998] NSWSC 354 (27 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 September 1998 
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES versus G & ANOR /97 March 1998 
Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By a summons filed on 3 July 1997, the applicant seeks:- 
A declaration that the order for costs made by the second respondent against the applicant on 6 May 1997 is void and of no effect.
An order quashing the order for costs made by the second respondent against the applicant on 6 May 1997.

The second respondent is a magistrate of the Children's Court. This matter arises as a result of a judgment delivered by that magistrate on 11 June 1997.
The judgment is Annexure A to the affidavit of Marina Rizzo sworn 27 June 1997 and filed on behalf of the applicant.

At p.19 of the judgment, the magistrate says this:- "[G] has applied for costs. In my view, he should have his costs. This has not been a case where the Department has simply failed on the merits of the case.
For reasons that I have already expressed, the Department has not been shown to have investigated this matter in a proper and complete fashion. I believe the case falls within the parameters of the inherent powers of the court to award costs as discussed in Wilson v. McDougall (1987) 11 NSW 241." 
In argument before me, it was conceded on behalf of the appellant that
Wilson v. McDougall (1987) 11 NSW 241 was authority for the proposition that the Children's Court had a power to award costs by reason of an inherent jurisdiction to provide an appropriate remedy to prevent the court's process from being abused. Newman, J. deals with this issue at p.245 and at F says this:- "In so holding I wish to make it clear that I do not believe that the inherent power vested in the Children's Court does in an ordinary case provide jurisdiction in a magistrate to make an order for costs. Indeed, even in a case where the proceedings brought were misconceived but not mischievous it would be difficult to see how the court's inherent power would extend so far.
However, in this case the proceedings and their conduct were, as his Worship found, not only misconceived but also mischievous. It is this latter element which I believe creates a vehicle which enables the court to use its inherent jurisdiction and award costs." 
This inherent power is not challenged on behalf of the applicant but it is said that it was inappropriate for the magistrate to exercise it in the present case. It is the exercise of a discretion and accordingly, it is necessary to see whether there was material entitling the magistrate to form the view he did. If there is such material, then in accordance with the well known decisions on the exercise of discretion, it matters not whether another court might have taken a different view.

In my judgment, there were three significant matters entitling the magistrate to make the order he did. At p.4 of his judgment he refers to two highly relevant matters being omitted from the affidavit of Ms. Warne in relation to the child. He found at pp.4-6 of his judgment that relevant matters had been omitted from the affidavit of Mr. McLennan. Further, he found that there had been a complete failure on the part of the applicant to discuss the allegations of sexual abuse with the father at all either before or after the institution of proceedings. In my judgment those three matters are enough to warrant the order of the magistrate and bring the matter within the principles of Wilson v. McDougall (supra).

A further point was raised that [s.15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/s15.html) of the [Children's Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/) enabled an order of costs to be made. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/s15.html) reads as follows:- "The court may, in relation to all matters in respect of which it has jurisdiction, make such orders, including interlocutory orders, as it thinks appropriate." 
It is not necessary for me to decide whether that section either confers a jurisdiction to award costs by way of inherent jurisdiction to prevent the court's process being abused or by way of a general power to award costs.
However, I do note Newman, J.'s observations in Wilson v. McDougall (supra at 243-244), namely:- "It is trite law that costs are entirely the creature of statute and if the statute granting power to a court to act in a particular way does not give the courts an express power to award costs the court has no such power. Common law courts whether superior or inferior have no jurisdiction to order costs." 
Newman, J. goes on to refer to various authorities which were not discussed in argument before me nor indeed was that particular passage.

In the result, I consider the magistrate correctly directed himself as to the relevant principles and there was material entitling him to take the course he did.

Accordingly I order that the summons be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
