

Regina versus Baker Matter No Cca 60047/97 [1997] NSWSC 340 (27 August 1997) 
Regina versus Troy Baker 
CCA 60047/97 August 1997 
Smart J, Grove J, Studdert J 
Court of Criminal Appeal 
CCA 60047 /97 REGINA V TROY BAKER 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Troy Baker pleaded guilty to armed robbery of a lady at her shop on 11 September 1996. On 20 December 1996, he was sentenced by Judge Bellear to a minimum term of 6 months commencing on 13 September 1996 and an additional term of 12 months. Judge Bellear ordered that the periodic detention order earlier made on other matters be revoked. He made no consequential orders fixing a minimum or additional term. The Crown has appealed against that sentence on the ground that it was inadequate. 
On the morning of the offence the applicant had attended Manly Local Court and been granted bail on a charge of common assault and one of breach of an apprehended violence order. Thereafter he had purchased a knife which he claimed was to replace one which had been stolen from his tool box by his ex landlord. In his record of interview Baker said: "...but soon as I had it, I seen the shop, it was very isolated. I just didn't think, I just sort of lost control of my sense of right and wrong and attempted to put some money in my pocket." 
He had said that he had changed his intention and decided to rob the shop to obtain some easy money. He described it as "pure greed".

About 2.40 pm he was prowling outside the Park Shop, 11 Lower Beach Street,
Balgowlah. He entered the shop, purchased some chewing gum and retired. When some customers had left he re-entered the shop and asked the 74 year old lady who owned and managed the shop if he could have a plastic bag. She said "yes" and bent down behind the counter. When she straightened back up he produced a large knife similar to a machete and said, "Fill the bag, I want gold coins and notes." He said that he placed the knife which was in a clear plastic sheet on the counter. The victim said: "He then pulled a long machete from under the right side of his jacket ... The blade was very shiny about a foot long and very wide. It looked very sharp." 
The lady was terrified. One of the witnesses said that it was a big knife and that the sun reflected off it.

On leaving the shop Baker climbed into a car which was waiting nearby. The victim estimated that she placed about $200 in the bag, but Baker estimated the amount at about $70. The difference is unimportant.

The criminality involved in this offence was high. A big knife was produced, the shop was isolated, the victim was an elderly lady alone in the shop and she was required to give Baker the notes and "gold" coins in the till. There were the aggravating features that Baker had been granted bail that morning and was serving periodic detention. Having regard to the offence and these features a substantial custodial sentence was required.

Baker was born in August 1967. His prior record commenced in 1981. It included dishonesty offences (1981, 1985 and 1995), malicious damage (1985), driving offences (1985, 1992, 1995 and 1996) of some seriousness and drug offences . On 13 June 1996 on charges of driving under the influence occasioning grievous bodily harm and aggravated dangerous driving causing grievous bodily harm he was sentenced on each charge to 9 months periodic detention. He was required to report on 28 June 1996 and weekly thereafter.

Baker was arrested on the charge of armed robbery on 13 September 1996 and remanded in custody. On 8 November 1996 at Manly Local Court he was sentenced on each of the charges of common assault and breach of apprehended violence order to a concurrent fixed term of 6 months commencing 13 September 1996. The
Magistrate also cancelled the periodic detention order and according to some of the sentencing records ordered that the applicant serve a fixed term of 26 weeks commencing on 8 November 1996 and ending on 8 May 1997. The precise order was not placed before us.

Baker appealed to the District Court against the severity of the Magistrate's sentences. That appeal came before Chief Judge Blanch on 5 February 1997. He was made aware of the Crown appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal against the sentence imposed by Judge Bellear.

Chief Judge Blanch was asked by Baker to deal with the two concurrent sentences of 6 months and the revocation order and to fix a minimum term. It was put to the Chief Judge that the revocation order was an associated matter.
When asked to state the Crown's attitude, the solicitor appearing for the
Crown said that she did not know what would happen with the revocation and whether the Chief Judge could deal with the matter.

He thought that the concurrent sentences imposed by the magistrate were excessive and that the cancellation of the periodic detention order had the effect of bringing into play a 9 month sentence from 13 June 1996. That would expire at the same time as the two 6 months sentences imposed by the
Magistrate.

Chief Judge Blanch upheld the convictions on both charges but varied the penalties. Because of the period already served, the judge deferred passing sentence on condition that Baker enter into a recognizance himself in the sum of $2,000 to be of good behaviour for 2 years. It was a condition that he place himself under the supervision and guidance of the Probation and Parole
Service. During the hearing the judge indicated that if he had been dealing with Baker initially he would either not have imposed a custodial sentence on the 2 charges or imposed a short sentence. He was concerned that Baker be supervised. He was influenced by Baker not having had a custodial sentence prior to 1996.

The Chief Judge confirmed the revocation by the Magistrate of the periodic detention order but imposed a minimum term of 7 months to date from 13 June and an additional term of 2 months. The Chief Judge was neither supplied with all the relevant information nor given useful assistance on the periodic detention aspect.

The appeal against Judge Bellear's sentence came on for hearing before this
Court on 5 March 1997 but the moving party had not obtained the transcript and judgment of 5 February 1997. It also appeared that a mistake may have been made in the imposition of the sentence consequent upon the cancellation of the periodic detention order and that the sentence may require correction.

Chief Judge Blanch purported to deal with the periodic detention aspect on 11
March 1997. He stated that a mistake had been made because the sentence imposed was one of 9 months, the total period of the order for periodic detention and not the unexpired portion of it. The judge revoked the sentence which he had earlier passed as to the cancellation of periodic detention and sentenced Baker to a minimum term of 17 weeks and 5 days from 8 November 1996 and an additional term of 8 weeks and 2 days. The Chief Judge ordered that
Baker be released at the expiration of 17 weeks 5 days, under the terms of supervision specified in the schedule to the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). Baker was released on 12 March 1997 subject to supervision.

We heard extensive argument as to the effect of ss 24 to 27 of the Periodic
Detention of Prisoners Act, the orders which were made and the Court's power to make them. I do not find it necessary to resolve these points.

There were significant subjective features. Baker, on arrest, readily admitted the offence and stated that he would plead guilty. He adhered to that course.
He co-operated with the police. He had not been to gaol prior to 28 June 1996.
That was periodic detention. The judge was satisfied that he had been remorseful from an early date and that finding is supported by the materials.
Baker had been drug dependant in the 1980's but managed to overcome that habit which had led to some of his early offences.

Until about June 1995 life seemed to be going satisfactorily for Baker. His business as a roof tiler was going well and profitably. He had a de facto wife and a baby son. About June 1995 he was diagnosed as suffering reactive arthritis. The arthritis immobilised Baker and he had to close his roof tiling business and cease work. He had difficulty in providing for his de facto wife and son. Relations with her deteriorated. She had weekends away while he looked after their son. She required a separation. They agreed on joint custody of their son. He moved out of the home on 5 February 1996. About 23
February 1996 she told him that she had another man and that the affair had been going on for some months. There was trouble over access. She and her son were not at home on 1 March 1996 to enable pre-arranged access by Baker to occur. While he was at the home the father of the de facto wife telephoned and advised that if access was wanted Baker would have to apply to the Family
Court.

On 2 March 1996 Baker met a friend and drank to excess. He became depressed and upset. He decided to drive to see his de facto's father. He drove erratically and had the accident which gave rise to the serious driving offences, involving grievous bodily harm.

On 4 March 1996 Baker was admitted to the Psychiatric Unit of Manly Hospital with a history of reactive depression over the previous 8 months and suicidal impulses over the previous 10 days. The doctors thought that he was suffering major depression, with exacerbation due to stresses, along with suicidal ideation. Upon his discharge from hospital about 12/13 March 1997 he continued to have treatment.

There were continuing problems with his wife and access troubles. Court proceedings were instituted to obtain access. It is not surprising that Baker became involved in an incident with his de facto wife. It was the charges against him relating to her that were before the court on 11 September 1996.
Given his history he was probably not in a calm and sensible state of mind a few hours later. That provides some explanation of his behaviour. There is nothing in his previous behaviour which approaches the offence of armed robbery.

Counsel contended that the sentence imposed was a substantial one and one appropriate to the circumstances of the case. While I feel much sympathy for
Baker's considerable personal misfortunes they cannot be allowed to obscure the objective gravity of this offence and the aggravating features. I agree that there were special circumstances. Having regard to Baker's medical condition and drug and alcohol history he would benefit from extended supervision and support.

Notwithstanding the special circumstances and the subjective features, the sentence imposed does not take into account, sufficiently, the gravity of the offence. The sentence is manifestly and disturbingly inadequate.

Baker submitted that even if the Court were of this view it should nevertheless dismiss the appeal in the exercise of its discretion. Counsel correctly relied on the principle of double jeopardy and that Baker had been released on 12 March 1997. Counsel contended that it would be unfair to return
Baker to prison some 5 1/2 months after his release when he had made significant progress in his rehabilitation.

The Parole Progress Report of the ACT Corrective Services states that Baker has attended his weekly appointment and been polite and co-operative. He is attending counselling. An agreement has been reached as to his access to his two year old son. Baker has established a roofing business with a partner and has worked regularly, although not consistently, since his release. He continued to live with his mother. Baker remains drug free and exhibits no signs of alcohol abuse. Baker's commitment to rehabilitation appeared genuine and a further period of imprisonment may severely disrupt this without apparent benefit to the community. The ACT Corrective Services has devoted considerable effort to Baker's rehabilitation with pleasing results.

There is an affidavit from Baker which indicates some of the difficulties he experienced in custody. Of particular note is that because of the Crown appeal he remained in maximum security throughout the whole of his sentence. Baker has provided evidence which supports the opinions expressed in the report of the ACT Corrective Services.

This appeal has caused me considerable difficulty and concern. In the end I have come to the view, based on Baker's release on 12 March 1997 and his re- establishment both as to business and personal matters since that date, that the correct order of this Court, in the exercise of its discretion, is to dismiss the appeal.

GROVE J: Not only do I regard the sentence imposed in the District Court as inadequate but I would categorise it as grossly inadequate. The complications in the forensic and curial processes which have been related by Justice Smart are not the fault of the respondent, except of course to the extent that he was responsible for the commission of all the offences for which he needed to be dealt with.

During the time which elapsed, essentially to sort matters out, he has been released from custody and on the evidence has made singularly promising advances towards rehabilitation.

Accordingly, I agree that the discretion of this Court to dismiss a Crown appeal should be exercised but I emphasise my opinion as to the inadequacy of a sentence of eighteen months penal servitude containing a minimum term element of six months for the offence of armed robbery in the circumstances described in the leading judgment.

I agree with the order proposed.

STUDDERT J: I would also wish to express my own conclusion that this sentence was inadequate, plainly inadequate and disturbingly so. However, for the reasons that have already been stated I agree that in the exercise of the Court's discretion the appeal should be dismissed. 
SMART J: The order of the Court is that the appeal is dismissed. * * * 
