

Perpetual Trustees Victoria Ltd and Ors versus Textralian Enterprises Pty Ltd and Ors Matter No 4497/97 [1998] NSWSC 706 (17 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 `PERPETUAL TRUSTEES VICTORIA LTD & ORS versus TEXTRALIAN ENTERPRISES PTY LTD &
ORS` `4497/97` `17 December 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a notice of motion for a stay pending the hearing of an appeal. The notice of motion was filed in both this matter and in 5027/97, allied proceedings which were heard by me together earlier this year. I will give the one judgment and just make a formal order in the other case for the reasons I am now giving in this case. 
The judgment that was given was that the applicants for the stay (the applicants) quit the premises at Erina Fair Shopping Centre and also pay a large sum of money to the respondents on the stay application. The applicants have quit the premises, but the money judgment has not been met. The applicants have appealed to the Court of Appeal and various procedural matters of that appeal will come before the Court of Appeal in February 1999.

The applicants ask for a stay of the money judgment. They say that they will be in a crushing financial situation if they have to pay the judgment now; that they are presently in a position where they could realise their assets and just about pay the judgment debt, but that would leave them without any funds to be able to trade, and that if they were able to trade during the
Christmas period then they would generate substantial income. They say that if there is a stay their assets position will possibly be much the same at the time the appeal is heard as it is now, and that if the appeal succeeds then the rent liability will be wiped out and money will be generated in their favour.

Accordingly, the applicants say, it is not fair that they have to pay the money judgment now when that will be a crushing financial obligation which may be quite unnecessary.

I understand all that, but as was mentioned during argument, the principles under which the court grants a stay are laid down in the authorities, though in each case it is a matter of the exercise of the discretion of the court.
However, in order to justify a stay an applicant must be able to point to some circumstances that warrant a departure from the general rule that the judgment below should be presumed to be correct and liable to be enforced.

That is the traditional position, even though the enforcement of the judgment may lead to bankruptcy or other undesirable consequences on the part of the person who lost at the trial.

The onus is always on the applicant for a stay to show that a stay will be fair on all the parties and it is not sufficient to show that the judgment would have a devastating effect on the applicant.

In the instant case, a whole series of peripheral matters have been explored.
Because I only had limited time this morning to deal with the matter, it has not been possible to go into the closely related peripheral matters in great detail and I have rejected evidence over the strong objection of Mr Conditsis, the solicitor who appeared for the applicants to the effect that the respondents, for whom Mr Insall of counsel appeared, have gone out of their way to sabotage any attempt by the applicants to establish a new business.

I put those matters aside as quite peripheral. I also put aside, as I said I would do in the oral argument, the conversation deposed to by Mr Friedgut a solicitor acting for the respondents on the motion, which might, if there were time to explore it, suggest that the applicants did have moneys available to pay for a new lease and the purchase of a business. For the moment I will also accept Mr Slattery's assurance that that money was to be generated from trading.

However, even doing all that, I cannot see how the material before me satisfies the matters that are set out in the useful summary of the law in note 51.15.3 of Ritchie's Supreme Court Procedure.

There is not the material which shows that in all the circumstances it would be fair on everyone to stay the judgment. I must assume that the judgment below is more likely to be upheld on appeal than the other way.

There is in this case no doubt at all that the applicants granted security for costs to their own solicitor by mortgages and charges made within the last five months, that their assets are behind discretionary trusts, to which the applicants to these proceedings are the trustees, without assets, and that it is, despite what Mr Conditsis says, more likely than not that if a stay is granted their position will deteriorate.

On the ground that the applicants have not discharged the onus of showing a stay would be fair, I dismiss the motion with costs.
 * * * 
