

Yeomans Engineering P/L and Ors versus Control Automation P/L and Anor [1996]
NSWSC 420 (9 September 1996) 
YEOMANS ENGINEERING P/L & ORS versus CONTROL AUTOMATION P/L & ANOR.
 /96 
Friday 30th August 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The first plaintiff, Yeomans, manufactures materials handling equipment including intermediate bulk containers (or IBCs). Control is a distributor/manufacturer of the same general class of equipment.

On 19th July 1994, an agreement was made between Yeomans and Control and other parties, settling some litigation in the Supreme Court of New South Wales. By cl.4 of that agreement, Control agreed with Yeomans, among other things, to perform its obligations under cl.17 of a certain licence agreement between the third plaintiff, Matcon, and Control, for a period of three years from 26th
May 1994. Clause 17 of that licence agreement is in the following terms: 
Upon the termination of this agreement at any time for any reason the Licensee shall cease forthwith to offer the agreement products for sale, to manufacture the agreement products and to use the patents and trademarks set out in
Schedule B annexed hereto, in connection with any goods and shall cease forthwith to use any word, name, mark or device so nearly resembling the said trademarks or which might be calculated to confuse or deceive purchasers or prospective purchasers of the licensed product and shall dispose of all publicity and technical literature or other printed matter upon which the said trade mark appears as may be specified by the Licensor.

The Licensee shall not offer for sale or manufacture products based on similar principles to the agreement products, and shall not make use of the know-how transferred under this licence.

Termination of this agreement and the said licence shall be without prejudice to any rights of either party against the other which may have been accrued up to the date of such determination.

The agreement products referred to in cl.17 are set out in Schedule A to the licence agreement, which is as follows: 
The Agreement Products are as follows:- a. Matcon-Buls Metering Valve b. Matcon-Buls Discharger/Valves c. Intermediate Bulk Container d. Matcon-Buls IBC Discharge Stations e. Blenders f. Wash Stations g. Big Bag/Sack Drum Dischargers h. Bin Fill, Locate, Weigh and Lift Units i. Containment Booths j. Bin/Drum Handlers k. Mechanical Handling Systems l. Controllers m. Airline Equipment n. Through Lid Filling System o. Any other product utilising the Matcon cone valve principle or applied in products a, b, d and n. above.

Control now proposes to offer for sale an IBC system, known as a BPK containment system, which the plaintiff say is a product "based on similar principles" to the Matcon IBC system, and in particular to the products referred to in pars.(b), (c), (d) and (o) of Schedule A. Control intends exhibiting this system at a major exhibition at Darling Harbour commencing on rd September. The plaintiffs now seek an interlocutory injunction to prevent the exhibiting of this BPK system, and preventing, in general terms, the offering for sale or sale of that system by Control.

As the case has been contested, the main issue on the serious question to be tried aspect has been whether or not the BPK system is based on similar principles to the Matcon IBC system. Mr. Durack, Counsel for the plaintiffs, has pointed to what he says are crucial similarities; and Mr. Joseph, Counsel for the defendants, has pointed to crucial differences.

At this stage of my judgment, it is sufficient for me to note that, in my opinion, there is clearly a serious question to be tried, and that accordingly it is appropriate to consider the balance of convenience. I will proceed to look at the balance of convenience question now, but for reasons that will become apparent, I will subsequently return to look again at the serious question to be tried aspect, because I think this is a case where it is appropriate to look more closely at that question.

On the balance of convenience, Mr. Durack has submitted that alleged inconvenience to the defendants should be discounted because this is a case of a negative covenant, and what is said to be inconvenient is simply a restraint from something that the defendants had promised not to do. I say at once that while there is some force in that argument, it seems to me to beg the question of the central issue in this case, namely whether the threatened conduct is or is not within the covenant.

Mr. Durack submitted that the real status quo which should be maintained pending a final hearing of the matter was a market in IBC systems of this general kind in which Control was absent, and had, for about two years, been absent. Control was now threatening to come as a new entrant to this market, seeking to erode the plaintiff's established goodwill and market position.
Because the injury which could be caused to the plaintiffs by this conduct is of the nature of erosion of established goodwill, rather than a mere missed opportunity to improve a position, as for the defendants, the balance favoured the plaintiffs. Mr. Durack submitted that any hardship to the defendants was a risk inherent in a course which the defendants deliberately embarked on in proceeding to make arrangements with the German manufacturer without any notice to the plaintiffs. Control had a range of other businesses which it could pursue.

Furthermore, Mr. Durack submitted, there was concern over Control's financial ability to meet an award of damage if the plaintiffs were limited to their remedy in damages. On that last point, it does seem to me that more recent financial material tendered on behalf of the defendants suggests that the defendants may well now have the capacity to meet an award of damages, so I do not think I should give very much weight to that last submission.

Mr. Joseph for the defendants submitted that the defendants had been in this general area for a long time. They ceased marketing Matcon IBCs when their licence was terminated, with the result that a turnover of around $3 million dropped to a turnover of around $1.5 million. The product which Control now wishes to market does fall within an area in which Control has not been concerned for the last couple of years, but is well within the general scope of its business over a longer term. Mr. Joseph submitted that the balance of convenience favours the defendants because, if the defendants were restrained but were ultimately successful in the proceedings, they would suffer losses which were incalculable. There was no way in which the Court could properly calculate the value of the lost opportunity to get back into this area at this time. While it would be difficult to calculate the plaintiffs' loss in the reverse situation, it would not be so difficult; for example, it could be related to the actual number of units sold by the defendants pursuant to offers to sell equipment made during the remainder of the restraint period.

Mr. Joseph also pointed to the interest of the third party, the German supplier. Even though there was no agreement giving Control exclusive agency, the fact was that Control was the only agent promoting the German supplier at present in Australia. To prevent these arrangements continuing would damage the German supplier, and would also cause damage to Control, very difficult to calculate, in its dealings for the future with the German supplier.

In my opinion, in those circumstances, the balance of convenience does favour the defendants. I think that the calculation of loss, although it would be very difficult for the plaintiffs, would be more difficult still for the defendants. I think the interest of an innocent third party is also a factor which needs to be considered. The plaintiffs have offered an undertaking as to damages suffered by the third party as well as by the defendants, but I do not think that altogether overcomes this consideration.

In a usual case, the view that the balance of convenience favours the defendant would often be the end of the matter. However, in circumstances where what I am considering is a restraint that is going to run out in May next year, so that the decision which I make on the interlocutory application will, in all probability, be the only chance that the plaintiffs get to obtain specific relief based on the contractual provision, I think it is appropriate to look a little more closely at the question to be tried to see whether the strength of the plaintiffs' case on that matter outweighs the considerations I have mentioned concerning the balance of convenience.

On the question of the serious question, Mr. Durack submitted that the use of the word "principles" suggested that what was involved was an idea or method of operation directed to achieving a particular result. Mr. Durack submitted that both the Matcon system and the BPK system shared identical principles; namely a lifting cone valve at the bottom of the container, which breaks the so-called invisible bridge formed by materials within the container and creates an annular outlet resulting in a controlled flow. Furthermore, in both cases, flow was aided by the application of vibration forces. He submitted that this could be contrasted with alternative principles applied in traditional IBC systems, which used sliding gates or butterfly valves. Mr.
Durack also pointed to an advertisement used on behalf of the defendants which did not refer to some of the differences now relied on by the defendants as indicating that the BPK system operated on different principles.

Mr. Durack also relied on circumstances surrounding the original licence agreement and the agreement of 19th July, in support of the interpretation he was suggesting. The licence itself was potentially a long-term arrangement under which know-how was provided by Matcon to Control, in circumstances where there could be modifications and improvements to the product over the period of the licence. The agreement of 19th July was designed, inter alia, to protect know-how and goodwill associated with and deriving from the ideas associated with the Matcon system, by preventing a party exploiting knowledge gained from his association with Matcon in the sale of competing products. The agreement was entered into in settlement of Court proceedings, with legal advice, in a context where Yeomans was foregoing certain debts against
Control, and was paying certain obligations which Control owed to Matcon.

Mr. Joseph submitted that the agreements should be interpreted contra proferentem. On the meaning of "similar" in this sort of context, he referred me to the decision of Spunwill Pty. Limited v. BAB Pty. Limited [(1994) 36
NSWLR 290.] He submitted that the agreements had to be construed in a matrix of circumstances. One important circumstance was that, at the time of the licence agreement, and again at the time of the July 1994 agreement, there were in the market two similar IBC systems, namely those of Matcon and those of a company called Solitech, both of which used a cone valve which protruded into the bottom of the container and vibrated to break the invisible bridge and encourage and control flow.

The BPK system was different from both these systems in a number of ways.
Firstly, and perhaps most importantly, its protruding cone valve did not vibrate relative to the container. Vibration was provided to the whole of the container externally, this being a very common system in the industry. Mr.
Joseph submitted there were important differences also in the cone valve itself. The BPK valve was located by a shaft and spring, whereas the Matcon valve rested at the bottom of the container and its position, when the probe was activated, was achieved by the engagement of the probe. The BPK valve closed with the use of a spring, not merely by gravity. The BPK system did not have, in effect, two cone shaped parts which engaged, but merely one cone shaped part. Finally, the BPK system had a remote control to achieve different levels of incursion into the container.

Mr. Joseph also relied on evidence that the use of cone valves generally in container systems was commonplace. He submitted that the circumstance that there may be an option with the Matcon system for external vibration, rather than internal vibration via the cone, and an option for remote control for different levels of incursion not yet available in Australia, would not affect the position.

In my view, this is not a case where I can say that the case for the plaintiffs' position is so much stronger than that for the defendants' position that it outweighs the balance of convenience to which I have referred. I think it follows then that I refuse the injunction.

I think the appropriate order for costs in this particular case is that the costs of this application be defendants' costs in the application.

The orders that I make are these.

I dismiss pars.3 and 4 in the Amended Notice of Motion, which I initial and date.

I order that the costs of the contested hearing before me today be defendants' costs in the proceedings.

I stand the rest of the notice of motion over to 9th September 1996 at 9.30am before the Registrar.

The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
