

Hooper versus Hallett [1996] NSWSC 310 (30 July 1996) 
HOOPER V HALLETT /96 
Tuesday 16 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This matter and associated proceedings have been before the Court on a number of occasions over the last few years. It is not useful to list the problems that have occasioned multiple appearances, but it is necessary to give a brief overview. In giving this overview I will of necessity have to oversimplify, and this may lead to some technical inaccuracies.

Mr Hooper, the present plaintiff, or his company, S J Hooper Pty Ltd, was involved in litigation with respect to a Mr Bridge and Castlereagh Stud in the
District Court. There was then an appeal to the NSW Court of Appeal. Mr Hooper was successful in those proceedings, both at first instance and then on appeal.

There were other proceedings before Cohen, J in this Division between the same parties in which Mr Hooper had an order for costs made against him. It is prima facie the position that the two sets of costs can be set off.

Mr Archibald, the solicitor for Mr Bridge, has been pressing for some time for
Mr Hooper to pay the costs that were taxed in the matter in which Mr Bridge was successful. That attempt has presently been stayed by this Division pending the provision by Mr Hooper of his bills of costs in taxable form.

Almost incredibly there has been great difficulty in obtaining bills of costs from Mr Hooper's own solicitor. The reason appears to be that the solicitor,
Mr Hallett, left everything in this matter to his then employed solicitor, Mr
Tumeth, and that when Mr Tumeth left the employ of Mr Hallett, he took with him all the papers that were necessary to prepare a bill of costs.

In 1992, in respect of what I will call memoranda of fees A and B, and in 1994 in respect of a memorandum of fees which I will call C, the client, Mr Hooper, received accounts for costs totalling some $59,000. However, these bills were not in taxable form because, although the disbursements were itemised, the work done by the solicitor was not. There was in the case of memorandum A a seven page continuous account of the work that was done and time that was spent and then a lump sum put against that account with the word "say" before it. Memorandum of costs B is similar. Memorandum of costs C refers to a lump sum under a conditional costs agreement.

Memoranda of fees A and B were not bills of costs within the meaning of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/) for the reasons set out in a large number of decisions of this Court, including Ex parte
Farmers' Fertilizers Corp Ltd <case>; [(1916) 16 SR 645];
Florence Investments Pty Ltd versus HG Slater & Co [[1975] 2 NSWLR ]
and Swane versus Marsh [[1978] ACLD 782.] 
Although the Court tried to short-circuit the expense involved with a dispute between Mr Archibald and Mr Hooper, in the end it was not able to do so thus it was necessary for Mr Hooper to obtain bills of costs in proper form which he could present, first of all, to Mr Archibald and, if need be, to the appropriate taxing officers or assessors so that there could be a proper assessment of costs in order that the figures which could be used in the set off could be reliably ascertained. There was no such bill, at least for A and
B, before the issue of the summons in the present proceedings. The current bills were received by Mr Hooper on 10 July 1996 after the issue of the summons and after the "request" made by Brownie, J on 9 July 1996. These bills were only forwarded after the defendant, Mr Hallett, had commenced a cross claim against his former employed solicitor, Mr Tumeth, who furnished the bills.

Today Mr Hooper appeared in person, Mr Fordham of counsel appeared for Mr
Hallett, and Mr Campbell of counsel announced that he had recently obtained instructions from Mr Tumeth but was not at this stage able to assist the Court any further than that.

Mr Hooper's problems today are twofold. First of all, the bills that he has now received seem to total less than the previous bills. This means that his position in the set off situation is weaker. However, that is not really of much moment because it must means he will not have to pay his own solicitor as much.

What really worries Mr Hooper is that the two bills are inconsistent. The amount of time and the rates charged in A and B are different to the new bills. Mr Hooper then asked how he could put forward to a court as being correct the bills that he has now received from his solicitor which are apparently inconsistent with earlier bills. One of the two, in the absence of an explanation, must be false. How can the client then put forward a false bill of costs to the Court? 
There is no evidence from either Mr Hallett or Mr Tumeth as to why the bills are different. There is no explanation as to how Mr Hallett, if he were a solicitor who was a sole practitioner, enabled Mr Tumeth to be put forward as the solicitor on the record in the District Court. Further it is hard to see how Mr Tumeth was able to remove so many records from Mr Hallett's firm so that Mr Hallett is not able to prepare a bill himself.

One way out of this problem is that the Court should make orders and then postpone those orders for, say, two weeks to enable Mr Tumeth to file an affidavit and serve it on Mr Hooper explaining the discrepancies or verifying one of the bills. Mr Hooper would then be able to proffer that bill confident that the oath of a solicitor to a bill would be sufficient to enable him to put forward that bill to the Court. On the other hand, it may be that as the present problem is really a client being put in a very awkward situation because of the strange arrangements that were made within his solicitor's office, that I should merely request the Law Society of New South Wales to see if it can sort the matter out between its members and so enable Mr Hooper to escape from his present position.

I am extremely loath to stand this matter over yet again because these parties have been before the Court too often. I am not dealing with the cross claim today, which can be stood over. There is no need, it seems to me, once the bill is verified by oath to make any further order with respect to the bill, but there may be some need, in default of an undertaking by the solicitor, to make sure that the documents which are going to be needed by the assessor of legal costs are available to him or her when making the assessment.

As the bill was not provided in taxable form before the summons was issued, it would seem to me that the defendant must pay the costs of the summons to date, though as the plaintiff has appeared in person, that may not be very much.
However, it is very difficult to foreshadow any order, so I think all I can do is to adjourn the matter to, say, 30 July 1996 and to indicate that on that day if the bill has not been verified on oath I will request the Law Society for assistance. If the bill has been provided by that stage and duly verified, and an undertaking is given to make the documents available to the assessor, I would dismiss the summons but order the defendant, Mr Hallett, to pay the costs and then the cross claim can be dealt with in due course.

Accordingly, if the bill is verified and that undertaking is given, there is no need for Mr Hooper to appear on 30 July and there is no need, indeed, for anyone to appear if the Court is given some indication as to what is happening.

If the solicitors are now standing by the second bill and Mr Hooper has in fact paid them more than they are claiming, then I would expect in the meantime the overplus would be refunded, or, alternatively, we can deal with that on 30 July.

Exhibit PX01 may be returned.
 * * * 
