

Drinkwater and Ors versus Caddyrack Pty Ltd and Ors (No 3) Matter No 3970/96 [1997] NSWSC 589 (28 November 1997) ` 
Peter Westgarth Drinkwater & Ors` `v Caddyrack Pty Limited & Ors (No 3)` ` 3970/96` `28 November 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /96 - PETER WESTGARTH DRINKWATER AND ORS versus CADDYRACK PTY LIMITED AND ORS (NO 3) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: There have been some significant developments in this matter since I delivered my reasons on 25 September 1997. The matter has come back into my list on, I think, three previous occasions for the parties and myself to work through short minutes which will reflect the reasons and allow the commercial divorce between the Drinkwaters and the Kyrwoods. 
On 23 October 1997 after the parties could not agree on anything, I ordered that the first defendant be wound up and I stayed this order until 13 November in case commercial sense might prevail. It did in one sense in that the parties agreed that the appropriate order was not the winding up but that the
Kyrwoods would be the buyers of the plaintiffs' shares in the Caddyrack companies at a fair valuation.

The issues thus left for determination are: 
Whether an order can be made in these proceedings that the defendants pay out the mortgage over Peter Drinkwater's property in favour of the National
Australia Bank Ltd; 
At what date should the valuation of shares take place; and 
Though this is really not a troublesome issue, what steps should be taken for the interim management of the company pending the consummation of the sale or pending an appeal.

I will deal with these matters in turn.

This order was actually sought in the initiating process. However, the course of the trial meant that attention was deflected onto other matters.
What happened in essence was that proceedings were commenced under <case> of the Corporations Law and for ancillary orders. The principal defence was that the parties had already settled their differences by contract and during the trial attention was primarily focussed on this defence. When it failed, it was obvious that the company was, at the very least, in a deadlock situation and that there must be a commercial divorce. Accordingly, in the reasons of 25
September 1997 over-much attention was not paid to whether technically, there had been oppression under <case> or to the matter I am now considering.
However, as it was "in the ring", it is competent to make an order.

The essential transaction was that Mr Peter Drinkwater committed his property to be used as security for the National Australia Bank's financial assistance to the company. The terms of the arrangement were that the security would be discharged if certain things happened on demand. Those circumstances existed.

There was no formal demand made prior to the institution of the suit. Mr
Newlinds for the defendants says that this is fatal to an order being made as sought by Peter Drinkwater. Mr Ashhurst for the plaintiffs, however, puts two submissions. His primary submission is that a debt payable on demand is repayable without the necessity for prior demand before action. He refers to
Chitty on Contracts 27th ed para 33-165; Norton versus Ellam <case>; [(1837) 2 M & W 461] and
Stage Club versus Millers Hotels Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 150 CLR 535], 569. It should be noted that both of these cases deal with the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) or its predecessor. The alternative submission is that the institution of the proceedings satisfies the requirement of making a demand.

Mr Newlinds puts that the primary submission is too wide. He says, first, the true rule is that it is a matter of fact in each case as to whether on a true construction of the parties' contract there is to be a demand or not. And secondly, that the "principle" reflected in Norton versus Ellam is a 19th century way of looking at commercial life, which if it held good today would result in drastic commercial consequences.

Norton versus Ellam is shortly reported. Indeed, all the case really says is that the rule for cases of interest free debts payable on demand also applies where the debt is to carry interest. However, Baron Parke, at ER 840, puts the rule in more general terms, that is that ordinarily there is no obligation to give any demand unless the parties have chosen to make it part of the contract that a demand should be given. This is because, "The debt which constitutes the cause of action arises instantly on the loan." 
The reason why that is so really comes from the ancient idea that a loan of money, which constituted a debt, was a deposit of specific coins that the borrower was obliged to restore at any time. The nearest present day example is where one borrows one's neighbour's lawn mower. The lawn mower is returnable on demand, but one should have it ready at any time for the owner who may reclaim it whenever he or she wishes. If one looks through the early cases such as those relied on in Norton versus Ellam, in particular Rumball v
Ball (1712) 10 Mod 39; [88 ER 616], one can see that this is the basis of the principle. So that, "I promise to pay on demand" means "I am ready to pay at any time". This line of thinking extends from 1712 to the present day and I need only mention
Jackson versus Ogg (1859) Johns 397; [70 ER 476]; Ogilvie versus Adams <case>; [[1981] VR 1041] and DFC New Zealand Ltd versus McKenzie [[1993] 2 NZLR .] 
Ogilvie versus Adams is the most significant case. It is a 1975 case, but it was not reported until 1981. Mr Ashhurst is very keen on it and rightly so because if one reads through Mr Pannam QC's propositions to Fullagar, J in that case, one can see that they are almost the same as are put by Mr Newlinds in this case and each and every one was soundly rejected by Fullagar, J. I do not need to reinvent the wheel. The thorough rejection of Mr Newlinds' propositions in Ogilvie versus Adams, reinforced by the dictum of Brennan J, in the Stage Club case at p 569, means that I must reject them no matter how appealing they sounded when Mr Newlinds enunciated them. 
The submission that the solvency of the majority of small corporations would be affected should this view be taken was also dealt with by Fullagar, J. His
Honour simply said that transactions with banks, and I would add, most directors' loan accounts, raise different considerations. The facility supplied by Peter Drinkwater in the instant case is not an ordinary directors' loan account scenario.

In response to the alternative submission, there will be occasions when the institution of proceedings will constitute the equivalent of a demand.
Ejectment proceedings fall into this category as does the commencement of a partnership suit which will determine a partnership at will. However, these are exceptional situations and have really come through peculiar historical situations. Ordinarily, the commencement of proceedings will not have the effect of amounting to a demand. It is to be noted that when the proposition was first enunciated in Rumball's case, the word "perhaps" was used by the learned judge, though that word has slipped out over the centuries. (See also
Stock Motor Ploughs Ltd versus Forsyth <case>; [(1932) 32 SR 259], ).

I do not consider that the rule applies in the instant case and accordingly I do not need to deal with Mr Newlinds' fascinating argument that, in any event, the rule never applied when there was no gap in time between the issue of writ and the filing of declaration contrary to the position under the rules of
Hilary Term 1834.

Accordingly, the order that the plaintiffs seek for repayment should be made.
The formal order that was tendered in the short minutes, which bore the name of Hansens, Solicitors, could be improved upon. I will mark the document in question "971199". What one should do with order 2 in that document is to take out the words after the brackets from the end of the order and put them at the beginning, and then substitute the word "unless" for the word "or". I think that in that form the order should be made.

One starts with the judgment of Nourse, J in Re London School of
Electronics Ltd [[1986] Ch 211], 224. Nourse, J states there is no general rule as to the date at which one must make a valuation where there is to be a compulsory purchase of shares under the English equivalent of <case> of the Corporations
Law. However, he says at p 224 that, "Prima facie an interest in a going concern ought to be valued at the date on which it is ordered to be purchased." Mr Ashhurst, in his submissions, points out that that is only one sentence amongst a number of other key sentences on the page, and it is necessary to remember there is no general rule and that other factors of fairness may outweigh that particular factor. Those submissions have great merit.

At p 33 of the judgment delivered on 25 September 1997, I said that the Court can order the valuation of shares for the purpose of a buy-out on the basis that certain transactions are to be included or other assumptions made. I did not develop those thoughts nor deal with the question of the relevant date.

Mr Ashhurst puts that the relevant date should be 13 February 1996. This is the date when the Kyrwoods virtually took control of the company. I need not go through the history, which is set out in the judgment of 25 September 1997, but there were two attempts to effect a commercial divorce, the first one which took place in about February 1996 and which was finally put to rest by the judgment of Brownie J on 16 July 1996; and the second in July 1996, which was disposed of in my judgment of 25 September 1997.

Mr Ashhurst says that since 13 February, the evidence shows that the defendants have deflected corporate opportunities to the fourth defendant, an entity which they wholly control, and they have breached their fiduciary duties. Accordingly, it would be unreasonable to value the shares at today's date because their value may well be affected by what the defendants have done since they came into de facto control. He also says there is practical utility in choosing a date for valuation which predates the breach of fiduciary duties. He says that if another date is chosen, there will be extra expense in an inquiry before the Master.

Mr Newlinds resists that suggestion and says that the proper date should be the date of the orders or the date of the judgment.

There is some merit in what Mr Ashhurst says. However, although the Kyrwoods have been in control since 13 February 1996, apart from transactions in which they may have syphoned-off part of the business to another entity owned by them, there is no present material to show that what they have done has the effect of depreciating the value of the shares. Apart from the syphoning-off of the shares of the business, if a person controls a business beneficially he usually tends to do the best for that business.

I believe that the valuation should be at the date of the reasons for judgment, 25 September 1997, because so long as the specific transactions which may have syphoned-off part of the business can be dealt with mechanically, the factor that seems to me to outweigh all others in working out a fair valuation is that it is a going concern that is to be bought and sold.

However, the valuation is either going to be done on inquiry before a Master or by some process of arbitration, mediation or expert assessment. Almost certainly, each of the parties will brief an expert, who will do some research into the affairs of the company and produce a report. Almost certainly, when that exercise is done, some special factors may become apparent which might influence the value of the shares. If the parties cannot agree on the influence those factors have, then the matter might, under the reservation of further consideration, be brought back to my attention and I can give the appropriate direction to the referee or Master so that the final price for the buy-out can be adjusted.

I realise that this process may involve additional expense. I think, however, that it is more likely than not that the present perception of what that expense may be exceeds what it will be in actuality. Most of the work will have to be done anyway and this exercise is less expensive than going back over the evidence and not only working out which matters go to oppression but also working out which matters may have affected the value of the shares.

Accordingly, what I propose is that there should be the appropriate order that the shares be valued. An order such as order 3 in document 971199 could be used, though I am not too sure whether the matter pursuant to <case> of the
Corporations Law is necessary, and order 4 can be made with the date 25
September 1997 being substituted.

The short minutes then provided that within twenty-one days of these orders, each party is to serve on the other a detailed proposal of valuation for the shares and (order 6) that the parties co-operate in making records available to the valuers. Those orders should be made.

Order 7 then provides that if the parties fail to agree, that there be an order that the Master hold an inquiry and certify the value of the shares. I think that is an appropriate order but the parties are encouraged to do some collateral thinking to find out whether there might be a more cost-effective method of dealing with the case. Instead of order 8, there should be reservation of further consideration. So with those substantial adjustments, I would make orders 2 to 8 in the document 971199.

There was fierce debate about another important matter at an earlier stage, the question of interim management. However, it seems now that as there is to be a buy-out, the parties are content to allow the lady who is currently de facto manager to continue. If there is a dispute in that area, that will be covered by my reservation of further consideration.

Each party should pay their own costs of the proceedings from 25 September until 28 November 1997. The reasons for this are that it is the normal order one makes when winding up a quasi relationship, because the parties must have contemplated that they would equally bear the costs of winding up, and that I think each party has succeeded a little and lost a little.

I will make in their amended form orders 2 to 8 in document 971199 and an order that each party bear his or its own costs after 25 September 1997 up to today.
 * * * 
