

Eckett Enterprises P/L versus Cosmetic Technical Services P/L [1997] NSWSC 62 (3 March 1997) 
ECKETT ENTERPRISES P/L versus COSMETIC TECHNICAL SERVICES P/L /95 
MONDAY 3 MARCH 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER JA, BROWNIE AJA 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: This matter arises out of a Notice of Motion by the claimant Eckett Enterprises Pty Limited against the opponent, Cosmetic
Technical Services Pty Limited, asking that time for varying the Notice of
Appeal be extended, that an order made by Sheller JA be revoked, and such orders as the Court may see fit to make.

The litigation, which has become lengthy, can be summarised in this form: there was litigation before Smart J between 3 May 1994 and 12 May 1994. His
Honour gave judgment against the present claimant on 15 August 1995. That was subject to a Notice of Appeal on 12 September 1995, a Notice of Appeal which does not seem, on the face of it, to have a great chance of success, insofar as it is wholly or largely attempting to challenge findings of fact which are based on credibility.

To make things more complicated the present claimant, the plaintiff company, allowed itself to become deregistered on 2 September 1994, which caused
Sheller JA on 11 March 1996 to strike out the appeal.

Registrar Jupp reinstated the company on 18 April 1996 but conditionally, those conditions being that security be provided within a certain time. The reinstatement order was 18 April 1996, and Registrar Jupp's orders were made on 28 October 1996.

The claimant has been at all stages out of time. It was out of time in getting the company reinstated, it was out of time in complying with Registrar Jupp's orders, it was out of time in bringing the present proceedings. No explanation has been offered as to why these various delays took place, and for that reason alone I would be minded to dismiss the present Notice of Motion.

But that is not the only factor. There is an allegation, and it is a fairly serious allegation, that the impecuniosity which the claimant says it suffers from was, in effect, caused by the opponent and taken advantage of by the opponent for the purpose of stifling the current litigation. There is no evidence of that at all. There is some evidence of impecuniosity in the claimant, but no evidence linking that impecuniosity with any other relevant factor.

For those reasons I am of the view that the Notice of Motion should be dismissed with costs.

BROWNIE AJA: I agree. 
MEAGHER JA: That then will be the order of the Court. So far I have only dealt with the claimant's application. As far as the appeal itself is concerned, that is still, as it were, pendant but without life. Learned counsel for the opponent argues that that should also be dismissed with costs, and in the circumstances I see no reason why that should not be done. 
BROWNIE AJA: I agree.

MEAGHER JA: The orders of the Court are both that the Notice of Motion be dismissed with costs and the appeal be dismissed with costs. * * * 
