

Regina versus Harold James Stewart [1996] NSWSC 557 (21 November 1996) 
REGINA versus HAROLD JAMES STEWART /96 
THURSDAY 21 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, JAMES J, DOWD J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask James J to give the first judgment.

JAMES J: This is an application by Harold James Stewart for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed in the District Court by his Honour Judge Grogan after the applicant had pleaded guilty to one count of receiving. His Honour imposed a sentence of penal servitude for two years and four months consisting of a minimum term of one year and nine months and an additional term of seven months. The sentence was imposed on 3 May 1996 but was made to commence from 15 July 1995. Under <case> of the Crimes Act the maximum penalty for receiving is penal servitude for ten years.

The sentencing of the applicant on the charge of receiving was part of a complicated series of events occurring in 1994 and 1995; to some of which it is necessary to refer in order to understand and assess the challenges which have been made to the sentence imposed by his Honour.

On 26 April 1994 the applicant had been arrested and charged with a quite unconnected offence of kidnapping. He was released on bail pending being dealt with on the charge of kidnapping and hence was on bail when the offence of receiving was committed in October 1994.

No complaint has been made on the hearing of this application about the statement of the facts of the offence of receiving set out in the sentencing judge's remarks on sentence. According to the statement of the facts of the offence in the remarks on sentence, on 7 October 1994 a juvenile and a young adult stole two motor cycles from a shop in Orange. One juvenile went to the applicant's premises in Lithgow seeking the applicant's assistance in concealing the motor cycles. The applicant accompanied the thief and a number of other young persons into bushland where the two stolen motor cycles had been temporarily concealed. Although the motor cycles were brand new, attempts to start them proved unsuccessful. At the direction of the applicant the motor cycles were pushed to the applicant's premises.

At the applicant's direction the motor cycles were stripped. The stripped motor cycles were put in a shed and the parts which had been stripped off the motor cycles were put under the house on the premises. A man named McDuff became a co-offender in the offence of receiving the two stolen motor cycles, in that he subsequently received parts which had been stripped from the motor cycles.

On 9 October 1994 the police went to the applicant's premises. The applicant told the police that there were no stolen motor cycles on the premises. The police found the stripped motor cycles in the shed but did not find the parts which had been put under the house. On 9 October the applicant made a statement to the police in which he asserted that the two motor cycles had been brought to his premises by two persons, who I will refer to as OB and JS, who, the applicant stated, had asked for his permission to leave the motor cycles at his premises for a short period.

On 9 October 1994 no charge was brought against the applicant. On the same day
OB was arrested. When interviewed by police OB denied that he had taken any part in the theft of the motor cycles.

On 9 December 1994 the applicant was arrested and charged with receiving the two motor cycles and with making a false accusation against OB, intending him to be the subject of an investigation of an offence, although knowing him to be innocent, which was a charge under <case> of the Crimes Act. McDuff was also charged with the same offences. The applicant was initially refused bail but was granted bail on 12 January 1995 and released on bail.

On 3 February 1995 the applicant was sentenced to eighteen months imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention on the charge of kidnapping, to which he had pleaded guilty.

On 13 July 1995 the applicant and McDuff allegedly committed offences of assault, possessing a firearm and firing a firearm in a manner likely to injure or endanger the safety of another person, which would be an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act. It was alleged that when committing these offences the applicant and McDuff were seeking a man named Hudson who was to be a witness against both of them on the charge of receiving the two motor cycles.

On 15 July 1995 the applicant was arrested and he has remained in custody ever since. As I have already indicated, his Honour Judge Grogan made the sentence he imposed on the charge of receiving commence from 15 July 1995.

McDuff pleaded guilty to all the charges against him and came before his
Honour Judge Saunders for sentencing. A sentence indication hearing took place before Judge Saunders in which the representative of the Crown submitted that a proper total sentence for the total criminality involved in all the offences committed by McDuff would be four years. Judge Saunders then gave a sentence indication in which his Honour said that he was prepared to accept the Crown submission that an appropriate total sentence would be four years. Judge
Saunders commented, "There might be different views about whether that is adequate or not".

In the sentence indication Judge Saunders said that he considered that he should find that there were special circumstances, consisting of McDuff's age, he was born in November 1972; that McDuff had not been in gaol before; his limited criminal record, which was very short and very minor; and his prospects of rehabilitation. Judge Saunders said that the total criminality in all the offences committed by McDuff should be "lumped together"; that he would pick, for the sake of convenience, the most serious charge, that under s
G of the Crimes Act; that for that offence he would impose a sentence of four years with a minimum term of two and a half years; that he would impose concurrent fixed terms for the other offences and, "in respect of the charge of receiving, I would propose a fixed term of eighteen months penal servitude" and on the other charges impose fixed terms of twelve months penal servitude.

McDuff accepted the sentence indication given by Judge Saunders and Judge
Saunders proceeded to impose sentences in accordance with the indication he had given and delivered remarks on sentence which were in accordance with what his Honour had said in the sentence indication.

For a long time the applicant did not plead guilty to any of the charges which had been brought against him. In December 1995 Judge Grogan made an order for separate trials of the charges of receiving and making a false accusation, on the one hand, and of the charges based on events allegedly occurring on 13
July 1995, on the other hand. The applicant stood trial on the 13 July 1995 charges and was acquitted of all those charges.

On 3 April 1996 the applicant pleaded guilty to the charge of receiving and not guilty to the charge of making a false accusation. The Crown decided not to proceed on the charge of making a false accusation. Hence when the applicant came to be sentenced before Judge Grogan it was for the single offence of receiving.

In his remarks on sentence, Judge Grogan recounted the facts of the offence of receiving. It was submitted to his Honour, and his Honour appears to have accepted that there was no pre-concert between the applicant and the thieves and there was no suggestion that what had happened on the occasion of the offence had been a representative incident.

With regard to the subjective circumstances of the applicant, Judge Grogan noted that the applicant was born on 14 August 1950 and was, accordingly, forty-four years old at the time of the offence and forty-five years old at the time of sentencing. The applicant had a lengthy criminal history with many convictions for offences of dishonesty. There was, however, a gap in his criminal history from 1979 to 1991.

His Honour noted that the applicant had been on bail on the kidnapping charge when he committed the offence of receiving. His Honour referred to a number of medical reports and medical files relating to the applicant. On the hearing of this application there has been no criticism of his Honour's treatment of the medical evidence relating to the applicant.

In his remarks on sentence, the sentencing judge then turned to the question of parity and his Honour's treatment of this question has been made the subject of submissions by counsel for the applicant. His Honour noted that no one had suggested that any question of parity arose with the thieves, who were both much younger (indeed, one of them was only sixteen and had been dealt with in the Children's Court); who had pleaded guilty at a much earlier stage; and who, when sentenced for the larceny of the motor cycles, were also sentenced for a number of other offences.

His Honour stated that a question of parity arose as to whether, in sentencing the applicant he should pay any regard to the sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude for eighteen months which Judge Saunders had imposed on the co-offender, McDuff, for the offence of receiving. His Honour took into account that the sentence imposed by Judge Saunders on McDuff for the offence of receiving was only one of a number of sentences imposed by Judge Saunders and had been imposed following a sentence indication hearing. His Honour also found that the objective criminality of the applicant was greater than that of
McDuff, so far as the receiving charge was concerned, in that the applicant had been the real receiver, that is the person sought out by the thieves to receive the motor cycles, and he had been the one who gave directions about the moving of the motor cycles, the stripping of the motor cycles and the storing of the motor cycles and the stripped parts. His Honour also found that the subjective circumstances of the applicant and McDuff were different, in that McDuff had virtually no criminal history and had not been on bail at the time of committing the offence of receiving.

However, his Honour would appear to have accepted the submission made to him by the representative for the Crown that Judge Saunders had not just "plucked out of the air" the sentence of a fixed term of eighteen months for receiving and his Honour concluded that the sentence imposed by Judge Saunders on McDuff for the offence of receiving was a matter that his Honour could take into account, "but in respect of which I am not bound by parity, in all the circumstances".

It has been submitted that his Honour erred in having any regard at all to the sentence imposed by Judge Saunders on McDuff for the offence of receiving and that some of the statements on the question of parity which were made by his
Honour in his remarks on sentence are inconsistent.

I do not agree that there is any inconsistency in his Honour's remarks.
Furthermore, I consider his Honour was entitled to take the view that, although Judge Saunders had sentenced McDuff for a number of offences and although Judge Saunders had selected another offence as the offence for which he would impose the principal sentence, nevertheless, the sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude for eighteen months, which Judge Saunders imposed for the offence of receiving, which was different in length from the other fixed terms Judge Saunders imposed, was not arbitrarily chosen by Judge Saunders and was a matter that Judge Grogan could properly take into account, while recognising that he should not regard himself as being bound by it. I see no error in the way in which Judge Grogan dealt with the suggested question of parity.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge then proceeded to deal with the submission that the receiving charge against the applicant could have been dealt with summarily under <case> of the Crimes Act, as it then stood, and that no higher sentence should have been imposed by Judge Grogan than the maximum sentence which could have been imposed in the Local Court. Judge Grogan rejected this submission for various reasons, including that, according to the evidence before him, the value of the property received exceeded the limit under <case> of the Crimes Act, as it then stood, and that the applicant could only have been dealt with summarily in the Local Court with his consent, that the applicant had not consented and that it was hypothetical to attempt to assess whether, had events happened differently, the applicant would have given his consent.

In his remarks on sentence Judge Grogan is recorded as saying that the summary procedure under <case> of the Crimes Act, as it then stood, was limited to cases where the value of the property the subject of the charge did not exceed $1,500. Counsel for the applicant has pointed out that the correct figure was $15,000. It seems to me likely that the figure of $1,500, which appears in his
Honour's remarks on sentence, represents either a slip by his Honour or a transcription error.

Counsel for the applicant also pointed out that in the witness statement by the owner of the goods received the total value of the motor cycles was said to be, not $16,000, as his Honour stated in his remarks on sentence, but $14,999, which would place the value of the motor cycles just below the limit of the jurisdiction under <case> of the Crimes Act.

It was also submitted on behalf of the applicant that, from the history of the criminal proceedings against the applicant, it could be seen that there were good reasons why the applicant did not consent to being dealt with summarily in the Local Court and that he had pleaded guilty to the charge of receiving at the first opportunity which reasonably presented itself after he had been acquitted of the 13 July 1995 charges.

Nevertheless, I consider that the court should accept the submission made to us by the Crown that in the events which actually occurred, the applicant did not consent to jurisdiction in the Local Court and that the applicant elected, on all the charges against him including the charge of receiving, to be tried in a higher court. I consider that the remarks of Hunt CJ at CL in R v
Sandford (1994) 72 A Cr R 160 at 195, to which his Honour Judge Grogan referred, are still apposite, notwithstanding differences in the facts of the present case from the facts in Sandford. At page 195 Hunt CJ at CL said: "if an accused elects to be tried in the District Court, he takes the risk that the higher penalty available in that court will be applied." 
In my opinion, Judge Grogan was entitled to take the view that it was hypothetical to ask what would have happened, had the applicant elected, as he had not done, to be dealt with summarily in the Local Court and I see no error in how his Honour dealt with that particular part of the submissions made on behalf of counsel for the applicant.

It was submitted that the sentence imposed by his Honour over-estimated the objective criminality of the applicant. However, I consider that the sentence imposed by his Honour was within the range of his Honour's sentencing discretion. The applicant took the leading role in arranging for the motor cycles to be located, brought to his premises and stripped and for the motor cycles and the stripped parts to be concealed. He was on bail at the time of committing the offence and he had a substantial previous criminal history, including a number of convictions for offences of dishonesty. His Honour took into account in favour of the applicant his plea of guilty, his medical history and that he had not previously served a sentence of full time custody.

It was submitted that his Honour should have found special circumstances within [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) but
I do not consider that there was any occasion for the applicant to receive a proportionately longer than usual additional term, see R versus Farroukh, Court of Criminal Appeal, 29 March 1996.

I would propose that leave to appeal against sentence be granted but that the appeal against sentence be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

DOWD J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the court is as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
