

Regina versus Graham Frances Negline [1997] NSWSC 53 (25 February 1997) 
REGINA versus GRAHAM FRANCES NEGLINE /96 
Tuesday 25 February 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, GROVE J, HULME J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - DISCHARGE OF JURY WITHOUT VERDICT - NO EFFECTIVE ORDER AVAILABLE WHERE ACQUITTAL SHOULD HAVE BEEN DIRECTED - R versus MUNRO CCA 30 June 1994 APPROVED - STAY OF PROCEEDINGS - NEW INDICTMENT SPECIFYING DIFFERENT CHARGES FROM THOSE PRESENTED IN ABORTIVE TRIAL - NO ERROR IN REFUSAL OF PERMANENT STAY 
RESULT: Application for extension of time granted. Leave to appeal refused.
 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I will ask Grove J to give his reasons first.

GROVE J: There are before the Court several applications for extension of time and leave to appeal. They arise out of the following proceedings heard in the District Court. On 31 October 1994 the Applicant was presented for trial before Saunders DCJ and a jury at Penrith District Court upon an indictment containing nineteen counts alleging offences contrary to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). On the third day of trial (2 November) there having been some amendments to the indictment as originally presented, the learned presiding Judge granted leave further to amend each count and then discharged the jury from giving a verdict as authorized by <case>. 
Grounds of appeal in relation to these occurrences are formulated in the following terms: "1. That his Honour Judge Saunders QC was in error in discharging the jury without verdict in the absence of demonstrating necessity to do so.
That his Honour Judge Saunders QC was in error in failing to direct the jury to find a verdict of not guilty on each count in the indictment as it was then framed." 
Prior to the Applicant again being presented for trial a motion seeking that proceedings on the indictment be permanently stayed came before Viney DCJ. On September 1995 his Honour dismissed that motion and directed that the indictment upon which the Crown intended to rely be served upon the Applicant or his legal representatives by 22 September 1995. Service of an appropriate document did not take place within the time specified.

Leave is sought to appeal against that decision and a formal ground has been filed: "3. That his Honour Judge Viney QC was in error in failing to order a permanent stay of the proceedings." 
Thereafter the Applicant filed another motion seeking a similar order. This motion was dismissed by Grogan DCJ on 30 July 1996. It appears from his
Honour's judgment (p 16) that provision of the form of indictment intended to be relied upon by the prosecution did not occur until 2 May 1996. That document might fairly be described as an entirely fresh proposed indictment.
It contained twenty seven counts as distinct from the earlier nineteen counts.
In further distinction, each of these alleged an offence contrary to <case> of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) instead of <case> in previous draft indictments and, of course, especially the actual indictment presented at the trial in October 1994. The Applicant seeks leave to appeal against that ruling and a formal ground has been filed: "4. That his Honour Judge Grogan was in error in failing to order a permanent stay of the proceedings." 
The order sought from this Court is that proceedings on indictment in the form supplied on 2 May 1996 against the Applicant concerning his dealings with
Union Insurance Company Limited, (and/or) Mercantile Mutual Insurance
Australia Limited between 1 February 1990 and 31 December 1992 be permanently stayed.

I turn first to incidents concerning the abortive trial. A transcript of the exchanges between the learned presiding judge and counsel has been obtained.
The relevant discussion commenced when his Honour raised the problem that the indictment appeared to be duplicitous in that it charged in each count that the Applicant intended to defraud both the seeker of insurance cover (client) and the insurance company on whose behalf a cover note and/or policy had issued. The Crown case was imminently to be closed. Although the transcript reveals no formal incantation of a motion on behalf of the Applicant for an acquittal by direction, a complete reading makes it plain that his Honour was being invited by counsel to so order. The discussion, of course, took place in the context of leave being granted or withheld from the Crown to amend the indictment further. His Honour is not recorded as giving any reasons for rejecting the implicit application to direct a verdict of acquittal but his rejection of the submission on behalf of the then accused is plain in his final exchange with counsel for the accused followed by his addressing the
Crown Prosecutor thus: "Mr Crown, assuming I give you leave to amend, what do you say about whether the trial should proceed or whether I should, in view of everything that has happened, discharge the jury from giving a verdict? That is what concerns me." 
As has been pointed out, in the course of time counsel for the Applicant obtained instructions and expressly stated that he did not oppose the discharge of the jury without verdict but that stance must be seen in its proper perspective, namely that it followed his Honour's positive indication that he intended to give leave to amend and that he proposed adopting that course. This was itself necessarily consistent with his declining to direct the jury to bring in a verdict of acquittal.

The relevant amendments to the counts in what I might describe as the original indictment were these. At the beginning of the trial each separate count (contrary to <case>) alleged an intent "to cheat and defraud" a nominated client and a nominated insurer. The statutory provision speaks in terms of "cheat or defraud" as distinct from "cheat and defraud" and amendment was made to delete the words "cheat and" wherever appearing.

It was nearly at the end of the Crown case that the duplicitous defect of alleging that both the client and the insurance company were foci of intent to defraud was drawn to attention. As is clear from his Honour's remarks both in the transcribed exchange and the judgment delivered, the evidence would not have sustained an allegation that the client was the victim of fraudulent intent on the part of the Applicant as it showed that in every case the client obtained the insurance cover sought. The Applicant was a director of a company operating as an insurance broker.

I consider that the circumstances which arose should have been dealt with by the presiding judge in accordance with the principles collated by Badgery-
Parker J in R v. Munro unreported, C.C.A. 30 June 1994. I recognize that by
October 1994 a print of that judgment may well have not come to hand in
Penrith. In the course of judgment Badgery-Parker J remarked: "The circumstances in which a judge is justified in discharging a jury without verdict are not capable of exhaustive description. There is ample authority for the proposition that such an order should not be made except where there exists a high degree of need which ........... does not mean an absolute necessity. It seems clear that the necessity referred to is the necessity occasioned by the interests of justice. See generally Archbold - Criminal
Pleading Evidence and Practice 44th Edn 1992 p 535 par 4-243. It is well established that a discretion to discharge the jury without verdict should not be exercised merely for the purpose of allowing the Crown an opportunity to make a better case than it has been able to do thus far: R versus Charlesworth <case>; [1861 1 B& S 460]; R v
Lewis 1909 2 Crim App Reports 180; R versus Grand and Jones 1903 3 SR 216 at
There is no doubt that the ordinary consequence of the lack of evidence in the Crown case sufficient to establish a prima facie case should be a direction to the jury to acquit." 
The circumstance which the Crown seeks to rely on as taking the present circumstances out of the ordinary category is that the defect lies in apparent failure to assess the criminality alleged to be involved in the Applicant's deeds and translate that by way of pleading into an appropriate indictment. In short, the deficiency is technical rather than substantial and unrelated to lack of evidence. Subject possibly to matters pertaining only to the proposed counts 25 and 26 in the form of indictment produced on 2 May 1996 it would appear that the "new" indictment will be sought to be supported by identical evidence to that advanced at the abortive trial.

The exchanges between counsel and bench on 2 November 1994 show that the
Applicant had stood his trial to that point upon the indictment presented to which he proposed to contend that the jury could never be satisfied that he had an intent to defraud his clients each of whom actually obtained the insurance cover that they paid for and that as he was charged with defrauding them and the various insurers the Crown must necessarily have failed to prove that ingredient of each charge.

His Honour was exercising discretionary judgment. In my view, a convenient way of testing whether his discretion has miscarried is to consider the likely result of an application by the Crown at the trial to amend the extant indictment to the extent that it is now proposed by the document produced in
May 1996. What would have been involved was an entire abandonment of the nineteen counts charged under <case> and the substitution therefor of new charges involving twenty six counts contrary to <case>. I would respectfully suggest that in the balancing of the interests of justice both to an accused and the community, an amendment which would amount to trial upon entirely new charges would not have attracted the exercise of discretion in favour of the
Crown.

That conclusion is however incapable of being determinative of the outcome of the present applications. The jury has been discharged without verdict and, such an order being specifically authorized by statute, it must operate to terminate any jurisdiction to deal with the Applicant as a result of his being placed in the charge of that jury. Neither is this Court seized of jurisdiction to make an effective order pursuant to s5F(5) of the Criminal
Appeal Act. See Munro supra.

The remedy sought by the Applicant impliedly recognizes this situation. The sustaining of argument on behalf of the Applicant in respect of grounds 1 and either in their precise terms or in substance would not in isolation lead to any benefit of practical consequence to the Applicant.

I turn to the order by Viney DCJ refusing to grant a permanent stay of proceedings. As already noted, the final form of indictment upon which the
Crown does wish to proceed was not available to his Honour. The submission on the part of the Crown that his Honour's rejection of contentions that the jury discharge allowed the Crown to prepare a better case against the Applicant and deprive him of an opportunity of acquittal lose any attraction when it is observed that his Honour remained at all times unaware of the content of the proposed amended indictment which became in essence an entirely new indictment. It seems to me that little point would be served by separate analysis of the proceedings and outcome before Viney DCJ having regard to the historical course of the litigation and the subsequent rejection of application for permanent stay by Grogan DCJ.

Unlike the proceedings at all former stages, Grogan DCJ had the advantage of knowing what the final form of intended indictment was. It should be emphasized that the Applicant seeks the intervention of the Court to overrule an interlocutory judgment which involved the exercise of a judicial discretion. It is not submitted that Grogan DCJ (or, for that matter, Viney
DCJ) misapplied himself to the task in hand as regards assessment of the factors of delay and the consequences of that delay as they affected the
Applicant. It was not disputed to have been fair comment that the indictment in the form proposed ultimately in May 1996 "more accurately and appropriately reflected ....... the real issues and allegations involved in the matter.......".

There is little doubt that the power to stay criminal proceedings permanently should be exercised only in the most exceptional circumstances and, especially where delay is relied upon, the interests of the accused have to be balanced against that of the community in the context of observation that the community has a right to expect that persons charged with criminal offences will stand their trial. The relevant principles have been adumbrated by the High Court:
Barton versus The Queen [1981 47 CLR 75]; Jago versus the
District Court <case>; [1989 168 CLR 23]; The Queen versus Glennon [1992 173 CLR 92]; Williams v
Spautz <case>; [1992 174 CLR 509.] 
In Carver versus The Attorney General [1987 29 A Crim R 24] Kirby P (as he then was) referred to the absence in that case of any claim of deliberate abuse of process by the Crown seeking to secure its own advantage by delay and the confinement of the issues in that appeal to the question of delay. The current case raises rather the advantage of delay accruing to the
Crown not as a result of deliberate abuse of process but as a result of apparent befuddlement on the part of those charged with the responsibility of preparing the basic pleading document upon which it was sought to put the
Applicant upon his trial.

I do not regard it as necessary to recount the chronology between the charging of the Applicant in August 1992 and the present as these details are thoroughly canvassed in the respective judgments of Viney DCJ and Grogan DCJ.

One way of articulating the issues presently between the Court is to enquire whether a permanent stay of proceedings upon an indictment charging offences contrary to <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) should be granted having regard to the circumstance that, arising out of the same facts, the Applicant ought to have been acquitted upon charges purportedly alleging offences contrary to <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and having regard to the span of time between the alleged commission of the offences (in about 1991-1992) and the intervening curial events.

A critical matter for examination by this Court is the question of whether anything which occurred in the abortive trial has left a residue of prejudice which will affect what can be conveniently referred to as the Applicant's right to fair trial. The nature of the case pleaded against the Applicant in the original defective indictment was to assert that he had, in effect, defrauded both the clients and the insurance company of the moneys which had passed to him from the clients. In the course of trial a witness who could speak from the point of view of the insurance companies confirmed in cross examination that arrangements were in force whereby the insurers would expect receipt of only the amount of premium less deduction for commission to which the Applicant's company was entitled. It was also established that accounting was apparently done other than on a policy by policy basis. It is contended that the Applicant would be prejudiced at the proposed trial because he had been placed in the position of having his counsel extract the detail of arrangements and payments in the earlier proceedings.

It is also said that it was intended by the Applicant to call expert evidence concerning industry practice. There is offered nothing to lead to a conclusion that such material is no longer available. In addition, reference was made to the "money trail" being cold but this is really a particular aspect of the overall issue of delay.

For myself I am unable to perceive the reality of the claimed prejudice. The
Applicant himself has neither given evidence nor made any statement. In the extreme, imagination suggests that if he gave evidence in future he may be cross examined (in the seemingly unlikely event that it became appropriate) along the lines that he heard his counsel at the Penrith trial ask questions which were inconsistent with some testimony that he had now given. If, and I emphasize the hypothetical nature of the matter as I see it, such a situation emerged it would be entirely within the jurisdiction of a presiding judge to ensure fairness by preventing any such potential prejudice crystallizing.

As has been the subject of frequent comment, an aim of the system of justice is to ensure fair trial and not to prevent a trial being held. I consider that the argument contending that prejudice is perceptible if such a trial were to be held cannot be sustained.

The authorities clearly proclaim that a permanent stay should only be ordered if the Applicant can show that his right to a fair trial has been prejudiced and cannot be fulfilled in all the circumstances. In this appeal the Crown has drawn our attention to the remarks of Mason CJ in Jago (at p 34) namely: "A permanent stay should be ordered only in extreme case and the making of such order on the basis of delay alone will accordingly be very rare: re
Cooney [1987 31 A Crim R 256] @ -64.
 ....................... Where delay is the sole ground of complaint, an accused seeking a permanent stay must be `able to show that the lapse of time is such that any trial is necessarily unfair so that any conviction would bring the administration of justice into disrepute' Regina versus Clarkson <case>; [1987 VR 962] @ 973." 
The distinction sought to be drawn in this case is that it is not delay alone which the Applicant calls upon in aid of his claim for relief. He points to the abortive proceedings and the deprivation of his inevitable acquittal on the charges as then specified. Had the Applicant been acquitted on those charges, those acquittals would not operate so as to enable him successfully to plead autrefois acquit to an indictment in the form produced in May 1996.
Whether in the event that verdicts of acquittal on the original indictment had been found, the Crown might have chosen not to proceed afresh is not a matter for investigation by this Court.

The ultimate question for this Court is whether there was error in the determination by Grogan DCJ that the circumstances were such that trial upon the "new" indictment was not predictable to occur in circumstances which would negate the right of the Applicant to fair trial. I am unable to conclude that his Honour fell into error. I am fortified in my conclusion by the observations of Brennan J (as he then was) in Jago @ p 54 when he said: "No abuse of process appears merely from delay on the part of the prosecution either by inadvertence or by negligence, in presenting an indictment. It may be different if the prosecution were to delay deliberately in presenting an indictment in order to prevent an accused from making an effective defence but, even in such a case, the remedy may lie not in permanently staying the proceedings but bringing them to a conclusion with a direction which nullifies the effect of the tactic." 
In the present case the sequence from the presentation of the first defective indictment and the attempts to repair it up until the preparation of the "new" document manifest at best inadvertence and at worst negligence. There is no basis for suggesting that the Crown engaged in some deliberate tactic to produce some lamentable examples of a criminal pleader's art. As authoritative judgments make abundantly clear the right of an accused person is not to be untried unfairly or, as Deane J pointed out in Jago @ p 57 to have "an immunity against conviction otherwise than after a fair trial". I repeat that I conclude that no error by Grogan DCJ provoking the intervention of this Court has been demonstrated.

Having reached that conclusion the result in the present applications is inevitable. I would not wish to depart from the matter however without deprecating in strongest terms the extended litigious ordeal to which the
Applicant has been exposed manifestly by reason of deficits in the handling of matters by those charged with prosecution. Whether the Applicant is to be presented for trial upon new indictment is a matter ultimately for the decision of the prosecuting authority but I would comment that little surprise would be engendered by a decision not to proceed further having regard to the "trials" through which the Applicant has already passed. As I have said, I am nevertheless unpersuaded that the decisions in the District Court refusing stay of proceedings were wrong.

I propose that the extension of time sought be granted, but that leave to appeal in respect of all matters be refused.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with the reasons given by Grove J and also his comments on the way in which the case has been handled in the past by the prosecuting authorities. 
HULME J: I also agree.

PRIESTLEY JA: The order of the Court is that the applications are dismissed.
 * * * 
