

Regina versus Oldfield Matter No Cca 60632/97 [1998] NSWSC 123 (28 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
REGINA versus JOHN BARRIE OLDFIELD /97 April 1998 
McInerney J, Studdert J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Supreme Court (Allen J) 
FILE NO: 60632/97 
DELIVERED: Tuesday 28 April 1998 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday 24 March 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus John Barrie OLDFIELD 
JUDGMENT OF: McINERNEY, STUDDERT, SIMPSON JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - S R NORRISH QC 
RESPONDENT - W G DAWE QC 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - ARDEN ASSOCIATES 
RESPONDENT - S E O'CONNOR 
RESULT: LEAVE TO APPEAL REFUSED 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - abandonment of appeal - power of court to reinstate appeal.

CRIMINAL LAW - drug offences charged - allegations of bribery and corruption of police officers considered and rejected by sentencing judge - "fresh evidence" at Police Royal Commission - whether sentencing process miscarried.

NO. OF PAGES: 20 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY J: I agree with Studdert J. 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, John Barrie Oldfield, pleaded guilty in proceedings before Allen J on an indictment containing four counts. He also asked that two further offences be taken into account pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Law Procedure Act 1966 . The offences charged were conspiracy to commit an offence outside New South Wales and in addition there were three counts relating to the supply of a prohibited drug in a commercial quantity. 
The applicant was sentenced on the conspiracy charge to a minimum term of eleven years imprisonment commencing on 26 September 1991 and expiring on 25
September 2002 and an additional term of three years commencing on 26
September 2002, and terminating on 25 September 2005. In passing that sentence his Honour specifically took into account the scheduled matters. In relation to the remaining offences of supply, on each of them the judge imposed a sentence for a fixed term of seven years commencing on 26 September
His Honour took into account in fixing those sentences the fact that the applicant had spent some time in custody, aggregating sixty days.

The applicant filed a notice of appeal and a notice of application for an extension of time on 14 November 1991. However when the application for leave to appeal was listed for hearing before the Court of Criminal Appeal on 2
March 1993, the applicant filed a notice of abandonment in circumstances to which I shall later refer. The applicant now asks this Court to go behind the notice of abandonment and to entertain the application for leave to appeal, having regard to the content of his affidavit of 13 August 1997 and bearing in mind the submissions advanced by Mr Norrish of Queen's Counsel.

The offences outlined 
The indictment numbered the counts 2, 3, 4 and 5; there was no count 1. It is convenient, as Allen J did, to refer firstly to the conspiracy charge (count ).

It was alleged that the applicant conspired with one Gazzard and another person Edgerton to manufacture methyl amphetamine at Cairns in Queensland in breach of the Drug Misuse Act, (Qld). By <case> of the Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act, 1985 the applicant is liable for the same punishment as if the offence of manufacturing the drug had been committed in New South
Wales.

His Honour found that early in 1989 there was a meeting between the applicant,
Gazzard and Edgerton in which it was agreed that they would manufacture large quantities of methyl amphetamine in north Queensland at properties which were owned by Edgerton. The applicant, who was a chemist by calling and who otherwise legitimately imported chemicals, imported a large quantity of hydriodic acid and pseudo ephedrine, both of which are chemicals used to manufacture methyl amphetamine. He sent these chemicals to Edgerton in Cairns and Edgerton manufactured at Daintree in Cairns a large batch of methyl amphetamine in April 1989. His Honour found that the applicant took an active part with the others in the manufacturing process and that it was his broad expertise which enabled the distillation method to be refined. The quantity of amphetamine manufactured when cut with pseudo ephedrine was approximately 14.3 kilograms with a street value of at least $4,000,000. The maximum term of imprisonment to which the applicant was liable in respect of the conspiracy was imprisonment for life (s 33(3)(a) of the Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act).

Count 2 
The second count charged that the applicant supplied not less than a commercial quantity of methyl amphetamine between 1 May 1989 and 16 August
The total amount supplied exceeded a large commercial quantity and related to six specific incidents of supply by distribution, each involving .2 kilograms. The source of the drug supplied was what had been manufactured near Cairns and what had been sent to the applicant's home at Winston Hills, where it was stored prior to distribution. According to the applicant, each of the six supplies attracted a purchase price of $70,000.

Count 4 
The fourth count concerned the supply by receipt and possession of methyl amphetamine between 23 August and 14 October 1989. The applicant, with
Edgerton and another person, made a further batch of methyl amphetamine at the
Daintree property but this manufacture was not as successful, producing only .1 kilograms. This batch was delivered by courier to the applicant's home at
Winston Hills for the purpose of sale and it was still there in his home when the premises were searched by police on 14 October 1989.

Count 5 
The fifth count on the indictment charged the applicant with having supplied not less than a commercial quantity of methyl amphetamine between 23 August and 14 October 1989. This related to one supply from the batch of 3.1 kilograms to a person at Wiley Park, again for a price of $70,000 
When the police searched the applicant's home on 14 October 1989 methyl amphetamine was found on his property in two large plastic bags containing .755 kilograms and two smaller plastic bags containing in aggregate 166 grams.

The various counts each attracted a maximum term of imprisonment for life.

There were two further offences to which I have referred and which the sentencing judge was asked to take into account. These concerned the importation of benzyl methyl ketone which is a prohibited import under the
Customs Act. In each case the nature of the drug imported was concealed by false documents and in each case the purpose for which the importation was intended was that the chemical would be used in the manufacture of methyl amphetamine. Each shipment was of 200 litres and each shipment was capable of producing approximately 112.5 kilograms of methyl amphetamine. His Honour found that a large percentage of the benzyl methyl ketone was sold by the applicant to another person in the chemical industry known by the applicant to be using it for the manufacture of methyl amphetamine. The applicant destroyed litres of the benzyl methyl ketone after his premises had been searched by the police. Benzyl methyl ketone is not a narcotic drug within the meaning of the Customs Act and had the two importing offences been charged separately they would each have attracted a penalty of $50,000 or three times the value of the drug, whichever is the greater (s 233AB(2) of the Customs Act).

His Honour categorised the crimes committed as being "of the greatest seriousness, seriousness of considerable gravity even in the sordid drug scene which itself is grave." He later went on to say: "The objective gravity of the offences charged in the indictment is such that an aggregate sentence, without taking into account the subjective matters, the pleas of guilty, and co-operation with the authorities, in the order of eighteen years imprisonment would be totally warranted." 
The applicant was given credit for his co-operation with the authorities in giving and in being willing to give information involving other offenders in the criminal enterprise, in particular in relation to Edgerton. Gazzard apparently freely co-operated with the police but his Honour considered that the applicant's evidence could swing the balance in determining whether
Edgerton was convicted for his involvement in the criminal enterprise. His
Honour also took into account that the applicant was willing to give evidence against two other offenders named Walker and Shaw. Because the applicant was going to be co-operating with the authorities, the judge also took into account the special hardship that the applicant would suffer during imprisonment.

Further he specifically had regard to the applicant's prior excellent character and, of course, to the applicant's pleas of guilty.

The subjective features which I have shortly reviewed explain the sentences which the learned judge ultimately imposed.

The earlier abandonment of the appeal and the power of reinstatement 
Although a notice of abandonment was filed pursuant to r 27 on 2 March 1993, this Court has power to reinstate the appeal because the appeal has not been heard on its merits: Grierson versus The King <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 431] and in particular per Dixon J at 436-437.

It is relevant in determining whether such jurisdiction should be exercised to ascertain how the notice of abandonment came to be filed and then to have regard to the prospects of success in the event that the applicant was now to be given the requisite leave: see R versus Bell [(1987) 8 NSWLR 311] and R v
Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] and in particular at 246. In Cartwright, Hunt and Badgery-Parker JJ said in their joint judgment at 246: "Assuming that there were fair prospects of success in the appeal itself, leave may be granted to withdraw the notice if it is established that the applicant had signed it without fully appreciating its significance or the significance of its consequences: R versus Griffin (1969) 90 WN (Pt 1) 548 at ; [[1969] 2 NSWR 497]; or as a result of fraud or of bad legal advice: R v
Stubbs [(1970) 71 SR 76] at 78; [92 WN 768] at 770; [[1970] 3 NSWR 392] at 395.
Even if the explanation proffered for the abandonment is weak, that circumstance will not necessarily stand in the way of the grant of leave if it be seen that there would be a miscarriage of justice if leave were refused." 
At the time when his application for leave to appeal was to be heard by the
Court of Criminal Appeal in March 1993, the applicant had not given the assistance promised before Allen J. In two statutory declarations made on 26
April 1992 and 1 September 1992 he indicated his unwillingness to do so and his reasons. In the earlier declaration he claimed he had been called upon to fabricate evidence, and in the later declaration he referred to proceedings awaiting hearing against Edgerton in these terms: "There is another matter due for court hearing during the coming month of
October concerning The Crown versus Edgerton and I would again stress the futility and needless expense of requesting my attendance in court as a witness. Anything I would have to say would most certainly be most detrimental to the DPP's case and would certainly offer no assistance. I feel most strongly regarding events which have led to my current situation and once again request the understanding of authorities concerning my situation. I just want to make a successful transformation back to society after serving my own sentence." 
The applicant was represented by Mr Paul Byrne of counsel in the Court of
Criminal Appeal on 2 March 1993. The applicant said that when he entered the court the judges constituting the court were sitting and that he, having been placed in the dock, was approached by his counsel who informed him that the
Crown was moving to quash the sentence and to have him re-sentenced because the applicant had not given the co-operation that he had promised when he was sentenced by Allen J. The applicant said that he was "taken by extreme surprise" and that counsel told him he "could attract another three years or in the best case scenario that the sentence would remain the same." Acting on that advice, the applicant said he gave instructions to his counsel to abandon his appeal.

Mr Byrne put on an affidavit. He confirmed that he had a discussion with the applicant whilst the court was sitting and that that discussion was understandably "relatively brief". It was Mr Byrne's recollection that he advised the applicant given his lack of co-operation, that the sentence would be unlikely to be altered, but it was possible it might be increased.

It was Mr Byrne's recollection that the applicant was "very clear" and "very determined" not to go ahead with the appeal if there was any risk that he might have his sentence increased.

In accordance with the applicant's instructions, the application for leave to appeal was not pursued and notice of abandonment was filed.

It is apparent that subsequent events, and in particular proceedings in the
Police Royal Commission, have prompted the present application.
 "Fresh evidence" at the Police Royal Commission 
In the sentencing proceedings before Allen J the applicant raised allegations of bribery and corruption of police officers involved in the investigation of the matters with respect to which he had been charged, and adverse evidence concerning those police officers was later given in the Police Royal
Commission. This Court is now asked to consider the significance of that fresh evidence for the purposes of the present application.

According to the applicant he paid bribe money to avoid charges proceeding against him. He paid firstly a sum of $30,000 to some private detective but the judge found that the private detective appeared to have pocketed that money for himself. Later, through a man who was referred to in the sentencing procedure as "M", the applicant claimed that he advanced $150,000 to be received by police officers. According to the applicant, and in furtherance of the conspiracy, he then made a contrived statement to the police officers which withheld any information as to his involvement in the manufacture in
Queensland and the sale of the amphetamine.

The evidence which the applicant gave about the bribery of police officers brought him into direct conflict in the sentencing procedure with the police officers involved, each of whom denied the receipt of any money and any impropriety in the police investigation into the applicant's wrongdoing. The police officers involved were Detective Constables Ison, Eade, Whittaker and
Vickery. The judge, where the evidence of the applicant conflicted with that of the police officers, did not believe the applicant and there are a number of passages in the remarks on sentence which make this plain. I propose to set these passages out because of the submissions made by Mr Norrish: 
At p 10: "The police asserted that all that happened in relation to the taking of that statement is that it was obtained in a completely regular manner and that it came solely from the prisoner who had come to the police station of his own accord. I accept the police evidence in that respect." 
At pp 10-11: "The prisoner has given evidence in these proceedings. He impressed me as being an intelligent, calculating man who would not have required any assistance from the police to make the best out of a bad situation. No doubt the police also had the skills which would have enabled them to fabricate this exculpatory statement. Those skills, however, were not needed. I accept the evidence of the police on this matter and I reject that of the prisoner.

He also claims that as he was leaving the police station he said to the senior detective something to the effect `about the money'. The detective's response was, according to the prisoner, to put his finger vertically across his lips and change the subject. I don't believe it.

There were then further conversations from time to time between the prisoner and M, according to the prisoner, relating to the payment of the agreed bribe of $150,000. The prisoner has given evidence that on 20 November 1989 he handed to M $100,000 in cash and that later M told him that the police had collected the money. On 23 November 1989 the prisoner went to the police station at the request of the police and was questioned about chemicals which had been stored at Temple. He claimed that the senior detective said to him, as he had on the previous occasion at Gosford, words to the effect: `Trust me, all is in order.' I don't believe him..." 
At p 12: "I do not accept the prisoner's claim that he heard the voice of the senior detective on the telephone conversation which M had in his presence..." 
At pp 12-13: "On 2 March 1990 Gazzard was granted immunity, whereupon the prisoner was again arrested and charged with the conspiracy offences relating to the manufacture of methyl amphetamine at Daintree in April 1989 and with the offences of actual supply as revealed by Gazzard's statement. The prisoner asserts that at the time of the arrest, and again during a further search of the premises, police commented on the granting of immunity to Gazzard, complained that the prisoner had not been frank with them and that indeed one of the police said: `You are a bloody idiot, you are the one who should be received the immunity, not Gazzard. Because of what you haven't told us you are now going to go to gaol.' 
I do not accept the police in that conversation referred to the immunity to
Gazzard, although I have no doubt that the prisoner bitterly resented the fact that Gazzard was going to go free in consequence of betraying his partners in crime. I do not accept the assertion of the prisoner that he asked: `What about the money?' and was fobbed off by one of the police saying that would be discussed later." 
At pp 13-14: "The response of the prisoner to the granting of immunity to Gazzard and to the preferring of further charges against him was swift. In about the middle of the same month he completely changed his tactics. He realised that he would get nowhere by bribery and he made a complete turnaround. He went to Police
Internal Security, gave a moderately detailed statement as to his own involvement in methyl amphetamine manufacture and supply and complained at great length and in great detail of the supposed acceptance by police of the bribe of $150,000. I do not accept that the conduct of the prisoner in going to Police Internal Security and making the statement to that unit, which I have described, reflects in any degree actual contrition which the prisoner felt at that time. It was a tactical ploy by a man who was acting boldly and decisively, a man much different in truth from the description of him giving by his wife in this Court. Bribery having failed, he elected to try a show of co-operation, which had worked so well for Gazzard, even to a point of exposing his own criminality in agreeing to the bribe in order that the far more serious, the far more heinous, criminality of the police in taking the bribe be exposed in the public interest. It is argued for him that the public interest in the exposure of corrupt police is so great that he should be rewarded for the exposure of these police notwithstanding that he was a party to the deal. He should be so rewarded, it has been argued, because by comparison his criminality in relation to the bribe was slight. It was a bold ploy, one which has been persisted in to the end. I find, however, that the foundation for it has not been established." (Emphasis added in the above passages) 
Later his Honour expressly found (at p 14): "Indeed on the evidence before me I would be affirmatively satisfied that the police had no involvement whatever in the supposed bribery." 
He went on to assess M's account of bribery negotiations with the police as being "a fabrication", and that what happened was M simply pocketed the money for himself.

The judge found that what the applicant had done was "to reveal his own very severe criminality in attempting so blatantly to bribe the police. There is no credit balance in his favour." 
Evidence was given at the Police Royal Commission which impacted upon the credibility of those police officers whose testimony the sentencing judge had favourably regarded, namely Detectives Ison, Eade and Vickery. (Detective
Whittaker died the day after he gave evidence before Allen J.) The applicant's solicitor, Mr Giddy, has sworn an affidavit on 4 March 1998 for the purposes of this application which identified particular extracts from the evidence taken at the Royal Commission, upon which reliance is now placed. The Court has been presented with two large volumes of extracts of transcript from proceedings before the Royal Commission. Mr Norrish has drawn upon that material in his extensive written submissions considered by this Court.

It would not be practicable to review the Commission evidence exhaustively but
I make these general observations: 
The applicant himself gave evidence of the various police officers' involvement in the acceptance of the bribe he offered through M; 
M gave evidence that he made payments to Detective Whittaker and had incriminating discussions with Detectives Ison, Eade and Whittaker.

Detective Eade was very much discredited in the proceedings in the Royal
Commission although he denied any wrongdoing in matters concerning the investigation of the applicant.

Detective Ison was also discredited and did admit to receiving corrupt payments from M in the past, although he did not admit to receiving corrupt payments coming from the applicant. Before Allen J, Detective Ison had given evidence to the effect that he had been cleared of any impropriety in the investigation concerning the applicant by Detective Inspector Chapman and that the allegations against him were "unsustained". However included in the material identified in Mr Giddy's affidavit is a report from Detective
Inspector Chapman which recommended that the relevant papers be forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions "to ascertain if evidence exists to support any criminal charges against...any of the Police Officers directly involved." The terms of that report were thus inconsistent with Detective
Ison's assertion that he had been cleared.

It has been submitted on the applicant's behalf that the findings made by the sentencing judge impacting upon the credit of the applicant generally and his contrition and willingness to co-operate with the authorities were unfavourably influenced by his acceptance of the integrity of the police officers. So it is submitted that the sentencing process miscarried when seen in the light of what emerged in the Police Royal Commission.

Had the sentencing judge been presented with the fresh evidence upon which the applicant here relies, his Honour would probably not have expressed the favourable finding which he did express about these police officers. However that fresh evidence would not have had any bearing upon the gravity of what the applicant did viewed objectively; it does not relate to it. Mr Norrish nevertheless submitted that the approach taken by the sentencing judge was contaminated by the favourable view he took as to the evidence of the police officers in a number of ways: 
The applicant claimed that he was blackmailed into becoming involved in the conspiracy by Gazzard and the sentencing judge rejected that claim, finding that the only cause of his involvement was "plain greed".
Notwithstanding the argument advanced to the contrary, I am not persuaded that the fresh evidence now relied upon might have altered his Honour's finding as to what motivated the applicant's involvement in this criminal enterprise; it seems to me that the assertion of blackmail as an explanation for the applicant's involvement is not a credible assertion, and I do not find in Mr
Norrish's submissions any plausible alternative reason for the applicant's involvement other than that found by Allen J; 
Allen J rejected the applicant's assertion that he did not appreciate that methyl amphetamine was a pernicious drug. I am unable to accept the submission that the judge may have accepted that assertion had the credibility of the applicant been unaffected by the judge's assessment of the evidence of the police officers. His Honour's remarks make it clear that he simply did not accept that the applicant, who he regarded as a mature industrial chemist, lacked the relevant knowledge and he treated the applicant's professed evidence as "poppycock"; 
Allen J considered that the applicant's presentation as vague and bumbling was contrived. I am unable to accept the submission that this experienced judge who had the opportunity of assessing the applicant whilst he gave evidence may have been misled in making that assessment because of any assessment he had formed of the testimony of the police officers who had given evidence before him; 
Dr Strum referred to the applicant's mid-life crisis and the sentencing judge accepted that the applicant had such a condition. His Honour went on to review the significance of this condition at pp 19-20 of his sentencing remarks. Having considered what his Honour wrote, I am unable to accept the submission by Mr Norrish that his Honour's assessment of the significance of this condition may have been influenced by the impact of the evidence of the police officers. What his Honour did say in the course of this assessment included the following: "I add that I am not impressed by the reliability of the picture presented as to the extent to which the prisoner was affected by the mid-life crisis. The evidence lacks cohesion. One illustration suffices. His wife, an articulate advocate for him, gave evidence that he was making excessively unreasonable sexual demands upon her. He, on the other hand, gave a history, accepted by Dr
Strum, of badly failing sexual capacity on his part, a failing capacity so marked as to be causing marital distress.

The truth I find is simply that the prisoner succumbed to greed." 
It may be that had the "fresh evidence" been before Allen J, the assessment of it could have impacted to some extent upon his Honour's assessment of the contrition of the applicant, but his Honour did accept that there was a measure of true contrition by 9 November 1990 at the time when the applicant made a detailed statement to the police in which he implicated others.

To be weighed against the possible impact the fresh evidence may have had upon the sentencing process, is the fact that the applicant having been sentenced declined to afford the anticipated co-operation to the authorities which the sentencing judge took into account.

Since the applicant was last before this court, he has co-operated with the authorities by giving evidence in the Police Royal Commission but it remains the position that if the sentences imposed by Allen J were considered now to warrant review, it would be appropriate to take into account in any re- sentencing exercise the fact that the applicant did not give the assistance expected: see R versus Walters [(1994) 33 NSWLR 612.] 
Assessing the possible impact that the fresh evidence now available to the applicant might have had overall, I am not persuaded that there has been shown to be any miscarriage of justice in the sentencing process.

Mr Norrish, in his written submissions, argued that even putting to one side the fresh evidence, the sentences imposed were at the top of the range. In his oral argument he submitted that taking into account the co-operation given by the applicant before sentence, his previous good character, his pleas of guilty and his contrition, the sentences were manifestly excessive. So it is that even without the fresh evidence upon which reliance was placed on this application, it has been argued that the sentence should be quashed as being manifestly excessive.

To support that submission Mr Norrish referred to an analysis of sentencing statistics for amphetamines covering the period from 25 September 1989 to 31
December 1989. That analysis was published by the Judicial Commission of New
South Wales. The Court was also referred to R versus Shaw [(1993) 66 A Crim R ] to support the submission that his Honour's task was to find a sentence within the range regarded as appropriate in 1989.

Whilst this court has made frequent references to the potential usefulness of sentencing statistics, a consideration of the analysis to which Mr Norrish referred us does not persuade me that the sentences here imposed were outside the appropriate discretionary range. Each of the offences was in a category attracting a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, and his Honour in my view correctly categorised the gravity of them in his remarks to which I referred earlier in this judgment.

Finally, it was submitted that the learned judge should have found special circumstances in this matter and that his failure to address that question reflects error. Reference was made to R versus Brindley [(1993) 66 A Crim R ] at 207. It was submitted that since this was the applicant's first prison sentence, that it would be accompanied by hardship in the dislocation of his family life, and that it would result in his release at an advanced age, called for an extended additional term.

I do not accept that the fact that the judge failed to refer specifically to special circumstances is indicative of error on the part of this most experienced sentencing judge. I would not infer that he overlooked any consideration of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).
His Honour made it clear that he did not think it likely that the applicant would offend again, and the sentence which he structured afforded an opportunity for three years of supervision on the assumption that the applicant comes to be released at the expiration of the minimum term which was set. I am not persuaded that the structure of the sentence reflected error or that such structure was inappropriate.

In all the circumstances, I have come to the conclusion that the leave now sought should be refused.

SIMPSON J: I agree with the order proposed by Mr Justice Studdert and with his reasons therefor. * * * 
