

Application of Bidvest Australia Ltd Matter No 3438/98 [1998] NSWSC 383 (7
August 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 `APPLICATION OF BIDVEST AUSTRALIA LTD` `3438/98` `7 August 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a listed company to have meetings convened of (a) its members, and (b) its option holders. In accordance with the previous decisions of this Court, such as Re Gwalia Consolidated Ltd [(1998) 16 ACLC 970], the second is treated as a meeting of creditors. 
The scheme involves rearranging the internal affairs of the company so that its new holding company will be a company recently incorporated in the Isle of
Man, and the shares involved will, in addition to their listing on the ASX, be listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange.

The company has, as would be expected of a company of this size, millions of dollars worth of trade creditors. However, the trade creditors will not be prejudiced because either there will be capital invested into the present company or, alternatively, loan funds will be made available by a bank to meet them, that bank's debt being subordinate to the interest of trade creditors.
The only other matters shown as a debt in the abbreviated accounts are provisions.

The arrangement is one which sensible people of business may well contemplate, so it should go to the members to have the commercial decision made, and although the option holders are technically creditors, their interests to a great degree are much the same as the members.

One thing that did concern me was that the scheme involves the subscription for shares in the company by the new holding company and the reduction of capital involved in the scheme could fund that purchase. That may well have been financial assistance prohibited by <case> of the Corporations Law, as it existed up until 1 July 1998.

The provisions in effect after 1 July 1998 are ss 260A and 260C. Section 260A allows financial assistance if the giving of the assistance does not materially prejudice, (i) the interests of the company or its shareholders; or the company's ability to pay its creditors. Section 260C(5) exempts from the prohibition of giving financial assistance a reduction of share capital in accordance with Division 1 of Pt 2J.1.

Mr Oakes, SC for the applicant puts that the present case comes within s
C(5)(a) because the scheme involves a reduction of share capital. I am unconvinced of this. It may be right, but I would prefer not to decide a case on that basis without full argument because my inclination is that whilst a reduction of share capital is the act of the corporate raider, rather than the act of the court, the words "in accordance with Division 1 Pt 2J.1" means that unless there is a discrete reduction of capital not caught up in the scheme of arrangement the words do not apply.

I can see considerable problems in the <case> definition of what are the interests of the company or its shareholders which are not to be materially prejudiced. This is because many of the classic frauds which this legislation is intended to avoid involve the company being acquired by new owners with its own funds. It is clear, however, that whichever view one takes of those words in the present case, the interests of the company as a whole, or its shareholders, would not be materially prejudiced because there will be a full opportunity in the meetings which are being convened to discuss the matter after full disclosure. There cannot be any effect on the ability to pay creditors for the reasons I have already mentioned. Accordingly, if there is financial assistance under <case>(a) it is within the permitted bounds of the Corporations Law.

The proxy form complies with the new <case>(a) in that a fax number is given as to a possible way of transmitting the proxy to the company. I am of the view that the formal documents are in order.

In accordance with modern practice, which is influenced by the presence in the
Corporations Law of <case> casting obligations on people who convene meetings, the order made is that the meeting be convened, not that the court convene the meeting.

Accordingly, I make orders in accordance with the amended short minutes and the matter can come back to me with the chairman's report for consideration of whether the scheme should be approved on 30 October 1998 at 10 am.

The one matter that I will need to be reminded of on 30 October is whether there is any provision in the companies law of the Isle of Man restricting the period for which an Isle of Man incorporated company can issue options to take up shares.
 * * * 
