

Regina versus P M Hart [1996] NSWSC 218 (21 June 1996) 
REGINA versus Paul Mark HART /93 June 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Allen J, Dowd J, Sperling J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - Consideration of the appropriate approach of the Court of Criminal Appeal to a new trial application where the application is based on the willingness of the co-offender, who like the appellant was convicted, now to give evidence that he alone was the offender (the appellant not having been with him at the time) yet the appellant made a statement to the jury at their joint trial that he was with the co-offender at all relevant times (although no offence occurred), the appellant, however, now claiming that he was coerced by the co-offender into making that statement and that it is in fact true that he was not with the co-offender when the crime was committed.

RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Reserved.

ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
ALLEN J: The appellant and Nigel Boland were arraigned before Studdert J and a jury of twelve on the charge that on 2 June 1992 at Newcastle they murdered Simon Francis McHugh. Each pleaded not guilty but the jury returned in respect of each a verdict of guilty.

His Honour sentenced each of them to penal servitude for a minimum term of fourteen years together with an additional term of four years. In respect of each of the offenders the commencing date of the term was backdated to take into account pre-trial custody.

Both the appellant and Boland instituted appeals to this Court against conviction and against the severity of the sentence imposed. On 13 December Boland was granted leave by this Court to withdraw his appeal. It was ordered that the whole of the time served by him pending the hearing of the appeal count.

The sole ground of appeal for the appellant is that: "Having regard to the evidence at trial and/or further evidence upon which the appellant seeks to rely the verdict of guilty of murder is unsafe and unsatisfactory and represents a miscarriage of justice." 
The substance of the evidence adduced at the trial was as follows. The deceased was last seen alive at the Bellevue Hotel in Hunter Street, Newcastle
West, in the early hours of the morning of 2 June 1992, unless it be by the appellant or Boland. He was well affected by liquor and, although he did not display any aggression, he sought to impose his company upon other patrons and he thereby made a nuisance of himself. Eventually he was asked to leave the hotel by the duty manager. He did so. The duty manager placed the time at about 2 am. One of the patrons, however, placed the time at about 3.30 am to 4 am. The appellant and Boland were also patrons at the hotel in those early morning hours and were there when the deceased left. They were amongst the patrons to whom the deceased had made himself a nuisance. When he left his clothing included track-suit pants and dress boots. The deceased was a man of relatively small stature, about five feet six inches in height, and he wore size 7 in footwear. A Mr Caldwell, a friend and work mate of the deceased, who shared residential premises with him, gave evidence as to the appearance of the pair of dress boots which the deceased used to wear and which, indeed, the deceased had been wearing when the witness last saw him on 1 June 1992. This witness, at the request of the police, went to shoe shops in the Sydney area to find boots similar to the ones which the deceased had been wearing. He found two pairs which were similar, although not identical. A photograph containing one boot from each of these two pairs was before the jury as an exhibit. Features of the boots were that they had extensive stitching, a light sole and were padded around the top edge. They were brown in colour. Mr
Caldwell stated that the boots the deceased had been wearing had a lighter sole than the soles of the boots shown in the photograph. A former girlfriend of the deceased gave evidence that the deceased wore "almost all the time" brown dress boots. She said that the boots shown in the photograph differed in that they were darker brown in colour and had more stitching in the area of the toes but that the padding on the top was very similar to the padding depicted in the photograph. At about 4.30 am on 2 June 1992 two constables were on general patrol duties in a police car. They saw the appellant and
Boland at a 24 hour coin operated car wash. The appellant was washing a Holden sedan with Boland standing nearby. The washing of the car at that hour attracted their attention. They stopped and spoke to the appellant about it.
He explained: "I've done some work on the car and we just took it for a run."
He was asked where else he had been that night. He responded: "We went to the
Bellevue earlier in the night for a couple of drinks". One of the constables did a registration check and found that the Holden had not been registered since December 1991. The other constable, Senior Constable Henry, said to the appellant that he wanted the registration plates taken off the vehicle: and he asked whether the appellant had a screwdriver. The appellant purported to look into the cabin of the vehicle and then replied that he could not find one.
Constable Henry asked why he did not look in the boot. The appellant then did open the boot and reached in and got a screwdriver. At this stage the other constable, who had been checking on the validity of the Queensland driver's licence which the appellant had produced, returned to the vehicle. He had ascertained that the Queensland licence had been cancelled. Constable Henry had the appellant re-open the boot (which had been closed after the screwdriver had been taken out). He looked into it and saw three or four items of clothing which included a pair of brown boots which were padded around the top and which had stitching on them. He said that the padding on the boots was nearly identical to that shown in the photograph - as was the stitching which ran around the top of the boot. They were somewhat darker than the boots shown in the photograph and had thinner soles. They were many sizes smaller than what Senior Constable Henry wore. He took a size 91/2 or 10 depending upon the make and manufacturer. These boots appeared "probably 7, 71/2, 8". The boots were too small to be those of Hart who appeared as if he would take boots the same size as Senior Constable Henry. Boland also was a big man - "probably /2". Constable Henry said that when he touched one of the boots "it felt damp, felt cold ... It just felt wet." The clothes, however, which were in the boot as well as the boots did not appear to be damp. Constable Henry asked the appellant: "Who owns the clothes and the boots here?" He replied: "I do. I took a change of clothes with me tonight. Is that alright?" The constable also saw in the boot a brass or copper bar one or two inches thick and about eighteen inches long. He asked the appellant what it was for. The appellant replied that it was off a welder. The appellant was arrested for driving an unregistered and unlicensed motor vehicle and for driving without a licence.

The appellant's wife gave evidence that the appellant wore size 10 boots. She had never seen him wear dress boots like those shown in the photograph.

The body of the deceased was found at about 6.40 am on 2 June 1992 floating near the edge of the weir between Barnsley and Teralba. The upper part of the body was clothed but the lower part was unclothed except for underpants. His feet were bare. He was not wearing any watch. The place where the body was found was approximately eighteen kilometres by road from the hotel. Despite careful search no blood was found at the road area in the vicinity of where the body was found. There was expert evidence that the body would not have been moved by current or tidal movement. An extensive search at the scene for the missing clothing and footwear failed to find them. Later that day police went to the home of the deceased. A search failed to find the distinctive watch which enquiries indicated that the deceased customarily wore.

On the following day police went to the home of a Mr Boatswain where they spoke to him and to his de facto wife. After speaking to them police took possession of a grey duffle bag, containing clothing, which was in the lounge room. At the trial Mr Boatswain's de facto wife gave evidence that the appellant had been fixing up a Holden, owned by her husband, since just before
June in the previous year. It had been damaged in an accident. He used to stay overnight once or twice a week, sleeping on the lounge. He had brought the grey duffle bag with the clothing in it on the afternoon of 2 June 1992. It was the following day that the police came.

When the contents of the grey duffle bag were examined it was found that what was included in the bag was the distinctive watch of the deceased.

On 3 June 1992 police also took possession of the Holden car. Neither the small pair of dress boots nor the metal bar were in it.

When subsequently invited to participate in a record of interview the appellant declined to do so. At his trial he made an unsworn statement. It contained no reference to either the boots or the bar. There was no evidence as to what had become of them.

Examination of the car, however, disclosed a small area of bloodstaining in the boot. There was evidence by a forensic biologist that the blood was not more than one month old and that it was consistent with the blood of the deceased. The grouping, however, encompassed approximately 50% of the community. Accordingly, she organised DNA testing. The expert who did the testing got a reading from two places in the boot. One of the readings, however, was faint. It was much less distinct than the reading he got from the other area: and he discarded it, accordingly, as being an area where the bloodstain had been contaminated. On the finding, however, from the distinct area his opinion was that the chance of anyone fitting that reading was less than 1 in 120. The deceased did fit it. He said that his result, combined with the findings of the forensic biologist, extended the odds to less than 1 in
His approach was criticised by an expert called for the defendant who said that the fainter reading should not be ignored and that when that was taken into account 16 to 17 people in 100 would meet the DNA results. He conceded that once you introduced also the results of the forensic biologist the number of people in 100 would be reduced.

The post-mortem findings revealed that the deceased had massive and extensive injuries. These included fractures of the skull and face. These were in a line cm in length and 5 cm wide. It was a comminuted fracture with the bone broken into ten or more fragments. He agreed that the infliction of the fractures required considerable force using a blunt object. He said that certainly a copper bar between one and two inches thick and eighteen inches long would have been consistent with the injuries received. Skeletal injury was not confined to the head. There was also a fracture of the upper shaft of the left ulna. The bone was snapped right through. Considerable force would have been required to cause such a fracture. The multiplicity of the injuries showed that different methods had been used to inflict them. Some were consistent with the use of a weapon such as a metal bar, others might be explained by kicking with a boot. Others were indicative of punching without the use of a weapon. The immediate cause of death had been drowning but the deceased would have been rendered unconscious "almost immediately, within minutes" from the brain damage which he received. The injuries were too gross to have been received by him falling into the weir. The injuries were such that there would have been extensive bleeding.

There was further evidence. It was from a man who was in the same cell at the police station as the appellant and Boland. At night on 6 June 1992, after he had got to sleep, he was awakened by a noise and heard Boland and the appellant talking to each other at the other end of the cell. The conversation he heard was as follows: "BOLAND: They've only got circumstantial evidence. All I did was break his arm.

THE APPELLANT: We shouldn't have kept the watch. We shouldn't have. We shouldn't have kept the watch. They reckon his skull was cracked. It must have been when he fell in the weir. We shouldn't have washed the car at 4.30 in the morning.

BOLAND: You were the one that kicked him in the guts and threw him in the back of the car." 
He also heard Boland say: "We shouldn't have - that's the only fucking thing the coppers have got on us is circumstantial evidence. That's where we fucked up." 
He denied that he had access to a radio or that he had read anything about the murder. The jury, however, were strongly cautioned by the learned trial judge in his summing-up as to the need to scrutinise his evidence "with the greatest care" and that the absence of substantial confirmation provided by independent evidence it would be dangerous to convict on his evidence alone. He pointed out that the witness had "a formidable record for offences involving deceit and dishonesty", that he was an informer, that the practice of the Court was to extend leniency to informers, that there was accordingly a temptation to inform and that it is very easy to fabricate a conversation.

Putting aside, however, the evidence of the informer it is manifest that the
Crown had a very strong circumstantial case against the appellant.

The case at trial for the appellant was the evidence, to which I have already referred, of the expert in DNA testing and an unsworn statement by the appellant. The statement was as follows: "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I'm not guilty of this charge put before me. On the night in question it was about quarter to eleven, I had been working on the car, Graham Boatswain's, decided to go for a run in it. I took it up to Nigel's place, there's where we sat and finished watching the movie that night; shared half a weight of speed with him, decided to go for a run into town to take the car for a run 'cause I put a new diff in it.

Arrived at the Bellevue about 11.30 that evening. Nigel bought the first round of drinks. We started playing card machines when a bloke come up to us. He was pretty well intoxicated and started making a nuisance of himself and asking about pills and Nigel told him to piss off. About ten, fifteen minutes later, he come back asking about speed and Nigel says to him, 'No, we don't know anything about them,' and we sort of talked 'cause Nigel still had half of what he had left originally and we decided to sell it to him for $80. So, we said to him, 'Yeah, $80,' and he said, 'No, I haven't got no money,' and he said he would leave his watch as collateral till the following night, that was the Wednesday night. He said, 'Right,' so he left his watch. I put the watch in my pocket.

We left a very short time after that to go to the hot dog place. We went up there, it was shut, we come back to the Bellevue and on arriving at the
Bellevue Stephen Hughes was escorting Mr McHugh from the Bellevue where we sat and had a couple of more pies and about a beer each. We left there to the vehicle and on the way home we had slight troubles but I knew I had to wash the vehicle and get it passed for rego the following day so we stopped at my father's place at Cardiff where I picked up all the paperwork, registration papers and some money. Down the road from there is a 24 hour car wash is where we stopped at, we stopped there. We started to give the car a wash when the
Highway Patrol pulled in. They done a rego check and search on the motor vehicle and found it was unregistered and uninsured. They took me to
Charlestown where on getting charged Nigel arrived, he had followed taking the vehicle back to his place and met me at the station.

Left there, went back to Nigel's. In the morning I rang Leon, that's the bloke
I was working for. He picked me up at the service station just up the road from Nigel's. Consequent on that, the following night police come to Graham's place taking the motor vehicle away and my bag of possessions, clothes and stuff and then I handed myself in the next day with my solicitor, thinking that it was just for an assault 'cause they were looking for me to find that I had been charged with murder and they placed me in the cells and at no time was the witness Mark Wilkinson ever in a cell with us 'cause me and Nigel were in the one cell by ourselves and was there any hash or marijuana smoked in the cells at any time. That's it, thank you." 
This statement accords fully with what the appellant had told the police at the car wash. He and Boland had been at the Bellevue: they then had left and had been in each other's company until police spoke to them at the car wash: and the use of the vehicle that night was related to work which had been done to it. Boland also made an unsworn statement. Insofar as it related to the appellant it coincided with his in all matters of substance.

On the evidence adduced at the trial, and the unsworn statement of the appellant it is clear, beyond scope for argument, that the jury's verdict was wholly reasonable. Counsel for the appellant has not suggested otherwise.

The appellant relies, however, upon evidence which Boland is now prepared to give and which, if believed, would exculpate him of murder as distinct from lesser offences relating to the appellant's conduct after the murder was committed. Boland has sworn an affidavit in which that evidence is set forth.
The substance of that account, insofar as it differs from the unsworn statements made by him and by the appellant at their trial, is that at the
Bellevue, not long before the deceased was made to leave, he again approached
Boland for drugs and said that he could get more money to pay for it. Boland gave the deceased his address and told him that he could see him at that address in about an hour. Not long after that the appellant and Boland drove to the appellant's home. Boland then borrowed the car from the appellant and drove to his own home. The deceased was waiting for him. Boland rang a supplier and they arranged to meet at the weir. He then drove the deceased with him to the weir. On the way the deceased talked about friends of his who wanted drugs. There Boland met his supplier and purchased a quantity of the drug. He then walked back to the car and opened the boot to "stash the speed".
While he was leaning into the boot the deceased said to him: "How about I suck your cock for a bit of speed?" What happened then was, in Boland's words: "I got angry and I chopped into him with my fist. I hit him a number of times with my fist to the head and the stomach and then I rammed his head into the back of the car. I rammed his head into the bumper bar and other parts of the back of the car at least 4 or 5 times. He collapsed to the ground and was unconscious.

I put him to the side of the car and he was then about 10 metres from the water. He was unconscious. I did not remove any of his clothing or his shoes.
I just left him there on the side of the road. I didn't pull him into the water.

I did not put the body in the boot and I didn't hit him with any object that was in the car. I have got no idea how he got into the water." 
Boland's account, as set out in his affidavit, continues that he then drove back to the appellant's home and they then drove to the car wash. Before the police arrived Boland told the appellant that the deceased had been waiting for him at his house, that they went to the weir, that the deceased made the indecent suggestion and that in the ensuing fight Boland had "smashed the cunt's head in" on the tow bar of the car. The appellant then started to wash the car. Boland "believed he wanted to clean the car up for the rego". As that was being done the police drove up and, in Boland's words: "I told Paul Hart that he should say if he was asked that we had been together all night. I remember saying to him 'if you don't say that, the shit will hit the fan'." 
Boland's affidavit continues: "He was arrested by the police and I was waiting for him when he was released on bail. We discussed what had happened earlier that night and I told him that he must keep his mouth shut.

I was later arrested and charged with murder as was Paul Hart and we were in the police cells together for a period of time. I told him to keep his mouth shut because I told him that the police didn't have anything on me.

Paul Hart and I shared a cell together at East Maitland Goal for approximately six months and we discussed the matter on a number of occassions. I told him a number of times that if he said anything about me being involved he would go down with me. I didn't threaten him directly but I did tell him what happened to dogs in prison.

I gave him a written version of the events which I wrote out and asked him to memorise it. I told him that in his instructions to his lawyers he should memorise what I had written out. I told him before he got bail that if he changed anything that he would go down with me. After he got bail before the trial he spoke to me on the phone about 2 weeks before the trial. At that stage I told him I was going to own up to it but I changed my mind about that and I let him know.

After the verdict of the jury and we were both found guilty I did tell Paul
Hart that I should have told the truth from the begining. After we were sentenced we were both at Maitland goal. He and I were in different cells and
I remember he took the verdict real hard. I needed him to support my alibi and support me in saying that I wasn't there at the time the fellow died. I knew I could take advantage of Paul Hart because he didn't have the experience of being in goal like I had and I could get him to do what I wanted because he would be afraid of me." 
Boland's account of what occurred on the morning of the murder of the morning is inconsistent with his unsworn statement to the jury at his trial. Boland has not placed himself in any jeopardy in swearing to an inconsistent account which, if believed, exculpates the appellant. He has never sworn anything to the contrary. His statement to the jury was not on oath. Certainly the swearing of the affidavit made it inevitable that his own appeal, which was then still current, would not succeed. But the solitary ground of appeal was that the verdict was unsafe. There was no significant possibility that the appeal would succeed. The Crown case against Boland was no less powerful than it was against the appellant.

In the course of his appeal the appellant sought leave to rely upon Boland's affidavit as well as upon affidavits by him related to the subject matter of it. The Court indicated that the cogency of these accounts, which varied from the accounts given in the unsworn statements at the trial, might be material to whether leave should be granted to adduce the further evidence. With the concurrence of the Crown and of the appellant accordingly the affidavits were read and Boland and the appellant cross-examined upon them without the taking of that course being indicative of any ruling by the Court as to the credibility or cogency of the evidence or as to the significance of it to the determination of the appeal.

The first of the affidavits by the appellant were sworn on 15 April 1995. In that affidavit he states that he did see the deceased and Boland talking alone together at the Bellevue not long before the deceased left. After that conversation Boland told him that "the deceased had a friend who wanted to get on, that he had cash or money for the deal". Not long after that he drove
Boland back to the appellant's home. Boland then borrowed the car. The appellant went inside and fell asleep. The next thing he remembered was Boland waking him. He said something about a fight and asked the appellant to give him a lift home. While the appellant was getting dressed for that purpose
Boland said something more about a fight. They then got into the car and were driving towards Boland's house when Boland told him to stop at the car wash.
His affidavit then continues: "I pulled into the Car Wash, Nigel was raving on about stuff such as some 'some poofter sucking him for a shot' and saying the bloke was 'full of shit'.
... We were washing the car and he told me that he had taken some poofter out to the weir 'that bloke from the Pub in town'. He told me that he waited for about an hour or hour and a half for the bloke to turn up with the money for the deal. He said Simon offered him a suck on the cock for a shot. He told me that he told Simon to piss off and then a fight started. He said that he had him in a head lock, he tripped over and when they fell down, he hit his head on the tow bar. He said it knocked him unconscious and there was blood coming out of his head. He said he checked if he was alive and then he shit himself and left him on the side of the road when he took off. I said to Nigel that we would go out and see if he was there and Nigel said, 'We can't go now'. It was just after that the Police drove up and spoke to me about the car. When we were washing the car I didn't see any blood on the outside of the car. When the Police pulled up Nigel was saying to me, 'I've been with you all night'.
He also said something like, 'If you don't say that, the shit will hit the fan'." 
The appellant's affidavit continues: "The Police arrested me and charged me with driving an unregistered car and being a cancelled driver and when I was released from Charleston Police
Station about 6 o'clock, Nigel was the Police Station to pick me up.

As we were walking back to his place, he told me, 'Keep your mouth shut or you will be looking over your shoulder the whole time'. When we went back to his place I think we had a line of speed and then I left him.

When I found out the Police were looking for me in relation to the alleged murder, I handed myself in and I went with a solicitor. When the Police spoke to me I declined to answer questions. After I was arrested, I was in custody in the cells at Newcastle Police Station for a few days with Nigel. We discussed the matter a couple of times during which time Nigel told me to keep my mouth shut because 'they have got nothing on us'.

I was refused bail and was later transferred to East Maitland Goal and shared a cell with Nigel for about 6 months. We discussed the matter quite a few times in the first few weeks and he said to me, 'If you say anything you'll go down too. You know what happens to dogs'. He said to me, 'They've got no proof, it's just circumstantial'. I had never been in goal like this before and when I was in Maitland Goal I heard about a bloke getting stabbed and another person having boiling water thrown over him for putting someone in and
I was very scared. Before the committal proceedings, Nigel had written out a version of events and wrote me out a copy. I had to memorise it. After I memorised it I gave it back to him about two days later and he told me that is what I was going to say or I would cop it. That is the version of events that
I told my lawyers for the committal and Mr Peattie for the trial. I never told my lawyers that Nigel had told me to tell them that and I never told my lawyers that Nigel had taken my car that night and left me alone.

Nigel and I discussed the matter on and off over a period of time until I got bail. I remember he kept saying, 'If you change anything, you're going down with me'. When I got bail I didn't visit Nigel but he did speak to me on the phone about two weeks before the Trial. He told me then that he was going to own up to it.

Shortly afterwards I went to see Robert Peattie who was my solicitor after the committal proceedings. I was sitting in my barrister's chambers in Newcastle and I was going to have a conference with him and Mr Peattie. Mr Fitzgerald was out of the room and I started to tell Mr Peattie that Nigel was going to own up to it. When I was talking to Mr Peattie I said, 'I don't know why we are going through this. Nigel is going to own up to what happened'. Mr Peattie just stopped me and said, 'I don't want to know about this'. He said, 'They have got nothing on you. You'll both beat it if you run it this way'." 
On 8 December 1995 the appellant swore another affidavit. In that affidavit the appellant says that the statement in his earlier affidavit that he had never told his lawyers that Boland had taken his car that night and had left him alone was wrong. Since giving instructions for that affidavit he had remembered that after a conference with counsel he and his then solicitor had gone for a walk and they had sat down together on the steps of Newcastle
Court. His affidavit continues: "I don't know how it came up but I told him that Nigel had borrowed my car and told me he had met the bloke and ended up having a fight with him over a deal.
I think I told him that Nigel said that he didn't kill the deceased that the bloke was still conscious when Nigel left him. I think it was then that Mr
Peattie said that if the case was run the way I had instructed him and Mr
Fitzgerald I had a chance of being found not guilty. He said that the case against me was a circumstantial evidence case and that the police did not have a strong case." 
The suggestion clearly being made, in the affidavits, as to what transpired between Boland and the appellant after the appellant's arrest is that the appellant was so terrified by Boland's implied threats of him being physically assaulted, if he did not give Boland the alibi of having been innocently with him after they both left the hotel, that he refrained from telling the truth at his trial and, indeed, lied.

On the hearing of the appeal both the appellant and Boland were cross-examined at length.
 [S 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) provides, that on an appeal against conviction the court shall allow the appeal "if it is of opinion that the verdict of the jury should be set aside on the ground that it is unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having regard to the evidence, or that the judgment of the court of trial should be set aside on the ground of wrong decision of any question of law, or that on any other ground whatsoever there was a miscarriage of justice". Of these grounds the appellant relies solely on the submission that in the circumstances set forth in the affidavits and expanded in the oral testimony of the appellant and of
Boland to this Court the trial as conducted was a miscarriage of justice.

It is argued for the appellant that the evidence of Boland which he now would be prepared to give at a new trial of the appellant is evidence which was not available to the appellant at the joint trial of him and Boland. I accept that argument. At the joint trial Boland was denying his guilt. The appellant could not have compelled Boland to give evidence in the appellant's case as to
Boland's involvement in the murder as he now admits it was. Yet Boland's involvement in the murder was the cornerstone of the exculpation of the appellant. Boland's present account is not fresh evidence in the sense that the appellant, at his trial, was not aware what Boland's involvement had been.
But it was fresh evidence in the sense that it was not available to the appellant at that time. The practical test as to whether a miscarriage of justice resulted is the same. The practical test is whether the appellate court considers that there is a significant possibility that the jury, acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant had the fresh evidence been before it at the trial (Gallagher versus The Queen <case>; [(1985-1986) 160 CLR 392:]
Mickelberg versus The Queen <case>; [(1988-1989) 167 CLR 259:] R v Hemsley (Court of Criminal Appeal - 8 December 1995). The issue is, then, is not how a reasonable jury might regard that evidence in a new trial tailored to accommodate it. The issue is whether the trial already had has miscarried. What matters is how that jury would have considered the evidence if it had been given at that trial. As Dawson J said in Gallagher (at 414) "The probative value of the evidence is considered not for the purpose of determining the likely outcome of a new trial; it is considered in order to determine whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred by reason of the absence of the evidence at the previous trial". In applying this practical test, one may postulate that the jury at that trial had the fresh evidence "in combination with the evidence already given upon the trial ... and in judging of the weight of the fresh testimony the probative force and the nature of the evidence already adduced at the trial must be a matter of great importance." (Craig versus The King <case>; <case>; [(1978-1979) 142 CLR 659] at
See also R versus Hemsley, Court of Criminal Appeal, 8 December 1995). The principle extends to an unsworn statement made to the jury at his trial by the appellant. The unsworn statement was part of the material to which the jury had to have regard.

Were this the only available approach, the appellant in the present case would face the formidable hurdle that at his trial he made an unsworn statement fundamentally inconsistent with the evidence Boland now would give as to what happened after he and the appellant left the Bellevue. It stretches credulity beyond breaking point to imagine that, if at his trial the evidence Boland is now prepared to give had been given - and that were the only difference - the jury might, acting reasonably, have acquitted the appellant. His statement denied the truth of the exculpatory evidence of Boland. But that is not the only available approach.

As Gibbs CJ said in Gallagher: "It is important to remember that the fundamental question is whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred, and that the principles that may be extracted from the authorities 'should not ... be regarded as absolute or hard and fast rules': Green v. The King <case>; [(1939) 61 C.L.R. 167], at p. 175). The circumstances of cases may vary widely, and it is undesirable to fetter the power of Courts of Criminal Appeal to remedy a miscarriage of justice." 
In reference specifically to the practical test to which I have referred in relation to fresh evidence Gibbs CJ said (at 399): "No form words should be regarded as an incantation that will resolve the difficulties of every case. No test can detract from the force of the fundamental principle that the appeal must be allowed if a miscarriage of justice is shown to have occurred." 
The fresh evidence of Boland remains of importance even though had it been before the jury at the appellant's trial the effect of it would have been nullified by the appellant's statement refuting it. That is because the appellant also seeks a new trial on the related ground that there was a miscarriage of justice because he was coerced by Boland, who wanted an alibi, into making that statement. The trial miscarried, it is urged, because the appellant was not able to tell the truth to the jury. If he had told them the truth, and Boland's evidence also had been before the jury, there would have been, it is put, a significant chance of acquittal.

It is true, as a general proposition, that where by threats of physical violence an appellant has been so intimidated that he has been coerced into giving to the jury at his trial not his own version of what happened but a version mandated by the intimidator, a miscarriage of justice has occurred if the result is that he thereby lost a reasonable chance, which otherwise he would have had, of being acquitted. A miscarriage of justice of this type has two elements each of which must be established. They are:
It was because of such intimidation that the appellant put before the jury not his own version but the version mandated by his intimidator; and
There is a significant possibility that if he had placed before the jury his own version and not the mandated version he would have been acquitted.

Such is the flexibility of the concept of miscarriage of justice that where at the trial the appellant did not have available to him evidence supporting his version but that evidence now is available (that is, it is fresh evidence) the second of the elements should be expanded to embrace, as an alternative to it, both the appellant's version and the fresh evidence.

It is essential to the claim of the present appellant that there was such a miscarriage of justice that in fact he was so intimidated by threats of violence made by Boland that he was too frightened to tell the jury the truth.
Unless that is the fact there was no miscarriage of justice - no matter how better his prospects of acquittal might have been if he had told the jury what, he says, is the truth. It is for this Court to determine whether there was a miscarriage of justice. Accordingly the threshold which the appellant must cross, in respect of his untrue statement to the jury, is satisfying this
Court that it is the fact that he was so intimidated by threats of violence made by Boland that he was too frightened to tell the jury the truth. If he does not satisfy this Court as to that there is no occasion for the Court to consider how the jury might have reacted if at his trial the appellant had not made his untrue statement but had put before the jury, as his version, what he now says is the truth or had put that version with the added support of the evidence of Boland as to what occurred after the two men left the Bellevue.

The authorities afford guidance as to principle. In R versus Jarrott (Court of
Criminal Appeal - 27 September 1993) Gleeson CJ said: "Where an appellant ... makes a deliberate tactical decision as to the contents of his unsworn statement, even though that may be taken against a background of reference by his lawyers to the consequences that might flow from pursuing a different course ... that ... is not a miscarriage of justice." 
In R versus Henry (Court of Criminal Appeal - 6 October 1992) a new trial was sought in the circumstances that at his trial the appellant had deliberately refrained from giving at his trial evidence which would have given an innocent explanation of incriminating fingerprints because if he had done so he would have exposed himself to being prosecuted for a serious criminal offence different from the one for which he was standing trial. In consequence of indemnities which, after the trial, he received from the Crown in relation to that different offence he was no longer at risk of prosecution. This Court found, however: "He made a considered decision and it could not be a miscarriage of justice to hold him to it." A new trial was refused.

In R versus Harris (Court of Criminal Appeal - 13 December 1985) the appellant who had been convicted of rape sought from this Court an order for a new trial on the ground that he had not placed before the jury evidence of the fact that he had a scarred arm which he habitually kept covered because of its ugly appearance. He said that that evidence had not been placed before the jury because he failed to appreciate that it was relevant to the issue of his identification by the victim. In dismissing the appeal this Court did not consider how the jury might have reacted had it had before it evidence of the scarring and of the appellant's habit of concealing it. The Court did not believe his explanation as to why that evidence had not been given. That was an end to the matter. There was no miscarriage of justice.

In the present case I am far indeed from being satisfied that the mind of the appellant was so overborne by threats made by Boland, whether overt or implied, that his unsworn statement to the jury was not truly his own statement as distinct from him being the mouthpiece of Boland. On the contrary
I am comfortably satisfied that the statement he made was pursuant to a considered tactical decision that, as it was a joint trial and Boland was going to say that the two of them had been together during the critical period, it was in the appellant's own interests to make a statement consistent with Boland's version. By doing that each gave an alibi to the other. Indeed I am far from persuaded even that Boland ever made any relevant threat to the appellant. I find the evidence of both Boland and the appellant in that regard, as well as in other respects, wholly unconvincing. Neither of them is worthy of any credit. What happened is that they put their heads together, before the trial, to work out a version which would give each of them, they believed, a good chance of being acquitted. That was the version that they gave. In that respect the appellant was comforted by what he understood to be the import of advice given to him by his then solicitor. Neither Boland nor the appellant had the slightest concern as to the truth of the version which they put forward at the trial. Now that each has been convicted they again have put their heads together to come up with a different version which, if believed, exculpates one of them. That is the best that they could come up with in the circumstances. I am satisfied that neither of them has had the slightest concern as to the truth of this different version or as to the explanation which they both offer as to why the appellant did not come up with it earlier.

It follows that the appellant has failed to cross the threshold of establishing to the satisfaction of this Court that his untrue statement to the jury at his trial was made because his will was overborne by threats made by Boland. There was no miscarriage of justice related to the giving by him to the jury of the version he now says is untruthful. It was a version which he chose to give to increase, in his expectation, his chance of being acquitted.
There is no occasion for this Court to consider how the jury might have been affected if it had had before it not the untrue version but the version now said to be true or that version together with evidence of Boland in support of it.

In fairness to the solicitor who acted for the appellant at the time of his trial I should record that I accept without hesitation the evidence which he gave this Court that at no time did the instructions which he received from the appellant include the version which he now claims to be the truth as to what happened after he and Boland left the Bellevue. The appellant's account that he did give his then solicitor that version was wholly unconvincing. He clearly was lying, changing detail from moment to moment as seemed expedient at the time. Yet the fact that he did not give that version to his then solicitor is eloquent testimony that he was not refraining from telling his then solicitor the truth because he was being intimidated by Boland. On his own evidence he had, during the two weeks or thereabouts preceding his trial, ample opportunity to tell his legal advisers what actually did happen without fear that by doing so he would incur the displeasure of Boland and retribution from him. Boland had informed him, so the appellant has sworn, that he would plead guilty. If Boland was going to plead guilty there was no basis for fear by the appellant of retribution if he gave a version of the facts which did not give Boland an alibi.

I add, for completeness, some observations concerning Boland. His cross- exmaination before the Court revealed him to be a man who regards untruthfulness as being a matter of no consequence. A stark example of that indifference to truth is one correction, as he said it was, in his oral evidence of something he had sworn to in his affidavit. In his affidavit he stated quite explicitly in respect of the deceased: "I did not remove any of his clothing or his shoes." In his oral evidence before this Court he said that that was wrong. He removed the shoes, jacket and, he thought, the socks from the deceased. When asked his explanation for having put in his affidavit that he had not removed any of the clothing his reply was: "Well, it just seemed a bit harsh. If I said I removed all the clothing, or most of the clothing, it made me look like a real arsehole, you know?" The transcript of the evidence continues: "Q. Well, you had been convicted of murder, did you think that would make you any worse? 
A. Well I thought it would, yes.

Q. So you are prepared to lie rather than make yourself look a bit worse, is that it? 
A. Well, I wouldn't really call it a lie, your Honour." 
No credence could be given to the evidence of this man. He simply says what seems best at the time regardless of what the truth is. Indeed he demonstrated his utter unreliability specifically in respect of what emerged during the hearing of the appeal to be the critical issue - namely whether it was because of intimidation by him that the appellant made his untruthful statement to the jury. In his affidavit he stated: "I told him a number of times that if he said anything about me being involved he would go down with me. I didn't threaten him directly but I did tell him what happened to dogs in prison." In his oral evidence he changed that account. It is not correct he said that he did not threaten the appellant. He did so a number of times. Indeed, he said, he told him that he would "hurt him severely if he spill(ed) his guts". The further his evidence went the more extreme became the alleged threats. It ended up with him averring: "Well, I kept threatening him, he had to keep his mouth shut, otherwise I would have bashed him and he probably would have been stabbed." He was asked why he had sworn in his affidavit that he did not directly threaten the appellant. The best he could come up with was: "I might have misread it, your Honour." This man simply is not believable. He has nothing to lose now by trying to help the appellant, his mate, with an untrue claim that the appellant was not with him when the murder was committed.

He manifestly has lied even in what now he says happened at the weir. It is obvious that, despite Boland's assertion to the contrary, it was not at the weir that the deceased was brutally bashed. So horrific were his wounds that there would have been copious blood spilt. None was found at the weir. In his remarks on sentence the learned trial judge was correct in finding that the bashing occurred elsewhere, probably not far from the Bellevue, and that the body was then driven in the boot of the car to the weir where it was dumped in the water. It is understandable that Boland, who whilst amoral is not unintelligent, would have appreciated that it might assist the appellant to place the bashing not near the Bellevue from which he and the appellant had left together but eighteen kilometres away from it.

A further incredible aspect of Boland's account of what happened is his assertion that although he inflicted, he says alone, these appalling injuries to the deceased, which were so severe that he was rendered deeply unconscious,
Boland then simply left the unconscious man on the side of the road and drove away. He says that where he left him was some ten metres from the water. How did the deceased end up in the water? His injuries were such that it is beyond belief that he would have moved from where he was lying. Someone picked him up and dumped him in the water. Only his assailants would have done that. Boland has denied any responsibility for dumping the body in the water for no better reason, as I see it, than the one he had for at first denying that he had removed part of the deceased's clothing. It would have made him look like an "arsehole". He preferred to lie about it. That he preferred to lie, for no better reason that he did not wish to look like an "arsehole" is borne out by the limited form in which he grudgingly admitted he did remove some of the clothing. Even in that admission he was not prepared to admit that he removed the deceased's pants. Yet it is absurd to contemplate that anyone but the assailant or assailants did so. Boland's evidence as support for the appellant's claim of intimidation is worthless.

The present case has similarities to R versus Giardini (Court of Criminal Appeal - 25 February 1993). It, too, was a case where after conviction a co-accused, one Stanford, gave a sworn version of what occurred which exonerated the appellant who had been convicted with him at their joint trial. This Court refused to order a new trial. Gleeson CJ, with whom the other members of the
Court agreed, said: "Stanford was cross-examined, and it is the obligation of this Court to consider the cogency and plausibility of his evidence (Craig versus The King <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 429] at 439). Stanford's evidence is seriously lacking in both cogency and plausibility. He is a witness who would be regarded by any jury as untrustworthy and completely unreliable." 
Those remarks are entirely applicable to the evidence of Boland.

The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

Leave to appeal against the severity of sentence is sought. It is not suggested that the sentence was not well within the range of sentences which duly could have been imposed in the proper exercise of sentencing discretion.
The argument advanced for the appellant is a very narrow one, namely, that there should have been a disparity between the sentences passed on the two murderers because of the difference in the gravity of their respective criminal records. It is submitted that as the appellant's record was not as bad as that of Boland the failure of the sentencing judge to impose a more lenient sentence upon him would engender in the appellant a justified sense of grievance.

I am unpersuaded that for the purpose of sentencing for this appalling murder committed on 2 June 1992 there would have been much to chose from between
Boland and the appellant in respect of their passed records. The appellant's record was brief but it did include a conviction less than four months before the murder for possessing a shortened firearm. For that offence he was given a recognisance to be of good behaviour for three years. Boland's record was more extensive. Putting aside juvenile offences he was convicted on 12 November for stealing offences but dealt with in a non-custodial manner - including the requirement that he perform community service. He failed to comply with the community service order and was sentenced to eight months.
Thereafter he had a number of offences relating to driving under the influence of alcohol as well as offences which were dealt with by fines or otherwise in a non-custodial manner. The manner of dealing with them suggests they were more in the nature of lairish behaviour than calculated criminality. The offences were offensive language in 1988, two assaults upon police in 1989 (apparently in the one incident) and malicious damage in 1991. In 1990 he was convicted for not holding a shooter's licence and for possession of a loaded firearm. Those offences again were dealt with by fine. They are of a different order to possession of a shortened firearm. Boland's irresponsibility continued to manifest itself, however, by failures to appear and eventually on June 1991 the patience of the judiciary was exhausted and he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for breach of recognisance (together with concurrent sentences of three months each for driving with more than the prescribed content of alcohol and for driving while disqualified).

In his remarks on sentence his Honour stated in respect of both Boland and the appellant that in the sentencing process he would not "view the prisoner's criminal record unfavourably to him". I have no doubt that he took this course because the murder for which he was sentencing was so horrific that in the case of Boland and in the case of the appellant his prior criminal record paled, in comparison, to insignificance. It was open to him to take that view.
It appears that his Honour was not informed of the three months sentence imposed upon Boland in June 1991. I do not consider that it would have made any difference to the approach his Honour took. The appellant has no reasonable basis for a sense of grievance at not being given a lighter sentence than the one imposed by Boland.

Leave to appeal against the sentence should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.
 
DOWD J: I have read the judgment in draft form of Allen J. I agree with the proposed orders and reasons stated.

SPERLING J: I have had the advantage of reading Allen J's judgment in draft. I agree with the orders which he proposes and with his reasons.
 * * * 
