

Fexuto Pty Ltd versus Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd and Ors Matter No 3799/97 [1998]
NSWSC 138 (24 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 `FEXUTO PTY LTD versus BOSNJAK HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ORS` ` 3799/97` `27 April 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for interim injunction. 
The parties are the various corporate vehicles owned and controlled by members of the Bosnjak family. The second generation of that family, if I can call them that, are at war with each other, two against one. The one is represented by the plaintiff's interests. The plaintiff has commenced an oppression suit which is due to be heard for two to three weeks commencing on 9 June 1998. The result of those proceedings may be that they are dismissed, or it may be that one or other side is ordered to buy the opposition out of the companies.

The main area of the companies' business is operating buses in Sydney,
Melbourne and Brisbane, with associated bus depots and plant. A business which is also carried on in Sydney and surrounds is the holding of real property. As is not uncommon with management reports given to Sydney companies there is a school of thought that companies should best concentrate on their core business and it is suggested that the holding of real property by these companies is not their core business and should be divested. There is also a contrary view.

However, the majority of the board of the main company has taken the view that a property in Church Street, Parramatta should be put under strata title and sold. The key unit would appear to be what will become lot 6 in the strata plan, which is currently being leased to a video store, the lease having at least eighteen months to run.

The majority says that it would be for the good of the companies to go ahead with the strata plan and the sale because that would produce sufficient to stabilize the borrowings of the companies and to put them in a better position.

The plaintiff takes the view that this would not be the right way to go. It puts the property holding part of the business far nearer the centre of activity than do the defendants. It says that this is a top income producing property that should be retained.

When the current problem came up last December, the proceedings were settled on an interim basis that the plaintiff did not press for restraint in this area. The defendants say, "Why have things changed by April to cause the court to intervene?" The plaintiff says that the reason is that this will destroy a valuable part of the empire of the companies, that it does so with a contract which may take up to six months to complete (because of the need to register a strata plan), and the whole proceedings are likely to be disposed of within two months. There is thus no benefit to the companies in locking themselves into selling this property when in two months all will be made plain.

It seems to me generally that the current contract is one which the majority of the board could make up its mind which of two equally competing management theories should be pursued. There is merit in both. Someone has to decide, and prima facie that is the majority, unless there is some element of oppression.

Mr Coles QC for the plaintiff says that the price is rather suspect because it appears geared to what the tenant is prepared to pay, rather than any proper assessment of its market value. The defendants obviously believe that it is a proper price; the plaintiff does not.

The deal that was reached in the interlocutory hearing last December was that if the plaintiff did not pursue its attempt to get an injunction with respect to the sale of this property on early it would have the first right of refusal. It had been accorded this right initially up to 30 March and later 2
April. Under a bit of pressure this morning the second to sixth defendants agreed that they would renew that offer for a further seventy-two hours.

It seems to me that, with this renewal of the offer, the plaintiff has it in its own hands as to whether it will preserve this property pending the hearing of the suit or not. The same terms as have been offered to the tenant would include payment of $65,000 deposit, which under the contract would be invested at interest by the stakeholder, with completion to take place after the registration of the strata plan.

The great probabilities are that this will not take place until after the hearing before me in June. At that time all the rights between the parties can be adjusted, if indeed they have not settled the proceedings themselves by then.

Mr Coles QC says that is unfair in that it makes his client lock itself into purchasing one of the strata units when it would be quite possible just to freeze everything without that commitment by his client. The answer to that is that I would not make an order on the material that is put before me because I cannot see how there is oppression in this particular sale and it is open to the majority to carry on the companies' business as they think most appropriate.

Accordingly, if the plaintiff is given the opportunity of putting an end to the problems by buying at $650,000, with a ten percent deposit, it can minimise any problem about destruction of the asset, and if, indeed, $650,000 is too low a price, as it claims, it will be able to reap the reward in due course.

Accordingly, I am prepared, and do extend the order made by Simos J on 17
April 1998 up to the end of 30 April 1998. Those orders, however, are also to apply to the ninth defendant, who is the registered proprietor of the subject property.

This extension is made on the basis that the plaintiff has until noon on 30
April 1998 to elect whether to purchase the property itself on the same terms and conditions. If it does so the injunction will be unnecessary, at least until there is some further threat. If it does not, then it would seem to me that the balance of convenience favours the sale rather than restraining it.

It seems to me that there has been a win-win position for all the parties and that the costs of each party should be costs in the cause.
 * * * 
