

Regina versus Cassell Matter No Cca 60649/97 [1998] NSWSC 527 (6 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 November 1998 
REGINA versus BARRY JOHN CASSELL 
CCA 60649/97 November 1998 
Smart J, Ireland J, Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Case stated from District Court 
FILE NO/S: 60649/97 
DELIVERED: Friday, 6 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: Thursday, 18 June 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA v. Barry John CASSELL 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART, IRELAND, DUNFORD JJ 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: T Game SC, J C Papayanni 
Respondent: P Berman 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Peter C Prior & Co 
Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: S 87 OF ICAC ACT - FALSE EVIDENCE - PARTICULARS - MATERIALITY - KNOWLEDGE REQUIRED - ADMISSIBILITY OF DOCUMENTS - ADMISSIONS - WHAT MATERIAL TO BE TENDERED - PRESUMPTION OF REGULARITY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Questions answered - no error 
NO. OF PAGES: 33 
REGINA versus Barry John CASSELL 
HEADNOTE 
Charges of false evidence in a material particular under <case> of ICAC Act - adequate particulars of charges and aspect of materiality - "False or
Misleading" in <case> are disjunctive and create separate offences - knowledge of falsity to be proved but not knowledge of materiality - materiality question of law or fact - admissibility of copy documents where originals lost - admissibility of transcript when very small sections of tape recording destroyed - tender of whole of evidence relating to admissions required along with exculpatory material relating to admissions but not other material - valid hearing - presumption of regularity.

ORDERS
That each of the questions in the case stated by Judge Downs, Q.C., herein on 18 September 1997 be answered in the negative.
That the case stated with that answer be returned to Judge Downs to proceed further.

REGINA versus Barry John Cassell 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: In this case stated pursuant to [s 5B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5b.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) Barry John Cassell, the appellant, seeks to challenge various rulings given by Judge L J Downs Q.C. The effect of those rulings would be to lead to a prima facie case being found against Mr Cassell on each of four counts of knowingly giving false evidence in a material particular. The judge was hearing, de novo, four appeals under the Justices Act 1988 against convictions and sentences pursuant to <case> of the Independent Commission against Corruption Act. The appellant had pleaded guilty to each offence before a magistrate in the Local Court. On 24 July 1996, in an earlier stated case, this Court held that two of the informations were sufficient in form and that the other two informations were insufficient in form but that <case> of the Justices Act applied. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s87.html) of the [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) provides: "87 False or misleading evidence 
A person who, at a hearing before the Commission, gives evidence that is, to the knowledge of the person, false or misleading in a material particular is guilty of an indictable offence." 
The offences charged were of a kind that could be dealt with summarily.

The four informations laid against the appellant on 25 July 1991 were in the following terms, omitting formal parts: ... Barry John Cassell on 6 September 1989 and 7 September 1989, being a person giving evidence on oath at a hearing before the Independent Commission
Against Corruption, did give false evidence in a material particular, to wit, that he Barry John Cassell did not have business dealings with Michael John
Ross, such evidence being false to the knowledge of Barry John Cassell.
... Barry John Cassell on 6 September 1989 and 7 September 1989, being a person giving evidence on oath at a hearing before [ICAC], did give false evidence in a material particular, to wit that he ... did not have business dealings with Thomas Edward Paul Hogan, a councillor of Tweed Shire Council, such evidence being false to the knowledge of Barry John Cassell.
... Barry John Cassell on 6 September 1989 and 7 September 1989, being a person giving evidence on oath at a hearing before [ICAC] did give false evidence in a material particular, to wit, that Michael John Ross did not participate in the business, nor share in the profits of Consultants
Corporation (Holdings) Australia Pty Ltd, such evidence being false to the knowledge of Barry John Cassell.
... Barry John Cassell on 6 September 1989 and 7 September 1989, being a person giving evidence on oath at a hearing before [ICAC], did give false evidence in a material particular, to wit, that Thomas Edward Paul Hogan did not participate in the business, nor share in the profits of Consultants
Corporation (Holdings) Australia Pty Ltd, such evidence being false to the knowledge of Barry John Cassell.

This court earlier held that it was not necessary for the first and second informations to identify the particular business dealings relied upon in support of the allegations that the evidence of the appellant was false nor to explain why the evidence, even assuming it to be false, was material to the inquiry being conducted by ICAC. It was "plain from the information that the
Crown is alleging, first, that the appellant gave evidence to the effect that one person did not have business dealings with another person; second, that contrary to such evidence, the former person did have business dealings with the latter person; and third that this was a material matter "(per Gleeson CJ at p.6). The Court held that these informations were not defective in form or substance. The Court did not deal with the question whether the Crown should give Mr Cassell, by way of further and better particulars, information concerning the business dealings upon which the Crown relied to falsify the evidence referred to in the information.

As to the third and fourth informations the allegedly false evidence was evidence of a compound nature. Gleeson CJ at p 8 said: "... the third and fourth informations do not state whether the evidence is alleged to be false for the reason that the named individual did in truth participate in the business of the named corporation, or for the reason that the named individual did in truth share in the profits of the corporation, or for the reason that the named individual did both of those things. It was suggested by the Crown in the course of argument in the present proceedings that in truth the Crown is alleging the third of those three alternatives.
However, the information does not say so." 
It was thus held that the third and fourth informations were defective.
Section 65 of the Justices Act was then applied. That provides that no objection shall be taken or allowed to an information in respect of any alleged defect therein in substance or in form.

The Chief Justice at p 9 said: "It may well have been that the proper course for his Honour to have taken would have been to require the Crown to clarify the matter of uncertainty in the third and fourth informations." 
On the appeals coming on for further hearing before the judge, the Crown
Prosecutor advised that the Crown would be seeking to prove that Ross and
Hogan did participate in and did share in the profits of the business set out in informations. Further, the Crown Prosecutor stated that if the Crown failed to prove both the participating in the business mentioned and sharing in its profits the informations would not be made out.

The Crown stated that its case was that in the course of his evidence on 6 and September 1989 before Assistant Commissioner Roden compendious questions were asked and answers given which set up an entirely false relationship between the appellant and Ross and Hogan, Ross being referred to by the appellant and those questioning him as a Mr Prince, Michael Prince. The Crown further alleged that on 7 September 1989, the appellant, on being confronted with additional material, confessed that he had been untruthful in relation to those matters concerning Ross and Hogan. The informations were based on those admissions. Cassell's challenge to the adequacy of the particulars supplied was rejected by the judge.

Stated Case Question 1 - Did I err in holding that the Crown had supplied the appellant with proper and adequate particulars in the circumstances of the case? 
Under cover of its letter of 11 March 1994 the Crown enclosed a summary of
Cassell's evidence before ICAC, nominating the pages and a summary of the statements on those pages on which it proposed to rely. This document covered the four counts. It was divided into two sections. Once dealt with the material as to Ross and the other with the material as to Hogan. Within these sections there was no differentiation between the material relied on as to each count. A similar position applied as to the material against Hogan.
However, within each section the Crown firstly set out the initial statements made by the appellant and secondly his admissions.

As to Ross, the particulars contain a synopsis of the appellant's statements.
Those on 6 September 1989 included that Michael Prince was the recipient of company memos (from Consultants Corporation (Holdings) Australia Pty Ltd) and a consultant in company projects from January 1983 to March 1985, Mr Cassell said that he met Prince at lunch in Sydney. He could not recall what Prince looked like but remembered commissioning a report from him and contacting him by telephone. He later gave a description of Prince and thus contradicted his earlier evidence. Mr Cassell denied that "Michael Prince" was a pseudonym for someone else.

On 7 September 1989 the statements on oath of Cassell included that his recollection now was that from looking at files he was able to identify some projects on which Michael Prince worked and in conjunction with other consultants. Cassell on being referred to a document prepared in his office referring to "Michael Prince or nominee silent, 13.5% profit distribution nil voting" (his shareholding in the company) stated that his evidence regarding his relationship with Prince was not entirely false. Cassell confirmed that
Prince did have a shareholding in the company.

Cassell admitted that he knew Michael Prince by the name of Michael Ross.
Cassell acknowledged that there was reference to further payments to Michael
Prince in an amount representing 13.5% of the total distribution. Michael
Prince is described as "Subcont Consultant". Mr Cassell admitted that Michael was referred to as Michael Prince because he was a public official. Ross was able to give advice on Departmental thinking. Cassell admitted that his earlier statements that he had lost contact with Michael Prince was part of a scheme of concealment and that Michael Ross was a lifelong friend. Cassell admitted that when he described Michael Prince as a contractor engaged by Dr
Munro he knew it was false. He admitted that the decision to include Prince as a shareholder was made by September 1982 and after discussion with Vince and
Tom Hogan.

Cassell admitted that he asked Ross to join Consultants Corporation and made the agreement with him. Cassell thought that he made the suggestion to use a name other than Michael Ross because of the sensitivity of the situation.
Cassell said that he knew it was improper and possibly dishonest for a public official to be working for a private development consultant company. Cassell admitted Ross was to get shares from the consultancy business but because his involvement was improper he was to be concealed by using the name Michael
Prince. Cassell admitted that Ross had supplied information of commercial advantage. There was evidence of confidential Ministerial documents being faxed by Ross to Cassell.

Unexplained, that material is capable of establishing the offences alleged.

As to Hogan, the particulars contain a synopsis of the appellant's statements.
Those on 6 September 1989 included that Vincent Hogan had a 40% shareholding in Consultants Corporation (Holdings) Pty Ltd, was a director and introduced several projects to the company. Payments to Vince Hogan were consultancy expenses and director's expenses as a working director but most payments were to him as a shareholder by way of end of year distribution. Cassell denied any business or professional dealings with Councillor Tom Hogan and said that he was not involved in any project with him or any dealings other than on the
Industrial Development Board Cassell claimed that any dealings with Tom Hogan were entirely personal, social and quasi political.

Cassell said that payments of over $4000 were made by Consultants Corporation to Tom Hogan between July 1983 and June 1986. Some payments were contributions to Hogan's political campaign. Payments to Tom Hogan would benefit the company's business and be an expense to goodwill. There was payment to T Hogan as expenses for introducing people for the purpose of Cassell's business.
Cassell confirmed that there was no business relationship with Tom Hogan.
Those business documents of Cassell sent to Thomas Edward Paul Hogan were for transmission to Vince Hogan who was on holidays. Cassell denied that memos were sent to Tom Hogan because he was involved in business deals with Cassell.
Cassell denied that Tom Hogan had anything to do with the shareholding of
Consultants Corporation and confirmed that Tom Hogan was neither a shareholder nor a director.

Cassell was referred to a document containing the statement "Vincent Hogan (anors silent)" and confirmed "anors" referred to others. Cassell said that the reference to the silent partner is to Tom Hogan. Cassell said that Tom
Hogan was to get shares from the consultancy business but because Tom Hogan was a Tweed Shire Councillor his involvement had to be covered by the use of his brother Vince. Cassell stated that he was aware that part of the payment of money to Vince Hogan went to Tom Hogan. He helped in respect of matters before Tweed Shire Council by giving planning advice in relation to Merrifield and Sea Ranch projects. The company received fees from developers which formed part of the company's profits and which were distributed inter alia to Vince
Hogan. Cassell confirmed that Vince was in the company to cover up for Tom
Hogan.

Again, this material, if unexplained, is capable of establishing that Cassell had committed the offences alleged.

Cassell sought further particulars. On 14 October 1994 the Solicitor for
Public Prosecutions wrote: "...

The summary of evidence given by your client to the ICAC on the relevant dates indicates those parts of his evidence upon which the Crown relies in support of the allegations [in the informations] 
In relation of your questions regarding materiality, enclosed herewith are the terms of reference of the ICAC investigation." 
In response to a telephone request from Cassell's solicitor, the Solicitor for
Public Prosecutions, advised by letter of 25 November 1994 that in each case in support of the allegation that Cassell gave false evidence the Crown relied upon his initial denials and subsequent admissions and the terms of reference of 3 April 1989 and 15 June 1989.

The reference of 3 April 1989 was headed "General Scope and Purpose of 
Investigation". It read: "TO INVESTIGATE: the conduct of former and present councillors and employees of the Tweed Shire
Council in the period from January 1982 to date: - in the exercise of their official functions; - in the use made by them of information acquired in the course of their official functions; and the conduct of persons in any way connected with or involved in the above.

TO ASCERTAIN whether any such conduct amounts to corrupt conduct within the meaning of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s7.html) of the [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/)." 
On 15 June 1989 the Commission amended and widened the General Scope and
Purpose of the Investigation. The Amended Reference read: "TO INVESTIGATE: the conduct of former and present councillors and employees of the Tweed Shire
Council, and of other public officials concerned with the use and development of land in the Northern Rivers region of New South Wales, in the period from
January 1982 to date: - in the exercise of their official functions; - in the use made by them of information acquired in the course of their official functions; and the conduct of persons in any way connected with or involved in the above.

TO ASCERTAIN whether any such conduct amounts to corrupt conduct within the meaning of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s7.html) of the [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/)." 
Significantly, the investigation was extended from the conduct of former and present councillors to include the conduct of other public officials concerned with the use and development of land in the Northern Rivers Region of New
South Wales.

The letter of 25 November 1994 from the Solicitor for Public Prosecutions also advised, by way of matters relied upon,:
Business relationships and profit sharing between "public officials" (as defined in the Act) and others who were concerned with the use and development of land in the Northern Rivers region of New South Wales (into which category your client fell because of his business) clearly falls within the ambit of "conduct" - (as used in the terms of reference) and particularly relates to considerations affecting the ascertainment of "corrupt conduct".

The letter specified in relation to each count the pages of the transcript upon which the Crown relied.

The Crown case was straight forward and simple and in each case based upon the evidence given by Cassell. The pages of the transcript relied upon were specified and limited in number. This was the evidence relied upon by the
Crown as to the commission of the offences. The falsehoods stood out. Proof of formal matters remained.

Cassell complained that despite the request in his solicitors' letter of 28
September 1994 the Crown had not advised what it relied upon as to each count in respect of materiality.

Cassell submitted that the particulars supplied did not identify whether what was relied upon was a single statement which was false or a number of questions and answers which in combination amounted to a single statement in substance to the effect alleged which was false.

Cassell contended that the particulars were inadequate to identify in what respect the allegations were said to be material and that the particulars referred to parts of the evidence some of which was allegedly false and some of which was allegedly true. It was submitted that if the allegations referred to one false statement to the exclusion of the others or to a number of alleged false statements it would have been necessary to support the allegations by one count or a number of counts as the case may be.

In Stanton v. Abernathy [(1990) 19 NSWLR 656] at 662
Gleeson CJ, with whom Priestley and Meagher JJA agreed, said: "As King CJ observed in R v. Traino [(1987) 45 SASR 473]; [27 A
Crim R 271](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=27%20A%20Crim%20R%20271 "View LawCiteRecord" ), in the context of perjury, a number of utterances made on oath by an individual concerning a given subject may or may not, depending upon the circumstances, constitute a single false statement or a number of false statements or, of course, a number of statements some of which are false and some of which are not. Each false statement involves a separate crime of perjury. Considerations of commonsense and fairness enter into a judgment on the question of how many statements ought to be taken to have resulted from a number of utterances." 
In the present case the Crown has relied upon the effect of Cassell's evidence as contained in a limited number of pages to support its allegation in the information that Cassell said that he did not have business dealings with
Michael Ross and its allegation in the information that Cassell said that Ross did not participate in the business nor share in the profits of Consultants
Corporation (Holdings) Australia Pty Ltd. The Crown relied on similar allegations in relation to Hogan. The Crown then relied upon a series of answers of Cassell to demonstrate the falsity of what it alleged Cassell had said. This is permissible. In the present case the Crown formulated the substance of the false evidence on which it relied and stated it in the information. See and contrast Stanton v. Abernathy at 672. This must be particularised if not stated in the information. The particulars revealed the pages in the transcript and the answers in the transcript on which that formulation was based.

Cassell further submitted that the material particulars in respect of which the evidence was false were inadequately particularised by simply referring to the terms of reference. It was contended that the questions as to materiality were bound up in respect of who were "public officials" and their position and what parts of sections 7 and 8 as to corrupt conduct were relied upon and that no information was given in this respect nor supplied prior to the hearing.

Cassell submitted that the materiality in terms of the reference must relate to something that Hogan did or might have done in relation to his functions as a councillor on the Tweed Shire Council. Telling lies about some other business deal would have nothing to do with the reference or the
Investigation. It was submitted that Ross did not have anything to do in any direct and tangible way with the Tweed Shire Council so that it was necessary to show how Ross tied in with corruption by officers of the Tweed Shire
Council. It was not self evident. At no stage were particular paragraphs specified as those upon which reliance was placed as to materiality.

The references made it clear that an investigation was being held into the conduct of councillors and employees of Tweed Shire Council and other public officials concerned with the use and development of land in the Northern
Rivers Region in the exercise of their official functions and in the use made by them of information acquired in their official functions and the conduct of persons in any way connected with or involved in such matters. The purpose was to ascertain whether there was any corrupt conduct. Under <case> of the Act Ross was a public official. The definition of corrupt conduct under <case> is exceedingly wide.

Cassell was involved as a consultant to developers and in Consultants
Corporation (Holdings) Australia Pty Ltd which was a consultant to developers.
They were operating in the area of Tweed Shire Council and elsewhere in New
South Wales.

The relationship between them and Ross and them and Hogan was obviously material. Ross was an executive officer with the Department of the Environment and Hogan was a councillor. The concealed relationships had to be uncovered.
Cassell initially tried to maintain the facades which had been created.

As Gleeson CJ observed at p 7 of his judgment in round 1 of this case in this
Court it was "worth passing mention" that Cassell "at one stage in these proceedings thought he knew enough about what he was being charged with to plead guilty and a Magistrate thought he knew enough about the case to sentence the appellant".

In the simple and obvious circumstances of the present case I would reject
Cassell's particulars argument.

Stated Case Question 2(a) - Did I err in holding that the informations were good in law in that the words false or misleading as they appear in Section 87 are disjunctive and not conjunctive.

Cassell submitted that Section 87 created one offence and that the section had to be read as though the words were false and misleading. The words are not synonymous.

There are cases in which the word "or" has been held to mean "and". On the other hand in Field versus Hopkinson 1944 1KB 42 at 43 Viscount Caldecote CJ said "if an enactment forbids the dong of Act A or Act B, it creates two offences and a conviction on one information charging both in the alternative is bad for uncertainty." It is a question of construction whether one offence or two offences are created.

In an investigation into whether there has been corrupt conduct it is important that a witness speak the whole truth and that his evidence not be misleading. In my opinion the word "or" should be given its ordinary meaning as this better reflects the objects of the legislation. Consequently, I think that the section creates two offences.

I agree with the conclusion reached by the judge.

Stated Case Question 2(b) - Did I err in law in holding that the informations were good in that the Crown was not required to prove the appellant's knowledge of the materiality of the particular.

Cassell submitted that on its true construction <case> required that the person giving evidence must know that the evidence alleged to be false dealt with "a material particular".

Cassell submitted that materiality under <case> was a question of fact and not a question of law to be decided by the judge. The Crown contended that materiality was a question of law to be decided by the judge. It was common ground that if materiality was a question of law for the judge, the Crown did not have to prove that Cassell knew that the matter on which he gave false evidence was material.

By [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s327.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) it is provided that on a prosecution for perjury the question of materiality is for the judge. Perjury is committed by any person who in or in connection with any judicial proceeding makes any false statement on oath concerning any matter which is material to the proceeding knowing the statement to be false or not believing it to be true.

In Traino [(1987) 27 A Crim R 271]
Jacobs J at 277 drew a distinction between a charge of perjury and a statutory misdemeanour under <case> of the Oaths Act (S Aust) of wilfully and corruptly making any declaration by virtue of the Part of the Act containing <case> knowing that declaration to be untrue in any material particular. In the earlier decision of Davies [(1974) 7 SASR 375] Wells J in a dissenting judgment, treated perjury and the statutory misdemeanour as analogous and regarded materiality as a question for the judge in both cases.

ICAC does not conduct a judicial proceeding. It conducts an investigation in the course of which it holds hearings if it thinks that that is desirable for the purpose of an investigation (S 30(1)). Section 30(4) provides that a person appearing before the Commission at a hearing is entitled to be informed of the general scope and purpose of the hearing.

In my opinion it would be difficult for a jury to determine whether particular statements made at a hearing by the Commission were relevant or material to the investigation which ICAC was carrying out to ascertain whether there was corrupt conduct. Corrupt conduct is very widely defined and the provisions of the Act are extraordinary. In some cases it would not be possible to deal with the question of materiality without a knowledge of the Act, its objects and provisions and an appreciation of the Investigation. I am of the view that the question of materiality in a prosecution under <case> is one of law. The reasons given by Wells J in Davies at 387-398 for holding that materiality is a question of law would apply, making all necessary changes, in the present case. What is involved differs markedly from a prosecution under <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) where a person, with intent to obtain a financial advantage, makes any statement which he knows to be false or misleading in a material particular, commits an offence. That is a relatively confined exercise.

If I am wrong, I would hold as a matter of construction of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s87.html) in its context in the ICAC Act 1988 and taking the objects of that Act into account that the Crown does not have to prove that the accused knew that he was making statements on material matters.

In Stanton v. Abernathy (No 2) [(1991) 53 A Crim R 241] this Court was concerned with a prosecution under <case> of the State Drug
Crime Commission Act 1985 . That section was similar in substance to but not identical with <case> of the ICAC Act. The Drug Crime Commission conducted investigations and was empowered to hold hearings. In discussing the matters which had to be proved under <case> of the State Drug Crime Commission Act
Gleeson CJ stated that the Crown had to prove that at the time the statement was made the appellant knew it was not true. There was no suggestion that the
Crown had to prove that the witness knew he was making statements on a material point. A witness may not know that he was making a statement on a material point or what points were material in the circumstances. He may be aware or deduce or sense that some matters on which he is being questioned are important and that other matters are not important or peripheral. There is nothing unreasonable about expecting a witness not to knowingly make untrue statements while giving evidence. There is a touch of unreality about a witness who is being questioned, pausing to consider whether the question relates to a material particular and, depending on his assessment as to materiality, telling the truth or lying. Requiring the Crown to prove that a witness knew that he was giving evidence on a material particular is artificial and unfairly onerous on the Crown. It is not required by the section.

The judge reached the correct decision.

Stated Case Question 3(a) - Did I err in holding that the following evidence was admissible as to the terms of reference A1 and A2 (3 April 1989 and 15 June 1989 respectively). By this question the judge was raising the issue whether the photostat copies of the terms of reference being Exhibits A1 and A2 tendered by the Crown at the hearing before him were admissible.

The judge accepted the evidence of Thora Susan Simes, Executive Assistant and
Associate to the Commissioner of ICAC since 1992. Over objection the judge admitted photostats of the references of 3 April 1989 and 15 June 1989 on the following evidence: 
She carried out a search of the records of ICAC to locate the originals of
Exhibits A1 & A2 but was not able to locate them.

She identified the signature of the Commissioner, Mr Ian Temby on these exhibits.

The originals of similar documents were now kept in the property section and registered but she could not say where the originals of the documents were kept at the time.

She did not at any time compare the photostat documents with the originals.

Exhibits A1 and A2 were photostats of photostats seen in the office.

Cassell pointed out that there was no evidence as to when the photostats were made or by whom. Cassell submitted that the evidence did not establish that a comprehensive or strict search had been made and that the original had been lost or destroyed. Further, the original copy must be produced. If this is not done a copy of a copy cannot be admitted without evidence as to it being a true copy and in the same terms as the original.

It appeared from the transcript of her evidence annexed to the stated case that before an investigation commences terms of reference are prepared. She had seen the originals of Exhibits A1 and A2 at the very beginning of the hearing. She said that they "searched files, everything" and could not find them. The photostat kept in the office is in the property register section.
She had never compared this photostat with the original because they could not find the latter. She said that the photostats tendered were exactly like the photostats held in the office.

Section 34 of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ea189880/) , which applied provided: "When any writing has been copied by means of any machine or press which produces a fac-simile impression or copy of such writing, such impression or copy shall, upon proof to the satisfaction of the Court that the same was taken or made from the original writing by means of such machine or press as aforesaid, be evidence of such writing without any proof that such impression or copy was compared with the said original, and without any notice to produce such original." 
It is apparent that there were original terms of reference and that photostats of these were made. Photostats are produced by a machine. The first photostats must have been taken from the original documents. The Commissioner's signature has been verified. Subsequent photostat copies have been produced. In an organisation with many files and where there is a substantial amount of papers and documents a document is effectively lost when after a thorough search it cannot be found.

In my opinion the judge was correct in admitting Exhibits A1 and A2, being the references of 3 April and 15 June 1989.

Stated Case Question 3(b) - Did I err in holding that the following evidence was admissible the transcript annexures A, C, E, F, H, J, L and M being Exhibits C1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

This question concerns the admission of pages of the transcripts of the tapes of the hearing before ICAC. The evidence given by Cassell was recorded using 3 sets of tapes on 3 decks of the recording equipment. There was one deck for the master tapes and two decks for the "ten minute" tapes. The master tapes had two sides, each of which ran for 45 minutes. They were normally removed and replaced after both sides had been filled (or substantially filled). The master tapes were kept by ICAC. Sometimes there was a short gap in the evidence recorded on the master tapes as they were turned from one side to the other or removed and replaced. The gap in the evidence recorded on the master tapes as they were being turned or changed varied from a few words to three lines. The master tapes and the "ten minute" tapes recorded concurrently. The latter recorded the few words missed on the master tapes as well as the rest of the evidence. The "ten minute" tapes were capable of recording for longer periods and sometimes for as long as 45 minutes. The "ten minute" tapes were replaced about every 10 minutes (or sometimes longer) and taken to the typists for the preparation of a written transcript. This enabled the written transcript to be prepared promptly. After transcription, the "ten minute" tapes were eventually re-used.

The contest was as to the admission of pages of the transcript of 6 and 7
September 1989 containing words not on the master tapes but on the "ten minutes" tapes which filled in the gaps in the master tapes.

The judge accepted the evidence of Kevin Hunter, employed by ICAC from 17
April 1989 with part of his duties including those of hearing room officer, that: he was present on 6 and 7 September 1989 when Cassell gave evidence.
 in 1994 he listened to audio cassette tapes (the master tapes) and identified 6 tapes of those days and the voices on them as those of Assistant
Commissioner Roden, Mr Toomey (counsel assisting) and Cassell.
 he marked with a green highlighter those words or lines on the pages of the transcript of 6 and 7 September 1989 which were not on the master tapes.

The judge accepted the evidence of Jennifer Anne Thrift, court reporter and monitor assigned by Spark and Cannon to ICAC between May 1989 and July 1992 that: during the changeover of one master tape of 90 minutes duration a "ten minute" tape would record what was spoken during the changeover.
 the master tape (that is the master tapes used) represented the whole day's hearing apart from the periods when the master tape was being changed.
 the transcripts of the hearings were prepared from the "ten minute" tapes not the master tape.
 she typed Exhibit C1 and C2 being transcript pages 2811 and 2858 of 7
September 1989 (after listening to the tape).

The judge accepted the evidence of Jean Mary Fourie who was employed by Spark and Cannon as part of a team for ICAC on 6 September 1989 transcribing the proceedings taking place. From the ten minute audio tapes she typed Exhibits
C3 and C4 being transcript pages 2721 and 2770 of 6 September 1989.

The judge accepted the evidence of Susan Mary Mujambi who was similarly employed on 6 and 7 September 1989 transcribing the proceedings. From the ten minute audio tapes she typed Exhibits C5, C6 and C7 being transcript pages and 2785 of 6 September 1989 and transcript page 2826 of 7 September
Mrs Mugambi explained that the transcript was typed from the tapes or cassettes using ear phones. The transcript is then checked by a checker. If there are any mistakes the transcript is corrected. She was confident that what she typed was correct.

The judge accepted the evidence of Rodney Edmond Grimwood who was similarly employed. He transcribed and typed from the "ten minute" tapes Exhibit C8 being transcript page 2875 of 7 September 1989.

Cassell contended that the transcripts of evidence of the tapes was not admissible. Reliance was placed on Conwell v. Tapfield [1981 1 NSWLR .] In that case the issue was whether a transcript of a telephone conversation should be admitted along with the original transcript of the conversations.

We are dealing with a transcript of an official public hearing conducted under the ICAC Act by an Assistant Commissioner with the evidence being officially recorded at the Commission's direction. The transcript of the investigation was lengthy and had reached 2800 pages by 7 September 1989. The master tapes were available and tendered. The "ten minute" tapes are not available due to re-use. The best evidence available of the few words or lines missing is contained on the transcript pages and that has a high degree of reliability.
It was transcribed and typed promptly and checked. The various employees of
Spark and Cannon have been called and verified their work.

I think that the transcripts were admissible upon the basis that they are the best available evidence of what was said and highly reliable. The Crown contended they were also admissible as a business record under [Part
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ea189880/index.html#p2c) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ea189880/) . See Weir v. Wallis, Wood J, unreported 30 October 1990. Each of the employees was a qualified person, simply recording the statements that person heard Cassell make or dictate. A "document" includes any record of information. However, s CG(3) provides that a statement made in connection with any investigation leading to a criminal proceeding is not admissible under <case>. I entertain some doubt whether the pages were admissible under [Part
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ea189880/index.html#p2c) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ea189880/) and I prefer to base my view on the former ground.

Exhibits C1-C8 inclusive were correctly admitted.

Stated Case Question 4 - Did I err in law in holding that it was not necessary to tender the whole of the evidence given by the appellant in respect of the investigation and hearing held in this matter.

Cassell complained that the whole of the evidence of the appellant in the
Investigation had not been tendered. It was not in issue that the appellant had given evidence on 5, 23 and 29 October 1989. Reliance was placed upon R v. McGregor [51 A Crim R 338] but that dealt with confessions.

In Jack v. Smail & Anor <case>; [1905 2 CLR 684] the only evidence adduced by the trustee in insolvency, upon whom the onus of proof lay, was the deposition of the insolvent's wife.
Griffiths CJ said at 695: "But, being used by the trustees as an admission, the trustees must take the deposition as they find it. They cannot select a fragment and say it bears out their case, and reject all the rest that makes against their case. They must take the deposition as a whole. That is the rule in criminal proceedings, and it was the rule in the Court of Chancery." 
At 708 Barton J said: "One essential principle is that, where an admission is put in evidence either in the civil or the criminal jurisdiction, the party relying on it is bound to take it as a whole, and cannot take those parts which are in his favour and reject the rest. It is clear this statement of the appellant is evidence as an admission, and upon that principle the whole is evidence as an admission, that is to say, the effect of any portion of it cannot be taken without the qualifications upon it contained in the remainder." 
The Crown was entitled to tender that portion of Cassell's evidence which was relevant to the prosecutions. It was not entitled to tender other evidence which was not so relevant. If Cassell gave any evidence that was exculpatory or watered down or affected or qualified the admissions on which the Crown relied, the Crown was bound to tender that material. Any material relating to admissions whether comprised in a statement or record of interview, affidavit, deposition or transcript must be taken as a whole.

The correct procedure is for the accused, upon the tender by the Crown of alleged admissions, to tell the judge, if it be the case, of other parts of his evidence which should be tendered to give the whole picture so far as the admissions go. The judge then rules in accordance with the principles in Jack v. Smail & Anor. If the judge is of the opinion that other parts of
Cassell's evidence ought reasonably to be tendered by the Crown so as to give the whole picture as to the admissions and to enable the admissions to be taken as a whole and the Crown does not wish to tender these additional parts the Crown tender without those additional parts should be rejected. Cassell does not seem to have told the judge of any parts of his remaining evidence which he wished to be tendered so that the "admissions" could be taken as a whole.

I do not think that the judge erred as the matter was argued before him. If counsel for Cassell did not follow the procedure mentioned it will be for the judge to decide what future course should be followed.

Stated Case Question 5 - Did I err in holding that the evidence was sufficient to prove that there had been a valid hearing under the ICAC Act in which evidence had been given by the appellant sufficient to support a conviction for an offence under Section 87 of the Act.

Cassell submitted that as the hearing was not conducted by the Commissioner evidence was required that another officer of the Commission had authority in the circumstances (s 4(4)). Cassell submitted that section 30(2) of the Act required "another officer" to be an Assistant Commissioner as determined by the Commissioner and that there was no evidence of such a determination.
Cassell submitted that there was no evidence that the Commission or the
Commissioner had delegated any of its or his functions. Further, there was no evidence of any authority given by the person presiding to administer an oath.

Evidence was not required of these matters. Section 6 provides for the appointment of an Assistant Commissioner and for him to exercise the functions conferred or imposed on an Assistant Commissioner under the Act. Section 30 provides for a hearing to be conducted by the Commissioner or by an Assistant
Commissioner as determined by the Commissioner. There was evidence of Mr Roden acting as an Assistant Commissioner, presiding at a hearing in a hearing room of the Commission and conducting a hearing and the Commission's reporting service of Spark & Cannon, providing the tape and the transcript. The master tapes were retained by the Commission. Under <case> Mr Roden as an
Assistant Commissioner could administer on oath. It would be in order if the
Commission's hearing room, officer and the witness uttered the requisite words of the oath or affirmation before and in the presence of the Assistant
Commissioner.

The presumption of regularity applies.

Cassell submitted that there was no evidence of compliance with <case> & on each of the days on which the hearing proceeded. I do not think that evidence of these matters is required. They do not affect the validity of the hearing; at most the provisions are directory.

In my opinion none of the challenges to the validity of the ICAC Investigation and hearing has been made good.

I propose that each of the questions in the case stated be answered in the negative and that the case stated be returned to the District Court with that answer.

IRELAND J: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J for the reasons given by his Honour. 
DUNFORD J: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J for the reasons given by his Honour. * * * 
