

Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus A I Georgievski [1996] NSWSC 12 (16
January 1996) 
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA versus ANNETTE IRENE GEORGIEVSKI /92 
TUESDAY 16 JANUARY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Annette Irene Georgievski has applied for a stay of execution of a writ of possession issued pursuant to the judgment of Mr Justice Bruce on 1 December 1995. His Honour declined to grant relief under the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) in respect of a mortgage Mrs Georgievski had executed over her home at 2B Muneela Place, Yowie Bay.

There are two salient facts. The bank is owed in excess of $750,000 and the home is said to have a value in the order of $500,000, so that any delay is critical to the bank and it will incur further losses as a result of delay. On the other hand, the property is Mrs Georgievski's home and if she is evicted that will cause hardship and probably damage if she ultimately succeeded on the hearing of her appeal.

When the matter came on before me on very short notice, Mr Beasley for the bank applied for an adjournment so that the bank could further consider the matter and sought a period of about one week. I indicated to Mr Beasley that I would probably grant the adjournment but I was reluctant to do so because the appropriate course in this case was for there to be an expedited hearing of the appeal so that the substantive appeal could be resolved at an early date and that a similar approach may well be taken in a week's time. Mr Beasley appreciated the reasons for such an approach and that it would save costs. Mr
Dodson indicated that his client was prepared to undertake to the Court to move the Court of Appeal at a very early date (the beginning of term) for an expedited hearing and to prosecute the appeal promptly. I indicated to Mr
Beasley that if the Court of Appeal declined to grant expedition it would be appropriate to reconsider the question of a stay.

Accordingly, upon the undertakings of the defendant by her counsel to the
Court to file by Friday 19 January 1996 the motion seeking an expedited hearing in the Court of Appeal with the earliest return date which that Court will allocate and to prosecute the appeal diligently, I grant a stay of execution of the writ of possession pending further order of this Court or the
Court of Appeal. The costs of this application are to abide the costs of the appeal.
 * * * 
