

Application of Barry Clifford Douglas Matter No 3479/98 [1998] NSWSC 388 (1 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 `APPLICATION OF BARRY CLIFFORD DOUGLAS` `3479/98` `1 September 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were brought by Mr Douglas, a person who is facing trial commencing next Monday in the District Court of New South Wales on a serious criminal matter. He has retained Mr Bruce Miles, a very experienced advocate, who has been appearing before this Court and the District Court for about fifty years, with extensive criminal experience to defend him. Mr Miles is a person who is a legal practitioner who holds a current practising certificate as a solicitor and barrister. 
It would seem from what I have been told that Mr Miles has the status of an employed solicitor, rather than one in practice on his own account.

It is clear that what happens in practice in both this Court and the District
Court is that legal practitioners who practice as barristers appear before this Court and the District Court wearing bar jacket, robe, bar tie or jabot and wig, but solicitors wear lounge suits or day dress.

The argument is that the Legal Profession Amendment (National Practising
Certificates) Act 1996 has altered that situation. That Act, which was designed to produce uniformity in the legal profession within Australia and to enable persons admitted to practice in one State or Territory to practice in any other State or Territory, redefined the terms "barrister" and "solicitor".
The term "solicitor" was redefined, so far as local legal practitioners were concerned, as "legal practitioner who holds a current practising certificate as a solicitor and barrister ... ".

The argument is that the Act converted solicitors into a new being, called a "solicitor and barrister" and, as barristers wore robes in the District Court and the Supreme Court, when the solicitor and barrister was carrying out advocacy functions he or she was not only entitled but bound to wear the robes of a barrister.

However, when one looks at the statute one does not see that it works that magic at all. As Mr Brown, who appeared as amicus curiae for the Law Society submitted, when one looks at the Act and its purpose of introducing national practising certificates and employing a common terminology throughout
Australia, one sees merely a change of nomenclature and not a change of the rights of people who formerly were solicitors and formerly were barristers.
The Act merely renames solicitors and does not elide the difference between barristers and solicitors. As Mr Brown submits the nature of a barrister and the nature of a solicitor and their work is quite different.

Whilst the work is different, it is quite clear that many of the functions of a barrister and many of the functions of a solicitor mean that they would in fact be doing the same work from time to time.

Mr Perram, who appeared for the Bar Association, said that the basic differences between a barrister and solicitor are what is known as the cab rank rule and the sole practitioner rule. Essentially, the cab rank rule is that, subject to agreed exceptions, a person who is a barrister is bound to accept a brief for anybody, including a person whose views he or she may hold in complete contempt.

It has been one of the basic principles of liberty of a subject that people who are unpopular and unattractive or who espouse unpopular and unattractive philosophies are entitled to be represented by a barrister.

On the other hand, solicitors have taken the view that their work cannot be done unless the cab rank rule does not apply to them. They must be able to specialize in certain areas. They must be able to choose their client and to prefer one client to another. Both of those philosophies are recognised as being valid within their limits.

The other rule, the sole practitioner rule, is that a barrister must be independent. He or she cannot be employed by anybody nor be in partnership. On the other hand, a solicitor usually relies on his or her partners and employees and the collegiality within the firm for the firm's effectiveness.

Again, we need both and both in their proper place mean we have a more solid justice system in New South Wales. Whilst both barrister and solicitor have equality in rights of appearance there are essential differences between them.

It is hard to see how the Act either intended to or did alter those distinctions. History shows that there have been at least two attempts in the last century in New South Wales to amalgamate fully the two branches of the profession and on each occasion there was a retreat from that position because of the demonstrated advantages of the present system in this State. It would be quite strange if by a mere change of nomenclature that had been effected which had not been effected directly.

Indeed, in his submissions Mr Corr for the applicant was virtually forced to admit that the cab rank rule would need to apply to a person who was exercising his or her right to appear in a court as a barrister, even though having the status of a solicitor and barrister. This view was not accepted by the solicitor for the Law Society, and I think rightly so.

It also is significant that under the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) there are two sets of rules mandated by [ss
G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s38g.html) and [38H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s38h.html) respectively which affect on one hand barristers and on the other hand barristers and solicitors.

Accordingly, apart from procedural problems the plaintiff has not made out his case.

This means that I need not spend as much time on the procedural aspect of the case as I might otherwise have to spend.

It is a fascinating historical exercise to try and work out how the system of robes in New South Wales came about and who can change the present system. A brief history is given by Judge Peter Mason QC in his article "Robing for the
Future" [(1978) 128 New Law Journal 523], which appears to be fairly accurate, so far as the English position is concerned.

It would seem that the Australian courts just adopted the English system last century and then adjusted the clothing for local requirements. When there was a change from bar ties to jabots, what seems to have happened is that the judges of the superior court as a collegiate body indicated that they would see counsel in jabots instead of bar ties and the other courts followed suit.
This would seem to indicate that the power is a power in the courts, query the superior court, to be exercised by all the judges. Just how the judges internally exercise that power is a matter for them.

However, what is the position in the District Court? It is unnecessary to go into this matter fully. It has been put that the District Court does not have inherent jurisdiction. This is so sub modo. However, as I said in R V
Frugtniet (CCA) 25 June, 1998, unreported, all courts including the District
Court have inherent powers in the sense of all powers reasonably required to protect their dignity, independence and integrity. In particular, the District
Court has jurisdiction to deal with its own status and to make sure that proceedings before it are carried on with due efficiency and due decorum.

Mr Perram puts that this is really a matter for the District Court. He agrees that there may be situations where an inferior court so exercises its powers that the principle of justice generally is affected, in which case this Court may need to exercise its supervisory jurisdiction over the inferior court or its supervisory jurisdiction over the profession, but unless one gets to that type of case then this Court just leaves matters to the independent courts to carry out their own work in accordance with the procedures that seem to them best.

He further says that because of that, this Court should not make any declarations that would affect the procedure of the District Court.

This seems to be correct and it seems that this sort of matter is one for the court affected and certainly the dicta in Russell versus Russell <case>; [(1976) 134 CLR 495] seems to confirm this.

Mr Perram's proposition was reinforced by reference to what Megarry J said in St Edmundsbury and Ipswich Diocesan Board of Finance versus Clark [[1973] Ch ] at 330, that the Court may dispense with robes, even when they are traditional, for inappropriate cases. In one's own practice one knows this is true, such as the situation that Mr Corr mentioned when in south western New South Wales the temperature reaches 40 degrees. Mr Perram says that when one sees the stark reality of the proposition put by Megarry J one sees the logical refutation of the plaintiff's case. I think that that is right.

In reply Mr Corr said that this is a serious matter involving the liberty of a subject. I agree that it is a serious matter and that is why I asked for, and was grateful for, the assistance of advocates for the New South Wales Bar
Association and the Law Society. However, whichever way one looks at this case the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief that he seeks and the summons must be dismissed.
 * * * 
