

Director of Public Prosecutions versus Serratore Nos. Ca 40642/95 and Crd /95 Criminal Law and Procedure - Statutes - Human Rights -
Telecommunications - Law Reform [1995] NSWSC 154 (14 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), COLE JA(2) AND SANTOW AJA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 9 October 1995 #DATE 11:10:1995 #ADD 14:11:1995 
Counsel for the Claimant (DPP):    A M Blackmore 
Solicitors for the Claimant (DPP): 
S E O'Connor, Solicitor for
Public Prosecutions 
Counsel for the Opponent (Accused, applicant for bail):          R S Toner 
Solicitors for the Opponent (Accused, applicant for bail):     Macedone
Christie Willis and Solari
ORDER
Declare that the application by John Serratore for bail is not a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence within the meaning of <case>(a) of the [Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ta1979350/) (Cth); and
Order that the proceedings be returned to the Criminal Division of the
Supreme Court for the consideration of the application by John Serratore for bail, conformably with the opinion of this Court.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P These proceedings are before the Court pursuant to an order of Smart
J, sitting in the Bails List of the Criminal Division of the Supreme Court.
His Honour, in removing the proceedings under [Part 12](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ta1979350/index.html#p12) [Rule 2(l)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ta1979350/s2.html) SCR, did so at the request of the Director of Public Prosecutions (the claimant) (DPP). Cf
Sivakumar versus Patterson and Anor [(1984) 2 NSWLR 78 (CA)], 81. The proceedings concern Mr John Serratore (the opponent). He has been charged with murder. He applied for bail. Smart J concluded that: "Substantially the bail application would appear to depend on the admissibility of... intercepted material... " 
Recorded pursuant to the [Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ta1979350/) (Cth) (the
Act)."
In earlier proceedings involving the opponent, at a time when he was charged under [s 26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s26.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), with the offence of soliciting to murder Levine J concluded, on his construction of the Act, that the record of intercepted material could not be received by the Court. At that stage, his
Honour rejected the tender of the record of the intercepted conversation and proceeded to grant bail. Smart J, whilst respecting the principle of comity with the decision of Levine J, was inclined to reach a different view on the point. This fact led him to accede to request of the DPP for a reference of the question to this Court.
The Court returned the application, and heard it, with maximum expedition.
Clearly the issue which it presented is one of general importance. The reference should therefore be accepted by the Court and the point of controversy determined.
First, however,
I will state, in a little more detail, the factual background.
The DPP's case is that, whilst he was at school, the opponent met and formed a personal relationship with Ms Frances Tizzone. The couple planned to wed in early 1994. However, their relationship allegedly deteriorated. Ms
Tizzone was then attending lectures at Macquarie University. An apprehended violence order was issued by the Local Court at Burwood on 18 November 1994 directed to the opponent. This notwithstanding, for a time the relationship between the couple was resumed. They exchanged correspondence. However, by
March 1995 the relationship had again deteriorated. An arrangement was allegedly made for them to meet again on 29 March 1995 at the Strathfield
Railway Station. It was on that day that Ms Tizzone was seen alive for the last time. On 2 April 1995 her body was discovered at French's Forest, dumped in bushland.
On 17 May , the opponent was interviewed by police. The interview was electronically recorded. He was then charged with one count of This charge arose out of an alleged conversation between the opponent and a friend of his to whom, it was alleged, he had, in October , confided an intention to murder Ms Tizzone. The opponent was refused bail by police following that charge. On 18 May 1995 he was again refused bail by Mr Clearly LCM at Manly
Local Court. On 26 May 1995 bail was also refused by Mr Moore LCM. On 14 June bail was also refused by Mr Clearly LCM. An application for bail from the
Supreme Court was heard by Levine J on 29 June 1995. The
DPP opposed the grant of bail. He sought to rely, inter alia, on a statement of Detective Jennifer
Rutledge. That statement contained an outline of an alleged telephone conversation, said to have been recorded as a result of a warrant issued under the Act. The record of the conversation was relied upon to support the DPP's contention that, if released on bail, the opponent would interfere with
Crown witnesses.
Levine J declined-to receive evidence of the record of the telephone conversation. He then proceeded to grant bail to the opponent.
On 20 September 1995, the opponent was arrested and charged with murder.
Police again refused bail. On September 1995, Mr Simpson LCM, at Central
Local Court, also refused bail. Once again, the opponent filed an application for bail from the Supreme Court. It was that application which was heard by
Smart J on 5 October 1995 occasioning the removal of the proceedings into this
Court. 
Relevant provisions of the Interception Act
In order to understand the ruling of Levine J, questioned by
Smart J, it is necessary to set out the relevant provisions of the Act. Its long title indicates that its purpose is: "To prohibit the interception of telecommunications except where authorised in special circumstances or for the purpose of tracing the location of callers in emergencies, and for related purposes. " 
The governing provision is <case> under the heading "Telecommunications not to be intercepted": "7(1) A person shall not:
Intercept;
Authorise, suffer or permit another person to intercept; or
Do any act or thing that will enable him or another person to intercept; a communication passing over a telecommunications system.
Subsection (1) does not apply to or in relation to:
The interception of a communication under a warrant." 
Where an intercept has been authorised by warrant issued under the Act, strict control on the use of the intercepted information is established by <case> of the Act: "63 Subject to this Part, a person shall not ...
communicate to another person, make use of, or make a record of; or give in evidence in a proceeding;
Lawfully obtained information or information obtained by intercepting a communication in contravention of subsection (1)." 
By <case> of the Act it is provided: "67 An officer of an agency may, for a permitted purpose, or permitted purposes, in relation to the agency, and for no other purpose, communicate to another person, make use of, or make a record of, lawfully obtained information. ..." (emphasis added) 
Section 74 (which appears in Part VII of the Act, referred to in <case>) provides, relevantly: "74(1) A person may give lawfully obtained information ... in evidence in an exempt proceeding. " "Exempt proceedings" are defined in <case> of the Act. Relevantly, it provides: "5B A reference in this Act to an exempt proceeding is a reference to
A proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence. " 
There follow a number of other proceedings which are specified. It will suffice to notice the following: "(b)
A proceeding for the confiscation or forfeiture of property ...
A proceeding for the taking of evidence pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea1988149/s43.html) of the [Extradition Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea1988149/) ...
A proceeding for the extradition of a person from a State or
Territory ...
A police disciplinary proceeding ...
Any other proceeding (not being a proceeding by way of a prosecution for an offence) insofar as it relates to alleged misbehaviour, or alleged improper conduct, of an officer of the
Commonwealth or of a State;
A proceeding for the recovery of an amount due to a carrier in connection with the supply of a telecommunications service, or
A proceeding under [section 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/maicma1987384/s13.html) of the [Mutual Assistance in
Criminal Matters Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/maicma1987384/)... " 
I draw attention to the distinction between the definitions of particular kinds of proceedings in each of the following paragraphs and the definition of "a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence" in para (a), which is the paragraph here in question.
The phrase "prescribed offence" is defined in [s 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/maicma1987384/s5.html) of the Act to mean, relevantly: 
A serious offence.
Any other offence punishable by imprisonment for life or for a period, or maximum period, of at least 3 years. ... " 
The phrase "serious offence" is defined by the same section to mean an offence that is or has been a class 1 offence. That expression is, in turn, defined by the Act to mean: "'Class 1 offence' means:
A murder, or an offence of a kind equivalent to murder. "
The scheme of the Act can be seen. In harmony with past traditions and general community expectations, communication by the telecommunications system is to be regarded as strictly private. Exceptions are allowed, relevantly, upon a warrant which, it may be assumed, was issued to police in this case.
But even then, limitations are imposed upon dealing with intercepted information, specifically on the giving of evidence in a proceeding even of information lawfully obtained by intercepting a communication. Such information may only be given in "exempt proceedings". These extend to proceedings on a charge of murder, because it is a prescribed serious offence.
The evidence must then be given, and only be given, if it is offered in: "... a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence. " 
It is those words which present the difficulty for the argument of the DPP which caused Levine J to exclude the tendered evidence concerning the lawfully obtained information relevant to the opponent and resulted in the earlier grant of bail which the DPP now resists. 
Reasons of the primary judges
In rejecting the tender of the record of the intercept, Levine J referred to the provisions of the Act just mentioned. He noted that objection was taken to the tender of the intercept record on the basis that the proceedings before him, in the application for bail: "...were "not exempt proceedings and were not proceedings which by any strain of language construction can be considered to be 'a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence "'.

His Honour pointed out that the relief sought by the opponent was pursuant to the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/). He recited that the Interception Act imposed: "... in a fairly strict sort of way the regulation of the interception of communications which ordinary tenants of good citizenship, morality and commonsense would regard as private, protected, precious is not inviolable...." 
He then came to his conclusion: "One's immediate reaction to those words in their natural and ordinary meaning focuses on those concerned to prosecute for a prescribed offence rather than a person in the position of the applicant.
That definition of an exempt proceeding was not, for example, worded as 'a proceeding by way of and in connection with a prosecution for a prescribed offence.' I have little difficulty in coming to the view that a bail application under the New
South Wales legislation does not fall within <case> of the Commonwealth Act. " (emphasis in original) 
Levine J then turned to other arguments which have not been pressed upon this
Court. As a result of his ruling, he declined to receive the information tendered.
As I have said, in the absence of that information, he then proceeded to grant bail on the charge first brought against the opponent.
After the second charge, the re-arrest of the opponent and the refusal of bail by the police and the Local Court, Smart J had to reconsider exactly the same point. After referring to a number of authorities which I will later mention, his Honour noted the amendment of the Act to include, <case>, the following provision: "6J A reference in this Act to a proceeding by way of a prosecution for an offence includes a reference to a proceeding with a view to the committal of a person for trial for the offence." 
As his Honour pointed out, whether that section was strictly necessary was open to question because Jenkinson J, in the Federal Court of Australia, had earlier held that a committal was within the phrase "a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence", without the need of statutory elaboration. See Shepherd versus Griffiths and A nor <case>; [(1985) 60 ALR 176 (FC)], 185.
But whether needed or not, and despite his Honour's construction of the section, Federal Parliament thought it necessary, and useful, to enact an amendment in the terms of <case> by the amending Act No 89 of 1987. Obviously the drafter had some doubts about the scope of the phrase in <case>(a) and its availability to support the holding of a single judge of the Federal Court. By inference, it was decided to put the matter beyond doubt or the prospect of further challenge and the possibility of a contrary decision. At the time <case> was inserted, no occasion was taken to enact a generally broader definition in s 5B(a).
The reasons which suggested to Smart J a conclusion different from that offered by Levine J were briefly stated: "Bail applications arise once somebody has been charged with an offence or an information has been laid. When looking at the phrase 'a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence' regard must be had to the statutory context, including its Australia wide operation. References to the procedures of each State or Territory would not be expected I regard a bail application as an incident of, or incidental to, a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence and thus falling within <case>(a). " 
It was in these circumstances that his Honour felt it better that this Court should consider the matter and provide an authoritative determination of the point.
 
Matters of approach
A number of general considerations which govern the approach of the Court to the task presented by this reference may usefully be stated:
Traditionally, in out law, liberty has been regarded as a most precious civic right. Legislation which has the effect of derogating from the right of an individual to enjoy liberty is conventionally accorded (in the case of ambiguity) a strict construction which favours liberty. Piper versus Corrective
Services Commission of New South Wales [(1986) 6 NSWLR 352 (CA)], 358;
Bail is a particular feature of the systems of law which derive their origins from the common law of England. It was not a feature usual to other legal systems, such as those of civil law countries, although in recent times the influence of the privilege to seek bail has come to be felt in the municipal systems of non-common law States and in the international statements of basic civil rights. The International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, (ICCPR), Article 9, for example, provides: "9.1 Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention. No one shall be deprived of his liberty except on such grounds and in accordance with such procedures as are established by law.
Anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release. It shall not be the general rule that persons awaiting trial shall be detained in custody, but release may be subject to guarantees to appear for trial, at any other stage of the judicial proceedings, and, should occasion arise, for execution of the judgment." (Emphasis added) 
Australia is a party to the International Covenant. In the event of uncertainty of the common law or ambiguity of legislation, an
Australia court may have regard to the provisions of the International Covenant to help resolve the uncertainty or ambiguity. See
Mabo versus The State of Queensland (No  [(1992) 175 CLR 1], 431, 447; 3. Another important civil right which is reflected in the statement of fundamental rights contained in the
International
Covenant, and also reflected in our common law, is the right to privacy. This extends to privacy of telecommunications. See Article ,
ICCPR. In Klass and Ors versus Federal Republic of Germany <case>; [(1978) 2 EHRR 214 ], the European Court of Human Rights described German legislation for the interception of telephone conversations as presenting "a menace of surveillance". That decision was cited by Gleeson CJ in support of his conclusions in John Fairfax Publications Pty Limited v Doe, Court of Appeal , unreported, 21 June 1995; (1995) NSWJB 58. In my judgment in that case,
I drew attention to the strict regime established by the Interception Act. At p 13 of my reasons I said: "Such a detailed scheme of control is not accidental
It is designed to protect the privacy and confidentiality of communications passing over the telecommunications system. This is to the benefit of all persons having telecommunication connection within, to or from Australia Section 63 should not be given a narrow construction, although it appears in a provision to which penal sanctions are attached. This is because of the high public policy, recognised and given effect to by the Act, for the protection of privacy and confidentiality of telecommunications. It takes little imagination to appreciate that (in interceptions as had occurred there) the telephone conversations of many law abiding citizens will have been recorded ... They will have expressed themselves, in a high expectation of privacy and confidentiality, about matters which are personal, potentially embarrassing, hurtful and destructive of relationships as well as banal and harmless.
It would be an affront to the obvious purpose of the Parliament in the Act if the record of such conversations, or any of them, came into the public domain except to the extent permitted by the Act, relevantly in a prescribed proceeding. " 
After referring to United States court decisions, those of England, other decisions of the European Court of Human Rights and the Commission and court decisions in Canada, I concluded: "These cases show the uniform vigilance in countries like
Australia to protect the fundamental values which are potentially challenged by telephonic interception unless that facility is limited in its operation and kept under the close supervision of the law ... The Act, by providing as it does in <case>, gives effects to the will of the Parliament that such misuse will not occur in Australia but will be strictly controlled. It is the duty of this Court, unless the Act is shown to be invalid, to give effect to its terms in proper proceedings and to accept its declaration of the high public interest which exists in this country in the protection of the record of information lawfully obtained, under a warrant. "
The validity of the Interception Act generally has been upheld.
Its predecessor, the Telephonic Communications (Interception) Act 1960 (Cth) was upheld by the High Court in Miller versus Miller <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 269], 74. It was found in Miller that the Act was intended to be the whole law on the subject of interception of telecommunications. In
Doe, this Court rejected an argument that <case> of the
Act was beyond power. No question of the validity of the Act was raised in the present case. Accordingly, the duty of the Court is to apply the Act according to its terms;
That duty is to find the meaning of the Act which best achieves its purpose. Ministerial speeches and other background material including statements of basic rights may be useful for resolving ambiguities. But if the language of the Act is ultimately clear enough, the duty of the Court is also clear: "It is always possible that through oversight or inadvertence the clear intention of the Parliament fails to be translated into the text of the law. However unfortunate it may be when that happens, the task of the Court remains clear. The function of the Court is to give effect to the will of Parliament as expressed in the law." 
See Re Bolton; Ex parte Beane <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 514], 518. That is why so much of the time of the Court, in considering this referred matter, has been taken up in analysis of the language of <case>(a) properly understood in its context and by reference to the other provisions of the Act; 
Some arguments favour the DPP's construction
Very properly, the DPP conceded that there was no specific statement in the Act which helped to resolve the problem before the Court. Nor was any authority upon its meaning called to our notice, save for the opinions of
Levine J and of Smart J.
Certainly, no decision of a court, binding on this
Court, requires us to give a particular meaning to the Act. This Court must therefore seek to derive the preferable construction using the available techniques of statutory construction but never straying far from the language used by Parliament to which the ultimate loyalty of the Court must be offered.
Certain arguments favour the submissions advanced for the DPP:, 
Unlike the other paragraphs of <case>, the relevant description of the "exempt proceeding" in this case is preceded by the phrase "a proceeding by way of a prosecution'. By juxtaposition with the other paragraphs, it must be assumed that Parliament had a particular purpose in adding that phrase. It repeated the phrase in para (f). So it is a deliberate addition.
It appears to be intended to soften the classification of a "prosecution for a prescribed offence" and to extend the application of that expression to a wider range of proceedings than might otherwise be embraced by a "prosecution", strictly so called;
The words "by way of', when used adjectively, have been considered in authority. In NEC Information Systems Australia Pty Limited versus Lockhart [(1991) NSWLR 518 (CA)], I examined the phrase "a proceeding by way of an appeal" in [s 6(8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s6.html) of the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/). I pointed out that, by juxtaposition, the phrase was not accidental. It appeared in a number of subsections of that Act, both in the Federal statute and in its cognate
State equivalents. Quite possibly, it is the product of the same drafting hand. Of this expression
I said, at 522: "Proceedings are thus included which though not an 'appeal' strictly so-called can properly be viewed as being in the nature of an appeal or for the purpose of an appeal or 'by way of an appeal." 
With this extension in mind,
I held that a summons for leave to appeal to this
Court was a "proceeding by way of an appeal". Its object was directed to the same end. It was the pursuit of an appellate right. Meagher JA (with whom
Samuels JA agreed) did not dissent from this opinion;
Likewise the word "proceeding" has a wide denotation. It is defined in <case> of the Act to mean, relevantly, "a proceeding ... in a Court of a State or
Territory". Curiously para (c) of the definition is wider still: "(c) An examination or proposed examination by or before such a
Tribunal, body, authority or person. " 
This paragraph does not, however, extend to an examination before such a court as is referred to in para (c). Had it done so, it would probably have embraced the examination of the accused in a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence. The DPP urged that it would be extremely odd. if an examination ancillary to a "tribunal, body, authority or person" could permit the use of information secured by an intercept yet a proceeding in a court, incidental to the very substantive prosecution for a prescribed offence was excluded; 4. The word "proceeding", standing alone, has traditionally also been given a wide meaning by the common law. Because the statutory definition in <case> repeats the word "proceeding", this broad definition is incorporated into the Act. In Krextile Holdings Pty Limited versus Widdows <case>; [(1974) VR 689 (SCV)],
Gillard J, at 693, in the context of the [Companies Act 1961](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/), <case> gave the word "proceedings" a very broad ambit: "In my opinion all the matters that flow, directly from or are invoked by the making of an order as a part of a process of winding up under the provisions of the [Companies Act 1961](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) are 'proceedings in relation to the winding up'." 
Of course, the words "in relation to" are broad words of connection. They do not appear in <case>(a) of the Act; 5. One of the reasons which lay behind the strict view of the Act taken by this Court in Doe and in the opinions expressed in Parliament concerning the operation of the Act when the Bill was being debated, was the concern that information, secured by a lawful intercept, should not haemorrhage. Once it does, it is difficult, even impossible, to retrieve it. In Doe, I emphasised that the Act established a regime whereby, even in the case of legally obtained information, its use was to be "limited ... and kept under the close supervision of the law". (See ibid, 16). The DPP pointed out that, in a bail application, the use of the intercepted information would remain under the strict control of a judicial officer who could adopt such expedients as were compatible with an open hearing to avoid the revelation of irrelevant or prejudicial material not strictly necessary to the application in hand. To that extent, some of the anxieties expressed in Doe, in the context of a threatened general publication of information, said originally to have been obtained legally but "leaked" to the media, would be averted. If a bail application were regarded as part and parcel of "a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence", the dangers of the misuse of the information which were troubling the Court in Doe would be reduced by the retention of judicial control;
Bail is such a common incidental feature of criminal prosecutions. It is so universal in cases of serious offences, of the kind with which the Act is, by definition, concerned, that to divorce a bail application from the proceedings by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence" is to draw a distinction which is unwarranted by the practicalities of Australian criminal procedure.
It was an absurd distinction.
It should not be one ascribed to Parliament;
This point was reinforced by the DPP's submission that the procedure contemplated by the opponent's construction of the Act was so unworkable that it could not have been Parliament's intention. Thus, a magistrate hearing a committal, would be obliged to receive information obtained by a lawful intercept because such was an "exempt proceeding" by <case>(a) (as interpreted) and expressly by <case>. Yet, at the end of the day's hearing, if an application for bail were made, the magistrate would not be entitled to receive in evidence, as relevant to the bail application, the very information which earlier in the day he or she had received as relevant to the "prescribed offence". Although the information in the record might be available for public reporting to the world at large, based upon material received in open court, the magistrate would have to dissect his or her mind and to put the record of the interception completely out of account. So inconvenient, even ridiculous, was this suggestion that it could not have been Parliament's purpose;
Bail is not the only interlocutory proceeding annexed to a prosecution for a prescribed offence. There are others, including applications for a stay of a criminal prosecution, applications for procedural orders etc. Unless a broad construction were adopted, which subsumed such proceedings within the scope of the statutory definition in <case>(a) incongruous and inconvenient results would follow. By the ordinary canons of constructions, the Court would adopt an approach to the meaning of the Act which endeavoured to avoid such consequences; and
The Act is intended to operate in all States and
Territories of Australia.

Bail rights and procedures are different in these several jurisdictions.

There is no Federal [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/). It can therefore be assumed that when the
Federal Parliament enacted S 5B(a), it did so intending the broad language of the paragraph to operate upon the differential criminal procedure, including the bail law of the several States and Territories. This understanding of the intended operation of the Act reinforced the need to provide a large ambit for the application of the phrase "by way of a prosecution".

The foregoing arguments are not without force. In particular, the arguments of inconvenience are strong. The avoidance of absurd, incongruous and highly inconvenient results in legislation is a function of the courts, derived from the presumption that
Parliament would not intend such results. Cf Bermingham v
Corrective Services Commission of New South Wales [(1988) 15 NSWLR 292 (CA)],
The modem approach to the construction of legislation is to endeavour to avoid such outcomes. In Kingston versus Keprose Pty Limited [(1987) 11 NSWLR 404 ] at 424, McHugh JA, in an often quoted explanation of the purposive approach to construction of statutes, cited Lord Diplock's injunction: "If... the Courts can identify the target of Parliamentary legislation their proper function is to see that it is hit: not merely to record that it has been missed": "The Courts as
Legislators", The Lawyer and Justice (Sweet and Maxwell) (1978) at .

I approach the present task of construction in this positive spirit. 
The language does not bear the DPP's construction
Unfortunately, I do not consider that the language of the Act will tolerate the construction urged by the DPP. My reasons are as follows:
An application for "bail" could not, in the ordinary use of that word of the English language, be classified as "a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence". It is connected to such a proceeding. It is adjunct to it. It arises out of it. It is related to it. But it is not such a proceeding. This is the essential reason why Levine J declined the invitation to classify it so. A bail application, of itself, simply cannot be put into that description
Nor is an application for bail a proceeding "by way of" a prosecution. In order to find the genus of this extended phrase, it is necessary to ask, as was done in
Lockhart, what is the characteristic of a 'prosecution" which the phrase "by way of' is intended to extend. A prosecution is a proceeding on a charge of criminal offence designed to lead to a conviction with consequent criminal punishment. That is why in Shepherd, Jenkinson
J, rightly in my view, held that a committal was a "proceeding by way of a prosecution". It was a proceeding which had the same object.
Not so in the case of a bail application. It is no part of the purpose of a bail application to punish an accused person. It would be a misuse of the bail discretion to refuse bail in order to impose a criminal sanction on the applicant. Although the effect of the refusal is a loss of liberty, that is not its purpose and object. Yet the purpose and object of a 'prosecution for a prescribed offence" may well be, in a given case, the deprivation of liberty. This is the fundamental distinction between a "proceeding by way of a prosecution" and a bail proceeding. In most cases, they have antithetical, and in all cases different, objectives;
The scheme of the Act, as I have demonstrated in Doe and in this case, is unusually strict. It is designed to attain the high objectives of protecting the individual privacy of telecommunications and community trust in the integrity of the telecommunications system and those who lawfully intercept it. The Court is obliged to conform to this strict regime. If Parliament wishes to make exceptions, it can do so. If it wishes to amend the Act, it can do so, as it did in the case of <case> relevant to the content of the very phrase now under scrutiny;
The amendment to the Act by the addition of <case>, even after the favourable decision in Shepherd (above), runs against the arguments of the DPP. Care must be taken in the use of the canon of construction known as expressio unius. See
Housein v Under-Secretary, Department of Industrial Relations and Technology , <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 88], 94. But the addition to the Act of <case> cannot be regarded as entirely irrelevant. It suggests that those advising the
Government and Parliament contemplated that even a committal proceeding would not come within <case>(a). This was all the more remarkable because the decision of Jenkinson J in Shepherd held that it did. By specifically providing for committals, it is arguable that Parliament acknowledged that other related proceedings which were not strictly "by way of a prosecution" were to be taken as being outside the phrase; 5. The arguments of inconvenience and absurdity which were addressed to the Court, were answered by Sackville J when a similar submission was put in Taciak versus Commissioner of Australian Federal Police,
Federal Court, unreported, 24 August 1995. There the question arose whether lawfully intercepted information was available to the Commissioner of Police in deciding not to reappoint a member of the Australian Federal Police. It was held that it was not. The arguments of absurdity were strongly pressed.
Sackville J was unconvinced: "It is well established that the Court should not impute to the legislature an intention to interfere with fundamental rights, freedoms or immunities; such an intention must be clearly manifested by clear and unmistakable language:
Coco versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 427] at 436-437. ... The close link between the fundamental right to be secure against trespass and the right to privacy is illustrated by the observations by Lord Scarman in
Morris versus Beardmore [(1981) AC 446] ... Parliament itself has ...
recognised, in the context of telecommunications, the fundamental importance of protecting individual privacy, although also recognising that the value of privacy can be over-ridden where it conflicts with other significant community values, provided that detailed safeguards are observed. The recognition and protection of privacy in the Intercept Act, in my view, justifies a restrictive approach to the construction of the statutory exceptions to the prohibitions on interception. ... where there is a genuine doubt as to whether the statutory language authorises the use of intercept information for a particular purpose, that doubt should be resolved in favour of a narrow, rather than a broad construction of the statutory authorisation."
If this view results in a construction which is deemed by Parliament to be too narrow, it is open to Parliament to amend the Act, as it did in the case of <case>. At least then the strict scheme, sanctioned by Parliament, will be reviewed by Parliament and not modified by a judicial decision based upon perceived inconvenience. Such decisions are not only an illicit usurpation of the responsibility of Parliament in such an important matter. They have a tendency to erode parliament's purpose which is always to be derived from the language it has used. 
Conclusion and orders
The result is that I consider that the opinion expressed by Levine J was correct. It accords with an analogous decision of the Federal Court in Taciak.
The record of the information obtained by the lawful intercept may not be received in a bail application because that application is not a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence. No other basis for its reception was argued. Levine J was thus correct to reject the tender of the record in the first bail application in the Supreme Court. The judge hearing the second bail application should do likewise.
In earlier times, bail was conventionally refused to an accused charged with murder. See R versus Borsboom [(1887) 4 WN 14 (SC)] See also R versus Higgs [(1962) 79 WN 335 (SC).] The statutory change to bail law in New South
Wales has introduced different general considerations, although it is still relevant to consider whether a person facing a serious charge may attempt to flee to escape a severe penalty. See Reg versus Walters [(1979) 2 NSWLR 284 (SC)],
Or interfere with witnesses. ibid, 286. At the time when murder was a capital offence, it was considered that it was too risky to grant bail for the accused had every motivation to flee. That position has now been changed by the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/). However, by [s 9(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/s9.html) of that Act the presumption in favour of bail in <case> is inapplicable to a person charged with the offence of murder.
See <case>(f).
It is not possible for this Court to determine the bail application on its merits. Nor would that be a correct course. It will be necessary for the bail application now to be heard; but without consideration of the information obtained by the lawful intercept.
The orders which I favour are:
Declare that the application by John Serratore for bail is not a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence within the meaning of <case>(a) of the [Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ta1979350/) (Cth); and
Order that the proceedings be returned to the Criminal Division of the
Supreme Court for the consideration of the application by John Serratore for bail, conformably with the opinion of this Court.
JUDGE2
COLE JA Smart J removed to the Court of Appeal pursuant to [Part 12](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ta1979350/index.html#p12) [rule 2(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ta1979350/s2.html) for determination by this Court the question: "Whether, for the purpose of s.5(a) of the Telecommunication 
Act 1979 (Commonwealth), a bail application pursuant to the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) is an exempt proceeding." 
BACKGROUND
The matter arises in the following circumstances.

On 17 April 1995 John Serratore, the opponent, was taken into custody charged with the offence of 'soliciting to murder" pursuant to [s.26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/s26.html) [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).
An application for bail was made to a magistrate and refused. An application for bail was lodged in the Supreme Court on 7 June
The matter came before Levine J on 29 June 1995. On the bail application the Crown sought to place before Levine J certain material being transcript of recordings of intercepted telephone conversations which were alleged to be between the opponent and others. Levine J declined to receive that material. His Honour referred to [ss.63.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s63.html) 63A, 74 and 5B Telecommunication (Interception) Act 1979 . Bail was granted.
On 20 September 1995 the opponent was charged with murder and taken into custody. He was refused bail by a magistrate and made application for bail to
Smart J on 6
October 1995. Smart J did not determine the bail application but referred the question I have set out to this Court. His Honour stated: "I regard a bail application as an incident or ancillary to a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence and thus failing within the s5B(a)."
That decision was contrary to the view expressed by Levine J. The matter was referred to the Court of Appeal to resolve the conflict of views. 
THE STATUTORY PROVISIONS
The use which can be made of legally intercepted telecommunications is found in the Telecommunication Interception Act 1979 (Commonwealth). The provisions material to the question to be answered are the following. Section provides: "7.(1) A person shall not: intercept; authorize, suffer or permit another person to intercept; or do any act or thing that will enable him or another person to intercept; a communication passing over a telecommunications system.
Subsection (1) does not apply to or in relation to: an act or thing done by an employee of a carrier in the course of his duties for or in connection with: the installation of any line, or the installation of any equipment, used or intended for use in connection with a telecommunications service or the operation or maintenance of a telecommunications system; or the identifying or tracing of any person who has contravened. or is suspected of having contravened or being likely to contravene, a provision of Part VIIB of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/); the interception of a communication by another person lawfully engaged in duties relating to the installation, connection or maintenance of equipment or a line; the interception of a communication under a warrant; or the interception of a communication pursuant to a request made, or purporting to be made, under subsection 30(1) or (2)."
Thus the general position is that interception of telecommunications is unlawful except for the circumstances contemplated by s.7(2). It was accepted for the purposes of the argument before the Court that the material sought to be tendered falls within an exception within s.7(2).
Section 74 provides: "74(1) A person may give lawfully obtained information (other than section 11A information) in evidence in an exempt proceeding.
For the purposes of applying subsection (1) in relation to information, the question whether or not a communication was intercepted in contravention of subsection 7(1) may be determined on the balance of probabilities."
Thus lawfully intercepted information may be given in evidence, but only in an exempt proceeding".
Further, s.63 provides: "63. Subject to this Part, a person shall not, after the commencement of this Part: communicate to another person, make use of, or make a record of; or give in evidence in a proceeding; lawfully obtained information or information obtained by intercepting a communication in contravention of subsection (1)."
The issue thus becomes whether a bail application under the [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) is an "exempt proceeding".
"Exempt proceedings" are defined in s.5B. That section provides: "5B. A reference in this
Act to an exempt proceeding is a reference to: a proceeding by way of prosecution for a prescribed offence; a
proceeding for the confiscation or forfeiture of property, or for the imposition of a pecuniary penalty. in connection with the commission of a prescribed offence; a proceeding for the taking of evidence pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea1988149/s43.html) of the [Extradition Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea1988149/), in so far as the proceeding relates to a prescribed offence; a proceeding for the extradition of a person from a 
State or Territory to another State or Territory, in so far as the proceeding relates to a prescribed offence; a police disciplinary proceeding; any other proceeding (not being a proceeding by way of a prosecution for an offence) in so far as it relates to alleged misbehaviour, or alleged improper conduct, of an officer of the Commonwealth or of a State; a proceeding for the recovery of an amount due to a carrier in connection with the supply of a telecommunications service; or a proceeding under [section 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/maicma1987384/s13.html) of the [Mutual Assistance in
Criminal Matters Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/maicma1987384/) in relation to a criminal matter (within the meaning of that Act) that concerns an offence, against the laws of the foreign country that made the request resulting in the proceeding, that is punishable by imprisonment for life or for a period, or maximum period, of at least 3 years."
It was accepted by the Crown that the only subsection into which a bail application might fall is subsection (a).
"Proceeding" is defined in s.5 to mean: "(a) a proceeding or proposed proceeding in a federal court or in a court of a State or Territory; a proceeding or proposed proceeding, or a hearing or proposed hearing, before a tribunal in Australia, or before any other body, authority or person in Australia having power to hear or examine evidence; or an examination or proposed examination by or before such a tribunal, body, authority or person..." .
Murder is a 'prescribed offence" within the definition of that expression as conviction attracts a permissible punishment of at least three years.
The natural use of language does not permit one to say that a bail application is "a prosecution for a prescribed offence". Indeed, it is rather the contrary. The Crown prosecutes for offences. A person so prosecuted may be taken into custody. That person may seek his liberty pending committal or trial. "Bail" is defined under the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) to mean "authorisation to be at liberty under this Act, instead of in custody". It has long had that meaning at common law((1) See
R versus Nottingham Corporation [(1897) 2 QB 502] per
Pollack B; The Law of Bail: D H K Donovan p.20). The power to grant bail was thus a common law power which power has been superseded by the statutory provisions found in the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/). The power to grant bail is found in [s.6.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/s6.html) The application is by the person detained in custody. It is thus by the person prosecuted, rather than by the party who would bring "a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence", in New South Wales that being the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The argument advanced on behalf of the Crown may be briefly stated. It was that some meaning must be given to the words "a proceeding by way of' in s.5B(a). "By way of' must be taken to mean a proceeding which is "intrinsically linked to the proceedings by way of a prosecution". Bail proceedings have no independent existence outside the criminal prosecution, and must thus be said to be so "intrinsically linked". Being "ancillary proceedings" to the prosecution for a prescribed offence, such proceedings must be read as being included within s.5B(a).
The expression "proceedings" has been the subject of judicial consideration((2)
NEC information Systems versus Lockhart [(1991) 22 NSWLR 518]; Make versus Norris [(1990) 20
NSWLR 300-] at 654.). In some circumstances, the meaning given to the word may be extended.
Further, in Shepherd versus Griffiths and Anor((3) <case>; [(1985) 60 ALR 176)],
Jenkinson J was called upon to consider the admissibility of intercepted telecommunications in committal proceedings. His Honour was of the view that a committal proceeding could properly be described as a "prosecution" and thus within the expression "a proceeding .. by way of a prosecution". Thus the evidence was held admissible. Notwithstanding that decision, there was subsequently enacted by amending legislation s.6J Telecommunication
Act 1979 (Commonwealth). It provides: "A reference in this Act to a proceeding by way of a prosecution for an offence includes a reference to a proceedings with a view to the committal of a person for trial for the offence."
The Crown sought to rely upon Jenkinson J's decision to contend that an application for bail "naturally conforms with what would be regarded as proceedings by way of a prosecution".
Additionally, the Crown contended that it would be absurd if the material legally intercepted was not admissible in a bail application. That was said to be so because the material was obviously admissible in committal proceedings, or in a trial. A bail application could be brought at any time; for instance, whilst committal proceedings were being heard. The legislature could not have intended that a magistrate hearing committal proceedings and having received the legally intercepted material for consideration in the committal proceedings should nonetheless not be permitted to have regard to it if application were made by the accused person for bail.
There is much to be said for the patent absurdity which flows from a magistrate or a judge being obliged to disregard material which otherwise may be admitted in committal or criminal proceedings, which may be heard by members of the public in court, and which may be widely disseminated by the media, being nonetheless unavailable to be considered by a judge on a bail application.
Nonetheless, the court is bound by the expressions used by Parliament in defining "exempt proceedings", they being the only proceedings in which such material may be received. The legislature did not enact that an exempt proceeding is a proceeding associated with, or ancillary to, or in consequence of, a prosecution for a prescribed offence. There is no justification for reading those words into s.5B(a).
 .
That view is reinforced by other provisions in the Act. Section 63A used expressions such as "for a purpose connected with", and "or otherwise arising out of" in connection with proceedings or applications begun prior to the commencement of the Telecommunication
Act 1979 (Commonwealth).
In addition, by enacting s.6J confirming the decision in Shepherd versus Griffiths, the legislature thought it necessary to enact that a "proceeding by way of a prosecution" included a reference to a proceeding "with a view to the committal of a person for trial". What else maybe "included" is not clear, but there is nothing in ss.6J or 5B to suggest that it includes an application for bail by the person charged, as distinct from a step being taken by the prosecuting authority as part of "a prosecution for a prescribed offence".
As the legislature has enacted that it is only in "exempt proceedings" that lawfully obtained telecommunication interceptions may be given in evidence, the narrow issue is whether a bail proceeding is an exempt proceeding being "a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence". For the reasons given, in my view it is not.
The question should be answered "No".
The bail application should be referred back to a judge of the Common Law
Division to be dealt with in accordance with law.
In view of the public importance of this matter, these reasons for judgment should be drawn to the attention of the Commonwealth Attorney
General.
JUDGE3
SANTOW AJA The factual circumstances are set out in the Judgment of Kirby
P and I do not therefore need to repeat them.
The fundamental issue to be determined is whether an application for bail made by a person accused of a "prescribed offence", within the meaning of s5(1) of the Telecommunication (Interception) Act 1979 (Cth) ("the Act") constitutes "an exempt proceeding" within the meaning of s5B(a) of that Act.
This is so as to permit certain telephone intercepts assumed to have been lawfully made to be given in evidence at that application for bail in accordance with Part 7 of the
Act and in particular s74. This is as an exception to the prohibition on the communication of such telephone intercepts in s63 of
Part 7.
Section 5B(a) of the Act provides as follows: "5B A reference in this Act to an exempt proceeding is a reference to: a proceeding by way of a prosecution for a prescribed offence; or...
It is of assistance in the interpretation of this critical definition that
I quote paragraphs (b) through (d) of s5B as these are the only other references in the definition of "exempt proceedings" to a "prescribed offence" and each of which paragraphs define an alternative "exempt proceeding". The remaining paragraphs (e) through (i) involve other proceedings of various kinds not related to a "prescribed offence".
 "(b) a proceeding for the confiscation or forfeiture of property, or for the imposition of a pecuniary penalty, in connection with the commission of a prescribed offence; or a proceeding for the taking of evidence pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea1988149/s43.html) of the [Extradition Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea1988149/) in so far as the proceeding relates to a prescribed offence; or a proceeding for the extradition of a person from a 
State or Territory to another State or Territory, in so far as the proceeding relates to a prescribed offence;" "Proceeding" in s5(1) of the Act is defined to mean, inter alia, "a proceeding or proposed proceeding in a federal court or in a court of a
State or Territory" as well as encompassing proceedings before a tribunal in
Australia or other body having power to hear or examine evidence, or an examination or proposed examination by or before such a tribunal or body.
 "Prescribed offence" is defined by s5(1) of the Act to mean, inter alia, "(a) a serious offence".
By s5(1) of the Act a "serious offence" means "an offence that is or has been a class 1 offence or a class 2 offence". Those terms are in turn defined to include various serious offences including, relevantly in the present case, murder.
Finally, s6J of the Act states "6J. A reference in this Act to a proceeding by way of a prosecution for an offence includes a reference to a proceeding with a view to the committal of a person for trial for the offence."
In John Fairfax Publications Pty Limited versus Doe (Court of Appeal, 21 June unreported), the Court of Appeal dealt with the constitutionality of the
Act in the context of contempt proceedings. Gleeson CJ at 13 characterised the
Act in these words: "It is not surprising that Parliament, in enacting a law to permit secret surveillance of citizens, should limit, stringently, the use to which the products of such surveillance can be put."
Earlier, at 8, in dealing with the basal prohibition in s63 of the Act, he identified the problem inherent in the present case when he said: "The problem is to give s63 a meaning which is not so narrow as to defeat the purpose of the legislation, and not so wide as to make the legislation unreasonably oppressive. "
In both Gleeson CJ's Judgment (at 13) and in the Judgment of Kirby P (at to 16), as well as in the Minister's Second Reading Speech, there is recognition of the requirement, recognised also in a number of jurisdictions and under international law, of the need for stringent controls in relation to the circumstances in which the fight of privacy of an individual may be subordinated. This is in permitting telephone interception, or access to its results, in the limited cases allowed by the Act for its purposes.
The question in the present case is the extent to which Parliament has curtailed the individual fight to privacy in creating a category of exception to the prohibition in s63 of the Act for an "exempt proceeding". Resolution of that question in favour of a narrow curtailment of that fight of privacy accords with the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd, in the absence of clear language to the contrary.
In identifying the purpose of the legislation, one may start with the preamble to the Act. This is "an Act to prohibit the interception of telecommunications except where authorised in special circumstances or for the purpose of tracing the location of callers in emergencies, and for related purposes."
The Minister's Second Reading Speech of 30 April 1987 recognised that the existing provisions of the then legislation "would be inadequate for the purpose of controlling the flow, of intercepted information, given that the National Crime Authority, the State Drug Crime commission and the State and Territory police forces are to be able to apply for interception warrants."
He then pointed to what he characterised as the stringent controls on the communication of information lawfully obtained.
In so doing he makes reference to the new Part 7 and paraphrases what became s5B(a), as follows: "For this reason, the Bill provides for a new Part VII to be inserted in the legislation, which provides stringent controls on the communication of information lawfully obtained by telecommunications interception, whether obtained on a warrant issued to the Australian
Federal Police, National Crime
Authority or a State or Territory law enforcement agency. The
Bill provides that lawfully intercepted information may be used in evidence in proceedings for the prosecution of an offence, punishable by three years imprisonment or longer; in proceedings for the confiscation or forfeiture of property in connection with the commission of an offence punishable by three years imprisonment or longer; in certain extradition proceedings; in proceedings of a disciplinary nature against a police officer, whether Federal, State or Territory; or in proceedings for alleged misbehaviour against an officer of the Commonwealth, a
State or Territory. (Hansard 30 April 1987 at 2308)
Earlier references in the Second
Reading Speech deal with the process for permitting warrants under the Act to be issued. They recognise that a Judge will be required to consider, "in addition to the matters to be considered for class 1 offences, how much the privacy of any person would be likely to be interfered with if an interception were issued; and the gravity of the particular conduct being investigated."
At 2307 the Minister states, "In the Government's view, allowing interception warrants to be obtained for these classes of offences will provide an effective tool for law enforcement agencies, and assist in the fight against organised crime. At the same time, the community is assured that telecommunications interception powers will only be used for the more serious criminal offences; and that this particular power will not be used as part of any ordinary criminal investigation. This is a further indication of the
Government's recognition of the very important privacy interests involved in the exercise of the telecommunications interception power. "
It is thus clear that there is no suggestion in the Minister's Second
Reading Speech that the safeguards applicable to the issuance of a warrant authorising interception obviate the need for the further stringent controls on the communication of such information lawfully obtained, under Part 7 of the Act. The Minister refers specifically in the earlier quoted passage (at of Hansard) to the permitted use of lawfully intercepted information "in evidence in proceedings for the prosecution of an offence, punishable by three years imprisonment or longer ..." (my emphasis). There is no suggestion of any legislative intention to dilute those stringent controls by permitting the use of such intercepted information in what are not strictly proceedings for the prosecution of an offence so punishable. This might have been suggested by an expansive interpretation of "proceeding by way of prosecution" in s5B(a) of the Act. But it is significant that the Minister used the word "for", rather suggesting a narrower scope to those words in the Act.
The Director of Public Prosecutions contended that a bail application was an exempt proceedings under s5B(a) and that to interpret "bail proceedings' as did Levine J as falling outside s5B(a) was an overly narrow construction of the words used.
He contended that it would also prevent the Crown from tendering evidence so obtained which might show that the accused was a danger to the community, when that same evidence could be available and permitted to be tendered in the conduct of the Crown case against the accused.
The DPP introduced his argument by contending that a bail application is no more than an ancillary proceedings in the overall prosecutorial proceedings and not separate proceedings initiated to obtain bail. It is important that I set out the basis put by the DPP for that proposition.
 "A bail application call only be made after "a proceedings by way of a prosecution" has been initiated. Bail is defined in the [Bail
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) as an "authorisation to be at liberty under this Act, instead of in custody". (Section 4(a) [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/)). Bail call only be granted to an "accused person " [(section 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/s6.html) [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/)). An accused person includes a person charged with all offence [(section 4(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/s4.html) [Bail
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/)). It is submitted that the application for bail is thereby intrinsically linked to the proceedings by way of a prosecution.

The bail proceedings have no independent existence outside the criminal prosecution. A prosecution itself is commenced by the laying of a charge or an information((4) Regina -v- Hull [(1989) NSWLR 385] at 40.1-5)) and this act invokes the operation of the Bail Act((5) Regina -v-
Rademeyer [(1985) 1 NSWLR 285] at 288.9 page 306A-E). It is therefore submitted that the bail application is no more than all ancillary proceeding in the overall proceedings and not separate proceedings "initiated by Mr Serratore to obtain bail" as
Suggested in the judgment of Levine J."
He then contended that the words "proceedings by way of a prosecution" necessarily have a wider meaning than if simply prosecution had been referred to. Thus in NEC Information Systems Australia Pty Limited versus Lockhart [(1991) 22
NSWLR 518] Kirby P in considering the meaning of the term "proceedings by way of trial" treated the words "by way of' as encompassing that which can properly be viewed as being "in the nature of an appeal, for the purpose of an appeal, or 'by way of an appeal" and that "the word 'appeal' can, in a particular context, be given a wide meaning" at 522 D-E. It should be noted however that Kirby P was simply construing those words in a particular context. The issue in the present case is whether the very different context of an exception to the strict controls on the use of intercepted information should be given a wider or a narrower ambit.
The DPP referred to a number of other cases in different contexts where an expansive interpretation of "proceedings" was given, such as in the context of a winding up (Krextile Holdings Pty. Limited versus Widdows <case>; [(1974) VR 689] per
Gillard J). However, all of these are but illustrations of the proposition that the word "proceedings" is capable of a variety of meanings so that it is therefore necessary to have regard to the statutory context in which the term is used; Blake versus Norris  <case>; [(1985) 60 ALR 176] Jenkinson J concluded that the phrase "a proceeding ... by way of prosecution" when used in s7 of the Act before it was amended necessarily included "committal proceedings". He first acknowledged that committal has been differentiated from prosecution.
Thus William Blackstone commences the 21st chapter of Book IV of his
Commentaries with a progressive order for proceeding in the courts of criminal jurisdiction where "commitment and bail" precede "prosecution". Nonetheless in the somewhat different statutory context with which he was dealing, he concluded: "I think that it is in accordance with common usage in legal discourse to speak of a committal proceedings as a prosecution.
That usage is exemplified in the judgment of Stephen J in Sankey v Whitlam <case>; [(1978) 142 CLR 1] at 558, as it is also in the language of statutory provisions regulating committal proceedings in Victoria and New south
Wales, to which I have referred. And the legal conception of a criminal prosecution comprehends, in my opinion, the preliminary investigation which is set in train by the laying before a stipendiary magistrate of an information charging the commission of an indictable offence against the Jaw of the commonwealth or of a State or Territory.
A committal proceeding was regarded by Brett MR as within the conception of "criminal prosecution, in Yates versus R [(1885) 14 QBD ] at 655, 657, 658."
To the argument that the bail proceedings have no independent existence outside the criminal prosecution and that a bail application can only be made after "a proceedings by way of prosecution" there is a short answer. In for example
New South Wales, a bail application, may be made only by "an accused person" [(s4(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/s4.html) of the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) ), defined as "a person charged with, convicted of or found guilty of an offence". Nonetheless that bail application may pre-date the commencement of the prosecution. This is because as R v
Rademeyer (supra) held, "charged" does not mean the formal charging with an offence before a Court. Rather it "relates to the formal verbal statement of the charge, usually by a police officer, following upon arrest" typically at the scene of an alleged crime or at a police station, per Yeldham J at 288. At that point while a condition precedent for a prosecution later to be brought may be fulfilled, the prosecution has yet to be commenced as a proceeding. An applicant for bail at that time in those circumstances would be applying for bail prior to the commencement of a proceeding by way of prosecution in the normal sense. Bail and prosecution may be frequently associated with one another, but they are by no means inevitable concomitants of one another. It is self-evident that the application for bail is an application to be released from imprisonment. It is in no sense a proceeding "in the nature of' a prosecution or "for the purpose of' a prosecution, or otherwise "by way of' prosecution or in its furtherance. It is, on the contrary, an application by the subject (not prosecutor) seeking liberty from imprisonment.
 .
In sum, the fact that both prosecution and bail application require, inter alia, an "accused person" duly charged, does not render a bail application ancillary to the prosecution or an Aspect of it. This is to argue from correlation to causation. In logic, merely because events B and C may depend in a causal sense in part on a prior event A, does not render B an aspect of C or vice versa.
It is true that the prosecutor may have a vital interest in opposing the application for bail. Indeed under [s48(1)(a)(iv)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/s48.html) of the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) the DPP may also initiate a review of a bail decision, though that latter is not what is occurring here. Furthermore, amongst the criteria to be considered in bail applications is the probability of whether or not the person will appear in court in respect of the offence for which bail is being considered, having regard to various matters. However, it should be noted that this is but one of the criteria for bail to be considered; see [s32(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/s32.html) of the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) . Indeed that fact emphasises that the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) is in fact a self-contained code (R versus Hilton [(1986) 7 NSWLR 745] at 750) in which the matters to be considered in a bail application are exhaustively and exclusively set out.
The position is not uniform in every State but it is accurate enough to state that bail, whether as a common law right or by statute, is a distinct code applicable to a charged person. Its grant permits a charged person, in essence, to obtain liberty from prison, conditional upon that person appearing at a later time before court to answer bail, generally upon that person's guarantee to so appear; see B H K
Donovan the Law of Bail, Legal Books Pty
Limited 1981, for a history of bail and its modem features. Thus bail is wholly distinct from prosecution. It calls for consideration of matters differentiated from those pertaining to the establishment of guilt or innocence via a prosecution.
Indeed when one turns to the statutory context and in particular s5B(a) through (d) of the Act, it is clear that each of the proceedings there referred to are proceedings which would not be initiated by the accused. They rather have to do with the furtherance of proceedings against the accused or the accused's property or for the imposition of a pecuniary penalty or for the taking of evidence or the extradition of a person, in each case concerned with a " prescribed offence". Such a context does not suggest that bail proceedings are similar in kind to the common genus of this group of exempt proceedings.
It is also significant that s6J of the Act expressly includes "a proceeding with a view to the committal of a person for trial" in any reference to "a proceeding by way of a prosecution for an offence". As was said in an analogous context in John Fairfax Publications "That being a subject upon which express provision has been made, it would be contrary to principle to conclude that there is an implication which covers the subject matter of the express provisions and takes them somewhat further"; per Gleeson
CJ at 10. Thus it is difficult to see why s6J of the Act were added if s5B(a) already included a committal proceeding. It might have been done for abundant caution and by way of clarification, particularly as it adds committal proceedings with the word "includes". Even were that so, a committal can readily be seen to be in furtherance of the prosecutorial process and an integral part of it, in contradistinction to a bail application.
Indeed were s5B(a) of the Act to be read as embracing any proceeding for a bail application which the prosecutor opposed, this would be to characterise the proceeding as being by way of a prosecution merely because of that opposition. The alternative of treating all bail applications, opposed or not by the prosecutor, as being proceedings "by way of" a prosecution, leads also to an absurd result. It is certainly not an interpretation to be adopted consonant with the purposes of the Act, more especially in the absence of clear language requiring that result. Put simply, a bail application is not a proceeding by the prosecution nor in furtherance of the prosecution. The role of the prosecutor when opposing bail does not give the application the character of a "proceeding by way of a prosecution", though a prosecution may be expected to ensue or already be in train.
Finally, it is said that as a matter of public policy it would be absurd and capable of bringing the administration of justice into disrepute were telephone intercepts lawfully obtained, able to be used in the actual Crown case but not in the bail application itself The answer to that contention, apart from the language of the Act itself, is that a bail application may occur before the time when the Crown first presents its case. Indeed the Crown may never present a case which includes the telephone intercepts. The telephone intercepts may be relevant, if at all, only to the bail application or for other reasons may not be used in the Crown case. Thus it does not follow that the interests of privacy would inevitably be invaded when the
Crown presents its case with the result that there is no injury to that right of privacy by reason of use of the telephone intercepts at the bail application. But recognising there may be an anomalous result in some circumstances (though not inevitably), that should not compel a result which is contrary to the terms of the Act, properly construed and which fails to reflect the stringent controls emphasised by the Minister in his Second
Reading Speech earlier quoted. Sackville J in Taciak versus The Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police (Federal Court 24 August 1995, unreported) was not deterred by such a possible anomaly from the proper construction of the Act.
He favoured a restrictive approach to exceptions to the prohibitions on interception where there was genuine doubt whether the statutory language authorises the use of intercept information; here I do not consider there is much room for doubt.
It is open to the Legislature by future amendment if it so desires, and with whatever appropriate safeguards, to alter the balance struck by the Act between the individual's right of privacy and the prosecution of serious crime; that is, to do so by expressly permitting the use of telephone intercepts in a wider category of proceeding to embrace bail applications or the review of bail applications particularly where the community may be at risk by release.
As Sackville J put it in Taciak "Parliament itself has ... recognised in the context of telecommunications, the fundamental importance of protecting individual privacy, although also recognising that the value of privacy can be overridden where it conflicts with other significant community values, provided that detailed safeguards are observed"
However,
I am satisfied that the legislation in its present form and context and as a matter of its plain meaning, does not permit the use of such telephone intercepts in bail applications.
I agree with the orders and declaration of Kirby P.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/154.html  
