

Chambers Fleming Padstow Real Estate P/L versus Oates and Ors [1997] NSWSC 23 (12 February 1997) 
CHAMBERS FLEMING PADSTOW REAL ESTATE P/L versus OATES & ORS /96 
Wednesday 4th September 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff carries on business as a real estate agency at Padstow. Prior to 12th August 1996, the defendants, Messrs. Oates, Mollica and Callahan, were employed by the plaintiff. On 11th August 1996, a company with some association with the defendants, called Vieme Pty. Limited, entered into an agreement to purchase a real estate agency named Robert R. Andrew of Padstow for $340,000.00. I am dealing with an application for an interlocutory injunction sought with a view to preventing the defendants from being concerned in that estate agency.

The application is based on a special clause said to be a term of the employment contracts of the defendants. That clause is in the following terms:- 
The employee covenants with the Employer that he will not for a period of (3) years from the date of termination of his employment either alone or jointly in partnership with an agent for any other person or corporation and either directly or indirectly carry on or manage or be concerned in a Real Estate
Agency business in either Padstow or Revesby to protect the goodwill of the employers business.

The clause was specifically signed by the first and second defendants in their contracts of employment, and those defendants had in fact been employed by the plaintiff for a number of years. As regards the third defendant, he had been employed by the plaintiff for about one year in 1993 and was re-employed on st July 1996. It appears that he was given the employment contract to sign and, while he put his signature on the contract generally, he did not sign in the place allocated in the contract for acknowledgement of the special clause which the plaintiff relies on in these proceedings.

Mr. Gorrick, Counsel for the plaintiff, has submitted that the third defendant should be treated in the same way as the other defendants, on the basis that he is estopped from asserting that he is not bound by the restraint. He was given the contract to sign; he knew he was expected to sign the particular clause, and he did not raise any difficulty about the matter.

As regards the construction of the clause, Mr. Gorrick submitted that it does, on its true construction, extend to preventing any of the defendants even accepting employment in a real estate agency within its scope. At the very least, he submitted, it was appropriate to prevent them from supporting the purchase of a rival real estate agency in any way. I interpolate here that the evidence is that the defendants propose to finance the purchase by a loan from a bank supported by security provided by the family homes of the first and second defendants.

Mr. Gorrick submitted that, even if the period of three years provided in the clause might be considered excessive, it could be read down under the
Restraints of Trade Act to a reasonable period, and a reasonable period would in the circumstances be no less than six months.

Mr. Walton for the defendants submitted that while there was a serious question to be tried on the merits in relation to the first and second defendants, there was no serious question to be tried in relation to the third defendant. He submitted that the circumstances surrounding the dealing by the third defendant with the employment agreement could not possibly give rise to an estoppel.

He submitted that, turning to the balance of convenience, undertakings offered on behalf of the first and second defendants were adequate, and the balance of convenience certainly did not require any restraint going beyond those undertakings. Those undertakings offered by the first and second defendants included an undertaking that they would not, either alone or jointly with any other person, own or hold any shareholding beneficial or otherwise in any company, or have any interest in any partnership, which owns a real estate agency business in Padstow or Revesby.

Mr. Walton submitted that the special clause should be construed contra preferentem; and on that basis it did not extend to preventing the defendants from becoming employees of another real estate agency business, and did not prevent them by way of loan or guarantee supporting the purchase of a real estate agency business by a separate entity.

As regards the third defendant, while I would not go so far as to say that there is no serious question to be tried, it does seem to me that the plaintiff's case is too weak to justify an injunction against him, apart possibly from requiring him to participate in certain restraints put upon the other two defendants.

It seems to me that it is very strongly arguable that he is not contractually bound by the restraint clause, even though he signed an employment contract generally. The document did make special provision for signing the restraint clause, and he did not sign that clause. On the estoppel point, it seems to me that relief based on estoppel has to relate to the degree of detriment caused to the plaintiff by the conduct of the first defendant, and the unconscionability of the first defendant in denying that he was bound by the special restraint clause. In my opinion, in circumstances where he was only employed by the plaintiff relevantly for a period of just over one month, it would be very difficult to make out a case of detriment or unconscionability adequate to support a significant injunction.

As regards the other two defendants, I am inclined to think that, prima facie, a three year restraint would be found to be excessive; but I am inclined to agree with Mr. Gorrick that a restraint in those terms for a period of six months would be upheld. In my opinion, damages would not be an adequate remedy for breach of a covenant of that kind, and prima facie the plaintiff is entitled to specific relief to enforce a negative covenant of that kind.

I accept Mr. Walton's submission that the covenant has to be construed contra proferentem and reasonably strictly. So construed, I accept Mr. Walton's submission that, in all probability, it does not prohibit employment, at least so long as the employment is on a fixed salary which in no way depends upon the extent of profits of the business. That view has some support from the case of Gophir Diamond Company v. Wood [(1902) 1 Ch. 950.] 
I am also inclined to accept Mr. Walton's submission that it is not expressed in terms which would prohibit the mere lending of money or providing of a guarantee to an entity which conducts the real estate business, unless the lending of the money, coupled with other circumstances, meant that the defendants in question had a role in the management of the business; or could be regarded as directors of a company carrying on the business; or meant that they, in truth, had some legal or equitable interest, either direct or indirect, in the business in the sense of an interest in the success or failure of the business.

In my opinion, if, by whatever transactions they entered into, they did acquire some legal or equitable interest, either direct or indirect, in the business, in the sense of an interest in the success or failure of the business, then that would, in all probability, be a breach of the clause. The considerations involved in that sort of question are looked at in the case of
Smith v. Hancock [(1894) 2 Ch. 377], and also in a slightly different context in the case of Hunt v. Pascoe [(1990) 21 NSWLR .] 
In my opinion, what the balance of convenience and the merits of the case, as they appear at present, require is an injunction against the first and second defendants, limited to six months or earlier order, which does prevent them taking any part in the management of this proposed real estate agency or having any legal or equitable interest, direct or indirect, in that business in the sense of an interest in its success or failure. Involvement as a director, whether formally or as a deemed director under the Corporations Law, or a legal or equitable interest held through companies or trusts or nominees would, in my opinion, be a breach.

An injunction in those terms goes beyond the undertaking which is offered. It is not entirely satisfactory, because it is impossible to lay down, with absolute certainty, how it would apply in all possible circumstances; but it seems to me that that is the best that the Court can do. As a practical matter, it seems to me very unlikely that the Court would be called upon to determine a doubtful question on a contempt application before the final hearing, and there would be no occasion to do so later. However, it seems to me that an injunction in those terms would, at least, prevent a clear breach of the clause being committed; and it would, I expect, prevent any involvement by legal advisers in setting up any structure which is in breach of the injunction.

Turning to the other undertakings which were offered on behalf of the first and second defendants, it seems to me that there should be a full account kept of all the dealings of the estate agency. I think it is common ground now that the diaries can be made available for inspection at the office of the defendants' solicitor. The undertaking in relation to the promotional material, it seems to me, is appropriate. It does seem to me possible that, notwithstanding the injunction, it may turn out at the final hearing that, assuming the purchase of the estate agency goes ahead, the actual regime set up in relation to the estate agency may be found to be in breach of the injunction, and any breach of the terms of the clause. In those circumstances, it does seem to me that an order along the lines of the first undertaking offered is appropriate. I note that it contemplates weekly drawings by each of the defendants. Consistently with my judgment, it seems to me that the first and second defendants should be on a fixed salary which can include specified commissions; but it would be inconsistent that the order that I am proposing that they have remuneration which, for the period of the injunction, in any way depends on the profits of the business.

I make the following orders.

Upon the plaintiff by its Counsel giving to the Court the usual undertaking as to damages, I order that the first and second defendants do not, until 12th
February 1997 or earlier order, take any part in the management of, or have any legal or equitable interest (direct or indirect) in, any real estate agency business in Padstow or Revesby, in the sense of having an interest in the success or failure of such business, and whether through companies or trusts or nominees or otherwise.

I order that, until further order, all of the defendants, so far as it is within their capacity to do so, cause full and proper accounts of all listings, and all sales, and all rents collected, and properties managed or listed for management, in connection with any such real estate business in which they are interested or employed, to be kept; and so far as they are able to do so, permit the plaintiff's solicitor and/or accountants to inspect the books of accounts of any such business, so far as they relate to sales and listings in the suburbs of Padstow and Revesby, and so far as they relate to any bank account used in connection with the business, upon reasonable notice in writing and at reasonable times.

I order that, until further order, all defendants deposit into an interest bearing account all the net proceeds of any such real estate agency business as relates to commissions from sales of real estate in the suburbs of Padstow and Revesby after deduction expenses of the business, including weekly drawings up to $1,000.00 each by the defendants, such deductions to be made out of the total income of the business.

I order that the first and second defendants make available for inspection to the plaintiff's solicitor, through their solicitor, any diaries held by them in respect of their employment by the plaintiff.

I order that, until 12th February 1997 or earlier order, the first and second defendants do not use or exhibit in connection with the business of selling or listing for sale through any such real estate business in the suburbs of
Padstow or Revesby any poster or advertising or promotional material (other than business cards) any part of which identifies or refers in any way to the plaintiff or contains photographs or drawings or reproductions of either of the first or second defendants.

The costs of this application will be costs in the proceedings.

If there is any continuing dispute about books and records of the plaintiff, I reserve leave to the parties to restore the matter on two days' notice.
 * * * 
