

Antonino D'Aleo versus Ambulance Service of NSW [1996] NSWSC 612 (12 December )

Antonino D'ALEO versus AMBULANCE SERVICE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /96; CC14233/95 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, COLE JA, COHEN AJA 
CATCHWORDS:WORKERS Compensation Act 1989 - s.68A - construction and application - history prior to introduction - Government Cleaning Services versus Ellul (Court of Appeal), 12 August 1996 considered.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Cole JA.

COLE JA: This appeal from the decision of Armitage CCJ sitting in the Compensation Court of New South Wales delivered 4 March 1996 is restricted to questions of law. Two questions only were raised on appeal. The first was whether his Honour erred in reducing an award made pursuant to s.66 by the application of s.68A, and the second was whether his Honour erred in failing to compensate the appellant for loss of use of sexual organs.

The facts are in brief compass.

The appellant worked for the respondent as an ambulance officer from 1980 to until 28 May 1995. When he commenced such employment he was thirty years of age and had no prior back injuries or disabilities. Between 1987 and 1995 when he ceased employment he suffered a series of injuries principally to his back, the injuries resulting from lifting patients. Injury itself was not in issue before the trial judge. In his claim for compensation the appellant relied on the general nature and condition of his employment between 1 July 1987 and 28
May 1995, in addition to the serious injury suffered on that latter date.
Armitage CCJ made an award in favour of the appellant pursuant to s.66 for permanent impairment to his back equivalent to 35% of a most extreme case.
However his Honour reduced the sum awarded in accordance with the Table in respect of that found permanent impairment by reducing it by 10% in purported application of s.68A. Applying the provisions of s.68A(8), his Honour was of the view that the deductable proportion for loss was 10%. The parties then agreed that the 35% should be reduced by 3.5%, and his Honour acted on that basis. No question has arisen on appeal whether in applying s.68A(8) the appropriate deductable portion for a loss should be 3.5% as was agreed or 10%.
I express no view on that matter and will deal with the matter upon the basis agreed by the parties before Armitage CCJ.

His Honour in addressing the evidence said: "In response to a question put by me to Dr Coroneos, in an effort to clarify the issues, at the end of his evidence Dr Coroneos said, as I understood him, that the impairment the applicant suffers in his back at the present time is the result, firstly, and to a major degree of the 1995 injury to which I have referred, secondly, of pre-existing degenerative changes in the applicant's back which one would expect in a man in his fourth decade, regardless of work, and thirdly, of the aggravating effect on those degenerative changes of the heavy work the applicant did and of the multitude of minor injuries the applicant suffered to his back in the course of his employment with the
Ambulance Service, lifting heavy patients from the date of commencement of his employment until the injury in 1995.

It seems to me that a large part of the pre-existing degenerative condition of the applicant's back before the 1995 injury itself resulted from the nature of his work in the way that Dr Coroneos described in his evidence. It seems to me that as a result of Dr Coroneos' concession that a small part of the applicant's impairment results from the fact that he has degeneration in his lumbar spine to which we are all heirs as a result purely of the aging process that s.68A should be applied, but that it is appropriate in view of the lack of certainty in Dr Coroneos' evidence (or for that matter, any other doctor) that s.68A(8) should be applied, that is to say that the deductable proportion of the loss which I have found the applicant to suffer from should be 10%. The way I shall do that for convenience is by calculating the applicant's entitlement in respect of 35% impairment of the back on a permanent basis ...
and then deducting from the monetary entitlement for those losses an amount representing 10% thereof. This approach was agreed in by the respondent in this case and seems to me to be a fair solution to the problem." 
Shortly put, the appellant's argument was that as there was no evidence of any back impairment prior to the work injuries complained of, s.68A did not permit a deduction from a worker's s.66 entitlement in respect of permanent impairment of the back when, but for work injuries, his spine would be normal for his age and not impaired. The argument was that s.68A permitted a deduction only in respect of a pre-work injury back impairment. Pre-injury asymptomatic back deterioration could not be considered in determining whether there was a "deductable proportion" within s.68A. The question thus involves the construction of s.68A. The relevant subsections are as follows: "S.68A 
If a loss suffered by a worker as a result of an injury is permanent impairment of the back, neck or pelvis, no compensation is payable under this
Division, by the employer who is liable in respect of the injury, for any proportion of the loss that is due to: a previous injury for which compensation has been paid or is payable under this Division, or any other previous injury or any pre-existing condition or abnormality.

The proportion of a loss for which no compensation is payable because of subsection (1) is the "deductable proportion" for that loss.
 ...

If there is a deductable proportion for a loss but the extent of the deductable proportion will be difficult or costly to determine (because, for example, of the absence of medical evidence), it is to be assumed (for the purpose of avoiding litigation) that the deductable proportion is 10%, unless this assumption is at odds with the available evidence." 
Four matters were advanced in support of the appellant's contention. First, it was said that s.68A contains is own dictionary. The introductory words make clear that a "loss" means in s.68A "permanent impairment of the back, neck or pelvis". Thus whenever the word "loss" was encountered in s.68A(1), one should read instead "permanent impairment".

It is true that s.68A(1) is dealing with a category of loss, namely permanent impairment of the back, neck or pelvis. Such a category of loss is contemplated by s.65(1) and (2), the latter subsection specifically noting that a reference to a loss mentioned in the Table to Division 4 includes a reference to the permanent impairment of the back, neck or pelvis. The introductory words of s.68A(1) however merely define the particular type of loss being considered in the section before specifying the types of injuries, pre-existing conditions or abnormalities which are to result in there being a deductable proportion.

The second matter advanced was the terms of Note (g) to the table to Division part 3, now removed, which had provided: "In the case of the impairment of the back, neck or pelvis, compensation is payable only in respect of the degree of permanent impairment suffered as a result of the injury concerned and as if any impairment existing before that injury did not exist." 
This was said to show that the concern of the legislature was with "permanent impairment" rather than with any degenerative changes found in persons with the advance of age. Thirdly, support was claimed from paragraph (g) of the explanatory note to the Workcover Legislation Amendment Bill 1995 which read: "Additional provisions are inserted to make it clear that lump sum workers compensation is not payable for pre-existing impairment of the neck, back or pelvis by requiring the deduction of that pre-existing impairment from the compensation payable. The amendment overcomes the effect of a number of court decisions." 
Emphasis was placed on the word "impairment" to suggest that a pre-existing condition, which was asymptomatic and which had not resulted in any prior "impairment" in the sense of some empirical physical disability or incapacity was insufficient to attract s.68A.

Reference may be had to such explanatory notes where the words of the statute are ambiguous but here I do not think that they are.

In considering these second and third factors put in support of the appellant's construction it is useful to have regard to the history of the provisions. In the 1987 Workers Compensation Act there appeared Note (g) to the Table to Division 4, Part 3 of the Act which I have set forth above. That note was introduced against the background of the decisions of this Court in
Rodios versus Trefel[1] and of the High Court in King versus Hayward[2]. In the latter case it was held that a worker who had received compensation pursuant to s.16 of the 1926 Act in respect of 95% loss of the sight of the eye could receive a further 100% compensation for loss of the remaining 5% sight because loss of that 5% resulted in a loss to the worker of 100% sight of that eye.
After the introduction of s.66 in the 1987 Act, one view of the transition provisions found in clause 6 of Part 6 was that where an award under s.66 was made in respect of a permanent loss resulting from a post 1987 injury, the compensation awarded should reflect only the additional element of permanent disability caused by the post 1987 injury. However in light of Note (g) this
Court in New South Wales Department of Technical & Further Education v
Pitt[3] held that Note (g) forbade the court, when considering impairment of the back from both pre and post 1987 events, from deducting the extent of the pre-1987 impairment of the back resulting from a pre-1987 injury, from the extent of permanent impairment found after the post 1987 injury. Cripps JA said: "If the appellants submission be accepted, the Compensation Court would be required to determine the impairment of back resulting from the injury after the commencement of the 1987 Act and the impairment of the back resulting from other causes (in the present case an injury before the commencement of the Act) and deduct the second from the first. That is expressly what Note forbids. To accede to the appellant's submission would be to oblige the
Compensation Court to do what the legislation says it cannot do, viz. treat the worker's previous impairment as if it did exist." 
There was thus a continuation of the approach adopted in Rodios versus Trefel and
King versus Hayward. This Court refused leave to reargue the correctness of the decision in Pitt in J A Crockett Pty Limited versus Cox[4].

The decisions of this court apparently did not accord with the legislature's intention. Accordingly by the Workcover Legislation Amendment Act 1995[5] the Parliament repealed Note (g) and introduced s.68A.

The terms of s.68A(1) are in my judgment, tolerably clear. The employer who is liable in respect of an injury causing permanent impairment of the back, neck or pelvis is not liable in respect of "any proportion of the loss that is due to" the factors referred to in (a) and (b). The circumstances referred to in are those in respect of which compensation has been paid or is payable under Division 4. The approach of the courts in Rodios versus Trefel, King v
Hayward and TAFE versus Pitt is negated. However the legislature went further by enacting (b). Prior non-compensable injuries, pre-existing conditions or abnormalities result in a deductable proportion being determined for which the employer liable in respect of the injury causing the permanent impairment of the back, neck or pelvis is not to be responsible. The words "any pre-existing condition" in my view include a degenerated back caused by the advent of age.
Insofar as the permanent impairment of the back as found is due to that pre- existing condition, an appropriate deduction for the effects of the pre- existing condition is to be made. In the circumstances mentioned in subsection , it is 10%.

The remaining matter advanced in support of the appellant's contention was a passage in the judgment of Beazley JA, with whom Mahoney P and Priestley JA agreed in Government Cleaning Services versus Ellul[6]. Her Honour in considering s.68A said: "The "loss", the proportion of which gives no entitlement to compensation, is that loss referred to in the opening words of the subsection namely, loss which is permanent impairment of, relevantly, the back. No compensation is payable for such proportion of the loss, that is, for such proportion of the permanent impairment, as is due to a pre-existing condition or abnormality. It is clear from the terms of s.68A(1) that the subsection is not concerned with any pre-existing condition or abnormality which is not causing any permanent impairment." 
Reliance was placed upon the last sentence, but I think it has been taken out of context. When the whole paragraph which I have quoted is read, it is clear that her Honour was clearly stating that unless the pre-existing condition was a contributing factor causing permanent impairment, s.68A(1)(b) had no application. That is clearly so. The decision in Ellul accords with the view which I have expressed above.

The remaining matter raised in respect of the first point was that there was no evidence that degenerative changes due to age were an ingredient in the permanent impairment of the appellant's back as found. In my judgment there clearly was such evidence to which the trial judge referred. The first point on appeal thus fails.

The second matter raised related to rejection of the appellant's claim for permanent loss of the use of his sexual organ.

The trial judge said: "A brief report from Dr Douglas Keller dated 20 December 1995 was the only evidence, apart from that of the applicant, which dealt with the claim for loss of sexual organs. It specifically indicated that he did not think it was possible to give a percentage assessment of loss of use of sexual organs because he said the ability to obtain an erection and ejaculate was still present, but that it was affected by back pain. Even applying the principles in Department of Public Works versus Morrow ((1965) [5 NSWLR 166)] I do not think it is possible to find in these circumstances that the applicant has a loss of sexual organs expressible as a percentage pursuant to s.66 of the Act. I do not by so finding intend to create an issue of estoppel to the fact that the applicant may never have such a loss. It may be that he is able to satisfy a future court that it exists, but it is enough to say that on the medical evidence before me that the case is not proved on the balance of probabilities, and that part of the applicant's claim therefore fails." 
The applicant's case was that on at least one occasion between July 1995 and the hearing in March 1996 he had been able to obtain an erection and was capable of ejaculation, but that because of back pain his erection deflated and he was unable to engage in sexual intercourse. Thus he claimed permanent loss of use of sexual organs. Dr Keller reported: "In actual fact this man does have the ability to have erections and intercourse and also ejaculation but he is prevented from doing so because of the severe back ache which is associated with the attempt to have intercourse." 
The appellant contended that the approach adopted by the trial judge was contrary to the subsequent decision of this Court in Roads & Traffic
Authority versus Malcolm[7].
 
I do not think that is so. Properly construed, his Honour's judgment was merely a finding that having regard to the medical evidence and the applicant's own evidence of the capacity to obtain an erection in the 8 months preceding the hearing, the trial judge was not satisfied that, at this stage, any loss of use of the sexual organ was permanent, and thus s.66 was not attracted.

This ground also fails.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
COHEN AJA: I agree with the reasons of Cole JA and with the proposed orders.
 <case>; [(1943) 67 CLR 488.] [3] (1993) 9 NSWLR CCR 309 at 318.
 [4] [(1984) 10 NSWLR 662.] [5] 89 of 1985.
 [6] (Unreported), Court of Appeal, 12 August 1996.
 [7] (Unreported) 4 July 1996.
 * * * 
