

In the matter of Belinda International Pty Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company
Arrangement) ACN 055 392 777 [2011] NSWSC 1283 (1 November 2011) 
Last Updated: 13 December 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
In the matter of Belinda International Pty Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company
Arrangement) ACN 055 392 777  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): October 2011  
Decision Date: November 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Ball J  
Decision: 
The first defendant's interlocutory process dated 27 October 2011 be dismissed with costs  
Catchwords: 
PROCEDURE - civil - interlocutory issues - stay or dismissal for abuse of process - whether proceedings for ulterior purpose - confuse purpose and motive - whether against public policy - plaintiff would receive direct benefit from litigation - third party had an interest in litigation - not against public policy  
JUDGMENT 
This is an application brought by the first defendant, Belinda International Pty Ltd, to stay or dismiss an originating process filed by the plaintiff, Mr Devin. By his originating process, Mr Devin seeks an order under [s 445D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s445d.html) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) ( the Act ) that a deed of company arrangement ( DOCA ) entered into by Belinda on 26 September 2011 be terminated or, alternatively, an order pursuant to [s 445G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s445g.html) of the Act that the DOCA be declared void. 
Belinda is a retailer of high end women's clothing which operates a number of stores in Sydney. On 23 August 2011, it went into voluntary administration. Mr Devin worked for Belinda and lent it $300,000.00, of which $284,740.06 remains outstanding. The loan was apparently a substantial part of Mr Devin's life savings. 
On 9 September 2011, Mr Devin entered into an agreement with AR Management Pty Limited ( ARM ). ARM, through one of its subsidiaries known as mycatwalk.com, is a competitor of Belinda. Under the terms of the agreement: 
Mr Devin agreed to appoint ARM to act as his authorised representative and to vote on his behalf in its absolute discretion at any meeting of creditors of Belinda; 
Mr Devin agreed not to attend or vote at any meeting of creditors of
Belinda or to exercise any other right attached to the debt owed to him except at the written request or direction of ARM; in return, ARM agreed to pay Mr Devin amounts referred to in the agreement as the "Price". The "Price" was defined to mean the sum of $14,237.00 (which was 5 percent of the debt owed to Mr Devin) together with an amount described as a "Success Fee". The Success Fee was defined to be the amount of $35,763.00 and was payable if ARM acquired all or the majority of the business assets of
Belinda within 12 months of the date of the agreement; 
Mr Devin was required to pay to ARM all distributions received in respect of his debt up to an amount of $14,237.00. He was entitled to keep any sum that he recovered above that amount for himself; 
ARM agreed to employ Mr Devin as a consultant at the rate of $2,500 per day for 4 days or, if ARM acquired all the business assets of Belinda, for 20 days.
On 13 September 2011, the administrators advertised the businesses conducted by Belinda for sale. The administrators also prepared an information package for prospective purchasers. The information package requested interested parties to lodge a signed contract with the administrators by 10.00 am on 19 September 2011 together with a 10 percent deposit. The information package made it clear that the administrators had complete discretion whether to accept or reject an offer. 
On 13 September 2011, the administrators circulated a report to creditors pursuant to [s 439A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s439a.html) of the Act. That report made reference to the fact that the business had been advertised for sale and that offers for the business were to be lodged by 19 September 2011. The report noted that it may be appropriate that the meeting of creditors be adjourned to consider any offers that were made. 
On 19 September 2011, ARM lodged an expression of interest for Belinda's assets with the administrators. The offer to acquire the business was for $2,170,230.00 and the expression of interest was accompanied by a bank cheque for $217,023.00. The offer was subject to due diligence and legal documentation. 
On 20 September 2011, ARM made a second offer. The offer was no longer expressed to be subject to due diligence and the offer price was increased to $2,353,895.00. 
The meeting of creditors was held on 21 September 2011. The chairperson of the meeting recommended that the meeting be adjourned in order to permit further consideration to be given to ARM's offer and time for the administrators to prepare a supplementary report to creditors concerning that offer. However, that resolution failed and a majority of the creditors voted in favour of accepting the DOCA. 
The creditors of the company have been divided into two pools. Under the terms of the DOCA, creditors falling within Pool A are expected to receive 100 cents in the dollar and creditors falling within Pool B are expected to receive 5 cents in the dollar. Management of the company has been returned to the existing management and the company continues to trade. Under the terms of the offer made by ARM, Pool A creditors would have received 100 cents in the dollar and Pool B creditors would have received 15 cents in the dollar. 
On 28 September 2011, Mr Devin commenced these proceedings. He seeks to set aside the DOCA on various grounds which have been identified in points of claim. It is sufficient to observe for present purposes that it is not suggested that these grounds are so weak that the proceedings should be struck out or dismissed for that reason. ARM has agreed to indemnify Mr Devin against any costs he incurs in the proceedings including any adverse costs order. 
Mr Rosenblatt, who appeared for Belinda, submits that the proceedings are an abuse for two reasons. First, he submits that they are being brought for an ulterior purpose - that is, for the purpose of assisting ARM to acquire Belinda's assets. Second, Mr Rosenblatt submits that they are contrary to public policy because they are being funded and are controlled by ARM, which has no real interest in the proceedings. In particular, Mr Rosenblatt points to the following features of the proceedings in support of this submission: absolute control of the proceedings is vested in ARM which is not a party; 
ARM has no liability for the first defendant's costs; there is a disproportionality of value between the rights the subject of the action and "subsisting rights independent of the litigation"; 
ARM does not have a genuine commercial interest in the proceedings, but only a "mere hope" that it will be able to acquire the assets if the DOCA is set aside.

In making these submissions, Mr Rosenblatt relies on the decision in Project Pty Ltd (Formerly Narui Gold Coast Pty Ltd) versus Barr  <case>
In my opinion, Mr Rosenblatt's first reason confuses motive and purpose: see News Ltd versus South Sydney District Rugby League Club Limited  <case>; [215 CLR 563] preventing a litigation funder from funding a representative action. It is not entirely clear whether ARM has complete control of the litigation. Certainly, I do not think that it is given complete control of the litigation by the agreement dated 9 September 2011. That agreement is concerned with the proof of Mr Devin's debt rather than any subsequent litigation. In any event, even if ARM does have complete control of the litigation, I do not think that that alone is sufficient to establish that the proceedings are an abuse. 
In addition, in my opinion, ARM's interest in the litigation itself goes beyond a mere hope or expectation. It made an offer in response to an invitation from the administrators and paid a deposit. The administrator chairing the creditors' meeting recommended that the meeting be adjourned to consider that offer. However, a majority of creditors resolved to continue the meeting and approve the DOCA. ARM has a genuine commercial interest in proceedings challenging that resolution. For that reason also, there is no abuse in it funding the proceedings brought in Mr Devin's name. 
The first defendant's interlocutory process dated 27 October 2011 should be dismissed with costs. * * * 
