

Surgeoner and Ors versus Hogarth and Ors Matter No Nr600021/96 [1998] NSWSC 700 (19 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 January 1999 
BARBARA SURGEONER & ORS versus DAVID HOGARTH & ORS /96 November 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application which comes to the court under Pt60 r10 involving the review of a decision made by Master Malpass on 11 November 1997. 
In order to explain the issue as it has emerged on this application, I should indicate that an action was commenced in the Common Law Division under the
Compensation to Relatives Act, arising out of the death of John Logan
Surgeoner on 12 November 1986. A Statement of Claim was filed on 27 March 1996 by Barbara Ann Surgeoner, the widow of the deceased, on her own behalf and on behalf of six children whose ages varied from approximately sixteen, at the time the action was commenced, to a child, the seventh plaintiff, born on 6
August 1985. In that action there were two defendants named, the first being the person David Edward Hogarth, and the second being New South Wales
Insurance Ministerial Corporation, formerly the Government Insurance Office of
New South Wales.

The action under the Compensation to Relatives Act arose out of a motor vehicle accident on 12 November 1986. At that time the deceased was travelling with his son, Peter Surgeoner, along a road known as the Putty Road, on his way to Queensland where he was to join his family. He was driving a vehicle which was towing a trailer. That vehicle came in collision with a vehicle driven by David Edward Hogarth, the first defendant. There is uncertainty as to the circumstances in which the collision occurred. Mr Hogarth provided a statement to the police in which he said that the vehicle driven by Mr
Surgeoner drifted onto his side of the road. The passenger in the vehicle of
Mr Surgeoner, his son Peter, was apparently looking elsewhere at the time of the collision, and has an uncertain recollection as to precisely what occurred. However, he does give evidence in the statement he has provided, that he and his father had taken a number of breaks after leaving their home near Penrith, and that his father was proceeding at a normal speed and carefully, as he saw it, in a northerly direction. The police attended the scene and, of course, the only person capable of being interviewed was Mr
Hogarth. They prepared a report which attributed blame to the deceased and provided in that report, in the usual way, a diagram which depicted the vehicle of the deceased straying onto its incorrect side of the road.

The matter came before Master Malpass as an application to join three additional defendants. They were, first, the Commonwealth of Australia, secondly, the Roads and Traffic Authority, and, thirdly, the Council of the
Shire of Singleton. One of the affidavits provided in support of the application by Mr Charles Wilson, a solicitor who has the carriage of the matter on behalf of the plaintiff, annexed a document which was labelled
Amended Statement of Claim, which sought to identify the basis upon which these parties were sought to be joined. In broad terms, the Amended Statement of Claim asserted negligence against the driver, David Edward Hogarth, in permitting his vehicle to proceed onto Mr Surgeoner's side of the road, but it recognised that the reverse may have been the case, as indeed Mr Hogarth alleged to the police and sought to assert an alternative basis.

The alternative basis was that the road itself was designed and constructed in a way which departed from appropriate standards. By reason of that departure from standards, the deceased driver, Mr Surgeoner, was deceived by the appearance of the road, such that his vehicle drifted onto its incorrect side.
The basis of that allegation can be traced to several reports by Mr Brown, a civil engineer, which were obtained by Mr Wilson on behalf of his client,.
These reports were furnished to the proposed defendants and they were annexed to the affidavit of Christopher Edward Newnham, solicitor acting on behalf of the RTA.

There are in fact two reports, the first of 8 November 1996, and a second report of 1 October 1997. The first report was provided, apparently before Mr
Brown had access to certain material which became available, one gathers, as a result of the RTA making a search of its archives, or State Archives, and retrieving certain material from that source. As a consequence of access to that material, Mr Brown provided a commentary upon the curves which formed part of the road at the site of the accident, and the distance referred to as, the transition, between those curves. He says this in his report of 1 October :
 "For curves of 122m and 182m radius the transition at each end of the curve would be 39.6m and 27.4m long respectively." 
If I could interrupt the quote to interpolate, Mr Brown is there referring to a design standard in 1937, which he believes was the relevant standard at the time. This particular road was constructed at some time between 1942 and 1945.
Going back to the quote, he continues: "In this case, the back to back curves are close together and after the length of the transition is added to the ends of the curves the intermediate straight remaining is 16m. This situation indicates substandard design. Acceptable road design, to the standards that existed at the time of construction, would provide for an intermediate straight of at least 30.5m in length.
Alternatively, the two adjacent curves could have been formed into one longer curve of a constant radius as is proposed by the reconstruction design plan. A driver that has been through the first curve northbound is likely to find that the vehicle overruns part of the entry transition without turning because of the short straight. As a result the vehicle crosses the centre line before a steering correction can be made." 
Mr Brown added: "It is considered that if the vehicle driven by John Surgeoner had crossed the road centre line, then the substandard horizontal geometry of these curves would be a contributing factor to the cause of this accident." 
He provides an opinion at the end of his report in which he repeats that conclusion.

The matter before me, and indeed as I understand it, before Master Malpass, proceeded upon the basis of affidavits. Mr Brown was not required for cross examination. However, when the matter was considered by Master Malpass, there was greater uncertainty as to the appropriate defendant than there is in the application before me. When the matter proceeded before me, the actions proposed against the Commonwealth, who had apparently funded this road, and against the Singleton Shire Council, being the Local Government area through which the road passes, were each abandoned and terms were filed.

The action therefore, is simply one in which it is proposed to join the Road
Traffic Authority as a third defendant to the action.

I should explain that the application so far as the claims for nervous shock are concerned, is confined to the fifth, sixth and seventh plaintiffs, that is to say the fifth plaintiff, Deborah Jane Surgeoner, the sixth plaintiff,
Stephen Joel Surgeoner, and the seventh plaintiff, Rachel Joy Surgeoner, they being persons who are still minors and in respect of whom there is therefore no limitation difficulty. Further, in respect of the claim under the
Compensation to Relatives Act, there being parties who are not in any way statute barred, the view is taken following a decision of Palmer v
Riverstone Meat Company Pty Limited, being a decision of Master Greenwood of 16 June 1988, Torts Report for that year, and in relying upon a decision of
Justice Enderby of Bendt versus Green & Ors of 7 April 1983, unreported, that there is no limitation difficulty in respect of the Compensation to
Relatives Act action either.

The particular rule which governs the addition of a party to an action which is already under way is Pt8 r8 of the Supreme Court Rules. That rule provides: "1. Where a person who is not a party - 
Ought to have been joined as a party; or 
Is a person whose joinder as a party is necessary to ensure that all matters in dispute in the proceedings may be effectually and completely determined and adjudicated upon, the court, on application by him or by any party or of its own motion, may order that he be added as a party and make orders for the further conduct of the proceedings." 
Here the difficulty which the respondent to this application faces, as they acknowledged during argument, is that it would be open to the fifth, sixth and seventh plaintiffs to commence an action which includes the Road Traffic
Authority as a defendant, and which alleges the matters which the plaintiffs now seek collectively to rely upon. Were that course to be adopted, it would obviously be sensible that the determination of that separate action should proceed at the same time as the action which is already under way, since many of the issues will be common between them.

So far as the respondent is concerned, it points to prejudice which arises for its client by reason of it being joined at this late stage. No explanation emerges for the delay in the material which was before Master Malpass, that material being the same material as is before me. Mr Glissan QC, appearing for the plaintiffs, contends that prejudice, as such, is not relevant to the exercise of the discretion which arises under Pt8 r8. In any event, the prejudice he contends arises, not through any delay on the part of the plaintiffs in bringing this action, but rather through the antiquity of the facts, this road being built between 1942 and 1945. I must say, for my part, I do not believe that the prejudice which exists for the proposed third defendant, the Road Traffic Authority, is any greater today than it was in when this accident occurred.

In any event it seems to me, in the circumstances that I have outlined, and applying my mind to the test which emerges from the rule itself, that it is far more convenient that the present respondent be added as a party, than the plaintiff be put to the expense and trouble of issuing a separate Statement of
Claim, and then applying to consolidate the actions or have them heard at the same time. Therefore, to ensure that all matters in dispute in the proceedings may be effectively and completely determined and adjudicated upon, it is preferable that the Road Traffic Authority be added as a defendant to the proceedings which are already under way.

There is, however, one aspect which was adverted to by Master Malpass. That is the question of the utility of giving leave to add the Road Traffic Authority or any party at this stage. Master Malpass expressed himself as not being satisfied that there would be sufficient utility in giving that leave. One can understand that view, given the uncertainty, at that time, as to who was responsible for the road, and the number of parties the plaintiff then sought to join on the basis that they may possibly be responsible. However, that uncertainty has to some extent evaporated. The Commonwealth and the Shire
Council have departed. It seems to me in the light of Mr Brown's report that there was, arguably, a departure from the standards which applied at the relevant time in the design of this road, and that such departure may have operated to deceive drivers as they approached the curve.

Mr Quinlivan, appearing on behalf of the respondent, has pointed to certain matters which, in his submission, cast some doubt upon the views of Mr Brown.
There may be some force in the issues which he raises, which can, no doubt, be tested in due course, when Mr Brown is called to give evidence. However, Mr
Brown does express an opinion, which I have already quoted, and that opinion does suggest a departure from appropriate standards. Mr Brown was not required for cross examination. His views make it difficult to suggest that the proposed action would inevitably fail. For all these reasons, it seems to me that it is appropriate to add the Road Traffic Authority.

So far as costs are concerned, that is, costs both before the Master, and before me, I vacate the order of Master Malpass, and I propose that the costs before him and the costs before me should be costs in the cause.

The orders I make are:
I give leave to add the Road Traffic Authority as a party in respect of the action between the plaintiffs under the Compensation to Relatives Act, and on behalf of the fifth, sixth and seventh plaintiffs for nervous shock.
I vacate the order of Master Malpass, and propose that costs before him, and costs before me today, should be costs in the cause.
 * * * 
