

Wallace and Anor versus State Bank of New South Wales Limited and Anor Matter
No 13578/97 [1998] NSWSC 206 (19 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
WALLACE & ANOR versus STATE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES LIMITED & ANOR /97 March 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: In 1995, the State Bank brought proceedings in the District Court to recover a monetary claim founded on a lease. The claim is in the order of $42,000 plus interest. Senite Pty Limited (Senite) was named as first defendant in the proceedings. Mr and Mrs Wallace were the other defendants. The claim is not proceeding against Senite. The Wallaces have filed a Defence. The substantial defences are a claim for relief under the Contracts Review Act. 
In 1995, the Wallaces filed a Third Party Notice. It propounds a claim founded on an indemnity. It is brought against Messrs Wong and Baxter, who are residents of Hong Kong. There have been difficulties in effecting service of that process. Whilst service is yet to take place, some discussions have been had and prospects are held for a resolution of the dispute.

There are differences between the District Court Rules and the Rules of this
Court. The former do not contain provisions enabling the effecting of service of the Third Party proceedings in Hong Kong. This Court does have the provisions necessary to enable that to take place (Part 10).

By Summons filed on 24 December 1997, the Wallaces now seek to have the
District Court proceedings brought up to this Court so that the service problems can be overcome.

The application is opposed. It is opposed on discretionary grounds. There is no dispute as to the existence of the service problems.

The Court has a discretionary power to bring the proceedings into this Court.
The power is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice can be best served between the parties. The onus rests with the applicant to satisfy the Court that an order should be made. In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that such onus has been discharged.

The amount involved may be described as modest. It is perhaps more appropriately litigated even in the Local Court. It is not said that the relevant issues involve any complex questions. As things presently stand, the plaintiffs can reasonably expect that the District Court proceedings will come on for hearing during about the middle of next year. If the proceedings are brought up to this Court, they may not come on for hearing for many years.
There are also significant cost considerations. The existing cost rules may deprive the parties of costs if the proceedings are brought into this Court.

The Court appreciates that the Wallaces are faced with certain problems and wishes to do its best to assist them. However, there does appear to be other approaches available to the parties. I shall mention one of them. The Wallaces may commence a proceeding in this Court against the Hong Kong residents. Any such proceedings may then be remitted to the District Court. They may then be heard together with the existing District Court proceedings.

The Court is concerned that the Wallaces have been put to the expense of paying a considerable filing fee to commence these proceedings. I have indicated, during the course of submissions, that I am prepared to make an order waiving the filing fee payable on the commencement of proceedings by the
Wallaces against Messrs Wong and Baxter founded on the claim for indemnity and
I make that order.

All that remains is for the Court to dispose of the existing Summons. The only course open is to dismiss the Summons. I make that order. The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of the Summons.
 * * * 
