

Regina versus Harrison Matter No Cca 60523/97 [1998] NSWSC 27 (23 February )

Last Updated: 3 April 1998 `

REGINA V KEVIN FRANK HARRISON` /97 February 1998 
Smart J, James J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown Appeal against sentence imposed by Judge Moore 
FILE NO: 060523/97 
DELIVERED: 23 February 1998 
HEARING DATE: 23 February 1998 
PARTIES: Regina versus Kevin Frank HARRISON 
JUDGMENT OF: Smart, James, Sperling JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT-WG Dawe QC 
RESPONDENT-JP Punch 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - SE O'Connor 
RESPONDENT- 
RESULT: Appeal against sentence upheld 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Armed robbery - community service order - whether most exceptional circumstances - voluntary disclosure of guilt - forgiveness by victims - sentence of periodic detention imposed 
No of pages: 16 
KEVIN FRANK HARRISON versus REGINA 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Mr Justice James will give the first judgment. 
JAMES J: This is an appeal by the Director of Public 
Prosecutions pursuant to section 5D of the Criminal Appeal Act against sentences pronounced by his Honour Judge Moore in the District Court on 5
September 1997 on the respondent Kevin Frank Harrison. The respondent pleaded guilty to a charge of armed robbery committed on 18 August 1996 and a charge of larceny committed on 2 December 1996. On each charge his Honour Judge Moore made an order that the respondent perform community service work of 400 hours, the two orders to operate concurrently. Armed robbery is an offence under section 97 of the Crimes Act and carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for twenty years. Larceny is an offence under section 117 of the Crimes Act and carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for five years.

The facts of the first offence were stated by the sentencing judge in his remarks on sentence as follows: "The armed robbery offence occurred in the evening of a Sunday at about 7.30pm when the prisoner walked into a service station. He had only just completed cutting down a .22 calibre rifle which he had at home and as he walked into the premises he pulled a stocking over his head. The rifle was not loaded and he did not produce it. He left it down inside his trousers but showed it to the attendant.

The attendant was frightened by that, as his statement says and one hardly needs a statement to that effect to believe that that would have been the case. He gave him all the money which was in the till, $371.40. The prisoner then ran out of the premises.

His complete lack of sophistication in this matter can be gauged by the fact that he had driven his father's motor car to the service station and parked it nearby. He got into it and drove home, changed and then went to the house of his then girlfried, Wendy Down, with whom he had had a relationship for some years".

Further facts of the first offence which were included in the facts sheet admitted into evidence and which were supported by admissions of the respondent or assertions in statements by witnesses and which were not disputed in the proceedings on sentence, included that the respondent had thought of committing the offence a couple of days previously, the respondent had cut down both the barrel and the butt of the firearm, so that it was capable of being held in one hand and being easily concealed and that before going to the service station he had changed into black trousers and a black jumper, as well as obtaining a stocking from a clothes basket.

The service station attendant who was the victim of the robbery was nineteen years old and was alone in the service station at the time of the robbery.

The facts of the second offence were stated by the sentencing judge in his remarks on sentence as follows: "The second offence occurred on 2 December 1996. On that date the prisoner, in company with another person whom he named, went to the premises of Down
Engineering, that being the premises of a business run by Wendy Down's father.
The person whom he went with was the person who wanted to steal four wheels and tyres from those premises and he assisted that person. In fact, he seems to have been the stronger of the two of them as he lifted the heavy items over a fence which his accomplice could not do, and he took a quite active part in the theft".

The sentencing judge then referred to different accounts of what had happened to the items taken from the vehicle. His Honour then continued as follows:- "Whatever the position, I am satisfied that all that happened on that occasion, grave as it is, was that the prisoner assisted another in the commission of the crime and gained nothing from it. That is by no means to depreciate the gravity of that crime which would, in ordinary circumstances, justify a prison sentence".

The respondent was not apprehended until 3 May 1997. On 29 April 1997 Wendy
Down had gone to a police station and made a statement. In her statement she described the respondent as her ex-boyfriend. She said that in August 1996 the respondent had come to see her and he had told her he had committed an armed robbery at a service station in Camden, that he had been wearing a stocking over his head and that he had had a cut-down .22 firearm. Wendy Down said he had offered her money from the robbery but she had said that she didn't want it. Wendy Down said in her statement that about two weeks later at the respondent's parents' house the respondent had shown her the stocking and the gun which he had used in the robbery. Wendy Down also said in her statement that one night she had gone with the respondent to the house of one of the respondent's friends, who she named. The respondent and his friend had left her and the friend's girl friend in the house and had returned two hours later. She then saw the respondent and his friend unloading tyres from a vehicle. Some weeks later the respondent told her that he and his friend had broken into Wendy Down's parents' factory and had stolen some tyres.

After taking the statement from Wendy Down the police contacted the respondent, who voluntarily attended the police station on 3 May 1997. At the police station the respondent admitted committing both offences and took part in an electronically recorded interview, in which he made full admissions. The respondent was arrested and charged and was granted bail and remained at liberty on bail until he was sentenced. On 27 June 1997 he pleaded guilty to both offences in the Local Court and was committed for sentence in the
District Court.

On or about 16 September 1997 the Director of Public Prosecutions notified the respondent by letter that the Director was considering an appeal against the sentences pronounced by Judge Moore. The Crown appeal was lodged on 15 October and promptly served on the respondent.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge observed that both offences were serious and each would ordinarily justify a prison sentence. His Honour referred to the sentencing principle that armed robbery is to be regarded as an offence of the utmost gravity and that a full-time custodial sentence must be imposed except in the most exceptional circumstances. (See for example R v Roberts [(1994) 73 A Crim R 306)].
However, his Honour found that in the present case there were most exceptional circumstances. These consisted of:- , the youth of the respondent, who was born on 24 June 1977 and hence was nineteen years old at the time the offences were committed and twenty years old at the time he was sentenced.
 , the good character of the respondent. He had no previous criminal history, had a good employment record and at the time of being sentenced was in the last year of an apprenticeship as a boilermaker. He had the support of his family and a number of referees, including Wendy Down's father testified to his good character.
 , the psychological state of the respondent at the time of committing the offences. A clinical psychologist, Mr Borenstein, had assessed the respondent on 22 August 1997 and in his report Mr Borenstein expressed the opinion that at the time of committing the offences the respondent was suffering from a major depression and an aberration of mind of a delusional nature, resulting from his association with Wendy Down.
 , the victims of the two offences, who the sentencing judge identified as the service station attendant, Mr Stewart, and Mr Down, had forgiven the respondent. As I have already stated, Mr Down gave a reference for the respondent. His Honour recognised that it was not as "unequivocally" clear that Mr Stewart had forgiven the respondent. The respondent had given oral evidence in the proceedings on sentence that, while he was on bail, he had seen Mr Stewart at a party and had apologised to Mr Stewart and Mr Stewart had said, "That's fine: I'm over it" and that Mr Stewart had wished the respondent luck, when the respondent went to court. In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge accepted that the Crown was taken by surprise by this evidence about Mr Stewart, given by the respondent. His Honour considered that the proceedings on sentence should be concluded that day and should not be stood over so as to enable the Crown to obtain evidence from Mr Stewart. His
Honour said that he was entitled to take into account the attitude of Mr Down and the "likely" attitude of Mr Stewart.
 , the early admissions, the respondent's pleas of guilty and the respondent's contrition.

A factor which was referred to by his Honour near the beginning of his remarks on sentence and which would appear to have been included in the circumstances which his Honour regarded as amounting to exceptional circumstances, was that the respondent had, as his Honour expressed it, "volunteered his guilt". His
Honour considered that the respondent merited a substantial reduction in his sentence because of his volunteering of his guilt.

On this appeal it was submitted on behalf of the Crown that the circumstances on which the sentencing judge had relied could not be regarded as amounting to most exceptional circumstances, so as to warrant the imposition of a sentence less than a full-time custodial sentence for the offence of armed robbery, that his Honour had not had proper regard to the gravity of the offences viewed objectively and that the sentences imposed were inadequate.

Counsel for the Crown also made a number of specific submissions, including that:- the sentencing judge had erred in finding that the respondent had volunteered his guilt, if that expression was to be understood in the way it is normally used in the sentencing of offenders.
 , his Honour's summation of the second offence, that the respondent assisted another in the commission of the crime was erroneous, in that the evidence before his Honour showed that, while the second offence was carried out for the benefit of another person, the respondent had played the leading part in the commission of the offence.
 , that the sentencing judge had erred in making the finding that the victim, Mr Stewart, had forgiven the respondent, particularly when his Honour had declined to adjourn the proceedings on sentence so as to give the Crown an opportunity to call evidence on the issue. The Crown asked this court to receive an affidavit obtained by the Crown from Mr Stewart on 24 December .`Counsel for the respondent did not object to the admission of this affidavit and the court received the affidavit. In his affidavit Mr Stewart confirmed that he had attended a party, that at the party the respondent had come up to him and had told him how sorry he was for his actions in committing the armed robbery and that Mr Stewart had accepted the apology. However, Mr
Stewart said the respondent had been intoxicated and that he had accepted the respondent's apology, "because I was really embarrassed and I didn't wish to continue talking with him."` 
The Crown also submitted that, quite apart from whether there was a proper factual basis for the finding that the victims of the offences had forgiven the respondent, the sentencing judge had erred in taking into account, or at least in giving the weight which he apparently had, to the fact that the victims of the offences had forgiven the respondent for having committed the offences.

The Crown also based a submission on his Honour's finding that in committing the first offence the respondent had not produced a firearm. However, the evidence before his Honour was that the respondent did not remove the firearm from his trousers. His Honour recognised and took into account that the respondent, while not removing the firearm from his trousers, indicated the firearm to the service station attendant and conveyed to the attendant that he was armed.

Counsel for the respondent submitted that his Honour was entitled to find that there were most exceptional circumstances and that the subjective features of the case could not be separated from the objective facts of the offences, because some of the subjective features explained the respondent's motivation for committing the offences. On whether the respondent had volunteered his guilt, it was submitted that if, after Wendy Down had made her statement, the respondent had denied his guilt and had denied making admissions to Wendy
Down, the Crown would have had only disputed admissions made to an estranged former lover on which to mount any prosecution. Reference was also made to statistics kept by the Judicial Commission, which showed over the period covered by the statistics that of those offenders convicted of armed robbery, who had pleaded guilty, who had no previous criminal history and who were under 21, 15 percent had received community service orders.

The general principles relating to the determination of Crown appeals are well known and need not be repeated here.

It is convenient to deal firstly with the specific challenges made by the
Crown to the sentencing of the respondent by the sentencing judge. As I have already indicated, the sentencing judge found that because he had volunteered his guilt, the respondent was entitled to a substantial reduction in sentence.

In Regina versus Ellis [(1986) 6 NSWLR 603] Street CJ said at page 604:- "This Court has said on a number of occasions that a plea of guilty will entitle a convicted person to an element of leniency in the sentence. The degree of leniency may vary according to the degree of inevitability of conviction as it may appear to the sentencing judge, but it is always a factor to which a greater or lesser degree of weight must be given.

When the conviction follows upon a plea of guilty, that itself is the result of a voluntary disclosure of guilt by the person concerned, a further element of leniency enters into the sentencing decision. Where it was unlikely that guilt would be discovered and established were it not for the disclosure by the person coming forward for sentence, then a considerable element of leniency should properly be extended by the sentencing judge. It is part of the policy of the criminal law to encourage a guilty person to come forward and disclose both the fact of an offence having been committed and confession of guilt of that offence.

The leniency that follows a confession of guilt in the form of a plea of guilty is a well recognised part of the body of principles that cover sentencing. Although less well recognised, because less frequently encountered, the disclosure of an otherwise unknown guilt of an offence merits a significant added element of leniency, the degree of which will vary according to the degree of likelihood of that guilt being discovered by the law enforcement authorities, as well as guilt being established against the person concerned".

This passage in the judgment of Street CJ in Ellis has frequently been referred to with approval by this Court, see for example R versus Dodd [(1991) A Crim R 349] at 352.

In the present case it is important to be clear in what sense, if at all, it could be said that the respondent had volunteered his guilt. The respondent did not disclose the fact of either offence having been committed. The victim of the first offence, Mr Stewart, who of course had first hand knowledge of the commission of the offence, disclosed the fact of the offence to the police, later on the night of 11 August, 1996.

The real victim of the second offence, a Mr Todorovic, who was the owner of the wheels and the tyres which were stolen by the respondent, became aware that they had been stolen the day after the offence was committed and reported the offence promptly to the police.

It was not the respondent who disclosed to the police that it was he who was guilty of having committed the offences. It was Wendy Down who, on 29 April, , a number of months after the commission of the offences, went to the police and made a detailed statement, in which she asserted that the respondent had confessed to both offences, that he had shown her the firearm and the stocking used in committing the armed robbery and that he had named the co-offender in respect of the second offence. It is only after Wendy Down had made her statement incriminating the respondent, that the respondent himself communicated to the police that he was guilty of the offences.

The respondent was entitled to credit for having made admissions when he first spoke to the police and for having pleaded guilty. The amount of that credit had to reflect that, if he had not made admissions to the police and had denied what Wendy Down had asserted, it might well have been difficult for the
Crown to establish his guilt. However, the amount of credit he was entitled to, on the ground that he had volunteered his guilt, over and above the credit he was entitled to receive for having made admissions and for having pleaded guilty, was limited and in my opinion his Honour erred in holding that the respondent was entitled to a substantial reduction in sentence on that ground.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge concluded, with respect to the second offence, that, "all that happened on that occasion was that the prisoner assisted another in the commission of a crime." In my opinion, this conclusion misstated the evidence about the respondent's role in the commission of the second offence, which the respondent had supplied in the electronically recorded interview and which was not disputed in the proceedings on sentence. According to the respondent's answers in the interview, it was his idea to steal the wheels and tyres. It was he who drove himself and the co-offender to the premises where the vehicle was. It was he who made use of his previous familiarity with the premises and it was he who did all of the acts involved in stealing the wheels and tyres, including unlocking the wheel nuts, lifting the chassis of the vehicle, kicking the wheels off the chassis and throwing the wheels over the fence of the premises.

The sentencing judge found that the victims of the two offences had forgiven the respondent and that he should take that circumstance into account in sentencing the respondent. His Honour treated Mr Down as the victim of the second offence and inferred from the reference Mr Down had given the respondent that he had forgiven the respondent. However, as I have already indicated, the victim of the second offence was not Mr Down, although his premises had been entered and although his insurer may have ultimately made a payment, but Mr Todorovic, who was the owner of the property which was stolen.
There was no evidence that Mr Todorovic had forgiven the respondent. Mr
Todorovic complained in his statement made to the police that he had had to wait four months before the wheels and tyres which had been stolen were replaced.

The sentencing judge found, on the basis of evidence given by the respondent himself, that Mr Stewart had forgiven the respondent. His Honour accepted that the Crown had been taken by surprise by this evidence by the respondent but declined to adjourn the proceedings on sentence, so as to give the Crown an opportunity to test the respondent's evidence. I am conscious that sentencing proceedings in the District Court have to be conducted expeditiously and that in the present case there were apparently a number of persons in the court room interested in the outcome of the proceedings and the sentencing judge was understandably reluctant to adjourn the proceedings on sentence. Nevertheless, the Crown was denied the opportunity of testing the respondent's evidence. The weight which could properly be given in the sentencing of the respondent to the respondent's own untested assertion that Mr Stewart had forgiven him, could, at the most, be very slight.

Accordingly, there was no evidence that the victim of one of the offences had forgiven the respondent and only untested evidence by the respondent himself that the victim of the other offence had forgiven him.

There have been cases in which this Court has said that the attitude of the victim of an offence can properly be taken into account in sentencing the offender. R versus Bradford (unreported 6 May, 1988) is such a case. In
Bradford the victim, who was the offender's wife, had returned to live with him, after he had committed the offence of maliciously wounding her with intent to do grievous bodily harm. However, the remarks of Street CJ at pages and 5 of his Honour's judgment should be kept in mind:- "One must, of course, recognise the very real concern of the victim of such an offence and the potential victims of similar offences. In this instance the attitude of the victim is manifested by her having returned to live with the appellant. It does not of course lie in the hands of a victim to determine what punishment should be meted out for a criminal offence. Punishment can properly be tempered in the light of the victim's attitude. But the community's interest in ensuring law abiding conduct by its citizens must be given due weight when determining the sentence in a case such as this".

In the present case, especially having regard to the flimsy evidentiary basis,
I consider that his Honour erred in treating as a significant factor that the victims of the offences had forgiven the respondent.

In my opinion the specific errors made by the sentencing judge I have already referred to would require the Crown appeal to be upheld. I would also uphold the Crown's general submission that, when regard is had to the objective facts of the offences and especially the objective facts of the offence of armed robbery, the circumstances relied on by the sentencing judge could not be regarded as amounting to most exceptional circumstances.

In the present case the offence of armed robbery was committed with a firearm, which had been shortened by the respondent for the purpose of committing the robbery, the robbery was pre-meditated, the respondent put on dark clothing and disguised himself by putting a stocking over his face and the robbery was committed at night at a service station while the victim of the robbery was alone in the service station. While not drawing the firearm, the respondent indicated the firearm to the victim. The second offence was quite separate from the first offence and the respondent played a major role in committing it. In my opinion, the Crown appeal should be upheld. I see no discretionary reason why the appeal should not be upheld.

In re-sentencing the respondent this Court should observe the principle that because of considerations of double jeopardy the sentence to be imposed after a successful Crown appeal against sentence should be less than the sentence which the court considers should properly have been imposed in the first instance.

I have already set out the objective facts of the offences and referred to the subjective circumstances of the respondent and I will not repeat them. In my opinion, the sentence which should properly have been imposed at first instance for the offence of armed robbery would have been a sentence of full time custody. However, having regard to the principle of re-sentencing I have already referred to, and having regard to the respondent's very favourable subjective circumstances, I would propose that a sentence to be served by way of periodic detention be imposed. I repeat that in my opinion the proper sentence in the first instance would have been a sentence of full time custody and the sentence I now propose is a lenient one.

I would propose that the Crown appeal against sentence be upheld, that the sentences imposed by Judge Moore on 5 September 1997 be quashed and that in lieu thereof on each count the respondent be sentenced to penal servitude for months to be served by way of periodic detention.

According to information which has been placed before the court, the respondent is suitable for periodic detention. A vacancy for periodic detention exists at Campbelltown Periodic Detention Centre. The periodic detention is to commence on Friday, 6 March, 1998 and the respondent should be ordered to report to that Periodic Detention Centre by 7pm on that day, 6
March, 1998.

SMART J: I agree. 
SPERLING J: I agree with the orders proposed by James J. 
SMART J: The orders of the court will be as proposed by James J. * * * 
