

O'Sullivan versus Thai Airways International Limited Matter No 10716/92 [1998]
NSWSC 624 (30 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 11 December 1998 
MARGARET ANNE O'SULLIVAN versus THAI AIRWAYS INTERNATIONAL LIMITED /92 November 1998 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: By statement of claim issued on 31 January 1992 the plaintiff, an American born Irish national, sues in the Supreme Court of NSW for injuries suffered by her in Thailand on 21 March 1991. The defendant is a company incorporated in Thailand and registered in NSW. 
On 13 February 1992 the defendant filed a notice of motion seeking a declaration that the court lacked jurisdiction over the defendant in respect of the subject matter of the proceedings, or alternatively an order that the court decline to exercise its jurisdiction in the proceedings. The notice of motion came before Sharpe J who delivered judgment on 10 July 1992, dismissing the notice of motion. In his reasons his Honour observed that, from the outset of the hearing the defendant's legal representative made it clear that the defendant's case was not based on any assertion of absence of jurisdiction, "but purely on the principle of `forum non conveniens'." 
There is no challenge to Sharpe J's decision and, accordingly, there is no jurisdictional issue.

There is, however, a contest as to the applicable law. At the commencement of the hearing counsel for the defendant stated that it was the defendant's position that the relevant law to be applied to the determination of both liability and quantification of damages was that of Thailand. However, he followed this with the immediate concession that he was not in a position to prove Thai law and that the defendant therefore accepted a presumption that
NSW law will be applied. The sole remaining argument concerns the quantification of damages, if liability under NSW law is established. The defendant argued that the relevant law in this respect is the scheme provided by the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/); the plaintiff that quantification of damages is governed by the principles of common law.

Liability 
The plaintiff's account of the circumstances in which she was injured is not in dispute and I accept it in full. It is as follows.

The plaintiff is a trained nurse. In 1991 she decided to travel to Australia on an extended working holiday and contemplated making her permanent home here. She was granted permanent residence status. En route to Australia she stopped in Thailand, planning to spend a few days in Bangkok and in Chiang Mai in the north of the country. She had booked accommodation at a youth hostel in
Khao San Road in Bangkok city. She arrived at Bangkok Airport at about 9.00 pm on 21 March 1991 and purchased a ticket entitling her to travel by minibus to the city. With other passengers she boarded the bus. The bus did not follow a designated route but delivered passengers to their various destinations as convenient. Because of the late hour the plaintiff a number of times asked the bus driver to take her to her accommodation first. This he repeatedly agreed to do but did not, dropping other passengers at their destinations first.
Eventually the plaintiff was the only passenger left on board. The bus was stationary, having set down the last passenger other than the plaintiff. The driver turned and asked the plaintiff to sit in the front with him. She declined. He motioned to her to do so. She declined again. He tried to "grab" the plaintiff, became angry and raised his voice. He screamed at her, then drove off, accelerating to a very high speed. The bus skidded and collided with a tuk-tuk, or motorised rickshaw. The plaintiff was thrown forward and then back and fell on her back to the floor, striking part of a seat as she did so. She immediately felt pain in the mid to low back. The bus came to a halt. The driver disappeared for about ten or fifteen minutes. When he returned, he "shrugged me off", to use the plaintiff's expression. She completed her journey to the city in a tuk-tuk and eventually arrived at the hostel. The pain in her back continued and she abandoned her plans to travel to the north of Thailand. She treated herself with non-prescription pain killers.

The plaintiff wrote to the defendant, outlining what had occurred. Two representatives of the defendant visited her at the hostel. One of them gave her his business card (ex A) which bears the insignia of the defendant and identifies him as Vicharn Abhicharttibutra, Manager, Thai Limousine Service
Department. He apologised to the plaintiff for the conduct of the bus driver and said that he had been referred by an agency. He provided a limousine to take the plaintiff to the airport for her flight to Sydney, referred her to the defendant's doctor at the airport, and invited her, if she had further trouble with her back, to contact the defendant's office in Sydney. I infer from this that this gentleman accepted that the defendant was responsible for the conduct of the driver. His authority to speak for the defendant was not disputed. By its defence, the defendant admits that the plaintiff boarded a bus "operated by the defendant".

The Plaintiff's Claim 
The plaintiff, in her statement of claim, pleads causes of action against the defendant in assault and in negligence. Her claim in negligence is two fold: she alleges, firstly, that the defendant is liable to her directly in failing properly to screen or supervise the driver; and secondly, that the defendant is vicariously liable for the assault and negligence of the driver who, she alleges, drove at "an excessive and/or grossly excessive speed" and failed to maintain proper control of the vehicle or keep a proper lookout. She further relies on the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.

On the evidence of the plaintiff I am satisfied that the bus driver committed an assault upon her for which he, if sued, would be liable in damages. The assault occurred when he "grabbed" the plaintiff. This is so whether or not he made physical contact with the plaintiff, which is not entirely clear on her evidence. I am further satisfied that the driver was guilty of negligence in the manner and in the speed at which he drove the bus. For this, too, he would, if sued, be liable to the plaintiff in damages.

The defendant did not argue against the proposition that it owed the plaintiff a duty of care and I take it as accepted and established that, applying the law of tort of NSW, it did owe her such a duty.

Nor did the defendant argue against the proposition that its duty to the plaintiff included a duty to take reasonable care in the selection and supervision of any employees into whose care she might be entrusted by the defendant. In my view, the circumstances I have outlined and the behaviour of the driver show that these procedures failed in the present case. That inference is strengthened by the acknowledgment of Mr Abhicharttibutra to the plaintiff that the driver had been referred to the defendant by an agency. The defendant called no oral evidence in the proceedings and no evidence at all on the question of liability. In my opinion, therefore, on the plaintiff's claim that the defendant is directly liable to her in negligence, she is entitled to a verdict. This finding includes liability for the assault committed upon the plaintiff by the driver. The consequences of the defendant's failure to ensure that its employee was a suitable person to drive the plaintiff to town extend to the assault perpetrated by the driver.

The alternative basis upon which the claim is put, that the defendant is vicariously liable for the negligence of and assault by the driver, is more contentious. Mr Southwick, for the defendant, based his argument on the law as stated in Deatons Pty Limited versus Flew <case>; [(1949) 79 CLR 370.] In that case, an employer company which owned and operated a hotel was held not to be liable for the act of its employee, a barmaid, who threw the contents of a glass of beer and then the glass itself into the face of the plaintiff causing him serious injury. Latham CJ wrote: "An employer is liable for the act of his servant only if the act is shown to come within the scope of the servant's authority either as being an act which he was employed actually to perform or as being an act which was incidental to his employment." (p378) 
On the facts of that case, the Chief Justice held that: "Upon the plaintiff's evidence the throwing of the beer was a gratuitous, unprovoked act which had nothing at all to do with the performance of the duties of the barmaid. Upon the evidence given for the defendant the act was an act of personal resentment and was not in any way performed as on behalf of the employer. It was not done even in supposed furtherance of the interests of the employer. In doing what she did the barmaid was, as Isaacs J said in
Bugge versus Brown <case>; [26
CLR 110]] acting so `as to be in effect a stranger in relation to (her) employer with respect to the act (she) has committed, so that the act is in law the unauthorised act of a stranger.' ...the act of the barmaid was not expressly authorised, it was not so connected with any authorised act as to be a mode of doing it, but was an independent personal act which was not connected with or incidental in any manner to the work which the barmaid was employed to perform." (p379) 
In Deatons it was accepted that an employer may be vicariously liable for the tort of an employee if the act the subject of the claim was reasonably incidental to, or an improper method of, the performance of the duties of the employer (see, in addition to the passage above quoted, per Dixon J, p 381).
It could not be otherwise. If it were not so, the law of vicarious liability would have no practical application because no employee is employed to commit a tort. The determination of any such question is one of fact and degree. An illustration of the change in the practical application of the law is to be found in Canterbury Bankstown Rugby League Football Club Limited versus Rogers;
Bugden versus Rogers [[1993] Aust Torts Reports 81-246.] There a Rugby League footballer who was employed by the defendant football club was found to have assaulted the plaintiff during the course of a match. The Court of Appeal held the employer club vicariously liable for the assault. Giles AJA accepted and applied the test set out in
Glass, McHugh and Douglas, Liability of Employers (2nd ed), at 93 as follows: "The vicarious liability of an employer for the torts of his employee extends to those acts or omissions which occur within the scope of his employment. An act or omission is within the scope of employment if it is either: an act authorised by the employer, or an unauthorised act which is so connected with the authorised acts that it may properly be regarded as a mode although an improper mode of doing them." 
Giles AJA specifically considered the demarcation between the classes of acts which the footballer was employed to do and those which fell so far outside what he was employed to do as to absolve the employer of responsibility for them. He gave as an example that, if the footballer had shot the plaintiff, the club might not have been liable for his act but held that, on the relevant facts and circumstances, the method by which the footballer played the game was "a well recognised event" and therefore one for which the club was liable.

The same form of reasoning can be applied to the present case. There is no reason to believe that the scope of the driver's employment included anything remotely approaching the assault he committed on the plaintiff. It is true that the defendant called no evidence to delineate what his employment required but I am prepared to infer categorically that it did not include the assault of passengers. I am therefore satisfied that the assault was outside the scope of the duties the driver was employed to perform. But driving at an excessive speed and in such a manner as to cause the bus to collide with the rickshaw is in a different class. That was, to use Giles AJA's words, a "well recognised" possibility during the drive from the airport to the city. I am, accordingly, satisfied that: -
The defendant is directly liable to the plaintiff for her injuries arising from the driver's negligence and for his assault upon her, and is liable to compensate her for the injuries sustained as a result both of the negligence and the assault.
The defendant is vicariously liable to the plaintiff for the driver's negligence and is liable to compensate her for any injuries resulting therefrom.
The defendant is not vicariously liable to the plaintiff for the driver's assault upon her or liable to compensate her for any injuries resulting therefrom.

Damages 
It was in relation to the quantification of damages that an argument arose as to the applicable law. The defendant argued that, the relevant law being NSW law, the assessment is to be made under the provisions of the [Motor
Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/)"); the plaintiff contended that the applicable law is the common law of NSW.

I have come to the conclusion, although it seems anomalous in some respects, that, as a matter of statutory construction, the defendant's argument is correct. It is necessary to recite some provisions of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).
 [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p6) is concerned with and bears the heading "Awarding of Damages". By [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s69.html) the Part applies: ... to and in respect of an award of damages which relates to the death of or injury to a person caused by the fault of the owner or driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle." [S70](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s70.html) is a central provision. It provides: "70. A court shall not award damages to a person in respect of a motor accident contrary to this Part." 
One question which arises is whether the injury to the plaintiff was an injury "in respect of a motor accident".
 [S 68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s68.html), the opening section of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p6), contains an extended definition of "motor accident" but the extension is immaterial. The operative definition is that which is found in the interpretation section, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s3.html), and is relevant to the construction of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) as a whole. "Motor accident" is defined as: "... an accident caused by the fault of the owner or driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle which causes the death of or injury to a person".
 "Motor vehicle" was, in 1991, defined as: " ...a motor car, motor carriage, motor cycle or other vehicle propelled wholly or partly by any volatile spirit, steam, gas, oil or electricity, or by any means other than human or animal power, or ..." 
Following amendment which post dates the plaintiff's injury, effective from 29
June 1998, the definition now reads: "... a motor vehicle or trailer within the meaning of the Traffic Act 1909".

The Traffic Act in turn defines "motor vehicle" as: "... a vehicle that is built to be propelled by a motor that forms part of the vehicle." 
There is nothing in any of the relevant provisions that confines their operations to injuries sustained in NSW, to motor accidents that occur in NSW, or to vehicles present, registered or insured in NSW. The sections are completely open ended in this respect. Where a court in NSW is to award damages arising out of a motor accident, the award of damages is subject to the provisions of the Act.

It is unnecessary to decide whether the relevant definition of motor vehicle is that which applied in March 1991 or the current one. Applying either, I am satisfied that the bus on which the plaintiff was travelling was a motor vehicle for the purpose both of <case> and <case>.

The plaintiff's injury was caused by the fault of the driver of the motor vehicle in the use and operation of the vehicle. By <case>, Part 6 of the Act therefore applies; the collision was a motor accident for the purposes of s ; a court may therefore not award damages contrary to Part 6.

The countervailing argument put on behalf of the plaintiff drew on several other sections of the Act and depended largely upon the contention that the
Act was not intended to have extra territorial operation. It may be immediately recognised that there is nothing in the Act that suggests that a conscious decision was made to extend its application to injuries suffered outside Australia. However, the question is to be decided by reference to what was in fact achieved by the language used in the Act and what injuries are in fact encompassed by the words chosen by the legislature. A centrepiece of the
Act and of its predecessor, the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance Act) ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/), is the creation of a compulsory scheme of insurance for the benefit of persons injured as a result of fault in the use and operation of motor vehicles. It is from the fund that thereby came into existence that awards of damages are paid to the injured. The focus of the Act is NSW. The Act is, therefore, peculiarly concerned with a scheme for compensation payable to persons injured as a result of fault in the use and operation of NSW based vehicles.

The first section to which reference was made was <case>(a). S 2A is headed "Objects of the Act". S 2A(1) lists a series of objects. These objects reinforce the view that the focus of the Act is the efficient and just operation and management of the compensation scheme and the insurance fund, balancing the twin interests of NSW motorists in keeping premiums to an acceptable level and providing the payment of proper compensation to those suffering injuries sufficiently serious to warrant compensation.

S2A(2) commences with the words: "It must be acknowledged in the application and administration of this Act..." 
This direction is followed by three sub paragraphs which might best be described as a reminder to those administering and interpreting the Act of the philosophy and purpose of the Act. The focus, undoubtedly, remains on the interests of NSW based motorists who participate in and finance the insurance scheme. Sub par (2)(a) is unequivocal in its terms. It provides: "that participants in the scheme under this Act have shared and integrated roles with the overall aim of benefiting all members of the motoring public by keeping the overall costs of the scheme within reasonable bounds so as to keep premiums affordable ..." 
There is no mistaking the intent: it is the control of the cost of the compulsory third party insurance scheme to those who meet those costs: those who own vehicles registered and insured in NSW. The way it seeks to achieve this is by restricting the level of damages awarded for non-economic loss in cases where the award of damages will be met from the fund created by the scheme. Neither <case> as a whole, nor <case>(a) in particular, is directed to the restriction of the award of damages in circumstances other than those which are to be financed by the scheme around which these provisions of the
Act are centred.

S 2B is a legislative injunction to those interpreting the Act, including courts, to prefer a construction of any of its provisions that would promote the stated objects over a construction that would not; and similarly to exercise any discretions conferred by the Act.

Counsel for the plaintiff referred to [s (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s12.html) of the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) which provides as follows: "12(1) In any Act or instrument - a reference to a locality, jurisdiction or other matter or thing is a reference to such a locality, jurisdiction or other matter or thing in and of
New South Wales." 
He argued that <case>, when applied to s2A: "Clearly establishes that the scheme is to be a scheme in and of New South
Wales and therefore not have any extra territorial application." 
There is no reference to any "locality, jurisdiction or other matter or thing" in <case> that can be restricted to NSW, at least in any way that can affect the interpretation of ss 69 or 70.

There are two things to notice about ss 2A and 2B. The first is that they are general provisions which may aid in the construction of the Act where there is some ambiguity or uncertainty. They do not, and were not intended to, override any clear provision of the Act. I do not detect any relevant ambiguity or uncertainty in any of the sections to which I have earlier referred. There is no doubt in the construction of the Act which would be aided or resolved by recourse to ss 2A or 2B. It may not have been the intention of the legislature to restrict damages that may be awarded to an injured person who is to be compensated from some fund other than that created by the scheme established under the Act, but, in my view, that is the effect of the clear language used.
Had the legislature intended to confine the effect of the Act, so as only to benefit those motorists who contribute to the scheme, it could readily have achieved that intention by a simple legislative provision to that effect. It did not do so.

Once it is conceded, as it has been, and accepted, as it is, that the law of
NSW governs the assessment of damages, the relevant law is that contained in the Act.

The plaintiff is therefore entitled to damages under the following heads:
Damages for Non Economic Loss.
Damages for Past Loss of Earning Capacity.
Damages for Future Loss of Earning Capacity.
Compensation for out-of-pocket Expenses.

Although I have concluded, because of the defendant's direct liability to the plaintiff, that its liability to her includes liability for the assault and any damage suffered as a consequence of the assault, it is appropriate here to note that any such consequence was minor. It is not clear on the evidence that the driver, when he "grabbed" at the plaintiff, made physical contact. Of course, the plaintiff was frightened by his act, but I do not think she suffered any other consequences from the assault alone and certainly it has caused no specific injury to her. If that were the only tort for which the plaintiff is to be compensated, the damages award would be very small indeed.
The plaintiff's injuries and ongoing disabilities are all attributable to the driver's recklessness in driving the bus.

The plaintiff was born on 29 May 1964. She was twenty-six years of age when injured, thirty-four years at the time of hearing. It was her intention, on arrival in Sydney, to secure nursing work. For the first twelve days she did not work at all because she was still suffering from pain in her back. She was able to borrow money and live rent free with friends for a time. However, work was a financial necessity. Through a nursing agency she obtained casual work in various hospitals, including, particularly, St Vincent's. There she initially was assigned to day shift, which she did for a couple of weeks, and then night shift, and she retained this employment for about four months.
Night shift was preferable to day shift because it involved less lifting of patients and she was able to call upon Irish colleagues to do any lifting for her. She continued to experience pain in her back and consulted general practitioners, one of whom was Dr Hirschowitz. The general practitioners prescribed physiotherapy, heat treatment and ultrasound, all of which she undertook. The pain continued. The plaintiff said that she had periods of "intermission" when she was pain free but generally, for the first couple of months, she lived with constant pain. She was referred to Dr Kohan, an orthopaedic surgeon, who first saw her in May 1991 and from time to time thereafter, the last time on 27 November 1991. At that time he formed the view that her prognosis, in the absence of fractures, dislocations, advanced degenerative changes and neurological abnormalities, was excellent. He thought it unlikely that any permanent disability would result from the accident and expected her to return to all normal activities with no restrictions. However, he reviewed her in November 1998 for the purpose of these proceedings. He then reported that she has suffered "quite a severe jarring to the lumbar spine" and that, while there was no evidence of fracture, dislocation or neurological abnormality, "She has been left with significant soft tissue related pain following this accident." 
He then thought it unlikely that further spontaneous improvement could be expected and that it was likely that she would continue to experience back- pain problem of the same kind she has had to date.

The plaintiff left St Vincent's at the end of September. In evidence she said this was because there was no improvement in the condition of her back and so she decided to give it total rest. She worked as a nurse on the "Fairstar", a cruise ship, for two voyages in December and January. This principally involved clinic work, giving injections for seasickness and the like, and she was able to avoid lifting.

After the second of the Fairstar cruises, she realised that her life would have to take a different direction and that she would have to give up nursing and retrain. This was because of the continuing pain in her back. She returned to Ireland in March 1992 and undertook a number of courses, one of which was a course in tourism and business studies. She commenced this course in October and completed it in April 1993. The course was a full time one and she was unable to take on paid employment during that time. She did not, however, seek any employment in the months before the course commenced in October because her back was still painful. She did very well in the tourism and business course and was able to obtain employment in a local leisure centre called the "Aquadome". She began in February 1994 as a duty manager and has progressed to the position of senior operations manager. There is no scope for further promotion. She earns less in this employment than she would if nursing in Ireland. There was no evidence of any disparity in the income she would have earned had she exercised one of the options she formally contemplated, that of remaining in Australia and making her life here, and what she earns in her present employment in Ireland.

She was previously an active sports loving person. She was a keen and regular sailor and had taken golf lessons. Neither of these activities is now available to her. She has substituted swimming, which she does four to five times each week, and has taken up scuba diving.

One factor in the assessment of damages is the loss of her profession. She described herself as "an excellent nurse" and I inferred that she derived considerable satisfaction from her employment. That is now lost to her.

The plaintiff's credibility came under attack. One basis for this concerned her application for employment at St Vincent's. A staff health assessment dated 29 May 1991 made for the purposes of that application and containing information supplied by the plaintiff was in evidence (ex 1). It was signed by
Dr Hirschowitz. The answers given to the questions contained on the form included a denial of any back injury. Another question asked whether there were any circumstances which might interfere with the satisfactory performance of duties in the position for which the plaintiff had applied and this, too, was answered in the negative. The answers are capable of being used in two different ways, either of which may be adverse to the plaintiff's credibility.
On the one hand, if the answers are correct, then the plaintiff's evidence in these proceedings cannot be believed. That is, if she, at that time, had no back injury or knew of no circumstances which might interfere with the satisfactory performance of her duties, she was not telling the truth when she gave her evidence. Alternatively, the plaintiff was a person who was prepared to put untrue information before St Vincent's for the purpose of securing employment. The plaintiff said in evidence, quite frankly, that she needed employment and would not have been employed had she admitted to her back injury. I am satisfied that what she said in evidence was truthful. Although the answers given in the staff assessment form demonstrate that she was prepared to be less than frank in her application and to have Dr Hirschowitz certify to an untruth on her behalf, that in no way affects my assessment of her credibility in the present proceedings.

The second attack on her credibility arose from the explanation she gave to the hospital when she terminated her employment, contrasted with the evidence she gave in this court. In a notification of termination dated 17 September (ex 2) she gave as her reason for leaving St Vincent's, "travelling on".
She made no mention in that document of the continuation of back pain which was the reason she gave in evidence for giving up that employment. The plaintiff said in evidence that she did in fact travel to Brisbane although she did not work there. There is, in my view, no reflection on her credibility in these proceedings in her failure to disclose to St Vincent's that she was leaving, at least in part, because of back problems. I am, however, satisfied that that was one reason for her doing so and the reason that she did not take up employment in Brisbane.

Counsel for the defendant also pointed to a "Peer Review" form dated October (ex 4). The document contained both the plaintiff's own evaluation of the performance of her duties and that of a "peer". The plaintiff generally assessed her performance as very good or excellent; the peer reviewer also assessed her favourably, although perhaps not as favourably as she did herself. The suggestion was that, if the plaintiff were as badly injured as she described in her evidence, she would not have assessed herself so favourably or been so favourably assessed by others. Again, I do not accept that her credibility is impinged by these assessments. The plaintiff clearly did regard herself as an excellent nurse, even though performing her duties under difficulties, and she was able to organise her work load so that she avoided those parts of the duties in which her performance was compromised.

The attack on the plaintiff's credibility included reference to Dr Kohan's reports. The suggestion was that what the plaintiff said in evidence was inconsistent with what Dr Kohan reported and with what she had told him.
Counsel pointed particularly to a passage in Dr Kohan's 1997 report in which, having referred to the reviews he carried out in July 1991, he said: "She was able to manage her work duties satisfactorily." 
Referring to reviews of October and November 1991, Dr Kohan wrote: "She was able to return to all normal activities ... her overall function, otherwise, was excellent." 
In my opinion these observations of Dr Kohan have to be seen in the light of an earlier one, following a review in June 1991, of which he wrote: "She was able to manage her work duties, although she was restricting work activities to non lifting ones". (emphasis added) 
This is consistent with what the plaintiff said in evidence.

Counsel for the defendant argued that, to accept the plaintiff, it would be necessary to accept the following: 
That Dr Hirschowitz was prepared to write a false report to St Vincent's
Private Hospital regarding her employment; 
That having obtained a false staff health assessment the plaintiff was able to disguise her injuries from the staff of St Vincent's to such an extent that they provided her with a satisfactory peer evaluation; 
That for no obvious reason the plaintiff lied to the staff at St Vincent's about her reasons for terminating her employment; 
That when she reported to Dr Kohan that she was able to manage her work duties satisfactorily, that she was able to return to all her normal activities and that her overall function otherwise, was excellent, this information was wrong; 
That despite taking no time off for sickness during the most acute period of her injury, that is in Australia, she has never been able to work as a nurse again, apart from a couple of cruises.

Counsel argued that: "By far the most plausible explanation is that her injuries were simply not serious enough to disable her from work. that she has simply chosen, for whatever reasons, not to work as a nurse." 
I do not have any difficulty accepting propositions (a), (b), (c) and (e). As to proposition (d), it is not correct to say that the information she gave to
Dr Kohan was wrong, but rather that, when these extracts of his reports are seen in context, they do not represent the complete picture.

A further attack on the plaintiff's credibility arose from her predilection for travel. Extracts from her passport show that she is an enthusiastic traveller and visits different parts of the world at least annually. I do not see this as inconsistent with the plaintiff's own portrayal of her condition since returning to Ireland.

I found the plaintiff to be a credible witness. There was no sign of dissembling, even when matters supposedly to her discredit were put to her, and no exaggeration of her symptoms. She gave an unembellished account of her condition in, if anything, a quite understated manner. She acknowledged frankly and explained the false representations she had made (or permitted Dr
Hirschowitz to make on her behalf) to St Vincent's. I do accept the account given by the plaintiff. I also accept the prognosis of Dr Kohan in the report of 9 November 1998, prepared for the purpose of these proceedings. He thought it unlikely that she will experience any further spontaneous improvement and that she will continue to experience the symptoms that she has had to date.

These symptoms were described by her in her evidence in the unexaggerated fashion I have earlier noted. She was asked about her condition since she commenced work at the Aquadome and said: "I has been pretty much good. I have usually about two or three times in the year that I get back pain and it lasts for a period of between three and five days. Outside of that my back is good." 
She said the pain might be triggered by something small and she was not quite sure what might be the precipitating factor.

Dr Kohan's opinion was similar to that of Dr Bleasel, who examined the plaintiff for medico-legal purposes in November 1998. He wrote: "I believe she has had more than a musculoligamentus injury and I suspect that she has damage at a facet joint in the lumbar spine and that this is now arthritic or at least inflamed...the prognosis for the future does not look at all good as her injury occurred in 1991.

There is no likelihood that she could return to her original nursing career...

I believe that she has suffered a permanent impairment of her back." 
In a separate report of the same date Dr Bleasel assessed the permanent impairment of her back as 30 percent of a most extreme case, and of the loss of efficient use of each leg at and above the knee, taking into account below the knee, of 5 percent compared to a most extreme case.

Dr Evans also examined the plaintiff for medico-legal purposes in 1998. He thought that the origin of her back pain is uncertain and could be regarded only as: "Soft tissue injury to the lumbo-sacral spine".

He thought that there may be a mild disc lesion at L4/5 or L5/S1 level and this, in fact, is in part confirmed by radiological reports.

Dr Evans thought that she was not fit for work as a nurse but fit for work that does not require repeated bending or twisting of the back or lifting of weights heavier than 10 kilograms. He thought she would continue to experience mild discomfort in the low back and may have problems in the low back in future years but thought that this was unpredictable.

The defendant's medical evidence is to a different effect. The plaintiff was examined twice by Dr Fionan O'Carroll, a consultant orthopaedic surgeon, once in June 1994 and once in November 1997. In his first report he expressed the view that: "Full recovery will occur on settlement of her case." 
In the second he thought she would have no major problems as long as she avoids "bending, lifting etc".

The plaintiff was also examined on behalf of the defendant in November 1998 by
Dr Lloyd Hughes, who found no objective evidence of any disability and thought that, if she did suffer any injuries in 1991, then they had resolved with no residual disability. He thought she was fit for work and all normal daily activities without restriction.

I prefer the evidence of Drs Kohan, Bleasel and Evans. Having accepted the plaintiff as a truthful witness, I find that their opinions are consistent with the history she has given. I am satisfied that she has ongoing symptoms as described by her, that she will continue to experience such symptoms and that she is incapacitated for work as a nurse.

Damages for Non-Economic Loss 
At the time the plaintiff was injured, <case> provided: "79(1) No damages shall be awarded for the non-economic loss of an injured person as a consequence of a motor accident unless the injured person's ability to lead a normal life is significantly impaired by the injury suffered in the accident." 
The section was subsequently amended to read: "79(1)No damages shall be awarded for the non-economic loss of an injured person as a consequence of a motor accident unless the injured person's ability to lead a normal life has been, or in the near future is likely to be, significantly impaired for a continuous period of not less than six months by the injury suffered in the accident." 
The amended <case> was subsequently renumbered as <case>(1B). Whichever version of the section applies I am satisfied that the plaintiff has brought herself within it. This is because of the interference with her ability to participate in her chosen profession, and her inability to participate in her chosen sporting activities.

The section directs me to assess the proportion the plaintiff's case bears to a most extreme case and to award damages calculated on that proportion of the maximum amount which may, pursuant to sub <case>, be awarded. The maximum amount which currently may be awarded is $259,000. I think the plaintiff's case represents 25 percent of a most extreme case. After the deduction required by subs (5), she is entitled to $56,000.

I should add, in case I am wrong about the applicability of the Act, that if I were awarding general damages at common law, I would award $65,000, of which (for the purposes of awarding interest) I would allocate 60 percent for pain and suffering to date and 40 percent for what she may expect in the future.

Past Loss of Earning Capacity 
The evidence relevant to the plaintiff's loss of earning capacity is to be found in exs C, D, E, F and H.

The earnings of nurses working in the Irish public health services are set out in Ex C and D. In calculating the plaintiff's losses, I have assumed that, had she been working in that system, from 1992, she would have reached the sixth salary level in January 1992 and gained annual progressions thereafter, so that she would be at the top of the scale by June 1995.

The tax which is deductible is to be found in ex E. The plaintiff's actual earnings at the Aquadome are in ex F, which is a letter from the Aquadome in fact prepared by the plaintiff herself from information provided to her by a co-employee, and signed by the Chief Executive. The plaintiff, in an affidavit sworn 16 November 1998 and delivered to my chambers after judgment was reserved, explained the two different tables that appear in ex F. The applicable table showing her actual earnings is the second table in that letter. The covering letter that accompanied delivery of the affidavit bears a note that a copy was to be sent to the solicitors for the defendant. Although
I have received further submissions from both parties since receiving the affidavit, no objection has been taken to my reading the affidavit or its annexures. I have taken them into account.

Annexed to this judgment is a table showing the calculations by which I have arrived at the plaintiff's economic loss to date. Paragraph 1, based on information drawn from exhibits D and E, shows what the plaintiff would have earned had she worked as a nurse in the Irish public health system from
February 1992. Sub paragraph (3) shows her net earnings after the deduction of taxation. Paragraph 2, drawn from ex E and the plaintiff's affidavit of 16
November 1998, shows her actual earnings at the Aquadome. Paragraph 3 shows the net loss, derived by subtracting the figures in paragraph 2 from those in paragraph 1.

The total loss, in Irish punt, is £35,788.

The parties agree that I should apply a conversion rate drawn from ex G, an extract from the Australian Financial Review dated 10 November 1998, and this
I have done. Converted, the plaintiff has lost in Australian dollars $84,266.

There was a period when the plaintiff returned to Ireland and before she commenced retraining when, although I am satisfied she was incapacitated for work as a nurse, I am not satisfied that she had no residual earning capacity.
However, I have made no deduction for this because it is, I think, balanced by losses prior to her return to Ireland for which no allowance has been made. In relation to past economic loss, I propose to award the plaintiff the sum of $84,000.

Future Loss of Earning Capacity 
The plaintiff's present income, if she were working in the Irish public health system, would be £21,328 gross (ex C).

After deduction of tax (ex E) the net figure would be £13,707 or £264 per week. Her present earnings (ex F) are £196 per week net. She is therefore suffering a loss of £68 per week. This converts to $A160 per week. The plaintiff is now thirty-four years of age. There was no direct evidence of her intentions in relation to continuing to work but I see no reason to infer that she would have done other than work to the age of sixty. On the 5 percent tables, for twenty-six years, the plaintiff would be entitled to $122,992.
After the usual deduction for vicissitudes, I allow $100,000 by way of damages for future economic loss.

Out-of-Pocket Expenses 
The plaintiff claims a sum of $526.00. I allow this amount.

There will be verdict and judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $240,526.00. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs.

ANNEXURE - PAST ECONOMIC LOSS -92 
From 8.2.98 -93 -94 -95 -96 -97 -98 
To 30.11.98 ---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 
What the plaintiff would have earned if working as a nurse in the Irish public health system 
GROSS EARNING (ex D) £
 £
 £
 £
 £
 £
 £
 £
 
TAX PAYABLE (ex E) 
NET EARNINGS 
Plaintiff's actual earnings at Aquadome (ex F, affidavit of plaintiff 16.11.98) -
 -
 
NET LOSS 
TOTAL LOSS 1992-1998: £35,788 
Conversion rate: .4247 (ex G) 
LOSS IN AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS: $84,266.00 * * * 
