

Regina versus C F R [1997] NSWSC 510 (25 October 1997) 
REGINA versus C F R /96 
Wednesday 30 October 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: We make a direction that the applicant will be referred to only by his initials CFR. 
The applicant, CFR, seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed on him by his Honour Judge Gibson of Queen's Counsel on 26 April 1996. On that date the applicant adhered to pleas of guilty to two charges of supply of prohibited drugs on 6 November 1995. His Honour was also asked to take into account a further offence under Form 2 of the Criminal Procedure Act of supply amphetamine, that being a deemed supply. Amphetamine was also the substance the subject of the first two offences.

Statements of facts were tendered for his Honour's consideration. So far as the offences of 6 November 1995 were concerned the evidence was that a police officer telephone the applicant on 6 November 1995 and arranged to purchase two grams of amphetamine from him. When the applicant left his home to effect the transaction he was stopped by police and, upon being searched, was found to be carrying four plastic resealable bags containing amphetamine. A search warrant was then executed at his home and in his bedroom one large plastic resealable bag containing amphetamine and one small plastic resealable bag containing amphetamine were located, as were weighing scales with white residue on them, some empty plastic bags and documents with names and dollar figures on them. When interviewed the applicant told the police that he used amphetamine daily by injection and used the scales to weigh his drug.

The applicant came before the court in relation to those charges and was granted bail. Then on 11 January 1996 he was observed by police officers in
Pitt Street, Redfern with another male person. The applicant was spoken to by police to whom he admitted being in possession of a small quantity of amphetamine. He was arrested and taken to the police station. Upon a subsequent search police found a small quantity of amphetamine. Other powder was also found and the applicant told the police that he used the other powder to dilute the drug. The total weight of what was found was approximately eleven grams and there was an alleged value of $550.

I should add that the gross weight of the drugs found on the first occasion was eighteen grams and the estimated street value was $1,300.

The events of 11 January 1996 to which I have referred were the subject of the
Form 2 offence. The judge had before him, apart from the evidence of the police officers, evidence in the form of an analyst's certificate concerning the amphetamine content of the bags seized by the police and the respective weights of such contents.

The learned sentencing judge imposed a minimum term of twelve months commencing on the date of sentence on the second count of supply to which I have referred. His Honour declined to find special circumstances and whilst he first set an additional term of six months, this was later corrected to an additional term of four months, which additional term will expire on 25
October 1997. That sentence, absent special circumstances, was appropriately structured having regard to the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).

On the first count his Honour imposed a fixed term of six months to be served concurrently with the greater sentence. Now of course in fixing those sentences his Honour also had regard, as he was required to do by law, to the offence committed on 11 January 1996.

The applicant now seeks leave to appeal against these sentences. The applicant has appeared in person and has submitted very detailed written argument to which he has spoken before the Court this afternoon.

A number of matters have been raised by the applicant. He complained that the sentencing judge did not fully canvass all the facts in his remarks on sentence. For instance, he did not refer specifically to the certificate of the analyst. However, putting to one side for the moment Exhibit F, a reading of the remarks on sentence does not indicate to me by reason of anything that his Honour said, that he had not have regard to all the evidence that was placed before him, and it is not incumbent upon a sentencing judge to set out exhaustively all the facts adduced in evidence before him.

The applicant also complains that the learned judge, having indicated that he proposed to fix a sentence on the second count that covered the applicant's "full criminality in relation to the totality of the charges", imposed a sentence on the second charge. However, he then proceeded to impose a penalty for the first charge and the applicant complains that this involves some contradiction. This submission is misconceived. The course which his Honour took by choosing one count upon which to fix the major penalty is a proper course for his Honour to have taken. The penalty which was imposed for the lesser offence was fixed to be served concurrently so there was in effect no added penalty.

The course taken in the structuring of the sentences was entirely appropriate and involved no error of principle.

The applicant has complained of the conduct of the judge. He submits that the judge interrupted too much in the course of the hearing and that he showed bias. A consideration of that submission involves a close examination of the transcript. Such examination does not persuade me that any bias was disclosed.
The sentencing judge is a very experienced judge of the District Court and the various questions which he asked were, to my opinion, pertinent questions.
Insofar as his remarks on sentence were concerned, there is nothing in them to indicate any bias. Indeed I read those remarks as amounting to a balanced assessment of the case before him.

I turn to Exhibit F to which the applicant has addressed submissions. This
Court has considered the content of that document. That content warranted favourable consideration by his Honour in determining an appropriate sentence.

His Honour referred to the document in the passage in the judgment which reads as follows: "It seems to me in these circumstances it leaves me little alternative but to impose a gaol sentence upon him. I have taken into consideration the document which is Exhibit G which I direct shall be put in an envelope and sealed and marked in the appropriate manner." 
The reference to "Exhibit G" is clearly an error of inadvertence, be it typographical or otherwise. Quite clearly the learned judge did consider
Exhibit F because this Court has seen the exhibit and that Exhibit F is the one which has been placed in an envelope, sealed and marked in the appropriate manner.

Plainly the sentencing judge considered Exhibit F. He has not said in as many words in the course of his judgment that he has allowed some discount on the basis of that evidence. Specific reference to that effect was considered appropriate by the Chief Judge at Common Law in his judgment in Gallagher ((1991) [23 NSWLR 220] at 234). However, it seems to me that not only from a reading of his judgment is it apparent that he considered the document itself in reaching a sentence, but that from the very sentence itself favourable consideration must have been given to the document, otherwise in my assessment a heavier sentence would have been imposed.

The applicant has submitted that the learned judge fell into error in not finding special circumstances. He submits that the judge should have done so having regard to the pre-sentence report which was Exhibit G and also having regard to Exhibit F.

The applicant had been led to believe, apparently, as he puts it to the Court, that the content of Exhibit F would warrant a finding of special circumstances. In that regard it would seem to me that the applicant is under a misapprehension. Before special circumstances can be established what has to be shown is a need or desirability for a longer than usual additional term, and not the need or desirability of a shorter than usual minimum term: see the judgment of this court in Phelan (unreported, 4 March 1993) and to the like effect the remarks of the Chief Justice in the judgment of Faroukh (unreported, 29 March 1996).

Having reflected upon that material which was available for his Honour's consideration, it does not seem to me that there was any error of law on the sentencing judge's part in failing to find special circumstances. It was appropriate for the judge to have regard to Exhibit F in fixing the sentence.
Its content did not warrant a finding of special circumstances. The applicant complains that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive. In my opinion that submission is without foundation. The learned judge indicated that had it not been for what happened on 11 January 1996 he may have dealt with the applicant by other than full time custodial sentence, but what has set him against that were the events of 11 January 1996.

I entertain no concern having considered all the material that his Honour did, other than give appropriate consideration to Exhibit F and appropriate effect to its content.

I am unable to detect any error of law in his Honour's remarks on sentence and
I certainly do not regard the sentence which was imposed as one which was manifestly excessive. In those circumstances I find no basis upon which this
Court could or should interfere with the sentences imposed in the District
Court.

The orders I propose therefore are that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

Mr Justice Hidden has pointed out that when I was recounting the terms of the sentence which was imposed on the second count I referred to an additional term of four months commencing on 26 April 1997 and expiring on 25 October
I correct that, it was expiring on 25 August 1997.

HIDDEN J: I agree with the orders proposed by the learned presiding judge for the reasons which he has given.

STUDDERT J: Exhibit F will be resealed and will be returned and will be placed with the papers.
 * * * 
