

James Hardie and Coy Pty Ltd versus Grigor Matter No 40305/98 [1998] NSWSC 266 (18 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LTD versus GRIGOR 
CA 40305/98 June 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Mason P, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LTD versus GRIGOR 
Private international law - jurisdiction - forum non conveniens - permanent stay of proceedings - action brought in NSW alleging negligent manufacture, supply and failure to warn - loss suffered in New Zealand - place of commission of tort - "clearly inappropriate forum" 
On 1 May 1998 Grigor, the plaintiff, filed a Statement of Claim in the Dust
Diseases Tribunal naming James Hardie & Company Pty Ltd James Hardie
Industries Ltd as defendants. The plaintiff, who had always resided in New
Zealand, claimed to have developed mesothelioma as a result of inhalation of asbestos dust emanating from the cutting and drilling of building materials manufactured by the defendants both in Australia and New Zealand. The
Statement of Claim alleged negligence on the part of the defendants in failing to warn the plaintiff of the risks associated with inhalation of asbestos fibres and negligent supply and manufacture of the building materials with knowledge of the risks of injury.

On 11 May 1998 the defendants filed a Notice of Motion seeking orders that the proceedings be permanently stayed or dismissed, contending that New South
Wales was a "clearly inappropriate forum". On 14 May 1998, Judge Armitage dismissed the notice of motion on the basis that the Plaintiff's cause of action arose in New South Wales.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: (By the Court) Where the principal breaches of duty alleged are a failure to warn of the dangers of inhaling asbestos and failure to ensure a safe system of work, the place of commission of the tort is the place where the plaintiff was exposed to the asbestos dust. Therefore, the trial judge's exercise of discretion miscarried as the tort was committed in New Zealand and not in New South Wales.

James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd versus Putt (unreported Court of Appeal, 27 May 1998), applied. (By Mason P, Beazley JA concurring; Spigelman CJ dissenting) The current proceedings should not be stayed as their continuation cannot be regarded as oppressive, in the sense of "seriously and unfairly" burdensome, prejudicial or damaging; or vexatious, in the sense of being productive of "serious and unjustified trouble and harassment".

Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Ltd <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538], applied. 
Discussion of principles stemming from Voth, including the need for possible legislation allowing courts to have regard to the impact of claims by non-residents upon overcrowded courts in New South Wales.

ORDERS
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LTD & ANOR versus GRIGOR 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The Plaintiff/Opponent suffers from mesothelioma. His condition is such that this matter has been brought on with considerable urgency, as is appropriate. The steps in the litigation have been the following: 
On 1 May 1998 the Plaintiff filed a Statement of Claim in the Dust
Diseases Tribunal of New South Wales.

On 4 May 1998 the Statement of Claim was served on the
Defendants/Claimants.

On 6 May 1998 the Claimants' solicitors advised the opponents' solicitors that they would contend that New South Wales is "a clearly inappropriate forum".

On 11 May 1998 at the directions hearing in the Dust Diseases Tribunal, the Claimants filed a Notice of Motion seeking orders that the proceedings be permanently stayed or dismissed.

On 14 May 1998 his Honour Judge Armitage of the Dust Diseases Tribunal heard the Claimants' Notice of Motion.

On 14 May 1998 his Honour delivered an extempore judgment dismissing the
Notice of Motion.

On 19 May 1998 the Claimants sought leave to appeal from the decision of his Honour Judge Armitage and also sought expedition of the appeal.

On 28 May 1998 the matter was heard by this Court.

The proceedings in this Court were conducted on the basis that the issue of leave, of expedition and the full appeal would be argued simultaneously.
Expedition has in fact been granted and there is no need for a formal order.

It is plainly desirable to determine an issue of forum non conveniens as a preliminary point prior to the incurring of substantial costs by local legal advisers. It is also desirable to ensure that court time is not wasted. An application of this character is appropriate to be determined as a preliminary point. Further, in this case there are significant legal issues raised by the
Claimants. Leave should be granted.

In argument before the Court, both parties agreed that the Court should proceed on the basis that the allegations in the Statement of Claim were made out. The essential facts set out in the Statement of Claim are as follows: 
The Plaintiff has developed malignant pleural mesothelioma as a result of the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres emanating from the cutting and drilling of products with a trade name "Fibrolite".

The Plaintiff was exposed to the dust and fibres from "Fibrolite" building material on various occasions between 1962 and 1980, when he carried out building renovations at his own and his father's homes, both of which were in
Auckland, New Zealand.

Each of the Claimants knew that the "Fibrolite" building products would be cut and drilled in such a way as to give off dust containing asbestos fibres in a respirable form.

The "Fibrolite" building materials were in part manufactured by the First
Claimant, James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd, at its Australian factories including at Camellia, New South Wales.

The "Fibrolite" building materials were also in part manufactured by James
Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd (New Zealand) at its factory at Penrose, Auckland.
This New Zealand company is a subsidiary of the Second Claimant, James Hardie
Industries Ltd. It has not been joined in these proceedings. Mr F M Douglas
QC, who appeared for the Claimants, indicated to the Court that he did not submit that any multiplicity of proceedings could arise from the failure to join the New Zealand company in the proceedings in New South Wales.

The asbestos used by the New Zealand company to manufacture "Fibrolite" building products at Penrose, Auckland were supplied by one or other of the
Claimants.

A number of assertions are made as to the link between the New Zealand manufacture and the Claimants. These include: 
The Claimants "had the control and management of the New Zealand company's factory premises and the operation of the factory at Penrose, Auckland".

The "Fibrolite" manufactured at the Penrose plant in Auckland was "manufactured and sold under [their] direction and control".

Each Claimant conducted the business of manufacturing and disseminating asbestos building materials in both Australia and New Zealand "through an
Executive Committee that had complete authority over the operations at the
Penrose factory".

It is also alleged that another product "Crocidolite" was withdrawn from
New South Wales, but not from New Zealand.

Central to the matters to be considered in this appeal are the particulars of negligence alleged against each of the Claimants. In the Statement of Claim these are set out as follows: "PARTICULARS OF NEGLIGENCE OF THE FIRST DEFENDANT 
Failure to warn the Plaintiff of the risks associated with the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Failure to provide any warning by way of notices on packaging, brochures accompanying products or generally disseminated notices concerning the risks associated with the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Failure to withdraw the `Fibrolite' building materials when it knew or ought to have known that a risk of injury was imposed upon persons including the Plaintiff, who, in the normal use of the products, were exposed to the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Supplying asbestos when it knew or ought to have known that in the course of its normal use once concerted into a building product it exposed those using the product to a risk of injury.

Knowing the risk of injury from the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form, continuing to manufacture `Fibrolite' products for sale and use in New Zealand.

Failure to heed warnings provided by public health authorities concerning the risk of injury arising from the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Failure to warn the Plaintiff of the risks associated with the use of `Fibrolite' building products knowing that such products were likely to be cut, drilled and worked in such a way as to release asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form into the atmosphere.

Failure to direct the New Zealand company to warn the Plaintiff of the risks associated with the use of the `Fibrolite' building products.

Failure to direct the New Zealand company to withdraw the `Fibrolite' building products until an asbestos substitute was used.

Knowing the risk of injury from inhaling asbestos dust and fibres, continuing to manufacture products containing asbestos and continuing to supply or control the supply of products containing asbestos to other persons who were carrying out construction work in New Zealand thereby exposing the users of the product such as the Plaintiff to unnecessary risk of injury.

Having put into effect an executive committee to manage the whole of the manufacture of asbestos products at the various factories including Camellia and Penrose, the First Defendant failed to take any steps to protect users of the asbestos product in New Zealand such as the Plaintiff from injury from the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Despite continuous interchange of technical personnel and information between the various Australian factories and the factory at Penrose, the First
Defendant failed to take any steps to protect the Plaintiff from injury caused by the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Permitting or directing the use of crocidolite in the `Fibrolite' building products manufactured by the New Zealand company at its Penrose plant after crocidolite had been withdrawn from the First Defendant's products in
Australia.

PARTICULARS OF NEGLIGENCE OF THE SECOND DEFENDANT 
Failure to warn the Plaintiff of the risks associated with the use of `Fibrolite' knowing that such products were likely to be cut, drilled and worked in such a way as to release asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form into the atmosphere.

Failure to provide any warning by way of notices on packaging, brochures accompanying products or generally disseminated notices concerning the risks associated with the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Failure to withdraw the `Fibrolite' building materials when it knew or ought to have known that a risk of injury was imposed upon persons including the Plaintiff who, in the normal use of the products were exposed to the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Supplying asbestos when it knew or ought to have known that in the course of its normal use once converted into a building product, it exposed those using the product to a risk of injury.

Knowing the risk of injury from the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form, continuing to manufacture `Fibrolite' products for sale and use in New Zealand.

Failure to heed warnings provided by public health authorities concerning the risk of injury arising from the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Failure to warn the Plaintiff of the risks associated with the use of `Fibrolite' building products knowing that such products were likely to be cut, drilled and worked in such a way as to release asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form into the atmosphere.

Failure to direct the New Zealand company to warn the Plaintiff of the risks associated with the use of the `Fibrolite' building products.

Failure to direct the New Zealand company to withdraw the `Fibrolite' building products until an asbestos substitute was used.

Knowing the risk of injury from inhaling asbestos dust and fibres, continuing to permit manufacture of products containing asbestos and continuing to supply or control the supply of products containing asbestos to other persons who were carrying out construction work in New Zealand thereby exposing the users of the product such as the Plaintiff to unnecessary risk of injury.

Having put into effect an executive committee to manage the whole of the manufacture of asbestos products at the various factories including Camellia and Penrose, the Second Defendant failed to take any steps to protect users of the asbestos product in New Zealand such as the Plaintiff from injury from the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Despite continuous interchange of technical personnel and information between the various Australia factories and the factory at Penrose, the Second
Defendant failed to take any steps to protect the Plaintiff from injury caused by the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Permitting or directing the use of Crocidolite in the `Fibrolite' building products manufactured by the New Zealand company at its Penrose plant after Crocidolite had been withdrawn from the First Defendant's products in
Australia." 
By letter of 6 May 1998, solicitors for the Claimants requested from the solicitors for the Opponents, inter alia, the following: "If you propose to allege that the torts which are said to have been committed were committed in New South Wales, would you please provide us as soon as possible with particulars of the facts, matters and circumstances upon which you intend to rely so as to allege that the relevant torts were committed in New South Wales." 
By letter of 8 May 1998 solicitors for the Opponent provided additional particulars which elaborated on those previously supplied as follows: "1 In relation to the material emanating from New South Wales: a The asbestos cement building materials which have caused the Plaintiff's condition were manufactured by the First Defendant in circumstances giving rise to a tortious liability on the part of both defendants and this manufacture took part in New South Wales. The manufacture involved the use of asbestos when the Defendants knew or ought to have known that in the normal application of the products, a preventable danger would be created and it is this preventable danger which has harmed the Plaintiff.
 b The defendants were part of an operation which each defendant conducted as a single enterprise. As part of that enterprise, the defendants made conscious and deliberate decisions to continue manufacturing building products containing asbestos knowing that in their normal use they would give rise to a preventable danger. The whole of the operations of each defendant was located in New South Wales, the knowledge which should have been acted on was in New
South Wales and the corporate decisions taken which have led to the
Plaintiff's harm were taken in New South Wales.
 c Given the knowledge which the Defendants had or should have had concerning the risks arising once the building products were used in their reasonably anticipated manner, the defendants should have ensured that if they continued to manufacture and disseminate the building products, then warnings should have been attached to the building products. These warnings should have been affixed at the point when the products left the defendants' operations in New
South Wales.
 d The Defendants should, by 1947, have withdrawn asbestos cement building products from the market. By 1947, each defendant had sufficient knowledge of the dangers of asbestos and the availability of safe alternatives to asbestos to have discontinued the manufacture of a product which, in its reasonably expected use, presented an unnecessary risk to those using it. These decisions should have been made by the defendants in the course of their management and operations in New South Wales.
 e The technical and scientific information within the defendants' organisation and the application of which in providing warnings for and discontinuing the use of asbestos as the fibre in the fibre cement building products which would have prevented the Plaintiff's harm was located in New
South Wales.
 f The relevant statutory public health information which should have led the
Defendants to take the steps necessary to prevent the Plaintiff from harm emanated from Parliaments and public health authorities in Australia.
 g The defendants' technical and scientific knowledge concerning asbestos and concerning its hazards through the relevant time was at least equal to but probably in excess of that possessed by public health authorities and governments in New South Wales in particular and in Australia in general. In these circumstances, the culpability of the defendants should be measured by reference to the standards which might have been expected of them in New South
Wales and not in New Zealand.
 h The conduct of each defendant, whilst causing harm to the Plaintiff in New
Zealand, was conduct which took place in New South Wales.
 i Each defendant took active steps from New South Wales to suppress adverse publicity and adverse opinions both in New South Wales and in New Zealand concerning known hazards of asbestos exposure.

J The defendants' retained medical adviser, Dr S F McCullagh, was based at the defendants' plant at Camellia was to advise in relation to health hazards for employees of the defendants in Australia and, additionally, to monitor potentially damaging medical information in Australia and elsewhere which might affect the profitability of the defendants' operations. Dr McCullagh attended New Zealand on numerous occasions and on some of these visits put forward on behalf of the defendants to public health authorities and others in position of influence views concerning the safety of asbestos favourable to the defendants in their continued operation as manufacturers and disseminators of asbestos based building products.
 In relation to the materials manufactured at the Penrose plant of the defendants: a The Plaintiff repeats the particulars set out above." 
The evidence before his Honour Judge Armitage was that the Plaintiff's life expectancy was "measured in months". There was evidence before his Honour that the High Court of New Zealand could provide an urgent trial in appropriate cases and a matter could be heard in weeks rather than months.

Further, there was evidence before his Honour as to the state of New Zealand law particularly with respect to the application of the Accident Compensation
Acts of New Zealand as in force from time to time. That evidence indicated the following: 
Subject to the operation of the Limitation Act 1950 , the Plaintiff would have a common law claim for damages for the period 1962 to 31/3/74.

Again subject to the Limitation Act 1950 , the Plaintiff "probably does not have a common law claim for the period 1/4/74 to 1980".

Under New Zealand law the existence of a common law claim for the period between 1 April 1974 and 1980 depends on whether the Plaintiff does not have cover under the relevant Accident Compensation Act. There is an arguable case that the particular Plaintiff here would not be within one of the exclusions of the Act for reasons which it is not necessary to set out.

The application of the Limitation Act 1950 does not involve any difficulty. The Claimants have before the trial judge and in this Court, indicated that they would not plead the Limitation Act in defence of any proceedings, including any part of the period 1962 onwards.

The Opponents' solicitor also gave evidence about practice in the Dust
Diseases Tribunal, particularly directed to the advantages to the Opponent of s25(3) of the Dust Diseases Tribunal Act which provides: "25(3) Historical evidence and general medical evidence concerning dust exposure and dust disease, which has been admitted in any proceedings before the Tribunal may, with the leave of the Tribunal, be received as any other proceedings before the Tribunal, whether or not the proceedings are between the same parties." 
The evidence indicates that an analogous case which was fought without the advantage of s25(3) took six weeks over a period of more than six months.
Further, the relevant practices of James Hardie have already been the subject of detailed historical evidence in two cases before the Tribunal of which the
Opponent could take advantage under s25(3) (Putt versus James Hardie & Coy Pty
Ltd (DDT No 181 of 1887) Coyle versus James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd (DDT No 171 of 1997)). A detailed list of s25(3) material from a number of other matters was annexed.

At the time of the hearing before the trial judge no Defence had been filed to the Statement of Claim. It has now been filed. Without objection a copy was tendered in evidence before us. If the Court finds that the exercise of the discretion by the trial judge miscarried then the discretion would fall to be exercised by this Court. In that event, the parties agreed that the Defence should be taken into account as indicating the scope and nature of the matters likely to be in dispute. Similarly, additional particulars provided by letter of 20 May 1998 can be taken into account. This does not qualify the proposition set out above that the factual issues have to be determined as if all of the Plaintiffs' allegations were correct. Nevertheless the issues that are in fact in dispute may assist the Court in determining the issue of forum non conveniens.

The material before the Court is extremely limited. The Court is required to decide the matter on the basis of the usual course of events concerning the location and reliability of witnesses, without having any material before it as to the actual identity of witnesses - lay or expert - or their places of residence. It does, however, appear that the Plaintiff is resident in New
Zealand and his condition is such that he will not be able to travel to
Australia for a hearing. It is likely that all of the lay witnesses with respect to the Plaintiff's exposure to the materials and his damage will also be located in New Zealand, but there is no basis for any inference as to their ability to travel.

Furthermore, the Court was informed that a Dr S F McCullagh was at relevant times employed by one of the Opponents at the plant at Camellia and that he has visited New Zealand on numerous occasions. Dr McCullagh continues to live in Sydney.

It appears likely that any documents and any witnesses relevant to the practices and procedures of the Claimants and of their state of knowledge are likely to be located in New South Wales, or at least that is where the documents were and where the witnesses did reside at the time of the relevant conduct and acquisition of knowledge. There is no suggestion that the situation has changed.

The Exercise of Discretion by Judge Armitage 
The leading authority in Australia on the subject of forum non conveniens is the decision of the High Court of Australia in Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills
Pty Limited <case>; <case>; [(1996) 185 CLR 571.] Australia has rejected a "clearly more appropriate forum" test in favour of a "clearly inappropriate forum test". The application of the
Voth test was common ground. No submission was made that the introduction, after Voth, of Pt10 r6A(2)(b) in a new form, made any difference.

The application of this test involves the exercise of a discretion by his
Honour Judge Armitage. The limitations on an appeal from a decision of that character are well known and do not require repetition. It is first necessary to determine whether his Honour's exercise of the discretion miscarried in some relevant manner.

One matter entitled to significant weight in the determination and exercise of the discretion is the location of the tort alleged. If the tort was committed in New South Wales, and accordingly New South Wales law applies to determine liability, it would take very special circumstances for the Courts of this
State to hold that a New South Wales Court was a "clearly inappropriate forum". Judge Armitage concluded that torts were committed in New South Wales.
Insofar as his Honour gave significant weight to that consideration then, if that conclusion was incorrect, the exercise of his discretion must be seen to have miscarried.

In his judgment Armitage J addressed the question "Where did the `failure to warn' allegedly occur?". He analysed the Statement of Claim and concluded that a failure to warn allegedly occurred in New South Wales by reason of the failure to provide: "Any warning by way of notices on packaging, brochures accompanying products, or generally disseminated notices concerning the risks associated with the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form." 
This, he identified, as having occurred at the factory of manufacture relevantly New South Wales, or in New Zealand under the control of the defendants, who exercised that control from New South Wales. He interpreted the Statement of Claim as alleging: "The act of manufacturing in New Zealand was the act of the first and second defendants who were at all times present in New South Wales and participated in New South Wales in those acts occurring in New Zealand by their servants and agents so that the failure to warn in that case may be said to have occurred partly in New South Wales and partly in New Zealand." 
His Honour's analysis went on to conclude that irrespective of the New Zealand manufacture, with respect to the goods manufactured in New South Wales there was an allegation of: "A failure to warn occurring in the State of New South Wales so that at least in part, if not in whole, the Statement of Claim is alleging that negligent actual omissions in the State of New South Wales is constituting a failure to warn." 
His Honour went on to refer to the particular concerning the failure to withdraw "Fibrolite" building products as also constituting conduct partly or wholly in New South Wales: "...because inherent in the withdrawal of products from dissemination in the marketplace is the prevention of them leaving the factory and if the factory was in New South Wales the failure to prevent them leaving the factory also occurred in New South Wales." 
To similar effect was his reasoning with respect to the particular of supply in para (d) of the Particulars of Negligence of the first Defendant: "...because in order to `supply' asbestos products it is surely sufficient to allow or permit the asbestos products to leave one's factory, and insofar as the manufacture is alleged to have occurred at Camellia, that supply occurred in New South Wales".

His Honour specifically rejected a submission that "the act of supply is not complete until a product reaches the end user".

In respect of the particular that refers to continued manufacture of "Fibrolite" building products in para (e): ""The continuation of manufacture of `Fibrolite' building products ...is clearly to my mind partly an allegation of wrongful acts occurring in New
South Wales, insofar as manufacture at Camellia is alleged." 
He indicated that a similar analysis applied to other particulars.

His Honour concluded that: "...if negligent manufacture is on a proper reading of the Statement of Claim alleged against both defendants, such negligent manufacture allegedly occurred, as to the building products made at Camellia, wholly in the State of New South Wales and this act is a significant part of the negligent acts alleged against both defendants in the Statement of Claim." 
His Honour concluded: "...a predominant part of the negligent acts alleged in the Statement of
Claim against the First and Second Defendants by the Plaintiff occurred wholly in New South Wales." 
His Honour posed the correct question in terms of the Voth versus Manildra Flour
Mills Pty Limited (supra) test: whether New South Wales was "a clearly inappropriate forum". His Honour expressed the conclusion: "I think that the crucial matter in such a determination is where the cause of action in truth arose, and in this case, for the reasons already set out, I think the cause of action in truth arose ... in New South Wales." 
His Honour had set out a number of the submissions on the question of appropriate forum made on behalf of the Defendants/Claimants by Mr Douglas QC.
His Honour concluded: "However, coming to the discretionary matters adverted to by Mr Douglas, I do not think they provide an indication that New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum either, once the view is taken (as I have done) that the
Plaintiffs' cause of action in truth arose in New South Wales".

After further consideration of the submissions made his Honour reiterated: "For all of those reasons I do not see, now that I have determined that the
Plaintiffs' cause of action in truth arose in New South Wales, that there are discretionary factors which nevertheless are determinative that New South
Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum." 
Finally his Honour indicated: "To determine that New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum, I must go as far as the High Court did in Voth and determine that the cause of action arose, as Mr Douglas argued, in truth wholly outside New South Wales, in New
Zealand in this case or failing that, that there are discretionary factors which establish, not just that New South Wales is not a more convenient forum than New Zealand, but rather that New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum. The evidence, for the reasons I have set out, does not establish these matters to my mind." 
It can be seen from these extracts from his Honour's reasoning that the determination by his Honour that the cause of action alleged in the pleadings arose in New South Wales was of crucial significance for his Honour in exercising the discretion. If his Honour erred in that conclusion then his exercise of discretion miscarried. There can be no doubt that if his Honour was correct in this conclusion, then his Honour was entitled to give the matter substantial weight.

Since the decision of Judge Armitage, indeed the day before the matter was argued in this Court, a decision was handed down in James Hardie & Coy
Pty Limited versus Putt (unreported Court of Appeal, 27 May 1998). The judgment of the Court was delivered by Sheller JA with whom Beazley and Stein JJA concurred. That case involved an employee in the New Zealand subsidiary of
James Hardie who sued the same two companies as are Claimants in the present proceedings, again without joining the New Zealand company, which in that case was also his actual employer. Questions of exposure of an employee gave rise to issues about a safe system of work, but the case also involved allegations of a failure to warn. The particulars were not identical, but the issue was squarely raised as to the location of the tort.

One of the issues on which the appeal was successful in Putt concerned the extent to which the two Australian companies owed a duty of care to the employee of the New Zealand company by reason of, inter alia, the exercise of control over the actual operations of the company. The issue was fully litigated. This aspect of the decision in Putt is not applicable in the present proceedings, where the application has been made at the time of lodging a Statement of Claim and providing particulars. As already noted, this
Court should proceed on the basis that the allegations in this regard will be made out. Accordingly, no issue arises as to whether either of the current
Claimants owes a duty of some character to the Opponents arising from the materials manufactured by the New Zealand subsidiary.

However, Putt also deals with the question of the place of the tort in a manner which is not distinguishable from the present case.

In Putt Sheller JA referred to "what were in truth the breaches, if the
Defendant owed a duty of care" and concluded: "These were a failure when supplying asbestos to a consumer to warn of the dangers of its use without appropriate safeguards or if indeed the Defendants had the capacity to give instructions which JHNZ was bound to accept, the failure to ensure a safe system of work for JHNZs employees." (p37-38) 
His Honour concluded: "... if the Defendants owed the Plaintiff a duty of care it was breached when and at the place where the Plaintiff was exposed to dust from the asbestos without adequate warning. Although there was no complete tort until the damage occurred ... it is manifestly just and reasonable that a Defendant should have to answer for its wrongdoing in the country where it did the wrong. In this case, property understood, the Defendants did the wrong complained of in New
Zealand.
 ................

In the present case the wrongful act of failing to warn or failing to provide a safe system of work occurred in the place where the Plaintiff was exposed without previous warning to asbestos dust.

If the Defendants owed a duty of care to the Plaintiff by supplying asbestos to JHNZ, knowing that it would be used by JHNZs employees in the course of their employment, the breach was a failure to warn of the dangers of exposure to asbestos dust and fibres in the circumstances in which those employees worked. ... In one case the place of the tort was the place where the warning should have operated to protect the Plaintiff, in the other the place where the system of work should have been safe. Both places were New Zealand I have no doubt that it was there that the tort complained of, property analysed, occurred. Treating the export of asbestos from Australia is one step in the series which ultimately led to the Plaintiff being exposed at Penrose to the asbestos dust does not make the place of the tort relied upon New South
Wales." (pp40-41) 
These reasons are directly applicable in the instant case. Applying them leads to the conclusion that the trial judge's exercise of discretion in the present proceedings miscarried. Accordingly, it falls to this Court to exercise the discretion afresh, for the same reason that the High Court did so in Voth .

Application of the Voth test 
As I have indicated above this Court has available to it, in addition to the evidence which was before Judge Armitage, a number of additional exhibits.

By letter of 20 May 1998 the solicitors for the Opponents replied to a further request for particulars from the solicitors for the Claimants. This provided a range of more specific information which it is not necessary to set out in full. These further particulars indicate the possibility of exposure of the
Plaintiff at four different points of time: 1957; 1962/1963; during 1963 and /1980.

As also indicated above, the Claimants have now filed defences. A number of notable features of those defences should be highlighted: Each Defendant denies that the "Fibrolite" building materials from which the asbestos dust and fibres which the Plaintiff inhaled were in part manufactured at the Australian factory including Camellia, New South Wales.
 Each Defendant does not admit that the "Fibrolite" building materials were in part manufactured at the factory at Penrose, Auckland.
 Each Defendant does not admit that the asbestos used at Penrose, Auckland, was supplied by the Defendants in circumstances in which they knew, or ought to have known, that the asbestos was to be used in the manufacture of "Fibrolite" building products.
 It is denied that the building products were manufactured by the First
Defendant, James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited.
 Each Defendant denies a number of the respects in which they are said to control the New Zealand subsidiary and its operations at the factory at
Penrose, Auckland.
 Furthermore, each Defendant alleges that warnings were given in different forms at different times: 
At a period, identified in submissions to the Court as commencing only in the early part of 1976, brochures accompanying asbestos manufactured in
Australia commenced to contain what the Defences identify as "Instructions as to the safe methods of handling the products" in the following terms: "All Hardies asbestos cement building products may be readily cut on site.
The methods available are `score-and-snap', and guillotine, power and hand sawing. The process should always be carried on in open air situations or in well ventilated areas." 
In or about October 1978, for the first time, what are described as "Warnings" were fixed as labels on asbestos cement building products and in brochures accompanying those products in the following terms: "CAUTION. This product contains asbestos. Breathing dust can damage health.
Keep dust down.

This product contains a small percentage of asbestos bound firmly into it by cement and other materials. Asbestos dust can damage health. Keep dust down by following these simple safety rules: When sawing, drilling, etc. work in well ventilated space, preferably outdoors.
 Use hand tools designed for cutting asbestos-cement sheets such as fibro cutters or a score and snap knife - or use an old hand saw. If cutting by power saw use one which has a dust suppression attachment.
 Avoid drilling overhead where possible by pre-drilling before fixing.
 Damp down waste dust and dispose of it in a sealed bag." 
The final additional matter, is that in submissions to the Court the Opponents indicated that it was their intention to join as a third party the New Zealand supplier of the product. Such joinder by way of Cross-Claim could be effected under Part 10 Rule 1A(f) and, perhaps, (i) of the Supreme Court Rules which apply by adoption in the Dust Diseases Tribunal.

In his submissions to the Court, Mr F Douglas QC appearing for the Claimants, submitted that the only connection with New South Wales was the fact that the
Claimants had their residence in the jurisdiction. Mr M Holmes QC, appearing for the Opponents, submitted that there were four additional local links namely: that the building products were partly manufactured in New South
Wales; the Defendants' activities and resources which gave rise to its knowledge, for example the employment of medical advisers, was within New
South Wales; the issues relating to the control of manufacture and supply in
New Zealand involved a consideration of the structure and control in New South
Wales; the failure to place appropriate warnings on the product occurred within New South Wales.

With respect to the question of control of the New Zealand operations, Mr
Holmes QC indicated that the Claimants had been successful in this regard in the case of Putt, with respect to a period well before the period in question in these proceedings. He emphasised that questions of control would constitute a live issue and that relevant witnesses would be located in New
South Wales. In any event, as indicated above, the Court will proceed as if these allegations were made out.

Both parties of course accepted that the relevant test to be applied was that identified in Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills (supra), namely was New South
Wales a "clearly inappropriate forum".

In seeking to give content to the test in the particular circumstance of the case Mr Holmes QC focused on the following passage from Voth: "The question whether the local court is a clearly inappropriate forum focuses ... upon the inappropriateness of the local court and not the appropriateness or comparative appropriateness of the suggested foreign forum." (p565) 
Mr Holmes sought to rely on this passage for the proposition that in determining inappropriateness of the local forum no process of comparison with the foreign forum should be made, or at least that is how I understood his submission. This goes too far. Whilst the focus is, as the High Court put it, on the "inappropriateness of the local court" that does not mean that all matters pertaining to the foreign court are irrelevant: the use of the word "focus" does not of itself suggest such a conclusion.

In a passage immediately proceeding that quoted, the High Court had indicated that matters of a broader character were relevant in the application of the ultimate test. A previous paragraph in the joint judgment said: "....the principles to be applied in applications to set aside service and in applications for a stay on inappropriate forum grounds are those stated by
Deane J in Oceanic Sun (1988) 165 CLR at pp247-248. In the application of those principles the discussion by Lord Goff in Spiliada (1987) AC at pp477-478, 482-484 of relevant `connecting factors' and `a legitimate personal or juridical advantage' provides a valuable assistance." (p564-565) 
In a subsequent case of Henry versus Henry [(1995) 618 CLR 571] at 587, in the joint judgment of Dawson, Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow JJ, their Honours repeated and elaborated on the above reference in Voth when they said: "In Voth, this Court adopted for Australia the test propounded by Deane J in
Oceanic Sun, namely, that a stay should be granted if a local court is a clearly inappropriate forum, which will be the case if continuation of the proceedings in that court would be oppressive, in the sense of both seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial, or damaging, or, vexatious, in the sense of 'productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment.' Oceanic
Sun at 247. It was also held in Voth that, in determining whether the local court is a clearly inappropriate forum, "the discussion by Lord Goth in
Spiliada of relevant `connecting factors' and `a legitimate personal or juridical advantage' provides valuable assistance". (Voth at 564-565). In this last regard, Lord Goff of Chieveley expressed the view that "legitimate personal or juridical advantage is a relevant but not decisive consideration, a fundamental question being `where the case may be tried both suitably for the interests of all the parties and for the ends of justice'." (Spiliada at 482).

The references in both Voth and Henry to Lord Goff of Chieveley in
Spiliada were, inter alia, to the following passages: "...it may be more desirable ... to adopt the expression used by my noble and learned friend Lord Keith of Kinkel, in the Abidin Daver [(1984) AC 398],415, when you referred to the `natural forum' as being `that with which the action had the most real and substantial connection'. So it is the connecting factors in this sense that the Court must first look; and these will include not only factors affecting convenience or expense (such as availability of witnesses), but also other things such as the law governing the relevant transaction ... and the places where the parties respectively reside or carry on business." (pp477-478) 
Furthermore, under the heading of "A legitimate personal or juridical advantage" his Lordship said: "We have to consider where the case may be tried `suitably for the interests of all the parties and for the ends of justice'. Let me consider the application of that principle in relation to advantages which the Plaintiff may derive from invoking the English jurisdiction. Typical examples are: damages awarded on higher scales; the more complete procedure of discovery; a power to award interest; and more generous limitation period. Now, as a general rule, I do not think the Court should be deterred from granting a stay of proceedings or in exercising its discretion against granting leave under
R.S.C.Ord. 11, simply because the Plaintiff will be deprived of such an advantage provided the Court is satisfied that substantial justice will be done in the available appropriate forum. ..." (p482) "But the underlying principle requires that regard must be had to the interests of all the parties and the ends of justice; ..." (p483) 
His Lordship considered a range of examples of particular advantages and disadvantages in this context. All of them involve some process of comparison between the two available forums.

Mr Holmes QC also relied on Goliath Portland Cement Co Limited versus Bengtell [(1994) 33 NSWLR 414.] In that case Gleeson CJ set out the reasoning of the trial judge, Judge O'Meally, and indicated his agreement in the following terms: "Judge O'Meally reasoned as follows. It cannot be suggested (and was not suggested) that New South Wales was an inappropriate forum in which to sue
CSR. The place where a large corporation has its headquarters is a reasonable place in which to commence action against it; it would only be in unusual circumstances that it could be described as clearly inappropriate. It is appropriate that the actions against CSR and Goliath should be heard together.
Although, if Goliath had been sued alone, the case would have been a proper one for a stay of proceedings, the presence of CSR as a co-defendant made an important difference. On that ground his Honour declined, in the exercise of his discretion, to order a stay.

I see no error of law or logic in that process of reasoning." (pp419-420) 
The reasoning of Kirby P did not accord with the reasoning of Gleeson CJ in this regard. In the course of his reasons the President said: "It is true that Judge O'Meally went further than was necessary in suggesting that `a New South Wales Court cannot be said to be a clearly inappropriate forum to hear an action against a New South Wales company'. Plainly, in some cases where the `connecting factors' to another jurisdiction are overwhelmingly numerous, the presence of a local company in a jurisdiction will not alone be sufficient so much is demonstrated by the decision Voth itself. But I regard this slip as immaterial. It was said in the context of a case where the New South Wales company involved made no application to stay the proceedings, to set aside the process or even to seek to transfer the proceedings under the cross-vesting legislation. Viewed in that light, I believe his Honour statement is innocuous. It did not cause the exercise of his discretion to miscarry." (p433) 
It is in this context that Gleeson CJ's acceptance of the process of reasoning of Judge O'Meally in Bengtell should be understood. The present Claimants, unlike CSR in that case, do take issue with proceedings being conducted in New
South Wales.

The test of "clearly inappropriate forum" should not be applied as if it was a statutory formula to be construed. Rather it is the ultimate reflection of a body of principle applying a flexible standard concerned with whether the effect on one party of the continuation of the proceedings in the forum can be described as "vexatious or oppressive". These words themselves are not susceptible of precise definition. As long ago as 1882 Lord Justice Bowen said: "I agree that it would be most unwise, unless one was actually driven to do so for the purpose of deciding this case to lay down any definition of what is vexatious or oppressive, or to draw a circle, so to speak around this Court unnecessarily, and to say that it will not move outside it. I would much rather rest on the general principle of the Court can and will interfere whenever there is vexation and oppression to prevent the administration of justice being perverted for an unjust end. I would rather do that than attempt to define what vexation and oppression mean; they must vary with the circumstances of each case." (McHenry versus Lewis [1882 22 ChD 397] at 407-8).

In Oceanic Sun Line Special Shipping Company Inc versus Fay <case>; [(1987-1998) 165 CLR 197]
Deane J, whose judgment, as shown above, constitutes the basis of the High
Court's current jurisprudence in this area of the law, drew on these concepts as they had been developed over a long period. His Honour said: "The general (or traditional) approach which emerges from Maritime Insurance
Co Limited versus Geelong Harbour Trust Commissioners <case>; [(1908) 6 CLR 194], is that the power of a Court whose jurisdiction has been regularly invoked to dismiss or stay proceedings on the ground that they should have been brought in some Tribunal in another country is limited to the case where the Court is persuaded that it is such an unsuitable or inappropriate forum for their determination that their continuance would work a serious injustice in that it would be oppressive and vexatious to the defence. On that traditional approach, the clear inappropriateness of the local forum may justify dismissal or stay. The mere fact that some foreign
Tribunal would represent a `more appropriate' forum will not." (p242) 
His Honour did, however, indicate that the concepts of "vexation" and "oppression" must be understood flexibly and should not be rigidly construed: "...it seems to me that those words should be read ... as describing and characterising the objective effect, on balance, of a continuation of the particular forum as the venue of the proceedings rather than as describing the conduct of the Plaintiff in selecting or persisting with that forum ... If the plaintiff is not acting bona fide or in pursuit of a legitimate advantage in pursuing the proceedings in the legal system of this country, that will, of course, make it much easier for a continuation of the proceedings to be characterised as vexatious or oppressive, since there will be little if anything to put into the balance against the inconvenience which would be sustained by the Defendant. On that approach, `oppressive' should, in this context, be understood as meaning seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging while `vexatious' should be understood as meaning productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment." (p247) 
It was immediately after this passage that his Honour came down in favour of the "so inappropriate a forum" test, adopted in the joint judgment in Voth.
However, before doing so, his Honour introduced that test with the following comments on the power to dismiss or stay proceedings on what his Honour described shortly as "inappropriate forum grounds": "That power is a discretionary one in the sense that its exercise involves a subjective balancing process in which the relevant factors will vary and in which both the question of the comparative weight to be given to particular factors in the circumstances of a particular case and a decision whether the power should be exercised are matters for individual judgment and, to a significant extent, matters of impression." (pp247-248) 
In the joint judgment in Henry (supra) at 588, their Honours said: "....the substance of the test in Voth is simply whether the chosen forum is a clearly inappropriate forum. And, as already indicated, that is to be determined by considering whether continuation of the proceedings would be `oppressive' or `vexatious' in the extended sense in which those words were used by Deane J in Oceanic Sun." (588) 
On this basis the "clearly inappropriate forum" test must be applied by identifying factors which can be seen to be either "oppressive or vexatious" in this broader sense, to one of the parties. In this case the relevant party is each of the two Claimant companies. What is required is to identify the matters which can be said to be either "vexatious or oppressive" to the
Claimants.

Once it is determined that the place of the tort is New Zealand this identifies immediately a significant source of prejudice by reason of the need to prove the law of New Zealand as a matter of fact, by means of expert evidence. At this stage it is not possible to say whether or not there will be a conflict of evidence on this matter. However, on the materials before the
Court at present, it does not appear that New Zealand law is sufficiently certain to determine how readily the applicable law will be able to be identified.

I must of course resist the temptation of reviewing the New Zealand authorities and assessing their likely future development on my own account. I am restricted to the limited evidence of New Zealand law which is before the
Court. I have made general reference to it earlier in these reasons. The evidence is to the effect that a common law claim would exist unless cover existed under the Accident Compensation Act as in force from time to time.

Indeed, in Putt this Court held that s17 of the Accident Rehabilitation and
Compensation Insurance Act 1992 , which prohibited personal injury proceedings arising out of employment, was a substantive and not a procedural rule. In accordance with the choice of law rules authoritatively determined in
Australia, this led to the conclusion that no such action was maintainable here.

Section 14 of the same Act is concerned with all proceedings for damages for personal injury. It is indistinguishable from s17. Until the decision in
Putt, a significant prejudice to the Claimants could have been said to arise. The Claimants would have been subject to a liability here, from which they would be protected in New Zealand.

In Voth, the High Court reasons included the following: "Indeed, circumstances could well exist in which the local court was a clearly inappropriate one notwithstanding that there was no other tribunal which was competent to entertain the particular proceedings: e.g., a claim for damages for injury in a road accident in circumstances where the courts of the only country with which the parties or the accident had any real connexion were denied jurisdiction to entertain any such claim by reason of the express provisions of a general legislative scheme providing for limited benefits and compensation for all road accident victims from public funds." 
In such a case, if the foreign law preventing suit were classified as procedural, in my opinion that would operate strongly in favour of finding the local forum to be clearly inappropriate. Because of Putt that is not the case here.

It is instructive to review the factors taken into account by the High Court when it came to exercise the discretion after finding that the Court below had erred in holding that New South Wales rather than Missouri was the place of the tort, a fact which the joint judgment described as "fundamental" p570.
Their Honours said at 570-1: "We turn therefore to consider the factors relevant in the present appeal too the exercise of the discretion whether or not to order that the action be stayed. In favour of a stay are the considerations that: the action has a substantial connexion with the law of Missouri; the relevant acts and omissions took place predominantly in Missouri; the appellant resides and works in Missouri and the professional standards of accountants in Missouri will therefore be relevant to his liability, if any; in large part the damage which the appellant was alleged to have caused was referable to United States taxation law; and the greater part of the evidence in any trial of the action would be found in Missouri.

On the other hand, the plaintiffs in the action are residents of New South
Wales and may therefore reasonably point to the advantages to them in practical terms of bringing an action in the local courts; the transactions concerned have some connexion with New South Wales and with Australian revenue laws; and, to a large extent at least, the damage was suffered in New South
Wales. However, these last considerations are natural consequences and incidents of residence in a particular jurisdiction and, as such, are merely different aspects of the right of any plaintiff to bring an action in the courts of the jurisdiction wherein he or she resides. That is a legitimate personal or juridical advantage which is acknowledged by the prima facie right of a plaintiff to insist upon the exercise of a jurisdiction which he or she has regularly invoked, but beyond that it has little weight. More importantly, the plaintiffs in this case point to three further legitimate juridical advantages. First, it is said that an effective limitation bar exists in
Missouri, through which the appellant could, if he wishes, successfully resist the action. Secondly, there is evidence that, in proceedings of this kind in
Missouri, the costs awarded in favour of a successful plaintiff may not include attorneys' fees. Finally, there is evidence that the rules as to the awarding of damages by way of interest are less advantageous to a plaintiff in
Missouri than in the Supreme Court of New South Wales.

Conclusion 
The first of these advantages was the subject of an undertaking by the appellant, both in the Court of Appeal and in this Court, when special leave to appeal was granted. Accordingly, it may be made a condition of any order staying the action. The second and third advantages, while doubtless significant to the respondent plaintiffs, are of diminished importance in the overall task of the court exercising the discretion based upon the competing connexions of the respective forums with the subject-matter of the proceedings. They are not sufficient to resist the conclusion to which the other considerations irresistibly point, that New South Wales is clearly an inappropriate forum in which to permit the action to proceed." 
In this case also, significant weight must be given to the fact that "the action has a substantial connexion with the law of New Zealand". However, it is not clear that this case has an equivalent to "the professional standards of accountants in Missouri".

The common law rights in this case must be determined in accordance with duties and standards of care applicable in New Zealand. There are significant policy elements in the determination of issues such as proximity and causation which may be significant in some cases. Cultural differences may also prove to be very important, although less so for New Zealand than any other foreign nation.

In areas at the forefront of the expansion of negligence, of which personal injury from dangerous products is not one, policy issues may be of considerable weight in determining whether New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum. There will be some policy element in many `failure to warn' cases. It is difficult to give this matter weight in the exercise of the discretion on this occasion, as there is no evidence before us about the state of New Zealand law in this respect. However, one of the issues in the case is the adequacy of a warning allegedly given before the last exposure. This is a matter on which judicial minds may differ. It is an issue best determined by a judge in the place where the failure to warn occurred.

One of the alternative periods of possible exposure alleged in the particulars is 1979-80. The evidence before the Court about New Zealand law is that, with respect to that alleged exposure the Plaintiff "probably does not have a common law claim" (emphasis added). The issue turns on the proper construction of the words, "personal injury by accident" and, "damages to the body ...
caused exclusively by disease" within the meaning of the Accident
Compensation Act 1972 . There is also a construction point as to the applicability of the "exclusively by disease exception" where there is an "accident", which the expert evidence states "has not been definitely decided".

On the evidence, there is New Zealand authority that a woman who suffered mesothelioma after inhaling asbestos dust from shaking out her husband's overalls, was covered, because each inhalation was an "accident". Further, the act of inhalation meant that damage was not "caused exclusively by disease".
The construction of such ordinary English words turns on the scope and purpose of the legislation to a significant degree.

These issues will be determined by an Australian Court as issues of fact, based, at least in theory, on evidence from an expert in New Zealand law. This is not a satisfactory method of deciding questions of law which, on the evidence in this Court, are unresolved and uncertain. In particular, it is not satisfactory for an Australian Court to determine, on the basis of expert evidence, the intention of the New Zealand Parliament, where it appears that there is uncertainty as to that intention, in a context of legislation which has a significant policy content. On an appeal in New Zealand, the judiciary may well confound any "expert" with respect to such unresolved points. This is a relevant factor in deciding whether there is "oppression" in the relevant sense.

Another significant detriment arises from the provisions of s25(3). The
Claimants will not necessarily be entitled to test "historical evidence and general medical evidence" tendered against them. The Opponents urged that difference upon the Court as a "legitimate juridical advantage". This may be so but, in the words of Lord Goff in Spiliada, approved by the High Court, such an advantage should not deter the Court from granting a stay providing that it is "satisfied that substantial justice will be done" in New Zealand (supra 482). This Court will be satisfied that this is true in the case of the
New Zealand Courts.

No doubt some of the matters to which s25(3) will apply would not be contentious and some will be the subject of admissions. In a New Zealand
Court, that would be a matter of choice for the Claimants. In proceedings before the Dust Diseases Tribunal, the right to make that choice may be lost.
This is also a factor of "oppression" in the relevant sense. However, the weight I attach to this matter is limited by the absence of any evidence as to the significance of the evidence which may be admitted, but which the
Claimants would otherwise challenge.

It may be that the statutory provision for informal proof and admissions found in s23 of the Dust Diseases Tribunal Act, could also result in significant forensic disadvantages. However, there is no evidence of New Zealand law and practice in that regard. The provisions are not so extraordinary that one would expect to be told if New Zealand provisions differed substantially in this regard. Accordingly, I do not take s23 into account.

On the materials presently before the Court it does not appear that matters relating to location of witnesses and documents, indicate a significant element of vexation and oppression. In Voth, the High Court said the "greater part of the evidence ...would be found in Missouri". That does not appear here. Nevertheless, a significant part of the evidence will be in New
Zealand and, on the issue of liability, it will be particularly difficult to identify and test it, because the alleged exposures happened so long ago.

In the normal course one would expect that the Plaintiff would find it more convenient to give his supporting evidence in New Zealand. The Defendants in the normal course, would find it more convenient to have the issue of control over their New Zealand subsidiary litigated in Australia. The fact that the parties take the reverse position in this case indicates that other matters are regarded as significant by the parties.

In my opinion, on balance and, to some extent for analogous reasons to those which ultimately prevailed in Voth, I find that the continuation of these proceedings would be "oppressive" to the Claimants, in the sense of "seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging". (Voth at 555 and 564).

I note one additional matter. Uninstructed by authority, I would have given weight to considerations of policy with respect to the call on the limited resources available for the administration of justice in New South Wales. I refer to resources generally available, not specifically the resources of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal which are, as a matter of budgetary practice, part of an amount which could be reallocated.

It is by no means clear to me that a foreign resident suing on a foreign tort should be entitled to the advantages of a special regime developed for the benefit of Australian residents. The demands on judicial resources are now such that this should be a permissible element in the exercise of the jurisdiction to stay proceedings.

This is a relevant factor in the United States doctrine of forum non conveniens. (See Gulf Oil Corp versus Gilbert <case>; [1947 330 US 501] at 508-9; Piper Aircraft Co versus Reyno <case>; [1981 454 US 235] at 261; Born International Civil Litigation in United States
Courts: Commentary and Materials (3rd Ed) 1996 esp p291-51 319-329; Stuckley "Conflict of Laws: a Comparative Analysis of the Forum Non-Conveniens
Doctrines in the USA, the UK and Australia" [1994 15 Queensland Lawyer ] at 26-7.

However, Deane J has rejected this US doctrine in Oceanic Sun at 250-1, -5. Although not expressly referred to in Voth, my understanding of the adoption in the joint judgment of his Honour's analysis in Oceanic Sun, involves acceptance of his rejection of the public interest considerations, such as court congestion, accepted in the USA. (Eg the emphasis at 554 is entirely on private interests).

Justice Deane concluded: "If the law of this country is to be changed in that regard, it seems to me to be preferable that it be done by legislation enacted after full inquiry and informed assessment of international as well as domestic considerations of a kind which this Court is not equipped to make of its own initiative." Oceanic
Sun supra at 255.

The Parliament should, in my opinion, consider a reform of the law which would permit the diversion of limited judicial resources, and other matters of public interest, to be considered as an element in the discretionary balance, when resolving forum non conveniens claims. On my reading of the authorities,
I am prevented from taking into account such matters of public interest.

The appeal should be allowed. Upon the Claimants giving to the Court an undertaking that they will not, in any New Zealand proceedings, plead the
Limitation Act 1950 , orders 1, 2 and 3 in the draft Notice of Appeal should be made save for the deletion of the words "that" and "be dismissed or" 2 and of the word "that" in 3.

JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LTD versus GRIGOR 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of Spigelman CJ. 
I agree with the Chief Justice that the discretion miscarried in the Tribunal because of the central weight placed on the erroneous finding that a predominant part of the negligent acts alleged in the Statement of Claim occurred in New South Wales.

Accordingly, it falls to us to exercise the discretion. I am grateful to adopt the Chief Justice's analysis of the relevant principles.

If this case were to be determined according to the "more appropriate forum" test in Spiliada Maritime Corporation versus Cansulex Ltd <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538] requires us to focus on "the advantages and disadvantages arising from a continuation of the proceedings in the selected forum" (at 558) and to ask whether the applicant for a stay has shown that it is a clearly inappropriate forum. This will be the case if continuation of the proceedings in that court would be oppressive, in the sense of seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging; or vexatious, in the sense of productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment: Henry versus Henry <case>; [(1996) 185 CLR 571] at 587. This is very much a matter of impression.

No two cases are identical, but I draw some assistance from the way in which the majority in Voth actually exercised the discretion (see the passage at 570-1 set out in the judgment of the Chief Justice). Their analysis reveals that a stay will not be refused simply because the plaintiff can point to some connexions with the local forum. Ultimately the discretion is to be exercised "based upon the competing connexions of the respective forums with the subject-matter of the proceedings"(at 571).

In favour of a stay are the considerations that the action has a substantial connexion with New Zealand, indeed nearly all of the particulars allege negligence occurring in New Zealand; the plaintiff has always resided in New
Zealand and is unable to travel to Australia to give evidence; all or virtually all of the evidence touching his damages will come from New Zealand witnesses, some of whom will be medical specialists; and New Zealand law will be determinative of the plaintiff's rights. This will require examination of that country's tort law (not necessarily the same as in Australia) and its complex scheme of accident compensation.

This case is distinguishable from James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd versus Putt,
Court of Appeal, unreported, 27 May 1998, in that there is evidence that the plaintiff may not be barred by the Accident Compensation Rehabilitation and
Insurance Act 1992 (NZ) if he establishes actionable negligence occurring before 1974. That distinction is significant to me in the balancing exercise that needs to be performed, albeit that the Court is not ultimately concerned with the substantive rights of the parties as distinct from the appropriateness of litigating in the chosen forum. Foreign law is capable of proof, but such proof is attendant with significant difficulties and uncertainties (as the Chief Justice points out). The fact that the substantive law to be applied is that of another country is "a very significant factor in the exercise of the court's discretion, but the court should not focus upon that factor to the exclusion of all others" (Voth at 566).

Placed opposite in the balance, in the plaintiff's favour, are the following connexions with New South Wales that will be relevant to the burden of litigating here: the manufacture and packaging of the products took place (in part) in New South Wales; the state of corporate knowledge of the locally resident defendants, including that of their medical adviser and advocate Dr
McCullagh, is essentially a matter calling for investigation of documents and witnesses to be found here (This touches perception of risk, and knowledge of intended use in the manufacture of "Fibolite" materials in Penrose, New
Zealand.); and some at least of the actual exercise of corporate control through the defendant which is the holding company (James Hardie Industries
Ltd) occurred here. Cf Putt at pp45-57. The defendants' denials in their recently filed Defences indicate that these will be live issues. Accordingly, the comparative vexation of litigating them here or in New Zealand is relevant.

It also appears that one of the plaintiff's allegations against the first defendant (Particular of Negligence (j)) pleads a case of negligent manufacture (in New South Wales). There is authority supporting the proposition that such a tort occurs in the place of negligent manufacture and not where the harm is suffered, for the purposes of the test approved in
Voth at 566-7: see Dicey and Morris, The Conflict of Laws 12th ed, pp1501-11. I do not see this as carrying much weight in the present calculus, but such as it does is in favour of the plaintiff.

I place some weight upon the fact that the defendants are resident and apparently based in New South Wales and were served here: cf Goliath
Portland Cement Co Ltd versus Bengtell [(1994) 33 NSWLR 414] at -20. But it is to be recognised that, wherever the defendants reside, being corporations they need to retain lawyers and other agents to act for them in litigation.

With some hesitation, I regard [s25(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s25.html) of the [Dust Diseases Tribunal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/) as offering more than a mere legitimate personal or juridical advantage to the plaintiff (cf Voth at 571; Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd versus Wordplex
Information Systems Ltd [(1990) 19 NSWLR 146] at 156).
The potential savings of time and cost offered by this provision are significant, even if used with proper circumspection and close attention to the defendants' right to insist on clear prior indication of the particular use to be made of the voluminous [s25(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s25.html) material that is often tendered. So long as the power is fairly used it cannot, in my opinion, be viewed as a source of prejudice to one party over another. Since [s25(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s25.html) is a matter of procedure it is, I consider, appropriate to take it into account in focussing on "the advantages arising from the continuation of the proceedings in the selected forum" (which is acceptable: Voth at 559.
See also at 571) while avoiding "assessment of the comparative procedural or other claims of the foreign forum" (which is not: ibid). (I frankly confess to some difficulty in applying these passages in Voth.) 
I have not thought it appropriate to weigh in the plaintiff's favour the possibility that the Tribunal might choose to travel to New Zealand to hear evidence. In my view one should ignore such extraordinary aspects of the forum court's powers.

Nor have I thought it proper to have regard to the impact upon the workload of an already severely burdened Dust Diseases Tribunal of allowing the proceedings to continue: see Oceanic Sun Line Special Shipping Company Inc v Fay <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 197] at 250-1, 254-5. (Had I done so, my conclusion may well have been in favour of a stay.) I respectfully agree with what the Chief Justice has written (echoing Deane J in Oceanic at 255) about the need to consider legislative reform of common law principles which place no burden of persuasion upon foreign residents wanting to litigate foreign torts in a crowded judicial regime developed for the benefit of Australian residents and funded by Australian taxpayers or local employers. This is specially problematical where a major issue in the local litigation is the extent of impact of the barring provisions of a compensation regime established in another country for that country's residents. I would simply add this. Any modification of the existing law should not overlook the scenario of an
Australian manufacturer of a dangerous product seeking to dump it in a foreign market with less stringent controls. (This is an allegation in the present case, hotly denied.) The legal, moral and economic issues are complex, but any legislative restriction of a foreign plaintiff's resort to a local court through the application of the forum non conveniens doctrine should at least address those issues.

Bearing in mind the guidance to judges advocated in Voth at 565, I conclude that I am not satisfied that the proceedings should be stayed. I do not regard the continuation of the proceedings as oppressive, in the sense of "seriously and unfairly" burdensome, prejudicial or damaging; or vexatious, in the sense of being productive of "serious and unjustified trouble and harassment".

I would grant leave, but dismiss the appeal with costs.

JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LTD versus GRIGOR 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Mason P. * * * 
