

Regina versus Damir Savka [1998] NSWSC 1001 (26 February 1998) 
REGINA versus DAMIR SAVKA /96 
MONDAY 26 AUGUST 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, STUDDERT J, SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: Sully J will give the first judgment.

SULLY J: This is a Crown appeal against sentences. The sentences in question were imposed on 3 May last by J B Phelan DCJ sitting in the Campbelltown District Court. The respondent to the appeal is Mr Damir Savka, who stood for sentence before Phelan DCJ having pleaded guilty to two charges, each being a charge of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm. Such an offence contravenes [section 52A(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and attracts, by reason of statutory amendment enacted in 1994, a statutory maximum penalty of imprisonment for eleven years.

It is fair to acknowledge at once that the respondent, when originally charged, pleaded guilty before a magistrate at what can be understood as having been the earliest practicable occasion for the entering of such a plea; and, as I have said, he adhered to those pleas before the learned primary
Judge.

Phelan DCJ dealt with the respondent by imposing in respect of each of the two offences a sentence of three hundred hours' community service, to be served concurrently, and a disqualification from driving for a period of two years from the date of sentence.

The sentences were imposed having regard not only to the two offences of which
I have spoken, but also to two further and associated offences which were scheduled at the request of the respondent, and which the learned primary
Judge took into account.

The first of those scheduled offences was that of driving a motor vehicle without a licence. The relevant facts are put in the appeal book simply as follows: that on the date mentioned, the respondent had driven his vehicle, being aware that his licence had been cancelled on 2 November 1995. It is to be noted that his licence had been cancelled because he had accumulated the requisite number of points by reason of various driving offences.

The second of the scheduled matters took account of the fact that the vehicle being driven by the respondent at the relevant time was not registered, its registration having been cancelled on 9 September 1995; and it being reasonable to infer that the vehicle, being not in an absolute sense unroadworthy, was at least in some significant respects not fit to be driven on a public street.

The facts concerning the principal offences are put succinctly by the learned primary Judge in the following terms which are taken from his Honour's remarks on sentence: "The circumstances show that on 15 January you had been drinking at a club with two friends who became passengers and in turn victims of this driving.
You drank far too much as is revealed by the reading of .182 grams of alcohol per 100 millilitres in your blood. It seems clear that you and your passengers had all responsibly agreed that you were to go to the car and sleep it off.
Alcohol no doubt changed your mind and you set off driving. The result was that you collided with a tree injuring yourself and more seriously your two passengers. The injuries that each of them received were life-threatening. You yourself continue to suffer some problem from your injuries. The others have apparently gone on to recover but I am not sure to what extent in respect of ....(one of the two)." one of the two. It is to be noted that the injuries suffered by one of the two passengers are stated as follows in the relevant medical report: "A blunt liver laceration, a fractured right femur and right patella, lacerations over the right hand, lips and face and a blunt chest injury." 
The injuries suffered by the other passenger are similarly stated to have been: "A fractured right wrist and brain injury intracranial head injury." 
Included in the appeal papers are copies of photographs which were tendered at the sentence proceedings. They are, as usual, poorly-reproduced; but even so, they are eloquent in what they show concerning the gravity of the condition of the crash in question. It is in my own view, literally an act of God that nobody was killed.

Those objective features fall to be considered in the light of some more particular things perceived by the respondent according to answers given by him when he was interviewed by the investigating police. The respondent told investigating police that he could not remember how the collision had happened. He said: "I guess I may have collapsed or fallen asleep in front of the wheel, veered off the road into a tree." 
Pressed further as to his recollections he said this: "I remember just getting in the car and then put the seat back and went to sleep for a while. I woke up. I thought I was all right. Then I drove off, I guess, and the next thing you know I was in the tree and I can't remember driving off." 
A little later in the record of interview the respondent explained to the investigating police that he had been at the beach for the whole of the day preceding the night on which the collision occurred. He said he thought he had been dehydrated due to that day at the beach. He was asked whether he thought alcohol might have contributed to the collision. He said he thought it might.
He was asked whether it would be fair to say that he felt under the influence of alcohol when he left the club heading towards his vehicle and he acknowledged that would be fair.

I think that the objective facts, putting aside for the moment subjective matters to which I shall come presently, indicate offences of significant gravity and of significant criminal culpability. That Parliament legislated in , not, so to speak, merely by way of tinkering with [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) as it had previously stood, but by way of repealing the section and re-enacting it as a wholly resettled statement of what was thereafter to be the law of culpable driving; and that Parliament in that context provided that in circumstances of the present kind, the available statutory maximum penalty should be a sentence of imprisonment as high as eleven years, surely says all that needs to be said about the perception of Parliament, representing as it does the general membership of the community, as to the gravity of drunken driving in aggravated circumstances leading to serious physical injury to third parties.

In its decision in R versus Hallacoglu [(1992) 63 A Crim R 287] this Court looked in some detail at the question of the range of criminal culpability appropriate to the offence of culpable driving under [section
A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html)
Notice was taken, in terms, of something that had been said as long ago as by the then Chief Justice in the matter of Murnin. Portion of what was then said will bear repeating for present purposes. The then Chief Justice said this: "A motor vehicle is a potentially dangerous, indeed, lethal machine. Those who drive motor vehicles on public highways, as do the overwhelming majority of members of our community, must inevitably accept that if they drive those potentially lethal machines dangerously and occasion death or grievous bodily harm, then the criminal law will exact from them a penalty appropriate to the degree of criminality that the whole of the circumstances disclose." 
I say again that, in my opinion, somebody who drives an unregistered motor vehicle at a time when he is physically debilitated by a day of exercise on the beach; and is, as well, drunk; and is, as well, unlicensed so as to have no entitlement, - I repeat, no lawful entitlement, - to drive at all, is doing something which manifests a degree of criminality which is significant in the scheme of such things.

Hallacoglu took account, as well, of things that had been said by the former Chief Judge at Common Law in MacIntyre, another decision of this Court. That was a decision which sought to take account of the undoubted fact that people drive motor cars these days at an age much younger than used to be the case; and it sought to take account, as well, of what might be described as the natural exuberance of youth. But that decision pointed out, and it is in my view timely to re-state the proposition, that offences of the kind here in question, especially when they lead to death or serious bodily injury, cannot be excused by using youth as what might be described as a cloak of convenience. People who are seventeen, eighteen, up to twenty-one as was the case here, are not children. If they are old enough to have licences to drive at all, then they are old enough to be expected to exercise that privilege responsibly. It is not exercising the privilege responsibly to drive without a licence when debilitated and drunk.

Of course, and as the learned primary Judge recognised, there were in the case of the present respondent significant subjective matters proper to be taken into account. They include in particular the age of the respondent; the fact that he has, not indeed an unblemished prior record, but certainly a record not suggestive of wilful and serious breaches of the criminal law; the fact that he has an apprenticeship which he has almost completed; the fact that he has, so far as these things can be gauged, some fair prospects of a useful career in the field of his choice.

As I say, these things were rightly recognised by the learned primary Judge, and they must be given their proper place in the scheme of things; but I cannot think that giving them their proper place in the scheme of things can possibly have justified sentences in the form of community service orders, in the context, I say again, of a deliberate amendment by Parliament to increase from three years to eleven years the available statutory maximum penalty. In my opinion the Crown appeal should be allowed.

Much more difficult is it to settle upon a way in which the respondent might justly be dealt with now. I do not see for myself any justifiable alternative to a full-time custodial sentence of some kind.

I do not accept the submission, which was urged with clarity and force on behalf of the respondent, that the notion of general deterrence as a legitimate concern of sentencing Courts is to be regarded as in some way discredited. I would myself have thought that in the field in which we are dealing in this unhappy case, general deterrence is a matter of prime importance. It is, in my opinion, of the very essence of what needs to be done on this occasion, to ensure that there is sent out into the relevant portions of the community a clear and unmistakable message that the Courts recognise that Parliament did not amend [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) just for the sake of doing it; but that Parliament intended that the new regime of penalties should be taken seriously by all concerned. It is not a dutiful response on the part of Courts, either primary 
Courts or appeal Courts, in my respectful view, to approach the situation in the way in which his Honour has done in this case.

The respondent has put before the Court some materials which have been marked
Exhibit A, and which reinforce the subjective features to which I have earlier referred. They are troubling, in the sense that they suggest the need to be particularly careful that a custodial sentence, which, as I say again, I think is inevitable in this case, be framed in such a way as not to amount to a crushing penalty that will destroy such good work as the respondent has done to date in the matter of his apprenticeship; or such as will destroy his prospects for rehabilitation.

I would say in that regard that the sentence that I shall propose in a moment would have been very significantly higher had it not been for considerations of those kinds. In my opinion a proper approach would be of imposing an aggregate sentence of imprisonment of three years, divided into a minimum term to be served of eighteen months and adding an additional term of eighteen months. I would justify that division on the basis of special circumstances found by reference to the comparative youth of the respondent; to his comparatively good past personal and general record; and to what appear to be substantial prospects for rehabilitation. I think that this is a case in which a weighting of the component parts of the sentence so as to extend beyond what might have been taken as the appropriate point, the additional term is well- justified.

I would append to the sentence recommendations, as follows, to the
Commissioner or Director-General of Corrective Services: first, that steps should be taken urgently for the classification of the respondent in order to reduce to an absolute minimum any risk of his being brought into contact in the Corrective Services establishment with what I would describe as hard-core criminals; second, that he should be considered urgently for placement in the
Young Offenders Programme to the end of there affording him every practicable opportunity to finish the theoretical, and perhaps as well the practical, aspects of the apprenticeship to which Exhibit A refers.

To that end I am of the opinion that the following orders should be made: that the Crown appeal should be allowed; that the sentences imposed by the primary
Judge should be quashed; that in lieu of those sentences the respondent should be sentenced to be imprisoned for a period of three years, apportioned between a minimum term of eighteen months to commence on 26 August 1996 and to conclude on 25 February 1998 and an additional period of eighteen months to commence on 26 February 1998 and to expire on 25 August 1989; recommendations along the lines which I proposed.

HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Sully J for the reason given.

STUDDERT J: I agree with the orders proposed.

HUNT CJ at CL: The orders of the court are as proposed by Sully J. The respondent is to be taken into custody.
 * * * 
