

Butler Pollnow Pty Limited versus McCann and Ors Matter Nos 20580-2/95 [1998]
NSWSC 1035 (20 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
BUTLER POLLNOW PTY LIMITED versus McCANN & ANOR 
BUTLER POLLNOW PTY LIMITED versus ROBERTS & ORS 
BUTLER POLLNOW PTY LIMITED versus BROWNIE & ORS 
BUTLER POLLNOW PTY LIMITED versus HING & ORS 
BUTLER POLLNOW PTY LIMITED versus CRAIGE & ORS 
BUTLER POLLNOW PTY LIMITED versus DYE & ORS 
BUTLER POLLNOW PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus GARDEN MEWS ST LEONARDS PTY LIMITED & ORS 
QUEENSBORO PTY LIMITED versus BUTLER POLLNOW PTY LIMITED & ORS -2/95, 20584-6/95, EQ 2983/83, EQ 3231/87 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
BUTLER POLLNOW (8 RELATED MATTERS) 
After completion of the hearing, the reserving of judgment and the actual writing of the judgment, a sizeable bundle of documents and material was recently delivered to my Chambers by Smits Leslie.

The documentation (apart from a letter addressed to my Associate) comprises, inter alia, proposed amended applications and other correspondence. The letter contains material which I do not regard to be factually correct. However, for present purposes, it is not necessary to dwell on that aspect.

Due to the volume of work and approaching leave, I have been pressed for time.
I have not had the opportunity to fully digest the contents of the documentary material and I do not have the time to embark on an exercise (involving a rewriting of the judgment) which may not be really necessary.

In the light of what has happened and my understanding of the material, there does not seem to be any real need for the Court to take any action and accordingly, I propose to proceed to deliver the judgment that has been written. After all, it deals with the case that was actually presented and argued.

If the parties wish to take any further action in relation to the material, I propose to leave it up to them to proceed as they may be advised.
 August 1998 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: There are a number of applications before the Court. By consent, the applications are being heard together. Similar considerations arise in each of the applications. 
Each of the applications concerns a claim made by Butler Pollnow Pty Limited (the Company). In some instances, it is made by Cross-Claim. There are eight proceedings (six in Common Law and two in Equity).

On 20 April 1998, orders were made dismissing each of the claims. At that time, the Company had been deregistered (it had been deregistered since 21
November 1997). The Australian Securities Commission (the ASC) did not oppose the granting of such relief.

On 26 May 1998, the status of the Company was amended by the ASC (it was reinstated and given a "Non-active" status).

Application has been made by Dr Errol Hugh Pollnow (Pollnow) for relief.
Pollnow is a director and shareholder of the Company. The relief was sought prior to the reinstatement of the Company.

A number of orders have been sought. I shall mention some of them. It is sought to have the dismissal orders set aside. Initially, it was sought to have the Company removed as a party in each of the Common Law proceedings.
During the hearing, these claims for relief were abandoned. The applications thereafter proceeded on the basis of Pollnow being added as a second plaintiff in each of those proceedings. It is sought to file an Amended Statement of
Claim in each of those proceedings.

The first matters to be addressed are the applications for the setting aside of the dismissal orders. The applications are made pursuant to Part 40 rule 9 of the Supreme Court Rules.

This provision confers a discretionary power. Each application is to be considered in the light of its own particular circumstances. The power is exercised so that justice is best served between the parties. The onus of demonstrating entitlement to relief rests with the applicant.

It is convenient to now refer to just some of the background which preceded the making of the dismissal orders. This is not intended to be an exhaustive recitation of matters that may be relevant.

On 21 July 1997, a Deed of Assignment was made between the Company and
Pollnow. A copy of the Deed may be found in Exhibit A. Clause 1 is the operative provision dealing with the assignment itself. As I understand the position, one of the purposes of the Deed was to effect an assignment of the
Company's entitlement to all of the claims. It is contended that notice of the assignment has been given.

The present solicitors for the Company and Pollnow (Smits Leslie) were retained during 1997.

Proposed amended processes were served on the other parties and consent to the filing of the same was sought. A purpose of the proposed amendments was to add
Pollnow as a party to the Common Law proceedings and to plead the assignment.

In late 1997, it was known that there would not be consent to the proposed amendments. There was also a threat to make an application for security for costs.

By letter dated 23 December 1997, Smits Leslie advised that the Company had been removed from the Register of Companies. Contact was made with the ASC. It advised that it had no intention of taking any action in relation to the proceedings and would not oppose any application to strike them out. Smits
Leslie became aware of intention to have the proceedings struck out.
Correspondence with Smits Leslie revealed that the firm regarded itself as then acting for Pollnow only.

The Notices of Motion were filed on 13 March 1998. They were not served on
Smits Leslie. Until the reinstatement had its retrospective effect, the
Company lacked legal personality during the period from 21 November 1997 to 26
May 1998. The orders were made during this period.

The present applications have been brought by Pollnow. I should add that the
Company has itself not sought any relief. Pollnow places great weight on certain decided cases (including, Video Excellence Pty Limited versus Cincotta (Court of Appeal, unreported, 8 July 1998)). The cases demonstrate that, by reason of the retrospective operation of section 574(2) of the Corporations
Law, upon reinstatement, the deregistered Company is deemed never to have lost its separate legal personality.

It is vigorously submitted that, because of this line of authority, the Court must set aside the dismissal orders. With respect, I do not accept that submission.

The reinstatement of the Company is a matter of significance in the circumstances of this case. However, it is not the only matter to be taken into account in the exercise of the discretion of the Court. The Court must have regard to all of the relevant circumstances.

Many matters have been argued. It suffices to mention just some of them. There were matters of futility. There were matters of dilatory prosecution. There was complaint as to lack of explanation.

Perhaps I should make express reference to a few of these matters. In so doing, I should not be understood as embarking on a recitation of all of the matters raised.

Pollnow says that, because of the provisions of the statute, the inference should be drawn that the deregistration was the product of error by the ASC.
Save for this matter, there is no explanation provided as to how the Company came to be deregistered. Also, the delay in obtaining reinstatement was not explained. There is material which suggests that Pollnow may not have intended seeking the reinstatement of the Company and that he only did so because of the dismissal orders.

At the commencement of the hearing, it had been intended that the Company be removed from the proceedings. After the commencement of the hearing, there was a change in approach and an amendment to the relief being sought. This had ramifications, inter alia, so far as the applications to set aside the dismissal orders were concerned.

There were arguments concerning, inter alia, the validity and/or effectiveness of the purported assignment. These were arguments which could not properly be dealt with in these applications. They raised real questions which would be appropriate matters for determination at a trial. It would seem that these considerations did lead to the view that it was desirable to keep both the
Company and Pollnow as plaintiffs in the proceedings.

There has been a considerable lack of activity in the prosecution of the proceedings. Not much progress has been made in any of them. The Common Law proceedings have been on foot since 1995. One of the Equity proceedings was commenced in 1983. The other was commenced in 1987. Whilst there are evidentiary deficiencies, there is enough to suggest that there may be some substance in the assertion that dilatory prosecution should be given weight in dealing with these applications.

The question of whether or not the orders should be set aside, is not an easy question to determine. The deregistration persisted for a period of about six months. The Company has been restored to the Register. If relief is not given, the claims will stand dismissed. I am not satisfied that it would be futile to grant relief. I have taken into account the other relevant matters. After some deliberation, I have reached the view that the onus has just been discharged and that I should set aside the orders.

Before leaving this aspect of the matter, I should make my views clear on certain other questions that were agitated. There were suggestions that there was some sharp practice involved in the obtaining of the orders on 20 April
In my view, there was no substance in these suggestions. I regard the orders that were made on 20 April 1998, as being properly made in the circumstances relevant at that time.

Further, it was said that Pollnow lacked locus standi to bring the applications for setting aside the dismissal orders. The question was not fully argued and was treated as being largely technical in nature. Whilst I am not satisfied that he lacked locus standi, at the very least, for reasons of completeness, it should have been made a party. In any event, if there was a problem, it could have been easily cured by making the Company a party to the applications. It seems to me that there would not have been any prejudice if such an order had been made.

I now turn to the amendment aspects of the applications. These only affect the
Common Law proceedings. At one stage during the course of the hearing, it appeared that there would not be any objection to the applications in their amended form. At a later stage, concern did emerge as to the source of power for the adding of Pollnow as a party.

One source of power is Part 8 rule 8. The other is Part 8 rule 10. In either case, the power is discretionary. The usual considerations have application.
In Knight versus McCann-Erickson Advertising Pty Ltd (McLelland J (as he then was), unreported, 26 August 1991), it was observed that:- "The addition of parties contemplated by Pt 8 r 8 is an addition which is ancillary to, not in substitution for, the proceedings as theretofore constituted." 
If Pollnow was required to commence fresh proceedings to pursue the claims founded on the assignment, the claims would be statute barred. The same result would follow if the Court exercised the powers conferred by Part 8 rule 8.

The claims that are presently pleaded in the processes do not have any limitation problems. Pollnow now wishes to propound those claims as Assignee.
It would be a futile exercise if the date of the commencement of the proceedings was taken to be the date on which Pollnow was added as a party to the proceedings.

Part 8 rule 10 has been the subject of little consideration in recent times.
It is headed "Death, transmission, etc". Its application was not the subject of full argument. Subrule (1) has application where a party dies or becomes bankrupt. Subrule (2) has application where "the interest or liability of a party passes by assignment transmission devolution or otherwise to another person". Initially, I had some reservations as to whether or not it had application in the present circumstances. However, upon reflection, it seems to me that it may be seen as having application in the circumstances of the subject assignment. It would seem to be the intention not to restrict the apparent width of subrule (2) by what appears in subrule (1).

I set aside the order for dismissal made in each of the eight proceedings. In each of the proceedings Nos 20580/95, 20581/95, 20582/95, 20584/95, 20585/95 and 20586/95, I grant leave for the adding of Errol Hugh Pollnow as a second plaintiff and for the filing of the proposed Amended Statement of Claim. I direct that any exercise of that leave be effected within seven days.

There was some consensus between the parties. It was common ground that all of the proceedings should be in the one Division of the Court. By consent, I order that proceedings Nos 20580/95, 20581/95, 20582/95, 20584/95, 20585/95 and 20586/95 be transferred to the Equity Division.

As usual, the question of costs is a vexed one. I have had regard to what has been said in submissions. This is a case where the applicant seeks indulgences. It is a case where the other parties were entitled to oppose the seeking of those indulgences. In these circumstances, it seems that the usual approach should apply and that the applicant should bear the costs of the applications. I order that Pollnow pay the costs of the applications and any costs thrown away by reason of the amendments.
 * * * 
