

Algons Engineering Pty Limited versus Abigroup Contractors Pty Limited Matter
No 55026/97 [1997] NSWSC 478 (14 October 1997) 
Algons Engineering Pty Limited versus Abigroup Contractors Pty Limited /97 October 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Construction List 
Name of Case: ALGONS ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED versus ABIGROUP CONTRACTORS PTY LIMITED 
Proceedings: 55026/1997 
Date of Hearing: 10 October 1997 
Date of Judgment: 14 October 1997 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr G J McVay 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Sparke Helmore 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr F C Corsaro 
Solicitors for Defendant: Clayton Utz 
Application for summary judgment on a cross-claim based on a Main Contractor's Representative's payment certificate.

Application refused on the basis that this certificate did not provide the particulars required by the contract, on its proper construction.

Consideration given to the particulars required having regard to the effect and purpose of the Certificate.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Defendant's Submissions 4 
The Plaintiff's Submissions 4 
Conclusions 9 
The Relief Sought 11 
Orders 12 /1997 - ALGONS ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED versus ABIGROUP CONTRACTORS PTY LIMITED (NO 2) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
On 1 August 1997, pursuant to a claim made by the plaintiff for summary judgment in respect of a progress claim without any deduction for a set off or cross-claim, I ordered judgment in its favour against the defendant in the sum of $480,260.54. I did so, essentially, because of what I considered to be the proper construction of a sub-contract entered into between the parties, whereby the plaintiff agreed to supply and erect structural steel for the defendant at a certain building site. In the sub-contract the plaintiff is referred to as the Sub-contractor, and the defendant as the Main Contractor.
In my reasons for judgment I set forth a number of terms of the sub-contract, which I do not propose to repeat, save to the extent that it is necessary to explain these reasons. An application for leave to appeal against that decision was refused by the Court of Appeal.

The result, apparently, led the defendant to consider a contractual basis upon which it might recover summary judgment on its cross-claim against the plaintiff and, on 18 August 1997, the Main Contractor's Representative, Mr J.
Hahn, issued a certificate purportedly in accordance with clause 42.1 of the sub-contract. It stated:- "In accordance with the provision of Clause 42.1 of the Contract and in the absence of a claim for payment for the month of July 1997, I am issuing a payment certificate, which is attached.

In respect of Variations 1-48 I have certified their value in accordance with my letter of 5 February 1997. In relation to Variations 49-67 which had not previously been approved by myself, I have taken the opportunity to assess the value of these variations based on the actual work done and have certified them accordingly. Variations 68-74 are currently being reviewed and remain unapproved at this stage.

The certificate has been adjusted in respect to monies owed to the Contractor by yourself in respect of back charges for work carried out on your behalf, cost of work carried out by others to complete the work unfinished by you and liquidated damages for the delays caused by you.

In summary, the certificate is as follows.

Contract sum $ 1,183,813 
Variation 1-74 $ 414,339 
Total $ 1,598,152 
Less 
Previously paid $ 1,294,252 
Back charges $ 155,753 
Cost to complete $ 11,500 
Liquidated damage $ 222,000 
Total $ 1,683,505 
Amount owed by 
Sub-contractor to Contractor $ 85,353 
You should forward this amount to the Contractor as prescribed in the provisions of Clause 42.1 of the General Conditions of the Contract." 
Annexed to the document was a payment certificate to 31 July 1997 setting forth amounts claimed, amounts previously certified, the total amount certified and the total of this certificate. Thereafter the document stated:- "Amounts otherwise due to the Contractor arising out of or in connection with the Sub-contract." 
It referred firstly to back charges and set forth items in respect of which they were claimed and the amount listed in the certificate. It then stated "cost to complete Algons work by others" and the amount claimed. Finally it stated:- "Liquidated damages 37 days @ $6,000" and gave the figure of $222,000.

On 18 September 1997 Mr Hahn wrote a letter to the defendant, which referred to that payment certificate and stated that he had discovered an error in that he had failed to take account of the amount due from the defendant to the plaintiff of $480,260.54 pursuant to my judgment. He accordingly added that amount by way of a credit thus producing total credits in favour of the defendant of $2,163,765.50, from which he deducted $1,598,152, which left an amount allegedly owing by the plaintiff to the defendant of $565,613.50. The defendant seeks summary judgment on its cross-claim for this amount.

The Defendant's Submissions 
Mr F.C. Corsaro of Counsel, who appeared on behalf of the defendant, submitted that it is entitled to summary judgment in this amount on a proper construction of the sub-contract. It was not in issue that as against that amount the judgment recovered by the plaintiff would have to be set off.

His submissions considered in some detail the definitions of "Date for
Substantial Completion" and "Date of Substantial Completion". It was agreed by the parties that the defendant had never advised the plaintiff of the latter date. The submissions referred to the various provisions of the sub-contract dealing with the entitlement to liquidated damages, and concluded that the defendant was entitled, having the benefit of the payment certificate, to summary judgment in the amount specified in that certificate. Mr Corsaro submitted that clause 42.1 made it clear that an amount so certified may be payable by the defendant to the plaintiff or by the plaintiff to the defendant and, in my opinion, that is clearly so.

The Plaintiff's Submissions 
Mr G.J. McVay of Counsel, who appeared for the plaintiff, submitted, firstly, that the effect of the judgment I have given was that the amount claimed by the defendant in its cross-claim could not be set off against the amount of that judgment. In the context in which I first considered the matter that is so. However, that was in a quite different context to the present. The point I made in my earlier judgment was that if there was a failure to obtain a payment certificate, which complied with the contractual requirements and provided a set off, there could be no set off. This acknowledged that the certificate may, on a proper construction of the sub-contract, set off amounts. At p.39 I said:- "As I understand it Blue Chip is not authority for the proposition that the superintendent in that case could not have deducted the amount of liquidated damages, but rather that as this had not been done the obligation was to pay the amount specified in the certificate." 
I reject the first submission made by Mr McVay.

His second submission was that there was an obligation on the defendant to pay the amount of the judgment and not to have it set off by Mr Hahn. In my opinion this does not pay full regard to the terms of clause 42.1, which provide, inter alia:- "The Main Contractor's Representative shall allow in any payment certificate issued pursuant to this Clause 42.1 or any Final Certificate issued pursuant to Clause 42.8 or a Certificate issued pursuant to Clause 44.6, amounts paid under the Sub-contract and amounts otherwise due from the Main Contractor to the Sub-Contractor and/or due from the Sub-contractor to the Main Contractor arising out of or in connection with the Sub-contract including but not limited to any amount due or to be credited under any other provisions of the Sub-contract." (My emphasis.) 
I accordingly reject this submission.

Thirdly, I think, Mr McVay submitted that as the plaintiff had not made any claim for payment under clause 42.1, Mr Hahn was not entitled, pursuant to the clause, to issue a payment certificate. I also reject this submission. Clause .1 provides:- "If the Sub-contractor fails to make a claim the payment under Clause 42.1, the Main Contractor's Representative may nevertheless issue a payment certificate." 
Fourthly, Mr McVay submitted that when one considered the payment certificate it did nothing more than articulate the cross-claim being brought by the defendant and that that rendered it void. In itself I do not regard that as invalidating the notice. Mr McVay also submitted that, in all the circumstances, it "smacked" of mala fides.

However, I am not satisfied that there is any evidence which would justify that conclusion. These submissions led to the submission which, in my opinion, deprives the defendant of the right to summary judgment, viz that the payment certificate failed to comply with various contractual obligations as to its contents and that, accordingly, it was not a valid notice.

Clause 42.1 provides:- "The Main Contractor's Representative shall set out in the certificate the calculations employed to arrive at the amount and, if the amount is more or less than the amount claimed by the Sub-contractor, the reasons for the difference." 
It also provides:- "A payment made pursuant to this Clause shall not prejudice the right of either party to dispute under Clause 47 whether the amount so paid is the amount properly due and payable and on determination (whether under Clause 47 or as otherwise agreed) of the amount so properly due and payable, the Main Contractor or Sub-contractor, as the case may be, shall be liable to pay the difference between the amount of such payment and the amount so properly due and payable." 
As appears from my earlier reasons the effect of a payment certificate is to require the recipient to pay the amount stated. Failure to do so can lead to summary judgment and there is no right to dispute the amounts payable until the dispute resolution procedures are activated. Accordingly, the recipient of the certificate is required to pay money during the course of the contract which, at the end of the day, it may be found it does not owe. The requirement to pay money may lead to financial difficulties for the payer, just as the failure to receive money during the course of the contract may cause financial difficulties to the payee. Also the payee may not be able, at the end of the day, to refund any overpayment. Considerations such as these lead me to the conclusion that a certificate must comply strictly with clause 42.1 if it is to have the consequences specified.

I consider there is also another strong reason why it should comply fully with clause 42.1. Clause 47 is concerned with dispute resolution and clause 47.1 requires that if there is a dispute between the parties, including one concerning a direction given by the Main Contractor's Representative:- ".. then either party shall deliver by hand or send by certified mail to the other party and to the Main Contractor's Representative a notice of dispute in writing adequately identifying and providing details of the dispute." (My emphasis.) 
This makes clear that the party disputing the payment certificate which, it was not suggested was not a direction from the Main Contractor's
Representative, must be able to state with specificity the nature of the dispute. Not only does clause 47.1 require this, but it is consistent with clause 47.2. It obliges the parties, within fourteen days after service of a notice of dispute, to confer at least once to attempt to resolve the dispute and failing resolution of it, "to explore and if possible agree on methods of resolving the dispute by other means ..". At any such conference each party is to be represented by a person having authority to agree to a resolution of the dispute and:- "In the event that the dispute cannot be so resolved or if at any time either party considers that the other party is not making reasonable efforts to resolve the dispute, either party may by notice in writing delivered by hand or sent by certified mail to the other party, refer such dispute to arbitration or litigation." 
In order for there to be any meaningful negotiations, which clause 47.2 obviously contemplates, it is necessary for the dispute to be identified with particularity so that the parties can address the issues. That can only be done if, in the case of a payment certificate, the Main Contractor's
Representative sets forth sufficient particulars to enable the other party to know with some precision the basis on which he arrived at the amount, so that the other party is able to address the issues. It is against that background, in my opinion, that there is a requirement for the calculations, which produce that amount, to be set out in the certificate.

This leads to a consideration of whether the certificate has sufficient calculations and information to enable the plaintiff to ascertain whether there is a dispute and, if there is, to adequately identify and provide details of it and, thereafter, to enter into meaningful negotiations.

Conclusions 
In my opinion the payment certificate on which the defendant relies does not achieve this result, and, accordingly, does not comply with Clause 42.1.
Although items giving rise to the amount for back charges are set forth there are no particulars as to how the total amount is divided up between the various items, nor the extent of the allegedly defective and inadequate work.
For example "temporary bracing", "additional craneage", and "damaged pipe work" hardly indicate to the plaintiff the extent of the temporary bracing, additional craneage or damaged pipe work to which reference is being made. I do not regard a catalogue of complaints followed by a lump sum in relation to back charges as setting out "the calculations", which Mr Hahn "employed". The information furnished would be quite insufficient to enable the plaintiff to formulate a dispute, which could be the subject of any meaningful negotiations between the parties as required by clause 47.2. The same comments apply in relation to the amount of $11,500 sought as the cost "to complete Algons work by others".

The calculation of liquidated damages is set forth but Mr McVay complained that in the absence of his client's being aware of the date of substantial completion for which the defendant contended, it could not meaningfully determine if there was a basis for a dispute. I consider this is so. This is the more so as no complaint about the date of substantial completion was made until very late.

In my opinion the payment certificate upon which the defendant relies does not meet the contractual requirements and, accordingly, it is not a basis on which the defendant is entitled to payment and, in the absence of payment, to summary judgment.

In my previous reasons I referred to the authorities relevant to a grant of summary judgment. The plaintiff, in resisting summary judgment on the cross- claim, only has to establish that it has an arguable case. It raised various points and as to a number I have come to the conclusion that it has no arguable case. However so far as the effectiveness of the payment certificate is concerned I consider not only that it has an arguable case, which would be sufficient to defeat the application for summary judgment, but that the construction of the contract compels the conclusion that the payment certificate does not meet the contractual requirements. I am content to state this as a concluded view, because there is no suggestion that any further evidence will be relevant to it, or that any further submissions on it are necessary.

The Relief Sought 
By its Amended Notice of Motion filed in Court on 10 October 1997, which I made returnable instanter, the defendant sought an order for summary judgment pursuant to Part 13 rule 2(1), and that the amount thereof be set off against the judgment obtained by the plaintiff on 1 August 1997. I decline to grant that relief.

In the alternative an order was sought pursuant to Part 13 rule 3 or, alternatively Part 44 rule 5, that execution of the judgment the plaintiff recovered on 1 August 1997 be stayed and, in paragraph 5, an order was sought pursuant to Part 13 rule 3 or alternatively Part 44 rule 5 that execution of the judgment be stayed pending the determination of the defendant's cross- claim. There is no doubt that the Court has power to grant the stay pursuant to the Rules.

The question is whether it should do so in the circumstances of this case. The plaintiff recovered judgment as long ago as 1 August 1997. The Court of
Appeal refused leave to appeal and the plaintiff, in my opinion, is, at least prima facie, entitled to the fruits of that judgment. It would be totally at odds with the intention of the sub-contract, as I found it to exist in my previous judgment, for the defendant to be permitted not to pay the judgment because it is alleging a cross-claim. The whole purpose of the contractual provisions upon which the plaintiff relied originally was to ensure that a party, which has carried out work during the course of a contract, shall be paid for that work with a final adjustment in accordance with the provisions of the contract.

It does not follow, to my mind, that the defendant will necessarily be in a position to furnish a further payment certificate overcoming the difficulties
I have identified in the existing document. I do not think I should make any assumption to that effect. However, the parties were agreed that I should grant a stay until 4 pm on the day on which I deliver this judgment, which I propose to do.

Orders 
I order that:-
The Amended Notice of Motion be dismissed.
The defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the Amended Notice of Motion.
Execution on the judgment recovered by the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $480,260.54 be stayed until 4 pm on Tuesday, 14 October 1997.
 * * * 
