

Cathay Developments Pty Ltd versus Laser Entertainment Pty Ltd Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 82 (25 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 `

CATHAY DEVELOPMENTS PTY LTD versus LASER ENTERTAINMENT PTY LTD` ` 4697/97` `25 March 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff seeks alternative orders against the defendant. The plaintiff is the occupier of premises at 22 Morts Road, Mortdale and the defendant is the registered proprietor of those premises. 
By way of background, the plaintiff is a company which is controlled by Marina and Kenny Tan. Marina Tan is the sister of Paul Lieu. Mr Lieu is the holder of seventy-nine shares in the defendant and is also its secretary though he is not a director. Mr Lieu is a director of another company Lieu Investments Pty
Ltd.

It would seem that towards the end of 1996 Mr Lieu was in need of ready cash and his sister agreed to provide it. However, she was unwilling to do so without proper security. Lieu Investments Pty Ltd and the plaintiff entered into an agreement which is said to be made on 18 December 1996 whereby Lieu
Investments Pty Ltd transferred its business of hiring video tapes carried on at 22 Morts Road, Mortdale to the plaintiff for $104,000 being the amount of money that Mr Lieu or one of his enterprises needed. Clause 7.9 of that agreement provided that it constituted the entire agreement between the parties. Clauses 7.10 and 7.11 were as follows: "7.10 It is agreed that if Paul Lieu pays Marina and Kenny Tan $A104,000 Paul
Lieu will acquire back all the shares of Cathay Developments.
 .11 Paul Lieu will have a period of three years to buy back the shares of
Cathay Developments, after that time Marina and Kenny Tan sell their shares to the company to another party." 
The only evidence before me apart from documentary evidence is the evidence of
Marina Tan. She says that about 18 November 1996 she asked her brother "Can we have a lease of the premises at 22 Morts Road?" to which he replied, "You don't need a lease, I own the building, anyway I intend to buy back as soon as
I can." Marina Tan replied, "Well, we will stay there until you buy back." 
The plaintiff conducted the business known as "Showstopper" at 22 Morts Road,
Mortdale and paid $8,000 per month for rent or occupation fee up until the end of June 1997. From then on until a notice to quit was given in October 1997 it would appear that the rent or occupation fee was not duly paid. After proceedings were commenced by the plaintiff in this Court by summons filed 10
November 1997, pursuant to interlocutory orders made by consent last year, the arrears were made good and currently the occupation fee is up to date.

It is admitted between the parties that the predominant business carried on by the plaintiff in the premises is that of a video library. That is significant because for some reason or other schedule 1 to the [Retail Leases Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/) provides that a video tape and pre-recorded music library is a proscribed retail shop, but does not appear to have anything to say about a shop that actually sells video tapes.

The summons filed originally by the plaintiff sought a declaration that what was called a "licence agreement" between the parties was still subsisting, that it was irrevocable until 18 December 1999 or until Paul Lieu acquired the shares of the plaintiff and an injunction to prevent interference with the plaintiff's occupation and quiet enjoyment. An interim injunction was granted and still subsists.

Today the plaintiff wished to amend its summons. That was resisted by counsel for the defendant, but I allowed the amendment and also allowed additional evidence to be given by the plaintiff orally. The summons as re-cast sought a declaration that the premises constituted a retail shop and that the parties had entered into a retail shop lease and an order that the defendant execute a lease giving effect to that agreement in registrable form. The other orders originally sought were modified in dropping the word "licence" before the word "agreement".

The only other fact that may be of some relevance is that on 27 October 1997 upon the application of Marina Tan orders were made against Paul Lieu prohibiting him from going "Within ten of the premises at which (Marina Tan) may from time to time reside or work." It is thought that "ten" may mean ten metres, but the existence of that order may be relevant if it is a case of granting specific performance of a licence agreement between persons who cannot come near each other because of an apprehended violence order.

The material in the affidavit which must have been supplied by Marina Tan suggests that it was she who was the proprietor of the business rather than the plaintiff company. This matter was also the subject of cross-examination where it was suggested to Mrs Tan that there had been some amendments to the first and last pages of the agreement without consent. It seems to me that I can put those allegations to one side, because the case can be decided without going into them.

The first proposition that the premises constitute a retail shop is one which is really a two edged sword so far as the plaintiff is concerned. If the premises are a retail shop then at least on its face there would be a retail tenancy dispute within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s63.html) of the [Retail Leases Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/) . The consequence is that the plaintiff is not able to make that dispute the subject of proceedings before any Court under [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s68.html) of that Act until the Registrar has certified that mediation had failed or a
Court was satisfied that mediation was unlikely to resolve the dispute.
Although there would be a predilection to consider a section such as 68 as not applying to equity proceedings, subs (3) specifically exempts proceedings for an order in the nature of an injunction. So, by expressio unius, specific performance proceedings are excluded from the Supreme Court's purview.

I considered a similar but not identical question in CAC Pty Ltd versus Diamond
Hill International Pty Ltd (1996) 7 BPR 14754. That case is not on all fours with the present and it would seem to me had I been of the view that there was a retail tenancy involved in the present case I would have been hard pressed to give any relief in the suit at least until there had been mediation. The suit did originally ask for an injunction to prevent interference with occupation and such an injunction was granted on an interlocutory basis so that the proceedings were well commenced. Indeed, they probably had to be commenced because there is a glaring gap in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/index.html#p8), the dispute resolution provision of the Retail Leases Act 1919 that apart from a Court of Equity there is no way in which the status quo can be held pending the dispute resolution process taking its course. However, <case> would,
I think, prevent the Court from going any further until there had been mediation unless one of the matters set out in <case> was established, namely that the mediation process had been exhausted or it was unlikely to resolve the dispute.

The requirements for the Act to apply seem to be satisfied other than the matter referred to in <case>(a). That paragraph provides that the Act does not apply to leases for a term of less than six months without any right for the lessee to extend the lease. The highest that the plaintiff's case goes is that this was a lease at will terminable by a month's notice under <case> of the
Conveyancing Act or was a lease from month to month. It has not been decided by any Court, as far as I am aware, whether such a lease which could mean that the relationship continued for years comes within the scope of the
Retail Leases Act 1941 . In Bradbook and Croft, Commercial Tenancy Law of Australia, Butterworths Sydney 1997, 2nd Edition, p 522 the learned authors say that a Court decision is a way to resolve this issue. I fondly thought until half an hour ago that I could side step the question because whichever way one looks at the case the plaintiff must lose. However, Mr
Morrissey for the plaintiff said that he wished the interim injunction continued so that an application could be made before the Tribunal under the
Act. This submission calls for a decision on the point.

There was, and indeed, still is in an amended form legislation protecting agricultural tenancies and existing short term agricultural leases to tenancies for two years. The point has arisen more than once in cases dealing with that line of territory as to whether a tenancy at will or a tenancy from month to month qualifies. It seems to me that the way in which almost invariably this litigation has been determined is that a tenancy from month to month or at will is not a tenancy to which such legislation attaches. See for instance Ex parte Calgaro; re Aloisi [(1949) 66 WN 223] and Australia and New Zealand Bank Ltd versus Strelitz [[1964] NSWR 401.] 
The definition in the Agricultural Holdings Act which was considered in both of those cases seems stronger than the definition in the instant case especially because of the proviso of <case>(a) that I think a fortiori the same result must follow. Accordingly, in my view the Retail Leases Act does not apply to the present lease or licence.

Had I been of the other view I would have had to consider whether I would have granted specific performance so as to construct a lease which complied with the Act. It seems to me that it would be extremely difficult to do so and it is not the role of the Court when granting specific performance to fill in major gaps in the terms of the contract that was made between the parties. See for instance Milnes versus Gery <case>; [(1807) 14 Ves 400]; [33 ER 574]; Hall versus Busst <case>; [(1960) 104 CLR 206] and Zucchiatti versus Ferrara (1976) 1 BPR 9199.

Accordingly I turn to the alternative case that the agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant is subsisting and still of force and effect. It seems clear on the evidence that the rent or occupation fee was not paid from
July to October 1997 and, indeed, no challenge was made to the validity of the notice to complete. What the plaintiff says is that some how or other the circumstances are such that there should be an implied term in the agreement that it would be subsisting until the time for the buy back by Paul Lieu had expired or until he in fact bought back the shares. It is very difficult to include such an implied term especially after the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Australis Media Holdings Pty Ltd versus Telstra Corp Ltd - 17
February 1998, unreported. In any event there does not appear to be sufficient evidence for me to conclude that it was the intention of the parties that there be such a provision. Furthermore, it is not one which had to be included in the contract to make it work. I use the words "had to" advisedly in view of the Australis decision. The principal property sold, if not the sole property, was the business its assets and goodwill and, whilst it may be that it was convenient to have it conducted in the old premises, there was nothing at all mentioned in the sale agreement as to the granting of a lease and that agreement was supposed to constitute the whole agreement between the parties.

There was no reliance on any equity that might arise. I think one of the reasons why that was not put was that Mr Paul Lieu and Lieu Investments Pty
Ltd were not parties to these proceedings. However, as it was not put I need not deal with it.

The plaintiff also put that there could be an injunction granted to prevent the licence being terminated prior to the buy back. Despite the problems that arise in the way in which personal licences have been dealt with under
Australian Law, see Cowell versus Rosehill Racecourse Pty Ltd (1936) 56 CLR , there is jurisdiction in a proper case to grant an injunction. See
Alonso versus Leichhardt MC (1975) 1 BPR 9368. However, for the reasons I have already canvassed, there is no sufficient material to show that there is any contractual provision or equity which would warrant the granting of such an order. It follows whichever way one approaches the matter the plaintiff's claim must fail.

Accordingly the proceedings are dismissed with costs. There is an existing interlocutory injunction that until further order the defendant is restrained from re-entering 22 Morts Road, Mortdale and for more abundant caution I should direct that order should cease as from midnight tonight subject to anything counsel may say.
 (Counsel addressed) 
I think that probably as the occupation fee has been paid up to 18 April and it is a case that involves some awkward principles of law and the plaintiff may wish to consider its options, upon the undertaking as to damages being renewed I will continue the interim injunction up to and including 18 April
The exhibits may be returned in 28 days time.
 * * * 
