

Shepherd and Ors versus Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd and Anor [1996] NSWSC 115 (8 May 1996) 
SHEPHERD & ORS v. AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND BANKING GROUP LTD &
ANOR /94 
WEDNESDAY 8 MAY 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
BRYSON J 
CATCHWORDS: COMPANIES - Directors' Liability s.556 of Code - in decision of separate question on assumed facts it was held that the company did not incur debts to consumers at times when the defendants were alleged to be deemed directors or managers - the debts were deposits on contracts for supply of kit homes or garages - it was held that there was not a debt for repayment of the deposit until the consumer elected to claim repayment which involved foregoing damages, specific delivery or the remedies and it was not alleged that that had happened while defendants remained deemed directors or managers.

PRACTICE - representative plaintiffs - circumstances in which representative proceedings should be allowed were considered at length although the lack of causes of action of the plaintiffs meant that representative proceedings could not continue. The view was expressed that claims against directors under s.556 could be suitable for representative proceedings.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The litigation; business failure of D & G McFadden Holdings Pty. Ltd.

These proceedings arise out of the failure in business of D & G McFadden Holdings Pty Ltd. In 1988 when the relevant events began Holdings was in the business of supply and erection of kit homes and kit garages, pre-fabricated to standard designs. In some cases Holdings supplied the components, so the customer had to erect the structure or engage a builder. In other cases Holdings contracted to supply and erect. It was usual for Holdings to obtain a payment at or about the time of a firm order. Holdings had a business technique of offering a discount or lower price if the whole price were paid at the time of order. Holdings used several standard written forms of orders, but the variations were slight and for present purposes they are not important.

By early 1990 Holdings had received either a full payment or a deposit for some hundreds of orders which it had not fulfilled within the expected times, and could not fulfil. A Provisional Liquidator of Holdings was appointed by this Court on 13 February 1990 and Holdings was wound-up by an order of this
Court on 15 March 1990. The liquidator did not and with the resources available to him could not carry out Holdings' contracts, so hundreds of customers did not ever receive performance of Holdings' contractual obligations to supply them with homes or garages, and did not receive repayment of the prices or deposits which they had paid, or any other value.

The represented classes.

There are four plaintiffs and they bring these proceedings with legal assistance furnished under Pt.2 Div.2 of the Fair Trading Act 1986. Each plaintiff sues both in his or her own right and as a representative of a class of customers who made payments to Holdings in the same period as that plaintiff'. The four classes are put forward on the footing that there are significant differences in the rights of customers according to the periods in which they made their payments.

As a table:- 
P4 8.3.88 to 19.10.89 (Neither defendant deemed director) 
P1 20.10.89 to 21.11.89 (ANZ Bank deemed director) 
P2 22.11.89 to 4.12.89 (ANZ Bank deemed director) 
P3 5.12.89 to 15.3.90 (Both defendants deemed directors) 
The fourth plaintiff Mr Osborne gave Holdings an order, on Order Form G11809, on 7 October 1989 for the supply of a kit garage for $2,500. Mr Osborne paid the full purchase price that day. Mr Osborne signed an order form which contained spaces for an indication of the approximate date required, and of the week during which forwarding the goods was scheduled, but these were not filled in. In the Further Amended Statement of Claim it is alleged that it was a term of the Agreement that the garage be supplied within a reasonable time, that he was told that it would be supplied within 8 to 10 weeks after he paid the purchase price, and that when this forecast was not fulfilled he was told that the garage would be supplied during the week commencing 5 February 1990.
There are a number of references in the Order Form to the question of time of delivery and the possibility that the scheduled time might not be met through factors beyond Holdings' control. On the back of the form there are conditions of sale, including Condition 1 by which Holdings was not to be liable for delay in delivery or non-delivery attributable to any cause beyond the direct control of Holdings. Payment of the price at the time of delivery was a condition of the obligation to deliver, although Holdings could deliver and charge interest. If the customer cancelled the order, a refund was at
Holdings' discretion. In the circumstances, the ordinary promise by a vendor of goods that there would be delivery within a reasonable time should be implied, and statements made on behalf of Holdings about when delivery was to be expected or would take place are admissible in evidence to establish what was a reasonable time for delivery. Mr Osborne sues to represent a class who made supply agreements with Holdings after 8 May 1988, who paid all or part of the amount payable between 8 March 1988 and 19 October 1989, and are otherwise similarly placed to Mr Osborne in that they did not receive the goods, they have not received a refund of the amount payable and their payment was deposited to Holdings' general credit account conducted with the first defendant Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd.

The first plaintiff Mr Shepherd brings the proceedings in his own right and to represent a class of customers who made payments to Holdings between 20
October 1989 and 21 November 1989. Mr Shepherd gave Holdings a written order
G11886 dated 25 October 1989 for the supply of a kit garage for $4,240, which he paid that day. His order form did not state an exact or approximate date for delivery but he alleges that he was told, on 25 October 1989, that the kit garage would be supplied within 6 to 8 weeks after he paid the purchase price, and that later he was told that it would be supplied by 10 February 1990. It never was supplied and he has not received repayment.

The second plaintiff Mr Garnet sues in his own right and to represent customers who made payments to Holdings between 22 November 1989 and 4
December 1989. He gave an order for supply of a kit home, with extras, on 30
November 1989; the price was $43,000 which he paid that day. He was told that delivery would take place in the week commencing 15 January 1990; a note to that effect was written on the manufacturing schedule completed when he gave an order, and he alleges that it was a term of the contract that the kit home would be supplied by the week commencing 15 January 1990 or alternatively within a reasonable time. He received no supply and no repayment.

The third plaintiff Mrs Adorna sues in her own right and to represent customers who made payments to Holdings between 5 December 1989 and 15 March
She was a given a quotation dated 16 December 1989 for the supply of a kit garage, and on 17 December 1989 she gave a written order for the supply of a garage for $2,900 and paid that sum. The order form said that the approximate date required was 26 February 1990. She alleges that she was told at the time that the garage would be supplied within 6 to 8 weeks after she paid the purchase price, and that she was later told that it would be supplied by 10 February 1990. Then she alleges that on 17 January 1990 Holdings agreed with her to vary the agreement by reducing the size of the kit garage, and reducing the price to $2,275, and Holdings agreed to refund her $625. No garage was ever supplied to her, and no repayment was ever made to her, of $625 or any other amount.

How the defendants are involved.

The significance of the dates by which the various represented classes are defined appears from the allegations against the defendants.

The principal claims are made under s.556 of the Companies Code 1981 on the contention that the defendants, who were not literally directors of
Holdings as they were never formally appointed to that office, incurred liability as deemed directors under subs.5(1) of the Code, or as persons who took part in management, referred to in subs.556(1) of the Code. It is alleged that ANZ Banking Group fell within one or other of these classes either from October 1989 until 13 February 1990, from 20 October 1989 to 15 March 1990, from 22 November 1989 until 13 February 1990 or from 22 November 1989 until 15
March 1990. It is alleged that the second defendant Mr Dellow fell within one or other of these classes from 5 December 1989 until 13 February 1990 or from December 1989 until 15 March 1990.

The significance of the division of the plaintiffs and the persons whom they represent into classes is that to support a claim under subs.556(1) against a defendant it must be shown that the debt was incurred by Holdings at a time when that defendant was a deemed director or a manager, and the various classes stand for different possible periods during which Holdings incurred debts.

A further claim, found in paras 165 to 175 of the Further Amended Statement of
Claim, is that ANZ Banking Group has incurred liability to account to plaintiffs on the footing that Holdings had trust or other fiduciary obligations with respect to moneys held in an account conducted by it with ANZ
Banking Group.

The allegations that ANZ Banking Group is a deemed director or manager are in paras 58 to 100 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, and I give a short summary. Through chartered accountants Holdings applied to ANZ Banking Group for finance in August 1986. ANZ Banking Group obtained a report from its own chartered accountant and then took a fixed and floating charge over Holdings' assets in December 1986. In May 1989 ANZ Banking Group provided a number of banking facilities for Holdings including an overdraft facility, a commercial bill facility, advances, guarantees and lease finance. Holdings conducted a general banking account which was supported by the overdraft facility. ANZ
Banking Group obtained much information relating to Holdings' affairs, and gave Holdings directions on some matters. The directions alleged are that in
June 1989 ANZ Banking Group told Holdings that the bank could not provide further funds unless Holdings changed accountants and provided regular monthly trading figures. The bank recommended that Holdings engage a named accounting firm to manage its financial accounting affairs (FASC paras 65 & 66). The bank suggested, in October 1989 that Holdings should delay a proposed offer of shares to the public until December 1991, instead of making the offer in
December 1990. (FASC para 74). On 21 November 1989, after many communications and decisions to dishonour some cheques and honour others, the accountants whom Holdings had engaged at the bank's recommendation gave the bank a written report about Holdings' affairs (FASC 85). About 22 November 1989 Holdings implemented a system of daily reporting by Holdings and those accountants to the bank of all cheques proposed to be drawn, with conditions requiring the bank's approval before Holdings drew and delivered cheques on the general account, and that cheques drawn were not to exceed moneys deposited (FASC 86).
This regime was complied with, which involved numerous communications. About November 1989 the bank directed Holdings to ensure the daily drawing on the general account did not exceed 90 percent of deposits (FASC 90). The bank sought compliance with this arrangement. The accountants appointed at the bank's recommendation gave the bank reports on Holdings' affairs including a report on 29 November 1989 that production had halted due to creditors requesting payment, that creditors were threatening legal action, and that continued monitoring by the accountants of Holdings' cash flow was impossible and the accountants were not able to maintain effective control (FASC 92). On January 1990 the bank at Holdings' request increased the overdraft limit by $100,000 (FASC 93). On 7 February 1990 the bank directed Holdings to appoint the chartered accountant who had reported to the bank in 1986 to investigate
Holdings' affairs and Holdings did so (FASC 94 and 95). On 8 February Holdings at the bank's request opened a second general account for the sole purpose of receiving and holding moneys received by Holdings from customers under supply agreements (FASC 96).

The allegations against the second defendant Mr Dellow are set out in paras to 164 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim. Again I give a summary only. Mr Dellow was a director of Pacifico Timber Importers Pty Ltd which was a supplier of timber to Holdings and a creditor, the debt in about November being $343,331.59 for timber supplied. On 12 October 1989 and later there were discussions about the possible sale of shares in Holdings to Mr Dellow or issue of new shares to Mr Dellow and Pacifico when financial information was furnished. Discussions concerning the possible sale of shares in various forms continued. About 17 November Holdings agreed with Mr Dellow and Pacifico not to use any timber supplied by Pacifico unless Holdings had paid for it (FASC ). Mr Dellow asked Holdings for details of aged creditors and aged debtors (FASC 109) and for a lien limiting the use of timber supplied and not paid for (FASC 110). Mr Dellow asked for and obtained further information about
Holdings' creditors and the state of its business, and about 30 November
Holdings made an agreement which limited its use of timber supplied. About 5
December Mr Dellow directed Holdings to forward a letter to all the current kit home customers; Mr Dellow corrected the letter (FASC para 117). Mr Dellow obtained further information from Holdings and on 7 December gave Holdings a letter of intention concerning provision of additional funding for Holdings (FASC 121). Then on 8 December 1989 the shareholders of Holdings agreed to sell 58% of its issued capital to Mr Dellow and Pacifico for $14,000.
Thereafter Mr Dellow directed ANZ Bank to arrange a meeting for 12 December with Holdings and Holdings' accountants. He attended the meeting where he gave
Holdings and its directors a number of directions (FASC 125 and 126), with which Holdings complied. These directions included arrangements by the then directors of Holdings about supporting its credit, their salary and drawings, what they were to tell the creditors about a repayment schedule, how long
Holdings was to close over Christmas, what part of the debt should be paid for, cancelling advertising and attempting to sell a franchise operation.
Thereafter Holdings furnished Mr Dellow with information about its affairs, and Mr Dellow gave Holdings a draft letter to be sent to creditors with a repayment schedule and credit arrangement. About 14 December 1989 Mr Dellow instituted a system of daily reporting of cheques and deposits (FASC 133) and about 15 December Mr Dellow directed Holdings about the manner in which
Holdings was to reach decisions in its affairs (FASC 136). Mr Dellow gave
Holdings directions about when to close its business over Christmas and for how long (FASC 137, 138) and gave it other detailed directions (FASC 138, 139 & 140). Many further detailed interventions by Mr Dellow in directing the affairs of Holdings are alleged. The latest allegation of relevant conduct of
Mr Dellow is as of 8 February 1990 (FASC para 162).
 
Text of the Code.

The ordinary meaning of the word "Director" in the Code including s.556 is extended by a definition of inclusion in subs.5(1) to include persons sometimes referred to as deemed directors or shadow directors. Omitting subpara (c) which is not now relevant the definition is:- "'director', in relation to a corporation, includes - any person occupying or acting in the position of director of the corporation, by whatever name called and whether or not validly appointed to occupy or duly authorised to act in the position; any person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the directors of the corporation are accustomed to act; and ..." 
The plaintiffs allege that the defendants were deemed directors under this definition.

Subection 556(1) of the Code is in these terms: "556(1) If - a company incurs a debt, whether within or outside the State; immediately before the time when the debt is incurred - there are reasonable grounds to expect that the company will not be able to pay all its debts as and when they become due; or there are reasonable grounds to expect that, if the company incurs the debt, it will not be able to pay all its debts as and when they become due; and the company is, at the time when the debt is incurred, or becomes at a later time, a company to which this section applies, any person who was a director of the company, or took part in the management of the company, at the time when the debt was incurred is guilty of an offence and the company and that person or, if there are 2 or more such persons, those persons are jointly and severally liable for the payment of the debt.

Penalty: $5,000 or imprisonment for 1 year, or both." 
The plaintiffs also allege that the defendants are within the reference to "any person who ... took part in the management of a company, at the time when the debt was incurred ...".

The selection of dates for the definition of classes of represented persons assumes that for the purposes of the inclusion of defendants as deemed directors or persons taking part in management there were significant turns of events on 20 October 1989, 22 November 1989 and 5 December 1989. It seems difficult to understand, on the allegations in the Statement of Claim, what could be said to support the claims of the fourth plaintiff Mr Osborne and the class of persons who made payments up to 19 October 1989 against ANZ Banking
Group if the true application of s.556(1) is that Holdings incurred a debt to them on or before 19 October 1989.

In practical terms any circumstances under which a defendant was a deemed director or took part in management were with fair certainty brought to an end with the appointment of a Provisional Liquidator on 13 February 1990. Neither defendant could be liable for a debt which Holdings incurred after that. The acts and circumstances alleged ended before then. The claims under subs.556(1) cannot be taken further on the basis of some termination or election to claim repayment later than the date of provisional liquidation (such as, in the case of the plaintiffs themselves, the date of the commencement of proceedings) because after that date it could not reasonably be argued that the defendants were involved. The questions whether each defendant was a deemed director or person who took part in management in each of the relevant periods is not for determination by me at present, although I do not see how it could be sustained against the bank for any date before 20 October 1989 or Mr Dellow for any date before 5 December 1989.
 
What is alleged about when Holdings incurred debts. 
The allegations in paras 51 to 55 inclusive of the Further Amended Statement of Claim show that it is alleged that Holdings incurred debts to the plaintiffs and the represented persons at one of four times alternatively (a) the time of the agreement, (b) the time of the payment, (c) on appointment of the Provisional Liquidator on 13 February 1990 and (d) at the time of the winding-up order on 15 March 1990. Other times at which it might have been alleged that the debt was incurred were: (e) when there was a total failure of consideration, (f) when the customer elected to treat his rights as rights to repayment and not as rights to damages and (g) at the expiry of a reasonable time for supply, or on the agreed date for supply where there was one, while a defendant was a deemed director or concerned in management. It was noticed during argument that the plaintiffs did not allege that the debt was incurred at times which might fall for consideration but were not then relied on. The plaintiff's counsel made several references in the course of submissions to the possibility that some amendment might be put forward, but did not put one forward or ask for leave to amend. Counsel seemed to indicate that if I was of the view that some other formulation of the plaintiff's case was appropriate an amendment application would follow my view. After judgment was reserved an application was made for a yet further amendment to raise case (g), expiry of a reasonable time before liquidation, and I reluctantly allowed this to enable full consideration of what the plaintiffs ultimately wished to put forward. Cases (e) and (f) were not put forward in terms.

The separate questions.

The questions before me are separate questions ordered to be tried under orders of Mr Justice Windeyer as follows: "(a) whether Part 8 Rule 13(1) of the Supreme Court Rules enables the
Plaintiffs to commence these proceedings on behalf of the persons referred to as the 'Represented Consumers' in the Further Amended Statement of Claim; if yes to (a), whether the Court should order that the Plaintiffs not be permitted to continue these proceedings as representing the persons referred to as the 'Represented Consumers' in the Further Amended Statement of Claim; on the assumption that the facts pleaded in the paragraphs referred to in paragraphs 51, 52, 53, 54 and 55 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim are correct did Holdings incur debts within the meaning of s.556 of the Companies
Code at any of the times alleged in paragraphs 51, 52, 53, 54 and 55 and if so, which times?" 
What is required for question (c) is an assumption that all facts alleged to show that there were debts to the plaintiffs and represented persons are true.
Some evidence was put in, although the hearing was not the occasion for determination of disputed facts, and what is required is acceptance of the plaintiffs' case at its highest. It is for my consideration, on the assumed facts, not merely whether a debt was incurred at one of the stated times, but whether a debt was incurred at all. In argument counsel did not confine themselves to questions of time.

The time when a debt is incurred.

There is no purportedly exhaustive judicial exposition of what is meant by "incurred" in subs.556(1), and I think that there could not be. It is important to keep in view that the obligation incurred must be a debt. Usually a liability to pay a debt comes into existence as a result of a series of acts and events, not all of which take place at the same time. After some of those events have happened, the completion of the series and the accrual of a liability to pay a debt may not be avoidable by the company, and it could conceivably be said that the debt has been incurred by the company even before the debt is actually in existence and could be sued for. The word "incurs" is often found in contexts in revenue law and in accounting where it is important to allocate a debt to a period of time so as to recognise the period to which the debt is best related; and that is quite commonly not the period when the debt accrues due or becomes payable. If the true intention is to identify the time when the debt accrues or becomes payable, the word "accrue" and its derivatives are ready to hand and it is unlikely that "incur" would be used.

The difficulties of applying the words "incurs" were illustrated rather than resolved by the following passage in the judgment of Gleeson CJ in Hawkins & Ors v. Bank of China [(1992) 26 NSWLR 562] at 572: "The words 'incurs' and 'debt' are not words of precise and inflexible denotation. Where they appear in s556 they are to be applied in a practical and commonsense fashion, consistent with the context and with the statutory purposes.
 'Debt' is capable of including a contingent liability ... Similarly, the word 'incurs' takes its meaning from its context and is apt to describe, in an appropriate case, the undertaking of an engagement to pay a sum of money at a future time, even if the engagement is conditional and the amount involved uncertain. Once it is accepted that 'debt' may include a contingent debt then there is no obstacle to the conclusion that, in the present context, a debt may be taken to have been incurred when a company entered a contract by which it subjected itself to a conditional but unavoidable obligation to pay a sum of money at a future time." 
There was no argument of substance in support of the debts' being incurred on the dates of provisional liquidation or winding up, and in my view those allegations cannot be supported.

It is clear and well established, by the decision in Hawkins v. Bank of
China and other decisions, that the debt may be contingent when it is incurred. For rent the position was broadly established by the decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia (Full Court) in Russell Halpern Nominees
Pty Ltd v. Martin & Anor [[1987] WAR 150.] Rent is treated as incurred at the time when the lease is entered into, even though time must elapse before rent becomes payable and various possible events (which in the nature of the exercise did not happen) might have intervened to prevent the rent ever becoming due. Further the amount may not be clearly foreseeable because of provisions for periodic review and adjustment. If a lease contains some unusual provision such as a "break clause" under which the tenant had an option to terminate, it will be difficult to maintain that rent which fell due after that opportunity had passed was incurred when the lease was first entered into, as the company could have avoided the later obligation. For obligations other than rent the position must be addressed in the broad way indicated by Gleeson CJ in Hawkins' case. It was in my view essential for the decision in Hawkins' case that the company had no opportunity after giving the guarantee to avoid the obligation by any action of its own, and could do no more than wait and observe whether the conditions including the passage of time were fulfilled.

In Standard Chartered Bank of Australia Limited v. Antico & Ors <case>; [(1993) 13 ACLC 1381] Hodgson J said at 1429 "In my opinion, a company incurs a debt when, by its choice, it does or omits something which, as a matter of substance and commercial reality, renders it liable for a debt for which it otherwise would not have been liable. This formulation has three aspects which could cause difficulty in particular cases: first, as to whether the company has a choice whether to do (or omit) the act or not; second, as to whether it is the act or omission, or something else, which renders the company liable for the debt; and third, as to whether the company would otherwise (in any event) have been liable for the debt." 
In my respectful view the text of subs.556(1) does not in any way express an element of choice, and the practical implications to which Hodgson J referred in earlier passages do not require any limitation of the language so as to apply only to the consequences of acts or omissions of the company's choice or to obligations which the company chose to be involved in. In my opinion obligations imposed by law, including revenue law and the law of restitution, can be debts for this purpose, whether or not acts or omissions which the company chose to be involved in brought them into existence; there is nothing expressed or implied in s.556 to the contrary. In particular, where the company's conduct and omissions involve it in liability for damages and the general law gives another party an election to recover money paid and by the election to bring a debt into existence, I see no warrant for not regarding that debt as a debt for the relevant purpose, or for not regarding the time of the election as the time when it was incurred.

What obligations did Holdings incur? 
The first defendant's counsel contended that persons in the position of the plaintiffs have no entitlement to repayment. For this reason no debt was incurred before the payer elected to bring the contract to an end and to seek restitution, so it could not be said that the company incurred a debt before then. Until then the payer has other remedies which he might follow; he can sue for liquidated damages and breach of covenant; he may claim specific delivery. Counsel contended that in principle there can be no restitutionary remedy until the contract has been terminated and that judicial statements show that the contract does not terminate when there is a failure to comply with it; it is still on foot although one party is in breach until the party not in breach adopts the position that it is terminated. He referred to Lord Wright in the Fibrosa case <case>; [[1943] AC 32] at 389, and to Dixon J in McDonald v. Dennys Lascelles at 475 to 478 on election.

In his exposition in Fibrosa Spolka Akcyjna v. Fairbairn Lawson Combe
Barbour, Limited <case>; [[1943] AC ] at 64 of the history and modern state of the law relating to actions for money had and received to the plaintiff's use, Lord Wright was not, it seems to me, directing himself to whether it is essential that the plaintiff should make an election to terminate the contract the consideration for which had totally failed, or to claim repayment of moneys paid under it. At times his Lordship's words seem to suggest that the right of repayment is automatic; yet at other times, for example at p64 foot his language recognises the need for termination - "No doubt, when money is paid under a contract it can only be claimed back as for failure of consideration where the contract is terminated as to the future." 
In David Securities Pty Ltd & Ors v. Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 353] at 389
Brennan J, in a contrast with money paid under a mistake, said "By contrast, a payment made for a consideration that totally fails is not affected by any operative mistake: it is made in order to obtain the consideration bargained for. The payer acquires no right to recover when the payment is received, but only when the consideration totally fails. The very hypothesis which makes it unjust for the payee to retain the payment when the consideration fails is that the payer has received no part of the contractual benefit for which the payment was made." This statement which is enmeshed in an exposition of views relating to recovery of money paid under a mistake cannot fairly be understood as meaning that there is an automatic entitlement to recovery which arises when the consideration totally fails.

The defendant's counsel also referred me to the passage at pp475 to 478 of the judgment of Dixon J in McDonald v. Dennys Lacelles Ltd <case>; [(1933) 48 CLR 457.] In my view this passage has no close bearing on the present claim, although it illustrates in a general way the results of a termination on breach.

The first defendant's counsel referred me to several statements by learned authors and commentators who treat an election by the payer as a necessary part of the foundation for a claim for repayment. In Carter Breach of
Contract p441 the learned author under the heading "Termination of performance and necessary foundation for a restitutionary claim" gives the following proposition as Article 74. "Where a party to a contract seeks to pursue a restitutionary claim in relation to a benefit conferred under the contract, it is necessary for the performance of the contract to be terminated and termination for breach or repudiation is sufficient, provided the party pursuing the claim is otherwise entitled to claim restitution." The following commentary at p443 treats termination as one of the events necessary for a right to recover back money paid. In Benjamin's Sale of Goods 4th ed (1992) at p902 the authors, speaking of the rights of the buyer who has paid the price when the seller fails to deliver, say "If he sues for restitution, he can avoid the rules on damages, since his claim is for return of the precise sum of money which he has paid to the seller, but he must terminate the contract." The authority given is Yeoman Credit Limited v. Apps [[1962] 2 QB .] In that case at 520-521 Holroyd Pearce LJ, speaking of a defendant who had purchased a defective vehicle, said "The defendant was plainly entitled to reject the car, to accept the plaintiff's repudiation of the contract by their delivery of such a car, and to rescind the contract. Had he done so, there would have been a total failure of consideration and he would have recovered the sums paid." This exposition shows his Lordship's assumption that rejecting the car and rescinding the contract were necessary steps for the defendant to have an entitlement to recover the sums paid; and the defendant failed because he kept the car for some months and treated it as delivered to him under the contract. At 523 and 524 Harman LJ also spoke in terms which show a view that even though there had been a breach of a fundamental condition, the purchaser would have been entitled to have his money back if he had repudiated the contract, but was not so entitled because he did not repudiate until he had become disentitled to treat the matter as if consideration had totally failed.

In Chitty on Contracts 26th ed (1989) at Vol. 1, p1340, dealing with failure of consideration the authors say "Money will only be recoverable on this ground where the contract is discharged. This requirement has practical importance where, as in the case of breach of contract, discharge operates at the election of the innocent party. A contract-breaker will therefore only be able to recover money where the other party has elected to accept the breach as discharging the contract." The authors refer to the judgment of Devlin J in
Kwei Tek Char & Ors v. British Traders & Shippers Limited [[1954] 2
QB 459.]
At 475 Devlin J said "Of course, if goods have been properly rejected, and the price has already been paid in advance, the proper way of recovering the money back is by an action for money paid for a consideration which has wholly failed, i.e., money had and received; but that form of action is governed by exactly the same rules with regard to affirming or avoiding the transaction as in any other case." In Goff & Jones The Law of Restitution 4th ed.
at pp417 to 419, dealing with contracts discharged for breach the authors state at 419 "Nevertheless, before he can proceed in quasi-contract the innocent party must first bring the contract to an end. If he does not do so, the contract continues to govern the situation, and the plaintiff must seek his remedy on the contract and not in quasi-contract. Moreover if, with knowledge of the breach, the innocent party affirms the contract, he will have lost his rights to determine the contract for that breach, unless the breach is of the continuing nature." As well as referring to Yeoman Credit v. Apps and Kwei Tek Char & Ors v. British Traders & Shippers Limited, the authors refer to Weston v. Downs (1778) 1 Douglas 23; [99 ER 19], an obscure decision where the plaintiff appears to have failed because he took a course inconsistent with reliance on his entitlement to repayment.

Counsel also contended that there must be a communication of intention to accept the failure to perform and a communication of intention that when an election is being made to claim repayment. He said that these communications may well take place by commencing proceedings, but on any view the bank ceased to be a director long before proceedings were commenced.

First defendant's counsel contended that incurring a restitutionary claim is not incurring a debt. This was based on the passage in Standard Chartered
Bank v. Antico on which I commented earlier. I respectfully doubt that a choice by the company is essential. In my view it remains open to consideration whether there may be an incurring of a debt within subs.556(1) where an obligation is imposed on the company, for example by revenue law, or in some other way without choice or decision by the company or its directors.
However the present case does not turn on this question.

The plaintiff's counsel contended that the debt was incurred when reasonable time for delivery expired and it was no longer open to Holdings without some further act of volition of the purchaser to compel the purchaser to accept the purported tender of performance. He contended that when the purchaser can no longer be compelled to accept delivery it is illusory to say that there is a need for some election or termination by the purchaser. He contended that the contract does not remain on foot subject to an election, and that a party in breach of an essential term cannot compel performance by another party in the absence of some waiver or agreement to accept performance or some act of approbation. He contended that the following consequences follow: (1) the purchaser is entitled forthwith and without notice to sue for recovery of the consideration paid; it must follow that giving notice is not an ingredient in the course of action; the claim for a debt accrues when the time for reasonable time for performance expires.

He asked me to answer question (c). Yes, but not at any of the times proposed in the Statement of Claim, but at the expiry of a reasonable time for performance.

He contended that observations of Lord Wright in Fibrosa at 62, 63, 64 and , relating to terminating the right of the payee to retain the money, support the proposition that the actuating condition for the right is the failure of consideration. It was then contended that the contingent liability arises when Holdings can no longer perform without waiver or adoption by the consumer.

In my opinion it is essential for an entitlement to recover money paid under a contract the consideration for which has wholly failed that the payer should elect to be entitled to repayment of that money. There is no legal obligation to repay money paid for a consideration which has wholly failed until the payer has elected to be treated as a creditor for the money. Unless the payer so elects, his remedy and only right continues to be a right to damages.
Unless and until the payer elects to be treated as a creditor there is in my opinion, no debt, contingent or otherwise. I see that the seller's obligations to pay damages may be replaced by an obligation to repay the moneys paid in the contingency that that election is made, but I cannot categorise the seller's obligations as a contingent debt.

The fact that an election must take place for there to be such a cause of action is in my opinion clear in principle, but the need for an election is obscured by the curious history of actions for money paid on failure of consideration which attributed to the defendant a fictitious undertaking to hold money to the use of the plaintiff, by a short form of pleading which did not state in plain language what the basis of the claim was. The significance of an election and of the need to allege it would not always present itself for attention because, in the nature of things, the plaintiff has signified his election to be treated as the creditor of a debt by bringing the proceedings; the election is incontrovertible and the need to state it in the pleading could excusably escape attention.

Holdings' contractual obligation to the first plaintiff Mr Shepherd on 25
October 1989 was to supply the goods as ordered, and to do so within a reasonable time. When Holdings entered into a contract with Mr Shepherd it did not have any contractual obligation to pay him back the amount of the deposit, or to pay him any sum of money. It is not a correct view of Holdings' position to say that on 25 October 1989 Holdings incurred a contingent obligation to pay back the money paid by Mr Shepherd if Holdings did not deliver goods, or to say that Holdings then incurred an obligation to pay back the money paid in the contingency that Holdings should not perform any part of its obligation so that there would be total failure of consideration. When there is a total failure of consideration and an action is brought to recover moneys paid, it is not the plaintiff's allegation that in their contract as first made the defendant promised to repay the money if the contingency should happen that the principal contractual obligations were not kept. That would not be an implied promise; it would be a fictitious promise. Fictions are no longer used and it is recognised that the obligation to repay money after a total failure of consideration is imposed by law and is not the enforcement of a contractual promise.

Adopting the allegations in para 14 of the Statement of Claim, it should be implied that Holdings promised to deliver the goods to Mr Shepherd within a reasonable time, and that a reasonable time viewed as at 25 October 1989 was 6 to 8 weeks, at the latest by 20 December 1989. When 20 December passed and the goods had not been delivered the contract and the obligation to deliver them did not come to an end. In an agreement for sale of goods, the time for delivery is of the essence; I would so conclude under [s.15(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/s15.html) of the [Sale of Goods Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/). A contractual term fixing a time for performance is an essential term, and if it is broken the party having the benefit of it may terminate the contract.

After 20 December 1989 Mr Shepherd was entitled to terminate the agreement for sale and sue for damages for Holdings' breaches. The breaches were failure to deliver the goods at all, and failure to do so by 20 December. It is not alleged in the Further Amended Statement of Claim that Mr Shepherd did terminate the agreement. If he did terminate the agreement it would not be a consequence of his doing so that he would be entitled to repayment of the money paid. The effect of termination is that no further rights under the agreement can come into existence; rights which already exist are not dissolved by the termination. He would be entitled to damages, not necessarily equal to the money paid. The usual measure of damages would be the reasonable cost of obtaining goods of the same description and quality from some other source. This involves some calculation and ascertainment and is not a debt and not within subs.556(1).

After 20 December 1989 Mr Shepherd was entitled to adopt the position that the money which he had paid was repayable to him because there had been a total failure of consideration. He could adopt that position whether or not he had ever expressly terminated the contract, because by adopting that position he would plainly show that he thereby terminated the contract. Until he adopted that position the remedy available to him against Holdings was a claim for damages; he was not entitled to recover any debt.

Attributing a time to a total failure of consideration, that is to an event which did not happen, is an artificial exercise but it cannot be dismissed as an absurdity and must be undertaken. As a time must be attributed to the event of total failure, it should be placed in time when Mr Shepherd terminated the contract and brought to an end Holdings' opportunity to tender performance by offering to deliver the goods. Unless and until he terminated the contract it could not be said, if Holdings had delivered late, that Holdings was in breach of its contractual promise to deliver the goods, although it would be in breach of its contractual promise to do so within a reasonable time, and would notwithstanding delivery be liable for any damages which flowed from lateness of delivery. However it is not alleged in the Further Amended Statement of
Claim that Mr Shepherd did terminate the agreements at any time; in particular it is not alleged that he terminated the agreement at any of the four stages referred to in para 51. What must be taken from the Further Amended Statement of Claim overall is that Mr Shepherd took both steps, that is terminated the contract and elected to claim repayment of his deposit, when he commenced proceedings. No other event is alleged in which either of these things happened. As there was no election ther was no debt.

I reject contentions that a debt which accrued later was incurred when the contractual time for performance passed and it became wholly in the control of the payer to elect to terminate and to elect for recovery of money so that
Holdings would become liable to a debt on the happening of contingencies over which it had no control. To break a contract in a way which gives rise to an election to sue for unliquidated damages or for repayment is not to incur a debt. A further event must happen before there is a debt; and unless it does, there never is a debt.

The essential difficulty with attributing total failure of consideration to the time of payment is that contract law gives the payer a different remedy, that is a claim for damages. He might prefer that remedy because it is more advantageous to him, or for some other reason. He continues to have an entitlement to that remedy until he elects otherwise. (Additionally, he may wish to pursue some other remedy such as specific delivery).

In my opinion none of the events put forward in para 51 of the Further Amended
Statement of Claim was an event on which Holdings incurred a debt to Mr
Shepherd. It had no liability to Mr Shepherd at the date of making the agreement or the date of his payment; the liability incurred to Mr Shepherd on failure to deliver was a liability for damages and did not accrue to him on any of the stated dates. The dates of appointment of provisional liquidator and the winding up order have no apparent relation to the progression of Mr
Shepherd's rights to the stage of being a debt. Neither of these events conferred on persons who had contracts with Holdings a right to terminate those contracts or to treat moneys which they paid under them as repayable to them; it is within the powers of liquidators and provisional liquidators to perform contracts on behalf of companies, and unless some contractual provision provides otherwise, provisional liquidation or a winding up order do not affect the contractual rights of persons who deal with the company.

After Holdings failed to deliver the goods within the contractual time by 20
December 1989 it had no control over whether or not Mr Shepherd would terminate the contract and elect to claim repayment, except for Holdings' opportunity to tender delivery, which it never took. In some ways its position resembles that of a person who has given a contingent guarantee and has no control over the fulfilment of contingencies, for example by some other person's deciding to deliver a demand, as in Hawkins' case. However the comparison is not at all a close one. There was the continuing opportunity to tender delivery, which Mr Shepherd might have accepted; there was the need for
Mr Shepherd to decide to terminate the agreement, which it was wholly in his hands to do and could be done wisely or unwisely, or simply neglected for an indefinite period. There were no circumstances which made it a foregone conclusion that Mr Shepherd would elect to terminate, as he might not have seen any other suitable source of supply, or might not have been satisfied with the alternatives offered and might have wished to persist with endeavours to get Holdings or its liquidator to perform. It might have been a long time before he took any action. As well as electing to terminate, it had to be seen whether Mr Shepherd would elect (perhaps by the same event) to claim repayment; it might be years before he did this and, so far as appears from his allegations in the Further Amended Statement of Claim, he did not actually do so until the proceedings were commenced in 1994.

Paragraphs 8 and 9 in the Further Amended Statement of Claim, which must be assumed correct for the present purposes, are in these terms: "8. It was Holdings' practice: to attempt to induce customers who were proposing to enter into a 
Supply Agreement to pay the total amount payable to them under the 
Supply Agreement forthwith upon entering into or within a short time after entering into the Supply Agreement, by offering them a 'discount' for such payment; or to attempt to require customers who entered into a Supply Agreement to pay to it, at the time they entered into that Supply Agreement, or within some time prior to the supply or supply and erection of goods under the Supply Agreement, the whole or a part of the total amount payable by them to Holdings under it, although Holdings could not either forthwith or within the period agreed to by Holdings pursuant to the Supply Agreement supply or supply and erect the goods to which that Supply Agreement related.
It was Holdings' further practice in the course of its business not to supply or supply and erect goods from stock but to manufacture them for supply or supply and erection only as and when it required them to satisfy its obligations under Supply Agreements." 
Reliance on (a) the time of agreement and (b) the time of payment as the times when debts were incurred was in some way related to these allegations, although not in any way which was made clear by the pleading or by counsel.

Taking these paragraphs together they do not mean that at the time of making the payment it was in every case impossible for the goods to be supplied; they mean that Holdings was entering into contracts at a rate beyond its capacity to fulfil them, but the plaintiffs have not by these allegations undertaken to prove that it was impossible for Holdings to fulfil any of them. Paragraphs 8 and 9 do not allege that Holdings did not intend or was unable to meet its contractual obligation in each case. If performance was impossible from the beginning there would in my opinion be a total failure of consideration from the beginning, but otherwise it could not be said that there was a total failure of consideration until the contractual times for performance had expired without performance.

My conclusion is that Holdings did not incur a debt to Mr Shepherd on or by any of the dates stated in the Further Amended Statement of Claim. In my opinion Holdings did not incur any debt until Mr Shepherd adopted the position that he wanted repayment, and the only indication of when that was is that he did so when he commenced the proceedings.

The positions of other plaintiffs differ only in detail and need not be spelt out. Evidence of an officer of the Department of Consumer Affairs shows that of the represented persons did make demands on Holdings for repayment of moneys which they had paid before the provisional liquidation. However none of these persons is one of the plaintiffs. The other represented persons are in no better position than the plaintiffs. It may well be that the 15 are entitled to bring a claim under subs.556(1); but the plaintiffs, who are not so entitled, cannot represent them. It is quite necessary that a representative party should have an interest of the kind in suit. The structure of Pt.8 r.13(1) is that it authorises commencement of the proceedings where numerous persons have the same interest in the proceedings.
That authorisation does not apply to the present case.

Other contentions on representative proceedings under [Part 8.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/index.html#p8) 
Counsel for the first defendant, whose submissions were adopted by the solicitor for the second defendant, made further contentions why Pt.8 r.13(1) does not apply which I would not uphold. Although not necessary for my decision I will express views on them. 
The first defendant's counsel contended that these proceedings do not fall within the provisions of the Fair Trading Act, either s.12 relating to the grant of legal aid, s.13 relating to the controls available to the Director
General, or the mechanisms in s.14 for relief. In my opinion there is no apparent want of conformity with the provisions of the Fair Trading Act, but if there were it would be irrelevant to the discretion under question (b) and to any other question before me.

It was contended that the requirement of the "same interest" was not met for a number of reasons.

Of the 671 represented persons identified by the Department of Consumer
Affairs, 186 did not respond to the Department's letters which told them of these proceedings and asked them to sign a consent form to allow the plaintiffs to act on their behalf. Counsel said that they apparently have no interest in the proceedings. This contention did not use "interest" in the sense in which it is used in Pt.8 r.13, which refers to the effect of proceedings on the rights of a person and not to the person's wish or lack of wish to assert rights.

It was contended that some of the represented parties may wish to obtain a different remedy such as specific performance or unliquidated damages. I see this possibility but I regard it as unlikely now. It points rather towards the need for the Court to make procedural directions to ensure that only those persons who wish to have the same kind of remedy as the plaintiffs claim are represented, to establish a list of represented parties and the nature of their claims, and to exclude those who do not adhere to the proceedings. The likelihood is that represented consumers came to some view about what they wished within a few months after the winding up, or abandoned any intention of seeking any remedy. An opt-in notice would deal sufficiently with the possibility that they may wish to claim other remedies if it points out that advancing claims for debt on their behalf will exclude them from claiming other remedies.

It was contended that Pt.8 r.13 does not contemplate joining plaintiffs representing classes each of which has a different interest. In support of this counsel referred to the judgment of Young J in Carnie & Anor v.
Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd delivered on 30 November 1995 after the proceedings had been remitted by the High Court of Australia; [(1996) ASC -336](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281996%29%20ASC%2056%2d336 "View LawCiteRecord" ), p56,741. In my view the joinder of several representative parties as plaintiffs representing closely similar classes is convenient and should be allowed, and Young J was not confronted with any similar situation and did not deal with it.

It was pointed out that the alleged debts if incurred were incurred on different dates, giving rise to different questions of capacity to pay under subs.556(1), and that in this and other respects the plaintiffs and the represented parties do not have the same interests; they have different causes of action, constituted by different facts, to support their alleged debts, and to support their claims under subs.556(1).

In my view the approach to representative actions taken before the decision of the High Court of Australia in Carnie & Anor v. Esanda Finance
Corporation Ltd <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 398] must now be discarded. That approach, which was applied and clearly expressed by Gleeson CJ in the Court of Appeal [(1992) 29 NSWLR ]
at 384 with the concurrence of Meagher JA at 403, was not restrictive and recognised the need for flexibility but it must now be understood that it involved too narrow a concept of identity of interest. It was never correct to regard it as essential that there be an entire identity of interest in all respects, such as amount, even in the narrow origins of representative actions in the old equity procedure; and this appears from the beginning in the old cases referred to by Young J in Carnie at 56746. In the oldest of those cases Brown v. Vermuden <case>; (1676) Chan Cas 272; [22 ER 796], each of the lead miners in the parish liable to pay tithes had his own mine and his own rate of production, and their interests could be differentiated from each other in these respects. Expressions in the judgments in the High Court show to my mind clearly that there could be different elements in the interests of represented persons. It might be necessary to deal separately with parts of the cases of many or of all of them so as to determine defences or discretionary decisions special to some, or to assess the quantum of remedy, yet their joinder in the proceedings might be justified. Mason CJ Deane and Dawson JJ said of r.13(1) at 404 "All this subrule requires is numerous parties who have the same interest. The subrule is expressed in broad terms and it is to be interpreted in the light of the obvious purpose of the rule, namely to facilitate the administration of justice by enabling parties have the 'same interest' to secure determination in one action rather than in separate action. It has been suggested that the expression 'same interest' is to be equated with a common ingredient in the cause of action by each member of the class (Prudential Assurance Co. Ltd v.
Newman Industries Limited [[1981] Ch. 229] at p255). In our view this interpretation might not adequately reflect the content of the statutory expression. It may be it extends to a significant common interest in the resolution of any question of law or fact arising in the relevant proceedings. Be that as it may, it has now been recognised that persons who have separate causes of action in contract or tort may have 'the same interest' in proceedings to enforce those causes of action." At 405 their
Honours said "Once the existence of numerous parties and the requisite commonality of interest are ascertained, the rule is brought into operation subject only to the exercise of the court's power to order otherwise." Their
Honours went on to refer to the discretionary power of the court to order that an action should not continue as a representative action. Toohey and Gaudron
JJ illustrated their view at 421 when they said of the represented persons "... they have the same interest in these proceedings in the sense that there is a significant question common to all members of the class and they stand to be equally affected by the declaratory relief which the appellants seek.
McHugh J said at 427: "In my opinion a plaintiff the represented persons have 'the same interest' in legal proceedings when they have a community of interest in the determination of any substantial question of law or fact that arises in the proceedings. Other factors may make it undesirable that the proceedings should continue as a representative action, but that is a matter for the exercise of the discretion, not jurisdiction." Brennan J agreed with these observations at p408.

In my view there is a strong commonality or community of interest in the sense conveyed by these judgments among all the plaintiffs and the represented persons. They are all alleged to be entitled to remedies under subs.556(1) in respect of the payments made under substantially similar contracts which failed to be performed in substantially similar ways, and they all make claims under the same provision of the Code which requires an examination of
Holdings' capacity to pay. The alleged times at which the debts were incurred are sufficiently close for it to be seen that the attempt to prove Holdings' lack of capacity to pay them can be undertaken for all of them together. Lack of capacity to pay debts can in the usual case be proved only in respect of a continuing period, and not with any clarity or precision as of the very day when an obligation was incurred.

All the plaintiffs and their represented parties have an interest in establishing the facts in relation to Holdings on which a claim under subs.556(1) must rest. Leaving aside facts which can hardly be contentious relating to the application of s.553 to Holdings, the principal matters are the existence of reasonable grounds to expect of Holdings that it would not be able to pay all its debts as and when they became due, or that it would not be so able if the particular debt were incurred, and whether each defendant was a director or took part in the management at the time when the debt was incurred. As the question when the debt was incurred should be answered for each debt on a date special to that debt, the principal matters must receive a special answer in each case, but in their nature it is very unlikely that there would be specific proof carrying either the existence of reasonable grounds for the relevant expectation or the capacity in which a defendant was acting to a finding relating exactly to one day. Both of them relate to continuous states, and it is likely that, on a full examination of the facts, a finding can be made on each which, if adverse to the defendants, will relate to the existence of reasonable grounds for expectation over a period, and to directorship or taking part in management over a period, by reference to which some claims can be upheld and others can be excluded. A large core of the facts in which plaintiffs and represented persons have commonality of interest could be dealt with in a principal hearing, while if particular claims involve issues which need further attention special to those claims, they can be dealt with at subsidiary hearings or referred for inquiry.

The first defendant's counsel made a number of submissions illustrating how different issues might arise in respect of particular represented persons, but these considerations are overridden by their commonality of interest in the principal matters. The possibility that defences might be raised which would require consideration of facts special to the circumstances of any particular debt is clear enough. Subsection 556(2) creates defences including that the debt was incurred without the defendant's express or implied authority or consent. There could be other defences special to a particular claim and requiring separate consideration. However, the complexity of the litigation does not lead to an answer to question (a).

A decision by the court to allow representative proceedings to continue will sometimes, as it would in this case, commit the court to an elaborate task of managing the litigation, giving directions in detail, attending to particular circumstances affecting each of numerous persons represented and devising fair procedures to do so. The complexities of such a task should be balanced with the complexities involved in the alternative course, which would require the represented persons to bring their own proceedings if they wish to do so. I would think that the complexity of a task involving an apparent need to address some of the details of hundreds or perhaps even thousands of claims would not usually be a predominating consideration; if overall the complexities of determining all the claims are reduced the task would usually be undertaken.

Claims under subs.556(1) involve elaborate and detailed examination of the facts relating to the business of the company, its capacity to pay debts and its sources of credit and other resources. This complexity and the expense of investigation and proof are a practical barrier to reliance on the subsection.
There is a tendency for claims not to come before the court unless they relate to relatively large amounts. Repeated examination of similar bodies of evidence relating to the affairs of a particular company is undesirable. In my opinion joinder of a number of creditors in a representative action under subs.556(1) would often be found to be quite appropriate, particularly where the times at which the alleged debts were said to have been incurred fall within a relatively short period.

The first defendant's counsel contended that the litigation can, within Pt.8 r.13A, proceed only to establish by declaratory relief the questions which are in common, presumably leaving all other questions to be established in separate litigations commenced by each represented person. It was said that this is supported by the decision in Carnie's case but I find no support for that proposition in the judgments.

Question (b) - discretion.

My views on other matters make it unnecessary to deal with question (b). I received many submissions but to my mind the overwhelming discretionary consideration is that, assuming that the facts alleged by them are correct, none of the plaintiffs are entitled to succeed on any of the grounds alleged because in no case was the alleged debt incurred on one of the dates relied on. Litigation which cannot succeed as formulated should not be allowed to go ahead, either in an unusually complex form or in any form; that would be futile. If these proceedings were to go further the court should require that the plaintiffs obtain a positive indication from each proposed represented person that that person wishes to have a claim advanced in the litigation on his behalf against these defendants. The communications between the Department and consumers which have taken place so far do not establish the position clearly. They did not show that anyone other than the Department was involved and did not say that the proceedings were going to be representative or would bind the addressee. The questions asked of those who telephoned were not related to their wish to be associated with the litigation. It would be necessary to point out in a short but clear way that the claim is not brought against persons who held office as directors, and there should be a clear indication of the basis on which the defendants are said to be liable. Each claimant should make a decision on an informed basis that he wishes to be associated with this claim and with the basis on which it is put forward. It is not obvious that every person would wish to be associated with the proceedings and with the alleged basis on which the defendants are said to fall within subs.556(1), particular customers might have personal or commercial reasons for dissociating themselves, and they should be given a fair opportunity to perceive their own reasons and act on them. In other words, the only persons who should be represented are people who decide on an informed basis to opt in. If the matter were to be taken further, I would give careful attention to the terms of any notice which was to be sent by the plaintiffs to persons whom it was proposed to represent, and also to any accompanying information which defendants wished to circulate. It would also be necessary to require represented persons to state particularly what their claim is so as to reveal whether they are in truth entitled to make a claim on the basis of total failure of consideration, whether they wish to make such a claim or wish to pursue other remedies and when and in what manner they have terminated the agreement and elected to claim repayment. 
I do not think that the court should allow representative proceedings to continue except in the interest of persons who truly wish claims to be made for them, have decided to be involved on an informed basis, with understanding of what is being put forward on their behalf against the defendants, and have stated in a clear way the relevant facts which affect them. The best way of seeing that they are adequately informed is for the court to give each party an opportunity to include a statement in the information to be sent out. It is not for the court to decide on behalf of all who had relevant dealings with
Holdings that they must wish to sue ANZ Banking Group and Mr Dellow on the grounds put forward. Reasoning to the effect that as they are unlikely to lose anything which has not already been lost or to be called on to pay costs it could be taken that they would all decide to support proceedings to load their losses onto ANZ Banking Group and Mr Dellow does not seem to me to be well based. Each would make his own decision for his own reasons, and the decisions would not necessarily be dominated by naked consideration of their own interests to the exclusion of consideration of their relations with and the position of the defendants. Neither the court nor the plaintiffs nor the
Department of Consumer Affairs has any authority from them, and the defendants ought not to be vexed with their claims unless the represented persons wish them to be. They are not a huge or unascertainable class, there are said to be no more than 671 of them, and the task of discerning their wishes ought to be undertaken by anyone who wishes the Court to give permission to speak for them.

Before effort and money are spent on a trial it is only reasonable to establish what is involved and how many claimants there truly are and what facts they put forward. It would not be right to carry on the litigation and require the defendants to deal with it without ascertaining what is truly involved. Litigation apparently involving 671 claimants and $2.4 million calls for a different response to litigation involving only 10 or 15 claimants and much smaller sums.

The interests of claimants are not the only interests to be considered; it is also appropriate to consider interests of defendants who if representative proceedings continue are committed to a very elaborate task and much expense.
Unless the interest of each represented person in the litigation is likely to be substantial, I would be reluctant to commit defendants to elaborate representative proceedings. This is not a procedure to be imposed on a defendant over claims for small sums or interests of small value which a reasonable person should accept in the flow of life's advantages and misfortunes. The amounts paid as deposits or as the full price of kit homes and garages in this case range from about $2,000 to about $42,000 and are too large to fall into that category.

The court should only decide that some person who has not clearly stated his position should be involved in proceedings where it is impractical to obtain a decision from that person for some reason such as minority or incapacity, or where there is an overwhelming probability that such a person would wish to be involved. If it is possible to consult them, the court should not make any paternalistic assumption about its capacity to decide on behalf of others that proceedings are to be brought on their behalf. I would think there would be few occasions when what was referred to as an "opt out" notice would be appropriate. Either the circumstances show that a person's actual decision is impossible to obtain or it is so obvious what it would be that it need not be obtained, or that person's actual decision should be obtained. There is a great gulf between not replying to a letter and wishing to bring a law suit, and it is unwarranted to assume that communications authorised by the court command so much attention that a lack of response has a clear meaning. In relation to the present facts, the people on whose behalf the court should authorise proceedings to be pursued against ANZ Banking Group and Mr Dellow should, in my judgment, only be people who distinctly decide that they wish that to happen.

Constructive Trust allegations.

In paras 165 to 175 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim the first, second and fourth plaintiffs and their represented consumers claim against ANZ Banking Group (and not against Mr Dellow) that moneys paid to Holdings under supply agreements and deposited into Holdings' general account conducted with the ANZ Banking group were held by Holdings on trust for the plaintiffs and represented consumers; that Holdings committed breaches of the trust, and that ANZ Banking Group knew or ought to have known these things and hence knowingly participated in or acquiesced in the breaches and has incurred liability as a constructive trustee. Questions (a) and (b) relate to this claim as well as to the claim under subs.556(1).

In my view the contention that Holdings was a trustee of the deposits is not sufficiently substantial to justify allowing the representative proceedings to continue. In the absence of some legislative requirement or some arrangement between the parties there are no trust obligations of deposits paid on orders for goods, and there is no basis in the pleading or in the evidence for the view that there might have been factual circumstances affecting depositors generally which would give rise to such a trust. Nor is there any substantial basis for a case to the effect that ANZ Banking Group knew or ought to have known of such trusts. The judgments in Walker v. Corboy [(1990) 19 NSWLR ]
well illustrate the lack of substance of these allegations. That was a far stronger case for the existence of a trust yet it was held that there was no trust. In the absence of any application to strike out these passages the plaintiffs are at liberty to take their own contentions to trial, but as a matter of discretion I am not prepared to allow them to continue to put the allegations forward as representatives of others.

Limitations 
There may be questions under limitations legislation, and some mention was made of them in argument, but I need not deal with them. Although there does not seem to be any clear authority on the subject, it seems doubtful that an election to claim repayment on the basis of total failure of consideration could be made if the claim for damages for breach of contract had become statute-barred. After the right to damages is time barred and extinguished the concept of an election to take another remedy would become meaningless.

Conclusions and orders 
The first defendant's counsel contended that under Pt.31 r.6 I should as a consequence of deciding the questions submitted strike out the parts of the Statement of Claim which allege a representative case and which allege a case based on s.556. I propose to go further than to answer the questions and to make the orders which the answers require.

Order that the questions be answered: (a) no (b) unnecessary to answer and no.

Direct that within 7 days the defendants delivery to my Associate for settlement their drafts of proposed consequential orders.

Cases Cited: 
Shepherd v. ANZ Banking Group. - Cases referred to: 
Cause of action and election 
Hawkins & Ors v. Bank of China [(1992) 26 NSWLR 562] 
Russell Halpern Nominees Pty Ltd v. Martin & Anor [[1987] WAR 150] 
Standard Chartered Bank of Australia Limited v. Antico & Ors (1993) 13
ACLC 
Fibrosa Spolka Akcyjna v. Fairbairn Lawson Combe Barbour, Limited <case>; <case>; [175 CLR 353] 
David Securities Pty Ltd & Ors v. Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; <case>; [(1933) 48 CLR 457] 
Yeoman Credit Limited v. Apps [[1962] 2 QB 508] 
Kwei Tek Char & Ors v. British Traders & Shippers Limited [[1954] 2 QB ]

Weston v. Downs (1778) 1 Douglas 23; [99 ER 19] 
Representative Action 
Carnie & Anor v. Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd <case>; <case>; (1676) Chan Cas 272; [22 ER 796] 
Prudential Assurance Co. Ltd v. Newman Industries Limited [[1981] Ch.
] 
Trust 
Walker v. Corboy [(1990) 19 NSWLR 382] 
Cause of action and election 
Hawkins & Ors v. Bank of China [(1992) 26 NSWLR 562] 
Russell Halpern Nominees Pty Ltd v. Martin & Anor [[1987] WAR 150] 
Standard Chartered Bank of Australia Limited v. Antico & Ors (1993) 13
ACLC 
Fibrosa Spolka Akcyjna v. Fairbairn Lawson Combe Barbour, Limited <case>; <case>; [175 CLR 353] 
David Securities Pty Ltd & Ors v. Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; <case>; [(1933) 48 CLR 457] 
Yeoman Credit Limited v. Apps [[1962] 2 QB 508] 
Kwei Tek Char & Ors v. British Traders & Shippers Limited [[1954] 2 QB ]

Weston v. Downs (1778) 1 Douglas 23; [99 ER 19] 
Representative Action 
Carnie & Anor v. Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd <case>; <case>; (1676) Chan Cas 272; [22 ER 796] 
Prudential Assurance Co. Ltd v. Newman Industries Limited [[1981] Ch.
] 
Trust 
Walker v. Corboy [(1990) 19 NSWLR 382] * * * 
