

Finlayson versus Campbell Matter No 4796/94 [1997] NSWSC 374 (4 September 1997) 
Finlayson versus Campbell /94 September 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /94 - FINLAYSON V CAMPBELL 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff sues to restrain interference with a right of way. The plaintiff is the registered proprietor of No 24A Rednal Street Mona Vale. The defendants are the registered proprietors of No 24 in the same street. Prior to 1973, what is now No 26, together with No 24 and No 24A, were part of land owned by Professor and Mrs Dunston which was resubdivided by deposited plan 560884. No 26 occupies the part of the land adjoining Rednal Street apart from a driveway 15 feet or 4.57 metres wide which is part of No 24. No 26 has no further part to play in this case. 
By instrument under <case> of the Conveyancing Act registered with that deposited plan, an easement was created by way of right of way burdening No 24 in favour of No 24A. The instrument merely describes the right of way as "Right of carriageway 15 feet wide & variable width". This description thus reads in Part 1 of Schedule 8 of the Conveyancing Act and confers a right "to go, pass and repass at all times and for all purposes with or without animals or vehicles or both to and from" No 24A or any part thereof.

The plans in evidence show that the lands in question have a street address in
Rednal Street, but they slope from that street down to Pittwater where they appear to have an absolute water frontage, and indeed, the witnesses tended to call the Pittwater side of the property "the front". Although as one moves from Rednal Street to Pittwater one is actually going north east, it is convenient for the purpose of these reasons, to talk of Rednal Street as being in the south, Pittwater in the north, the ocean (which is about a kilometre away) as being east and the side of the land near Bayview as being west.

Prior to 1973, there were two lots on each of which there was a dwelling. Each was more or less a rectangular lot and each had its own separate driveway onto
Rednal Street, which driveways came off Rednal Street at approximately 90 degrees. After the resubdivision, the 15 foot concrete driveway became part of
No 24 with the whole of the drive constituting part of the right of carriageway in favour of No 24A. However, from the rear boundary of No 26, the right of way bent to the east at an angle of approximately 45 degrees and formed a scalene triangle whose apex was a point adjacent to the southern extremity of the building on No 24. The longest side of this triangle was the common boundary of No 24 and No 24A, so that there was theoretically access of the right of way onto No 24A along a line of 81 feet 3 inches or approximately metres.

The deposited plan shows a weatherboard garage on No 24 near to the south eastern boundary of that lot. Other evidence shows that this led south into a drive which connected with Rednal Street. The plan also shows a small weatherboard garage and concrete brick car port close to the south eastern boundary of No 24; indeed, the north eastern corner of the car port was actually on the land that became No 24. Although there is not unarguably clear evidence about the matter, it would seem that these three structures were demolished shortly after the plan was registered and a brick garage with an entrance facing west leading on to the right of way was built at the southern boundary of No 24A and that shortly afterwards, the area adjoining the right of way on No 24A was paved or concreted and an additional car port erected at the south side of the weatherboard cottage on No 24A. In between this car port and the brick garage, the proprietors of No 24A constructed a swimming pool.
In case it's confusing, I should state that I have used the numbers 24, 24A and 26 as denoting the street numbers in Rednal Street after the subdivision.
Those lots are respectively 3, 2 and 1 in the deposited plan and the cottage which I have called No 24A before the plan was registered was actually then known as No 26.

The owners of the whole of the land at the time of the registration of the deposited plan were Professor Dunston and his wife. They continued to occupy
No 24A and sold the other pieces of land.

The defendants, Mr and Mrs Campbell, purchased No 24 from Professor and Mrs
Dunston in November 1975. They considerably improved the brick cottage which was on No 24. Mr Campbell says that in 1975 there was a pipe rail fence concreted into the concrete driveway approximately on the common boundary between Nos 24 and 24A. He says that where the pipe rail fence stood the concrete driveway was approximately one to two metres above the ground level, that is, there was a drop of that distance from the concrete driveway to the adjoining land on No 24. He says the concrete driveway was approximately 6.9 metres wide in the area between the end of the pipe rail fence and the rear boundary of No 26, so that there was approximately a 6.9 metre wide access to
No 24A.

In January 1976, Mr and Mrs Campbell obtained approval to do building work on
No 24. Apart from work which is irrelevant to this case, that work involved the erection of a car port and garage at the southern side of the building on
No 24. The garage, which on the council approved plan is called "a brick store room" and the metal roof of the car port encroached onto the right of way so that the car port overhang was about 0.13 metres. At the same time, a brick wall was erected, being the eastern wall of the brick garage and a prolongation of it to the south. At this time the pipe rail fence was removed.
The plan of Mr Surveyor Buchan, which was annexed to the contract by which the plaintiff purchased his land, shows that the garage encroached 0.095 metres over the actual boundary of No 24A. The plan also indicated to whoever wanted to read it, that the garage encroached very much more over the right of way and that the brick wall was erected wholly upon the right of way. However, the surveyor did not actually draw attention to these matters in his report. The alterations made by Mr and Mrs Campbell involved, inter alia, raising the level of No 24 to the level of the drive. Mr Campbell says that Professor
Dunston assisted him, carrying the pipe rail fence away to storage on No 24A.
Mrs Campbell, although she gave evidence in the case (though she was not cross examined), does not refer to this at all. Professor Dunston, although apparently alive though in hospital, was not called by either side to give evidence as to this, but in 1990/91, he was protesting that what had happened had happened without his consent. I will return to this later.

The plaintiff purchased No 24A from Professor and Mrs Dunston by contract bearing date 8 November 1991. Since he acquired the land, he has demolished the buildings on No 24A including the swimming pool, and currently it is bare land. However, the plaintiff has obtained a development approval and building approval to erect a building containing two dwellings on the land, each of the two dwellings containing a garage and car port. These four car spaces face south so that to enter on to the right of way, the occupants will need to make a righthand turn out of the parking space and on to the right of way. The evidence from traffic experts shows that their manoeuvring to exit No 24A and get on to Rednal Street may indeed be more complex than this.

In early 1992, the defendants continued the wall a further metre towards the south and installed a gate from the end of that wall to the western boundary of No 24. These works meant that there was less room for carriage along the right of way, the neck now being between 4.57 and 4.595 metres wide and then a righthand bend to the east with a mouth about 5.9 metres wide. The plaintiff says that there is a real and substantial interference with the right of way.
He says that whilst on the plan he was to have the benefit of an area of .775 metres from which he could get from No 24 to No 24A, and in making that transition did not have to negotiate a curve of more than 45 degrees, with the structures on the defendants' land he is in fact reduced to 5.9 metres involving a sharp righthand turn.

The defendants deny that there is any substantial interference with the right of way, and further say that there are a series of other reasons why the plaintiff should not have relief. I will deal with these matters seriatim under the appropriate headings which are:
IS THERE A SUBSTANTIAL INTERFERENCE WITH THE RIGHT 
OF WAY?
HAS THE PLAINTIFF OR HIS PREDECESSORS IN TITLE 
ABANDONED THE RIGHT OF WAY?
SHOULD THERE BE MODIFICATION OF THE RIGHT OF WAY 
UNDER S 89 OF THE CONVEYANCING ACT?
IS THE [LIMITATION
ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) SOME BAR TO THE
PLAINTIFF 
GETTING RELIEF?
SHOULD THERE BE RELIEF GIVEN TO THE DEFENDANTS 
UNDER THE [ENCROACHMENT OF BUILDINGS
ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/eoba235/)?
WAS THERE SOME AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES 
WHICH PRECLUDES THE PLAINTIFF FROM RELIEF?
LACHES AND LIKE DEFENCES.
THE RESULT.
WAS THERE A SUBSTANTIAL INTERFERENCE WITH THE RIGHT OF WAY? 
This question occupied the bulk of the hearing time and it really should be subdivided into the following: 
What is the plaintiff's cause of action? 
Construction of the easement; 
What is a substantial interference with an easement? 
Can non-physical interference amount to a substantial interference with an easement? 
Was there in fact a substantial interference in the instant case? 
What should be the result? 
As Megarry & Wade point out in the 5th ed of their Law of
Real Property (Stevens, London 1984) p 834, easements were not described as incorporeal hereditaments until recently. Traditionally, they were classed as a privilege appurtenant to a corporeal hereditament. Challis's Law of Real
Property 3rd ed (Butterworths, London 1911) by Charles Sweet, says at 55, "Mr Challis says: `easements are not incorporeal hereditaments, but rights appurtenant to corporeal hereditaments'. This statement entirely ignores the fact that for over a century easements have been treated as incorporeal hereditaments by text-writers of authority, and that their view has been adopted by the courts. The heresy appears to have originated with Blackstone . ... The view that easements are incorporeal hereditaments has been accepted as correct by the courts." The learned author then cites a series of cases, the latest being Hastings versus North Eastern Railway Co [[1900] AC .] In commenting on this case, Holdsworth says at 322-3, "This statement makes it fairly clear that Blackstone's inadequate account of easements does not fairly represent the available learning on this topic. At the same time, the confusion which it shows between true easements and customary rights in the nature of easements, and its assertion of the possibility of reviving an easement destroyed by unity of seisin, would seem to show that some very elementary principles of our modern law were as yet not clearly recognized. In fact right down to the beginning of the 19th century, there was but little authority on many parts of this subject ... The industrial revolution, which caused the growth of large towns and manufacturing industries, naturally brought into prominence such easements as ways, water courses, light, and support; and so Gale's book became the starting point of the modern law, which rests largely upon comparatively recent decisions. "Nevertheless the leading principles, upon which this modern law is founded, come from all periods in the history of the common law; and some go back to a very early period in the history of that law." 
Holdsworth then goes on to show that whilst Bracton had incorporated some
Roman learning as to servitudes, medieval law developed around the assize of nuisance. However, Coke copied some of Bracton's borrowings from the Roman Law which with modifications were pieced onto the rules which had gathered around the assize of nuisance. In the 19th century "It was expanded and elaborated, partly on the basis of the old rules, which had been evolved by the working of the assize of nuisance, and its successor the action on the case; partly by the help of Bracton's Roman rules; and partly, as Gale's book shows, by the help of the Roman rules taken from the Digest, which he frequently and continuously uses to illustrate and to supplement the existing rules of law." 
It is important to analyse the basis of the law of easements because it is important to understand what is the action that the holder of the dominant tenement of an easement brings when he or she says that there has been substantial interference with the easement. Mr Coles QC, who appeared with Mr
S Reuben for the plaintiff, in his submissions said that there was a common law trespass and a common law nuisance and the remedy at law was insufficient, therefore equity would give a mandatory injunction. This historical analysis shows why trespass does not lie.

In Paine & Co Ltd versus St Neots Gas & Coke Co [[1939] 3 All ER ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1939%5d%203%20All%20ER%20812 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 823, Luxmoore, LJ said, "An easement differs from a profit prendre, although both may be classed under the head of servitudes in that the owner of an easement cannot maintain trespass, the only remedies available to him for disturbance being by abatement or by an action for nuisance ... for he is asserting a right which of necessity excludes the possibility of possession of the servient tenement, or any part of it: ...".

His Lordship relied on two cases for those propositions, William Aldred's case <case>; [(1610) 9 Co Rep 57b] and Higgins v Betts [[1905] 2 Ch 210.] In the latter case, Farwell, J said at 214-5 of an easement for light, "Any substantial interference with his comfortable use and enjoyment of his house, according to the usages of ordinary persons in that locality, is actionable as a nuisance at common law." 
Jackson, The Law of Easements and Profits (Butterworths, London 1978) p 210 says that an action for interference with an easement can only lie in nuisance. He cites as authority Lane versus Capsey [[1891] 3 Ch 411] 
Accordingly, in this case one is really looking to see whether there has been such a substantial interference with the plaintiff's property right as would be actionable in nuisance. I will deal with this matter further in subsection .

Construction.

The easement was granted by a <case> instrument. At the time of the grant,
Professor and Mrs Dunston were the proprietors of both the dominant and servient tenements. Section 88(3)(c) of the Conveyancing Act makes it clear that any such easement shall be created notwithstanding that the land benefited and the land burdened may be in the same ownership at the time when the plan is registered.

One ordinarily construes the grant of an easement as at the date of its creation and if there is any ambiguity, looks at the physical attributes of the land as at that day to see what sort of right of carriageway could have been intended. However, where there is a <case> instrument with an obvious intention of land coming into the hands of three different parties, there is a lot to be said for the point of view that one looks at the situation not so much as at the date of creation of the easement but as at the date when it becomes of practical value when the same person ceases to be the proprietor of both the dominant and the servient tenement. The point has a little importance in the instant case because the deposited plan, as I have already indicated, shows that at the date when it was recorded there was a concrete and brick car port straddling the boundary between what is now No 24 and No 24A. However, the aerial photograph of 1977 shows that by that time the Dunstons as proprietors of No 24A had not only erected a brick garage, but had also erected an additional car port with a paved area adjoining the right of way over which vehicles could be driven. I believe I should infer that the intention was at the date of creation to enable vehicles to gain access to No
A, not only along the relatively small mouth that would have been left in the right of way between the edge of the car port and the pipe fence, but also, at least in due course, at some one or more other points.

When considering what were the sort of vehicles that could be brought in, accordingly, there is nothing on the ground which would indicate that there was to be any restriction. However, the properties were suburban residential properties so that one would not expect that there would be heavy traffic.
However, it must have been contemplated that from time to time a large vehicle would need to enter No 24A, either a removalist truck or alternatively vehicles to assist in demolition of existing structures and erection of new structures. In the long run in this case it matters very little because the basic difference between the parties is in respect of the passage of ordinary domestic motor vehicles rather than the extent of the sort of vehicle that could be driven in.

It should be realized that as at the date of creation of the easement, there were single dwellings along the whole of Rednal Street. The people who created the easement may well have had in mind that eventually there would be some redevelopment, but essentially they were creating an easement to service a single dwelling. In Rodwell versus GR Evans & Co Pty Ltd (1977) 3 BPR , 9119, Holland, J said, "However wide the words used, the ambit of a right of way will be construed having regard to the state of affairs at the time of the grant and the purposes of the grant and an excessive or unreasonable user may be restrained by the court on the ground of going beyond the presumed intention of the parties." This decision was affirmed by the
Court of Appeal [[1978] 1 NSWLR 448], though the appellate court did not consider this particular point. It is, however, clear that a grantee is not confined to using a right of way for the purpose prevailing at the date of the grant but may use the right of way for any reasonable different purpose: Bradbrook & Neave, Easements and
Restrictive Covenants in Australia (Butterworths Melbourne 1981) [620].
Thus one can use for the purpose of a motel a right of way that had been originally granted in general terms when the dominant tenement had erected on it a block of flats: Grinskis versus Lahood [[1971] NZLR 502.] 
One must work out what was in contemplation at the time of the grant though perhaps the cases suggest that one must objectively attribute to the grantor more than he or she may have actually had in contemplation. Despite this width of presumption, there are limits so that in Milner's Safe Company, Ltd v
Great Northern & City Railway Co [[1907] 1 Ch 208], a right of way was granted in 1832 in favour of several buildings in London which were at that stage being used as dwelling houses and/or warehouses. About 70 years later, two of those buildings were pulled down and the defendants erected a railway station. The consequence was that at all times of the day and especially in the morning and evening peak hours, a large number of persons were using the right of way to leave the railway station to get to the surrounding streets. The plaintiff sought an injunction to prevent substantial interference with the right of way.

Counsel for the railway submitted (p 217), "When once buildings used for trade purposes are on land in a city it is not possible to suppose that the grantor meant to limit his grant to the purposes for which the premises were then used. No clear-sighted man would so tie his property up. In 1812, Moorfields, the site of this property, were waste, and the testator must have foreseen to some extent at any rate the progress of London." Kekewich, J did not agree, however he did use that test saying at 227, "Not only was the erection of a railway not contemplated by the grantor, but it could not possibly have been within his contemplation, and a railway station is not merely in its construction, but in its mode of occupation, something entirely different from any dwelling-house, warehouse, or even manufactory, which could have been erected on the land." 
As Bradbrook & Neave point out at [621], this test of working out what was in contemplation at the time of the grant has not been universally applied, but it seems to me that it is the test that is more often applied than any other. It was the test applied by Holland, J in the Rodwell case and it is the one I should apply. However, as at the date of grant, it might have been contemplated by Professor and Mrs Dunston that in the future more substantial structures would have been erected than the fibro or weatherboard single dwellings that lined the shores of Pittwater and Mona Vale in the 1940s to the 1970s. As Haslam, J said in the Grinskis case at , the question is one of fact and degree. Whilst I can well contemplate that Professor Dunston may have thought that one day there might be a block of flats on the land, it is difficult to credit him with an appreciation that one day there might be use of almost 90% of the ground area of the site for buildings and that the parking facilities would be placed in a very cramped way at the western end of the building.

What then is a substantial interference with an easement? 
It has already been seen that the words "substantial interference" flow from the law of nuisance. At common law, each act of nuisance was a separate tort and a separate action for damages could be brought in respect of each. If there was a continuing nuisance, then this common law remedy was inadequate and activated a jurisdiction in equity for an injunction against further nuisances or for damages under Lord Cairns' Act which could include future damage. Indeed, one would have thought that once the tort of nuisance was found out at common law after the procedural reforms in the mid-nineteenth century, a common law injunction might have been granted for the future.

So far as easement cases are concerned, the first to consider is Clifford v
Hoare [(1874) LR 9 CP 362.] In that case, there was a grant of a right of way over the defendants' land. The road and footpath were constructed, but later the defendants built columns for a portico over part of the footway. In the Court of Common Pleas the Chief
Justice thought that the plaintiff had not suffered any injury. The other two
Judges, Brett, J and Denman, J as their Lordships then were, agreed, the former saying at 371, "I am of opinion that no substantial interference with [the plaintiff's] exercise of that easement has been made out." Denman, J said at 372, "I come to the conclusion that it was not intended to give to the plaintiff and to the other persons through him a right to go upon every square foot of the space so delineated, but only a right to the reasonable use of a way such as substantially existed over the spaces pointed out. It is only a grant of a reasonable user of a right of way." This judgment appears to be where the words "substantial interference" originated as indeed was acknowledged by Swinfen Eady, LJ in a case on which both parties relied,
Pettey versus Parsons [[1914] 2 Ch 653], 665.

The first significant Australian case in this area is Powell versus Langdon <case>; [(1944) 45 SR 136.]
That was a case where there was a right of way over a strip 20 feet wide and the servient owner had built over part of the right of way leaving an opening of approximately eight feet though he had also erected two brick piers and hung a gate between them closing in the middle of the opening, though the gate could be opened. The defendant also threatened to erect a fence restricting the width to 15 feet. Roper, J at 139 said that the test was whether there was "a real substantial interference with the enjoyment of the right of way." In the case before him he held there was such an interference.

In Dyer versus Mousley (English Court of Appeal 1962 unreported), Russell, LJ held that the owner of the right of way cannot insist on having the whole parcel of land over which the way exists kept absolutely free from obstruction. The owner of the soil is entitled to maintain an obstruction, provided it does not amount to a substantial interference with the right of way. (Quoted in Keefe versus Amor [[1965] 1 QB 334] at 339). His
Lordship repeated a similar observation in Keefe's case at 347.

In Celsteel Ltd versus Alton House Ltd [(1984) 49 P & CR 165] at , Scott, J, after analysing the cases I have considered, said that there emerge from the cases "two criteria relevant to the question whether a particular interference with a right of way is actionable. The interference will be actionable if it is substantial. And it will not be substantial if it does not interfere with the reasonable use of the right of way." 
In this State, the next case to look at is Zenere versus Leate (1980) 1 BPR
At 9305, McLelland, J said that terms need to be ordinarily implied in the grant of an easement that "the servient owner is not entitled to do anything ... which substantially interferes with the exercise by the dominant owner." 
In Ex parte Purcell [(1982) 47 LGRA 433] at 439,
McPherson, J said that "The question in a case such as this is not simply whether the interference is `substantial', if that expression is used simply to denote an extensive interference. It is whether it is `material', and it is material if the consequences of the interference are likely to be extensive, even though the interference itself may be slight and the occasions of its occurrence infrequent. Hence a slight interference with the council's right of access to and use of appropriate machinery on the easement area may constitute an impermissible interference with that right in circumstances where, as here, the consequence may be a prolonged interruption of a clean water supply to many residents of the shire." 
These remarks were taken up by Bryson, J in Prospect County Council versus Cross [(1990) 21 NSWLR 601.] In that case an electricity authority sought an injunction to prevent a substantial interference with an easement for power lines. Bryson, J held that the impediments caused by the defendants in erecting swimming pools and other obstructions underneath the power lines caused the problem that the engineers would not be able to get onto the area of the easement in order to fix the power lines.

I have some doubt as to whether the decisions in Purcell and Cross are of much practical guidance in the ordinary private easement case apart from throwing up the matter that a substantial interference may in appropriate circumstances be caused by a relatively small physical interference.

Before one can see whether there is a substantial or real substantial and material as the case may be, interference, one has to see what rights the plaintiff has under the grant. I have already touched on this in section (b), but it is necessary to look at the way in which courts construe these grants of rights.

Mr Coles QC and Mr Reuben put that one focuses on the position of the grantee and asks whether what the grantee is doing with the servient tenement is a reasonable user. On the other hand, Mr Jucovic QC who appeared with Mr PT
Taylor for the defendants, says that one focuses, if one focuses at all, on the fact that the land is owned in fee by the servient owner and that he has only granted to the dominant owner limited rights.

In my view, the analysis by Messrs Jucovic and Taylor is the correct one and is supported by the authorities. Many of these I have reviewed already. In
Zenere versus Leate at 9304, McLelland, J said, "The dominant owner has only such rights as are to be found expressly or by necessary implication in the terms of the grant. The servient owner has all the rights of an owner except those which are inconsistent with the exercise by the dominant owner of the rights expressly or by necessary implication conferred on him by the terms of the grant." 
In Butler versus Muddle (1995) 6 BPR 13984, I said at p 13986, "When looking at what is reasonable, the mere fact that the defendants have deliberately designed their building in a certain way to make the best use of their land and so have great problems if they cannot enjoy the access that they now need is not the dominant consideration when working out what is reasonable. Again the matter that the plaintiffs are not currently using the land is, to my mind, of little relevance. I think the test really is ... that it cannot be reasonable for the defendants to appropriate the plaintiffs' land and use it without the plaintiffs' consent as if it were their own." In that case the plaintiffs were the servient owner and the defendants the dominant owner, the reverse of the present case.

In SS & M Ceramics Pty Ltd versus Kin [[1996] 2 Qd R 540], a right of way was granted in 1955 to a dominant tenement which at that stage had sufficient space available for parking. The dominant owner erected more structures on its land so that by 1977 it lost the capacity to provide parking on its own land. It then commenced parking vehicles on the servient tenement for the purposes of loading and unloading. Although it would have been quite reasonable in the eyes of the dominant owner for there to be parking associated with the right to pass and repass, on a proper analysis of the grant, there was no such right.

Thus one looks at the grant and the rights which are expressed or implied in the grant and those are the rights which the dominant owner has and no more.
The dominant owner cannot increase his position by so building on his dominant tenement such that an additional burden is thrown on to the servient land unless that extra burden was one which is within the express or implicit terms of the grant.

Having looked at the matter theoretically, do the cases give any assistance as to when one finds that there has been a substantial interference? 
The general answer to this question is in the negative. It is a question of fact as to whether there is a substantial interference. Indeed, the only decided case that I have found of any value in this area is Austin versus The
Scottish Widows' Fund Mutual Life Assurance Society (1881) 8 Law Reports . In that case the plaintiff was entitled to a right of way on foot through a passage across the defendants' premises. Apart from a three inch step, this passage was level. The defendants then raised part of the passage so that a person needed to ascend four steps and descend three. The plaintiff sued and the jury found that the passage was rendered by the alteration substantially less convenient as a mere footway. The plaintiff was held entitled to damages for five cents and costs. It would seem from the report that at the trial the plaintiff proved that it would now require many more men to get heavy goods through the passage. This tends to show that if a plaintiff can establish that in exercising his rights under the grant he is required to use a substantially greater labour force or have to carry out a manoeuvre with far greater attention, there may well be a substantial interference.

Can non-physical interference be a substantial interference with an easement? 
Mr Coles QC insisted in his submissions that a non-physical interference could of itself amount to a substantial interference with a right of way. He instanced obstruction of view of a driver of a vehicle using a right of way creating a situation where the driver had to use greater skill and care in manoeuvring the motor vehicle. He mainly relied on Cross's case.

With respect, I cannot see how this proposition can be correct, though in most cases, including this case, it really does not make any difference. This is because when one is looking at substantial interference this type of question really merges into the problems caused by physical obstructions.

To take an example, however, suppose that to dissuade a neighbour from using a right of way the servient owner painted horror pictures of people being massacred or skeletons hanging in a visible place on the right of way. This would be a non-physical interference in the sense that it might make the right of way less attractive, but I cannot see how it would be a substantial interference with the right of way.

Even if one does not limit Cross's case and Purcell's case to statutory authorities with a right of way to maintain a pipe line or electricity line, the physical obstructions on the ground in both of those cases were more than mere dissuasions or difficulties of the type the subject of Mr Coles QC's submissions.

Was there in fact a substantial interference in the instant case? 
It seems to me that the plaintiff has the right to pass on foot or with vehicles including removal trucks onto No 24A so long as this is reasonably infrequently. For all easements there must be a terminus a quo and a terminus ad quem. The terminus a quo is obviously Rednal Street. The terminus ad quem from 1977 until the recent demolition of the buildings on No 24A was a point approximately opposite the brick garage and the apex of the triangle near the car port. It does not seem to me that the right of way gives the dominant owner the right to access at every spot along the 25 metre common boundary.
Certainly the proprietor of No 24A is able to have access at at least two points along the boundary, possibly more. I cannot see from the wording of the grant construed in the circumstances as existed in 1973 (or 1976 when the defendants purchased their land) how there was any right to park because there was adequate parking on No 24A. Furthermore, the plans make it clear that the object was to get vehicles from the road onto No 24A. It is true that the parties must have contemplated that from time to time there would be redevelopment of the site and that the access points might change. This does not mean that the servient owner is prevented from building a fence or wall along the boundary so long as they provide reasonable access points to No 24A.

Up until the buildings were erected, those reasonable access points were provided. It is only after the plaintiff obtained development consent and building consent for a plan that used virtually the whole of his site and required the four car parking spaces to be on the southern side, that the problems arise. What the plaintiff is really saying is that there is a nuisance at the moment and there will be continuing acts of nuisances in the future so that there should be an injunction granted to protect the plaintiff.
I think the actual focus is on the present and the question is, is there, at the time of the suit, or at the time of the hearing, or both, an actionable nuisance? It may be that one expands that question and asks whether there might also be a nuisance unless restrained in the foreseeable future.

However, the matter is not like an action at common law where the plaintiff has to prove his or her damages forever and can never bring another action.
With nuisance, one can bring a fresh action as soon as there is a fresh nuisance. If at some time in the future, the plaintiff has a different development on his land, and what is on the defendants' land is a substantial interference with the plaintiff's rights to use the right of way, then an action will lie. Accordingly, dismissing the plaintiff's claim at this stage will not forever disbar him from making a claim for a fresh nuisance. That claim may be made even though the fresh nuisance may consist of the same buildings as are there at present. Looking at it another way, the court could, at the moment, even say that there was a nuisance, and like the Irish case, give five cents damages but say that there was insufficient obstruction to grant an injunction. However, if circumstances change in the future, an injunction could be applied for and granted in the light of the then circumstances.

Mr Jucovic QC says that the matter is really quite simple. The plaintiff, more likely than not, will develop his land in accordance with the plan for which he has obtained development approval and later building approval. When one looks at that plan, one can see that neither the wall, nor the garage, nor anything else that is built on the actual right of way causes any physical obstruction to the plaintiff at all. The plaintiff's 5.9 metre wide space on the boundary between Nos 24 and 24A gives reasonable access to that part of No
A where the car parking is to take place. The plan shows that the whole of the rest of the block will have a building on it and it is of no interest to the plaintiff at all to get access to the northern part of the block.

I must confess I find this argument extremely attractive. Mr Coles QC, however, says that it is merely superficially attractive. He says that there may be an amendment to the building plan, so that a greater amount of spaces are provided on No 24A for car parking. There are various answers to this. The first is that the plaintiff's case really is based on the building and development plans as approved by the council. If there is to be an amendment, then the case should be judged on the amendment.

Indeed, the only significant amendment that is forecast is that the present plan shows service yards (ie screened areas where the occupants will install their rotary clothes lines and store their refuse in bins pending collection) which are adjacent to the defendants' wall. With these service areas there, there is no sensible possibility of people being able to use the right of way other than through the opening that is actually there. Mr Coles QC says that the service yards could be moved and his client's architect, Mr Kearns, has given evidence as to where they might be put. This is the only significant amendment. This plan shows that the service yard for Unit No 2 in the plaintiff's proposed development would be put hard against the southern boundary with No 26 and taken away from the wall. Certainly this would make the wall more of a hindrance than it would be under the approved plan.
However, one cannot just invent space on land where that space is not there and it seems to me that the removal of the service yard merely makes the access to the plaintiff's block just as difficult but in a different way.

It is clear that the plaintiff does not wish to amend his plan in any substantial way that might endanger his development consent. This is because the value to the plaintiff, who is an experienced amateur developer, is brought about through a window of opportunity allowing separate title dual occupancy in the Pittwater Council area. That window has closed and, were the plaintiff to apply for development approval today, he would not obtain it, at least not with separate titles. However, I must agree with Mr Coles QC that it would be possible to have minor alterations. The minor alteration forecast by
Mr Kearns does not seem to me to alter any particular problem of access.

To put it in a nutshell, so long as the plaintiff is going to build a building such as that for which he has development and building approval, the actions of the defendants do not form a substantial interference with access to the plaintiff's site.

Accordingly I uphold Mr Jucovic QC's submissions.

However, I should examine the matter on a wider basis. This means that I need to examine the witnesses who gave evidence for both sides.

I must confess that I did not accept the whole of the evidence of either the plaintiff or of the male defendant. The plaintiff, whilst not a developer in a big way, has nonetheless been involved with some small development projects.
He gave evidence that his solicitor treated him as a person who did not have to have explained to him in detail what it was he was buying, though it was interesting to note that the solicitor thought that he did in fact explain things to Mr Finlayson far more than the latter would accept. Mr Finlayson said that his solicitor gave him the survey which was attached to the contract and said, "Have a look and make sure that's what you are getting." He saw from the survey that the only encroachments appeared to be an encroachment of millimetres. However, he knew that there was a right of way. He says that it was not apparent at first as there were structures erected on the right of way. This could be accepted. However, he went and saw the premises three or four times and was a person who had some experience in the developing of land.
His evidence on T11 that, despite this, he didn't notice the garage or that it did not register that there were substantial encroachments on the right of way and that he was guided only by the remarks on the survey I find difficult to accept. It was put to Mr Finlayson in cross examination - "The wall on the site of the right of way did not bother you. That is what you said?" 
A. "It was common knowledge - and I believe it still is common knowledge - that anything built on a right of way is either of a temporary nature or exists only until such time as somebody wants to remove it." 
Q. "The garage and the wall will be of a temporary nature?" 
A. "The wall, as I remember it at that stage, was much lower than it is now and it appeared in no good state of repair. So I took it to be a temporary, or in decline -" 
Q. "What about the garage?" 
A. "I didn't notice the garage".
 ...

Q. "Do you deny that Mr Smith told you at some stage that there were encroachments onto the right of way?" 
A. "Well, I had a survey prepared in 1994. My surveyor drew my attention to the fact that the wall, which had since been extended and made higher, and the gates fitted, were across the right of way and I rang Smith next day and he said `Get a bulldozer and knock it down'. Those were his words. He again said `Anything that exists on a right of way can be removed'." 
It was then said that this occurred in 1994 and that he had no conversation about the right of way in 1991.

Mr Smith, solicitor, gave evidence on subpoena. Mr Smith's notes showed that he had spoken to the local council and had made notes of what he had seen on the council file and those notes included a diagram showing the approximate positions of the various improvements on the defendants' land. His notes included the comment "Gates do not open outwards and do not interfere with the right of way". It should be noted, however, that the reason for Mr Smith's visit to the council was not in connection with the right of way so that it was not at the forefront of his mind. Nonetheless, the reason for the visit was in connection with plans Mr Campbell had put to the council to expand the structures on his land to lengthen the wall by a metre and erect gates. It is possible that Mr Smith did not convey this information to Mr Finlayson because the latter was at about that time in hospital in Japan, but the balance of probabilities is that Mr Smith, who appeared to be a careful and experienced solicitor, either conveyed the information that the Campbells' application did not deleteriously affect Mr Finlayson's interest, or alternatively, acted under delegated authority from Mr Finlayson to reach and act on the same conclusion himself.

The main complaint about the interference with the right of way is that cars coming on to the plaintiff's land have to perform manoeuvres that would not be necessary if they had access through the whole of the common boundary. Of course, two things can initially be said about that. The first is that on a proper construction of the right of way, there is not access along every point along that common boundary because one must find the terminii ad quem; see
Zenere versus Leate (1980) 1 BPR 9300, 9306-7.

Secondly, as I have already said, the easement must be construed at the time of the grant and at that date the parties to the easement's creation would not have contemplated the proprietor of No 24A having to exit the right of way into a confined parking area with apertures facing south.

Even putting these matters aside, the evidence on traffic flow which was adduced before me does not convince me that there is a substantial interference as a result of Mr and Mrs Campbells' structures on the right of way.

Two witnesses gave evidence on this matter, Mr Kearns on behalf of the plaintiff, and Miss Atkinson on behalf of the defendants. Mr Kearns was an architect and town planner; Miss Atkinson, a senior transport engineer employed by Arup Transportation Planning. Miss Atkinson made a far better impression as an impartial expert witness than Mr Kearns who was, I thought, far more emotionally attached to his client than Miss Atkinson. Miss
Atkinson's computer simulations of the path that cars would take from the proposed parking facilities on the plaintiff's new developments did not give me the impression that the erections on the defendants' land provided substantial interference with the access to those garages.

I realize, and indeed, I stated at the view as recorded in the transcript, that one has to make allowances not only for access by expert drivers, but also for the average driver whose reflexes might be affected by the effects of a hard day's work. I have taken that into account, but I still do not consider that there is a substantial interference with the access. I say this not only because I accept Miss Atkinson's evidence, but also because the view gave me that firm impression. The view of the site was, of course, conducted under conditions where there was no structure on the plaintiff's land at all, and one had to work out where the garages would be. However, the aperture for vehicles to pass from No 24 to No 24A did not seem to me to be unreasonably narrow. There was a relatively tight righthand turn required, but this I did not think was beyond the ordinary capacity of even a tired average driver.

There would be occasional large vehicles coming onto the site both for construction purposes and for removal from time to time. These would be driven by expert drivers so one discounts the "fatigued average driver". There was some evidence from a Mr Vickerman, a driver of earthmoving equipment, that it took him about 10 minutes to negotiate the turn between the driveway and the plaintiff's property whether going in or out. Mr Vickerman was not available for cross examination and I indicated I would discount the weight of his evidence accordingly. However, even if that statement is fully accepted, one would expect in many suburban situations that a driveway constructed primarily for private motor vehicles of the inhabitants would cause some problem to drivers of large vehicles. Indeed, in many cases, as Mr Jucovic QC put to various witnesses, there need to be restrictions on the size of vehicles which can use private drives and equipment or goods have to be off-loaded from large removal trucks etc onto smaller vehicles. The mere fact that it is difficult or that smaller vehicles have to be used does not, to my mind, in itself show that there is a substantial interference with a right of way.

Mr O'Neill gave evidence that in his view the value of the plaintiff's property, because of the restricted access, was $200,000 less than it would have been with full access. Mr O'Neill is a registered valuer and gave his evidence objectively and gave all the signs of being a man who is fully competent in his profession. Mr O'Neill's evidence was countered by Mr Vallack who has been a real estate agent and valuer in the Pittwater Peninsula area for very many years. The valuation exercise was difficult in that there were virtually no comparable sales on which an expert could base a considered opinion.

One of the problems in this area is that Pittwater Council only allowed dual occupancy with separate titles in this area for a very short period during which period Mr Finlayson obtained his development approval. Accordingly, there are really no sites with corresponding benefits to the developer on the absolute waterfront of Pittwater. Mr O'Neill looked at two residences in
Rednal Street, one which had sold for $900,000 in March 1996 and the other for $670,000 in June 1993. He then looked at some home units in Beaconsfield
Street, Newport which is across the bay. However, there is quite a significant difference between home units in Beaconsfield Street, Newport which is on a main road in Newport and the quiet almost backwater of Rednal Street, Mona
Vale. In any event the Newport units were sales made in 1992-1995 of up to $755,000. None of this really supported a valuation of one million dollars for each of the townhouses on the current site.

Mr Vallack was a most impressive witness. He did not use comparable sales so much as his general knowledge of what buyers look for in this particular area in respect of which he had great experience. Mr Vallack's view was that comparable sites in the area had different drawbacks and that the problem with access on the instant site was not such a significant factor as to decrease the value at all. I feel confident in accepting Mr Vallack's view of things and accordingly find that the diminution in value of the plaintiff's land as a result of the defendants' structures is nil.

I said earlier that I did not accept everything that Mr Finlayson said, nor everything that Mr Campbell said. Although it really matters very little for present purposes, Mr Campbell did give the impression of a person who was prepared to take every opportunity to develop his own land for his own comfort with little regard to what was happening to his neighbours. He initially had a neighbourly relationship with Professor Dunston but that soon deteriorated, and certainly by 10 October 1991 Professor Dunston was writing to Mr Campbell protesting about the encroachments onto the right of way. The letter (which was actually sent to Mr Campbell's solicitor) (PA05-A), says as follows: "You will note that the garage and the adjoining brick fence stand approximately 10cm over the northern boundary of my property.

Furthermore, the brick fence and garage encroach upon the Right of Carriageway shaded in yellow upon the sketch.

I request that these structures, or such parts of them as encroach upon the Right of Carriageway, be removed, and that no further encroachments upon the Right of Carriageway be made." 
Professor Dunston also protested to the council about Mr and Mrs Campbells' plans to increase the height and length of the wall and to erect the gates.

The Campbells' solicitor, Mr Dunstan, replied on 16 October that the brick fence "was constructed some approximately 15 years ago by mutual agreement between yourself and our clients on the location of the previously existing pipe fence." The solicitor also said that the structure did not impede the reasonable user of the carriageway. Professor Dunston replied, "The brick fence was not constructed by mutual agreement between myself and your clients, nor was there any previously existing pipe fence in the area which the brick fence now occupies. The only fence which was erected by mutual agreement and sharing of costs was a wooden one." Professor Dunston also indicated that he had used the word "garage" loosely, intending to convey by that word the car port that was on the Campbells' land, and then continued "Your reply does not address a major burden of my letter, namely that there shall not be any further encroachments upon the Right of Carriageway, as envisaged in the present form of the proposals for further additions currently before the
Warringah Shire Council." 
Professor Dunston was not called by either party. It is difficult to work out whose camp he is really in, because his evidence may have assisted both parties. However, the general impression Mr Campbell gave me in the witness box and Professor Dunston's letter denying that there was any mutual agreement to put up the wall in 1976, make me wary of accepting Mr Campbell's uncorroborated evidence that the original wall was put up with Professor
Dunston's concurrence. Indeed, I do not accept that evidence. I say this despite the fact that it would appear that Professor Dunston was mistaken and there was in fact a pipe fence at the relevant place before the fence was put up. It may be, however, that the Professor is concentrating on the exact place of the pipe fence rather than denying that it actually existed at all. It was noteworthy that although Mrs Campbell put on an affidavit, she did not make any mention at all of any agreement with Professor Dunston for putting up the wall in the first place.

Mr Campbell (and indeed Mr Finlayson), both gave the impression of men who did not usually let things stand in the way of them getting what they wanted. Both seem to me to be men who have selective memories and, as I say, although there is very little real contest of fact in this case, I would not accept the evidence of either of them in every respect.

The Result.

It follows, that even if I was looking at the matter as a pure question of fact, I would still find that there was no substantial interference with the right of way.
HAS THE PLAINTIFF OR HIS PREDECESORS IN TITLE ABANDONED THE RIGHT OF WAY? 
In view of my finding on the main issue, there is not much need to review the arguments on abandonment though I will do so in case the matter goes further.
The authorities show that it is difficult to establish that an easement that is a right of property has been abandoned, and that what is necessary to prove is that not only has there been non-user for a considerable period of time, but that the actions, words and inactions of the dominant owner are such as to demonstrate a fixed intention never at any time thereafter to assert the easement or attempt to transmit it to anybody else. The main Australian authorities are Treweeke versus 36 Wolseley Road Pty Ltd <case>; <case>; [(1852) 7 Ex 838], 839; <case>; [155
ER 1189], 1190 and
Tehidy Minerals Ltd versus Norman [[1971] 2 QB 528], 553.

It is clear that in considering the question of abandonment, one looks not only at the acts, deeds and inactions of the present proprietor of the dominant tenement, but also those of his or her predecessors in title. This is made clear by the PSP 9968 case.

I cannot see anything in the actions of the proprietors of the dominant tenement for the time being which would lead me to infer that they had abandoned the use of the easement forever. The access when Professor Dunston had his building on No 24A was sufficient for his family and I cannot see any act or inaction which would allow me to infer abandonment, particularly, of course, as the defendants' case weakened in this regard when I do not accept
Mr Campbell's evidence of Professor Dunston's consent to the original wall.
 
Then it is put that there has been an abandonment of part of the easement.

It is very difficult to make out that case and I do not consider that the defendants have done so. First, Professor Dunston's letter of October 1991 makes it abundantly clear that he was not intending at that stage to give up any of his rights. Secondly, the mere non-user of part of the right of way is not a matter that leads to the inference of abandonment, even of part:
James versus Stevenson [[1893] AC 162], 168. As Viscount
Dunedin said when giving the decision of the Privy Council in Keewatin
Power Co Ltd versus Lake of the Woods Milling Co Ltd [[1930] AC 640], 657, "The grantee may always, if he chooses, not exercise his right under the grant to the full without in any way prejudicing his full right if he finds it convenient to use it." 
However, as Needham, J points out in the PSP 9968 case at 613, there is a real distinction between not using a single right to the full extent permitted and the omission to use one of a parcel of rights. In the latter case, there can be an abandonment of part of an easement. Thus, in Webster v Strong <case>; [[1926] VLR 509], when a fence had been erected in 1885 on a right of carriageway reducing it to a right of footway without protest for about 30 years, there would have been abandonment at common law of the right of carriageway but not the right of footway.

Although it would seem to me that the present case is merely one of non-user of part of a right rather than an abandonment of part of a right, there are some dicta in the cases such as that by Farwell, J in Young versus Star Omnibus
Co Ltd [(1902) 86 LT 41], 43, that one could have an abandonment of part of such a right.

The difficulty in applying the doctrine of abandonment of part is really a result of the fact that the doctrine first grew up in connection with partial abandonment of a right of ancient lights. With such a right, the dominant owner's alteration of a building to block up some windows and to reposition others can well be an abandonment of part as was said by Pollock, CB in
Jones versus Tapling [(1862) 12 CB (NS) 825], ; <case>; [142 ER 1367], 1382, a dominant owner may abandon any portion of what he has been granted or used. It is, however, very difficult to apply that principle to a right of carriageway.

In any event I cannot see any intention by the dominant owner in the instant case to abandon the way in whole or in part.
SHOULD THERE BE MODIFICATION OF THE RIGHT OF WAY UNDER S 89 OF THE
CONVEYANCING ACT? 
The defendants, by their cross claim, ask that the right of way be modified or extinguished under <case> of the Conveyancing Act to permit them to retain the existing structures on the right of way. That section provides a series of gateways which, if an applicant can pass through, enables the court in its discretion to extinguish an easement in whole or in part or to modify the same. Mr Jucovic QC says that the continued existence of the easement would impede the reasonable user of the land without securing any practical benefit to the dominant owner, that the dominant owner's predecessor in title at least partly waived the benefit of the restriction and that the proposed modification would not substantially injure the persons entitled to the easement.

I do not consider that I should make any order under <case> in favour of the defendants in these proceedings. Although the plaintiff still intends to erect a building on his land in accordance with his building approval, until the building is actually erected, there is still a possibility that some other building would be erected. I have taken the view when assessing the plaintiff's case that he is bound to show that there is a substantial interference with access to the building as delineated in his plans. However, when one is looking at the cross claim, I do not consider that I should be so restrictive of the plaintiff.

It may be that in due course if the plaintiff's building is erected and by its very position it makes it clear that there is a semi-permanent denial of any access to No 24A by the mere fact that the walls of the building prevent it, that may then of itself amount to an abandonment. At least it may be a reason why, at that stage, the present defendants can pass through the gateways of s and have the court exercise its discretion in their favour.

At the moment I do not consider that stage has arisen.

Furthermore, the cases show that the mere fact that the person entitled to the right of way comes to court and says that the right of way is of benefit to him and is prepared to spend money on counsel defending his right is itself good evidence that the right is of some practical benefit.

I do not consider that the fact that the erections on the defendants' land do not presently amount to a substantial interference with the right of carriageway is of itself sufficient to come within one of the gateways that Mr
Jucovic QC has nominated. In any event, even if I had been of that view, an order under <case> is discretionary (see Pieper versus Edwards [[1982] 1 NSWLR )] and I would not have thought the present is an appropriate case for the exercise of the discretion in the Campbells' favour. They have gradually, bit by bit, built up the encroachments over onto the right of way without the consent of the neighbouring owners. Their application to the council in 1991 was opposed by Professor Dunston, but then the Professor sold the land. Their general unneighbourliness with respect to the occupiers of No 24A would not seem to me to put this case into the category where there has been a change in the neighbourhood or in the use of the land so as to enable the court to feel justified in extinguishing property rights.
THE [LIMITATION
ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/).

The [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) operates so that, under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s27.html), there is a 12 year limitation period on the recovery of land. The limitation period after the 1976 wall has expired. Furthermore, the right had expired before Mr Finlayson became registered proprietor. Mr Jucovic QC puts that this has two significances, the fact that the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) applied would have affected the price that Mr Finlayson paid Professor Dunston, but more importantly, that no damage could be claimed by Mr Finlayson for something that had happened before he became registered proprietor and had been statute barred. I consider these submissions are correct. They do not, however, deal with the problem of the extension of the wall and the gates which occurred in 1991.
SHOULD THERE BE RELIEF GIVEN TO THE DEFENDANTS UNDER THE [ENCROACHMENT OF
BUILDINGS ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/eoba235/)? 
The defendants also seek relief under the [Encroachment of Buildings
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/eoba235/). The better view is that this court has jurisdiction to deal with claims made under the [Encroachment of Buildings
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/eoba235/) as incidental to proceedings before the court particularly when the incidental matters are raised in a cross claim; see Cantamessa versus Sanderson (1993) 6 BPR 13127.
After some initial resistance, the plaintiff did not pursue its initial submission that the court had no jurisdiction to deal with this claim.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/eoba1922235/s3.html) of the [Encroachment of Buildings Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/eoba1922235/) provides that an encroaching owner may apply to the court for relief in respect of any encroachment and the court may make such order, including payment of compensation to the adjacent owner, as it considers just. "Owner" in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/eoba1922235/s2.html) is defined as "Any person entitled to an estate of freehold in possession ...".
An easement is not an estate of freehold in possession. As the buildings on No are wholly on the freehold of No 24 and do not encroach on to No 24A, the mere fact that they encroach on to an easement which the owner of No 24A has over No 24 is insufficient to attract the court's jurisdiction under the Act.
Accordingly, this claim should be dismissed.
WAS THERE SOME AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES WHICH PRECLUDES THE PLAINTIFF
FROM RELIEF? 
The next defence is that there was an agreement between Mr Finlayson and Mr and Mrs Campbell brought about by the mediation of Mr Fish of the Pittwater
Council in the objection process to the plaintiff's development application.
The Campbells say that the upshot was that Mr Finlayson was able to get his development application through council because the Campbells permitted this to happen (provided certain alterations were made) on the basis that their structures would remain where they were. They say that there were arrangements between themselves and Mr Finlayson's solicitors that a deed would be executed releasing the easement once the development approval was given but Mr
Finlayson reneged.

There is no doubt that Mr Fish did conduct a mediation and that the council itself gave way in some respects by modifying its foreshore development line and its normal requirements for open space so as to accommodate Mr Finlayson's development plan, which plan did leave Mr and Mrs Campbells' encroachments in place.

Mr Coles QC says that there was no agreement, all there was was an agreement to agree at the very most. Furthermore, Mr and Mrs Campbell gave no consideration, they merely acted in self interest. Furthermore it is significant that on 6 February 1997 Mr Campbell merely pulled out of negotiations and can't explain why he did so. In any event, the parties would have been aware of <case> of the Conveyancing Act and knew that any agreement to release an easement would have to be in writing signed by the party to be charged.

There are a number of cases in the law reports about deals where a person drops opposition to a railway bill before Parliament on the basis that the railway company will provide some benefit. One of the more recent examples is
Greene versus West Cheshire Railway Co [(1871) LR 13 Eq 44.] The abandonment of a sincerely held claim amounts to consideration.

The evidence is not sufficiently strong for me to infer an agreement in the instant case. In my view Mr Coles QC is correct, the parties never got beyond the stage of an agreement to agree. There was not only the mediation with Mr
Fish, but also both parties acted by solicitors and were very conscious of their legal position and their rights. One would have expected had there been a concluded agreement to release the easement that that would have been documented. Instead one finds that there was a certain degree of negotiation between the parties and then negotiations broke off. I do not consider that the parties got beyond the stage of agreeing to agree. It is also difficult to see how, in the circumstances of this case, there was any consideration flowing from Mr and Mrs Campbell to support any alleged agreement.

The question of agreement also involves an evidentiary issue which I reserved until the hearing of the proceedings. An affidavit by Mr Dunstan, the defendants' solicitor, which is marked DA20, deals with the negotiations between the solicitors and what happened in the mediation with the council.
Many of the letters were marked "Without Prejudice". Section 131(1) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) says that "Evidence is not to be adduced of:- a communication that is made between persons in dispute ...
 in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of the dispute ..".

Subsection (2) provides that that rule does not apply if - "(f) the proceeding in which it is sought to adduce the evidence is a proceeding to enforce an agreement between the persons in dispute to settle the dispute, or a proceeding in which the making of such an agreement is in issue." 
Mr Coles QC says that paragraph (2)(f) of <case> cannot apply because the agreement, even if made, could not have been enforceable because of <case> of the Conveyancing Act.

I admitted the evidence. It seemed to me that if a court had to try on the voire dire the question as to whether an agreement had in fact been made and was enforceable, that would just completely disrupt the trial process and could not be what was intended by the legislature. It is significant that the words in s 131 are "evidence is not be adduced" rather than "evidence is not admissible", but it should be noted that recent cases on the section have in fact used the word "inadmissible"; see eg Bradford versus Bradford [(1995) Fam LR 486.] 
Section 54A of the Conveyancing Act does not affect the validity of the agreement or the fact of an agreement but merely prevents someone suing on it if it is not in writing. Accordingly, the fact that there was no writing does not seem to me to bear on admissibility under <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). However, in the instant case I have in fact found after hearing all the evidence that there was no agreement, so that I should not have admitted affidavit DA20 if <case> means that I have to find that there is an agreement resulting from the discussions before the evidence can be adduced. I believe the only sensible way of reading <case>(f) is that if it is alleged that there is an agreement resulting from the without prejudice discussions, and it appears that such allegation is supportable, the court should, at that stage, allow the evidence to be adduced. Accordingly, even though in the ultimate I have found that there was no agreement, I believe I should admit the evidence.
LACHES.

I cannot see any material which suggests that anyone has been prejudiced by any delay in this case. Accordingly, no defence of laches is sustained.
THE RESULT.

The result of the case is thus that the plaintiff fails on his claim and the defendants fail on their cross claim. I should merely deliver these reasons and leave it up to the parties to put the matter in the list to argue costs if they are so advised. Unless other arrangements are made with my Associate, I will list the matter on Thursday 18 September 1997 at 9.30 am for this purpose.
 * * * 
