

Lawarra Nominees P/L versus Wilson [1996] NSWSC 584 (29 November 1996) 
LAWARRA NOMINEES PTY LIMITED v. WILSON /95: CC 8644/93 November 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY P, HANDLEY JA, POWELL JA 
CATCHWORDS: Workers Compensation - Extent of incapacity for work - appeal against judge's finding of total incapacity - Assessment of amount of compensation 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
Worker employed in landscaping business injured back whilst loading truck -
Successful claim in Compensation Court - Appeal by employer against finding of total incapacity by judge - Whether incapacity for work previously engaged in or total incapacity - Order made for weekly payments by judge - Whether quantum of award excessive - Held: appeal dismissed, the judge's finding of total incapacity was justified and the quantum of the award was not excessive.

Arnotts Snacks Products Pty Ltd versus Yacob <case>; [(1983) 155 CLR 171]; applied 
Holden versus Toll Chadwick Transport Ltd [(1987) 8 NSWLR 222];
Australian Wheat Board versus Pantaleo [(1984) 3 NSWLR 530]; referred to.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: The worker, Mr John Robert Wilson, was at all relevant times employed by the appellant company Lawarra Nominees Pty Limited. In October 1992 and again on 11 January 1993, he suffered injuries to his back in the course of his employment. He brought proceedings for worker's compensation under the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). He claimed total incapacity from work from 15 January 1993. 
On 20 June 1995 Maguire J, a judge of the Compensation Court of New South
Wales, awarded compensation, by way of weekly payments, on the basis that the worker was totally incapacitated. He awarded the worker lump sum compensation under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the Act in respect of a ten per cent loss of the use of the left leg at or above the knee, a ten per cent loss of the right leg at or above the knee and thirty per cent permanent impairment of the worker's back. In addition, he awarded $30,000 compensation under <case>, $15,000 apportioned to past pain and suffering.

The company has appealed to this Court against various aspects of the judge's judgment.

As is not unusual in appeals from the Compensation Court where the appeal is by way of rehearing, a number of grounds have been taken in the notice of appeal, written submissions differently directed have been filed before the hearing relating to grounds in the notice of appeal, and upon the hearing, some of the grounds taken have been pressed, some pressed in a manner somewhat different from what might have been anticipated from the notice of appeal and/or the written submissions. It is not necessary for me to itemise the grounds in the notice of appeal and the written submissions and how they have been dealt with in the written submissions and the oral submissions before this Court. I make these observations to make clear that the grounds of appeal which have been pressed and the extent to which they have been pressed are to be determined by reference to what has taken place at the hearing of the appeal.

Upon the hearing, Mr Hislop QC for the appellant employer and Mr Deakin QC for the worker have, in their helpful arguments, clarified the points which are at issue and have indicated the extent to which they have been pressed or the
Court must deal with them.

In the notice of appeal and the submissions issues were raised as follows: whether the judge made a finding of total incapacity; (2) whether the judge was correct in finding total incapacity; (3) whether the judge was correct in finding the gross weekly earnings, the basis for calculating compensation, to be some $627 per week rather than $358.12; (4) whether the judge was correct in his calculation of the net compensation which should be awarded; (5) whether his Honour erred in calculating the amount of compensation, particularly in relation to the period between 1 October 1994 and 1 December 1994 and whether the compensation for that period should have been $354.80 rather than $355.50; and (6) whether the award of $30,000 under s was appealably excessive.

In referring to these issues it is proper to record that apparently the evidence of the worker Mr Wilson was the subject of detailed scrutiny in cross-examination at the trial. His Honour referred, inter alia, to the "very serious allegation" made by counsel in cross-examination that the worker's account of the effects of his injuries, at least at a particular time, "was an invention". The trial judge evidently rejected that submission. I infer from his findings that he accepted that the worker was credible and that the account he gave of what had occurred to him and thereafter was accurate.

THE JUDGMENT: 
In view of the submissions made in the written submissions and, to an extent, in the oral submissions, it is proper to record the findings set forth in the judgment of the trial judge.

The worker was born on 20 November 1948. The employer company was a company with which he was associated. It had initially been concerned in pig-raising on a substantial scale but in or about 1982 commenced the business of landscaping. The worker was employed by the company working in that capacity when he was injured.

The judge noted that the worker had had two previous accidents: in 1985 he was injured working in relation to a patio and had completely recovered from that injury. On 16 May 1986 he was involved in a motor car accident resulting in an injury to his left leg. Again, he had made a complete recovery.

In October 1992, whilst loading a truck with rubbish, throwing timber on to it and shovelling debris, he felt a pain in the small of his back radiating down the left leg just above the knee. On or about 30 October he returned to work.

On 11 January 1993 occurred the injury which, in the judge's finding, caused "the long term damage which results in the case coming to court". The worker had been doing contract lawn-mowing and was loading a domestic type lawn-mower onto a vehicle. He felt "unbelievable pain" in his back radiating down the right leg. He was at that time still suffering pain in the left leg, presumably as the result of the injury of October 1992.

Thereafter, he had extensive treatment for the problems which these injuries had caused. It appeared from the medical evidence that there had been "a mild annular bulging of the L3-L4 and L4-L5 discs". He had five admissions to the
Lawrence Hargrave Hospital, spending in the hospital periods of up to two weeks or so.

In March 1993 he was admitted to St Vincent's Private Hospital in Sydney under the care of Dr Pell, who performed a lumbar laminectomy on 10 March 1993. The judge concluded that, following the operation by Dr Pell, he was still "suffering pain in the back and in each of his lower limbs". He had further treatment at the Lawrence Hargrave Hospital and the St Vincent's Private
Hospital. He was thereafter "reviewed by Dr Manohar and by Dr Pell a number of times since then".

On 11 September 1993 the company (through its insurer) ceased making the weekly payments of compensation which to that time it had been making. His
Honour said: "That is a remarkable state of affairs because so far as appears from the evidence, no medical examination had yet been conducted on behalf of the insurance company up to that time. Medical examinations were indeed conducted in January of 1994." 
He was then seen by three doctors representing the employer and its insurer; his Honour noted that the employer "has chosen not to adduce any evidence at all from any of those three medical practitioners".

His Honour then referred to the assessments of the worker's condition thereafter. In February 1994 the worker gave to Dr Pell "a history of residual low back pain and pain in the left leg" with "numbness persisting in the outer aspect to the right foot and burning in both heels". The judge observed: "Thus it is plain that almost 12 months after the surgical procedure the applicant was still suffering pain in the back and affects in each of the lower limbs." 
On 26 May 1994 the worker was reviewed by a specialist consultant Dr John
Segelov. The judge saw Dr Segelov as having agreed to Dr Pell's assessment of back impairment at thirty per cent; Dr Segelov was of the opinion that the worker had a permanent loss of efficient use of each of the lower limbs at or below the knee of ten per cent. The judge formally accepted Dr Segelov's various assessments.

The judge then said: "The applicant has given accounts of various endeavours that he has undertaken or endeavoured to undertake to rehabilitate himself into the work force. It is quite plain that he will never return to pig farming or the heavy duties involved in landscaping. There are, he says, less demanding tasks that he would hope to be able to perform, but having regard to the medical evidence and to the applicant's presentation, which struck me as being that of a man in extreme pain in his back (sic). On each occasion that I saw him in the court room he did not demonstrate any capacity for work of any kind.

He has obviously had, and will continue to have, a very bad time with this back and with these legs, and I have no doubt that the pain and discomfort involved in the treatment and otherwise thus far and into the future is quite debilitating. There must be an extraordinary amount of anxiety involved and that will be reflected in the appropriate way." 
On the basis of what he had said, the judge made the findings of, inter alia, incapacity to which I have referred.

THE JUDGE'S FINDING: 
The first submission relates to the judge's finding. It was submitted, as a preliminary submission, that the judge had not made a formal finding of total incapacity. The judge had, after detailing the matters to which I have referred, proceeded to "make the following findings ... ". The relevant finding was "3. As a result of the aforesaid injuries, the applicant has been and remains incapacitated for his pre-injury employment." 
The submission pointed to the fact that the finding was not one of total incapacity generally but only incapacity "for his pre-injury employment". The submission suggested that for this reason it was wrong for the judge to have assessed weekly compensation upon the basis of total incapacity.

I do not think that effect should be given to that submission. It is in my opinion clear that the judge had reached the conclusion that, at the relevant times, the worker was totally incapacitated, not merely for his pre-injury employment but generally. This, I am satisfied, was the thrust of his findings previously in his judgment and, in his observation of the applicant in court, he recorded that "he did not demonstrate any capacity for work of any kind".
What is the finding of the judge in matters of this kind is not to be taken simply from the "findings" which ordinarily judges of the Compensation Court record in separate numbered paragraphs. It is convenient and of assistance that they record their findings in this way. But what they say is, of course, to be understood against the background of the reasons that they had given for the orders that are made. I am satisfied that the judge found and acted upon total incapacity.

WAS A FINDING OF TOTAL INCAPACITY WARRANTED? 
This was, as Mr Hislop QC indicated, the central issue in the appeal. The issue was approached, in my opinion, correctly, upon the basis that the judge had accepted the worker as a witness of credit in the sense to which I have referred. There was no significant contest as to the basic facts detailed in the evidence. The submissions made were made essentially upon the basis that the basic facts as found should be accepted: at least, that in my opinion is the approach which should be made. What was in issue in this regard was whether it was proper for the judge to draw the conclusion of total incapacity.

The submissions were put in various ways. However, in the main, two things were suggested. First, it was submitted that the judge did not take account, or proper account, of the fact that (as it was suggested) part of the plaintiff's incapacity resulted not from the compensable injuries of October and January 1993, but from subsequent and separate incapacities resulting from an injury to his neck which occurred at a date towards the end of 1993.
What occurred in relation to his neck is not completely clear. However, it appears that for a short time the worker was working with his brother in a jewellery business. Whether because of the nature of the work being done or because of some individual trauma, he ceased employment with his brother: what occurred produced pain and related symptoms in his neck and his right arm. For this reason he ceased swimming and had other problems.

The injury to the neck and the effect on the right arm were not dealt with in detail in the judge's reasons. He did not spell out in terms the effect they had when he determined whether and to what extent the compensable injuries resulted in the incapacity the worker claimed. Subject to what I shall say, I shall assume for purposes of the present proceeding that the onus lay upon the worker to establish that the total incapacity that he claimed resulted or would have resulted from the compensable injuries had the neck problems not arisen. This is the way in which, as I infer, the learned trial judge considered the worker's application.

That leads to the second basis on which this submission was put. The submissions suggested, I think, that the evidence, taken according to its terms insofar as it dealt with the effect of the two compensable injuries (the back injuries) did not establish that the worker was totally incapacitated.
The submissions suggested that, though injured, there were various things which the worker could do: reference was made inter alia to sedentary work and to work in the real estate industry. Accordingly, the submission suggested, the Court should, as on a rehearing, conclude that the worker's incapacity was not total but only partial.

The incapacity for work upon which the right to compensation depends is a physical incapacity for doing work in the labour market in which the employee was working or might reasonably be expected to work: Arnotts Snacks Products
Pty Ltd versus Yacob <case>; [(1983) 155 CLR 171] at 177. That principle has been applied frequently by this
Court: see, eg, Holden versus Toll Chadwick Transport Ltd [(1987) 8 NSWLR ]
at 226-9. As the Arnotts case illustrates, partial incapacity involves the physical incapacity for doing some but not all of such work.

Normally, a court in determining whether a worker is totally or partially incapacitated will, in a practical sense, ordinarily consider two questions: what is the relevant labour market, ie, what work was the worker doing or could he reasonably be expected to do; and of that kind of work, what is he physically able to do.

In considering the second of these, it is necessary to bear in mind that what is in question is capacity or incapacity "for work". The legislation is not concerned merely in the abstract with work or work capacities, as such. It is concerned with the capacity to do work of a particular kind or kinds and in a context which will produce income. I do not wish by what I say to narrow the scope of the inquiry to be undertaken in the assessment of capacity or of compensation. But in assessing whether a worker is wholly or partially incapacitated and to what extent, the Court will ordinarily not be concerned, for example, to determine in an artificial or theoretical situation what he could do if the work available to him would allow him to stand for a time, sit for a time, cease when the pain he suffers became unacceptable, and generally work as, in his condition, he would fairly wish to work. The Court does not, as it were, spell out according to the periods of time which could be spent at work in such a way and what he could do during those periods, the extent of his capacity for work. The exercise is, in my opinion, a more practical exercise. It involves the assessment of a capacity "for work" having regard to the realities of the labour market in which he is to be engaged. The
Compensation Court, within the scope accorded to it in this regard, must assess whether, in a case such as the present, the pain and disabilities from which the worker suffers by reason of his compensable injuries are such that he is able to do those things which will permit him to do work in the relevant labour market. The provisions of, for example, <case> of the Act contemplate in my opinion that, in an appropriate situation, the Court will make assessments of this kind.

In the present case, the injuries to the worker's back were serious. It is clear that he could no longer do the landscape work which previously he had done. It has been suggested that, in such a case, the worker is to be seen to be totally incapacitated unless the employer shows the contrary: cf
Australian Wheat Board versus Pantaleo [(1984) 3 NSWLR 530] at 539. It is not necessary in the present case to determine whether that is the approach to be adopted. I shall assume that the onus of proof upon the worker required that he show incapacity for the things in the "market" to which ordinarily he would be expected to go.

Having regard to the evidence and putting aside what would be the effects of the neck and right arm difficulties to which I have referred, I am satisfied that the judge's finding of total incapacity was justified. In his more recent examination in February 1994, Dr Pell opined that the worker "will have continuing pain both in his low back and cervical spine which hopefully with treatment will be intermittent and will not preclude him from working on a light duties basis". Dr Segelov, in his report of 6 June 1994, saw the worker as "permanently unfit for his previous occupation in landscaping, or for any occupation requiring lifting, repeated bending, or prolonged standing or sitting". That evidence would, in my opinion, suggest the inference that the effect of the medical evidence could be inferred to be that even sedentary work, insofar as it required "prolonged standing or sitting", was work for which he was "permanently unfit".

The worker's evidence warranted further inferences. He referred, inter alia, to the pain from his back. He said that during the period 1993-1994, he was being treated with pethidine and methadone. After his discharge from St
Vincent's Hospital he took pain-killers "but not many" and "at night when I can't sleep".

He thought that he could get a job in real estate management, government departments or the like and he attempted an accountancy course. He did so on the basis that he could get up and walk out whenever he liked. But, as he said, he had pain in his left leg, starting in the buttock or the small of the back and descending down to the knee and that it was sore "all the time". The pain in his back was the worst of his problems, "the neck and the foot would be equal second". He reiterated that "the pain in my neck is with me twenty- four hours a day" and that is to be taken into account. He detailed the condition of his right leg but affirmed that, even walking on uneven ground with shoes, he was "guarded" "because I don't want to jar my back".

He referred in detail to the pain in his left leg, from his buttock or the small of his back. That pain was almost continuous, varying with his activity.
He believed that if his back caused no problem and the only problem was his left leg, that would not stop him "from doing a great deal".

Towards the end of the long cross-examination of the worker, counsel elicited that the worker had pain "in my back virtually three or four hours a day and twisting aggravates it, stepping out aggravates it". His condition was such that he could do domestic work around the house such as ironing and cleaning the dishes. He could not do vacuuming, although he had tried a couple of times, "it's a no no. Sweep the porches and I tried cleaning the windows". He does not particularly like driving "because of my back". "In the initial stages" he used to stop when driving the car, get out and walk around, "I suppose now an hour and a half", but "on some occasions if your back is not feeling too bad you can go from Wollongong to Marrickville without stopping".

It was put to him and he agreed that he could work as a driveway attendant if that meant sitting behind cash registers or standing behind cash registers in the offices but he felt work as a shop assistant was "stretching it" unless he "could sit down".

I have referred to these matters because, in my opinion, the inference to be drawn as to the worker's condition and what he could do depends upon the conclusions to be drawn as to the extent of the pain in the back, the continuing nature of it, and the effect it would have even upon sedentary work or work as an attendant or shop assistant. The assessment of these matters would, I think, have been apt to be affected by what the judge saw of the witness and his general assessment of the significance of the answers given.

I do not think that this Court should disturb the judge's conclusion that he was totally incapacitated for work of the kind that he might be expected to seek and take. His capacity for real estate work and for accounting was not clear. Mr Hislop QC submitted that he had done further training at the TAFE
College in administration and clerical work and that he had completed the real estate course he had undertaken. It was, I think, proper for the judge to hold that the circumstances in relation to this were not clear and that he was not satisfied that the worker could carry out such work on the appropriately sustained basis, on a basis such that he would be able to obtain and hold such work.

THE QUANTUM OF THE WEEKLY PAYMENTS: 
The written material placed before the trial judge was in my opinion sufficient to sustain the order for weekly payments that is here in question.
The judge, in his "findings", concluded that "his average gross weekly wage during the financial year prior to 15 January 1993 was $627 per week".
However, the order that he made was for weekly compensation at rates differing at various times, concluding with an order that the weekly compensation should be "at $298 per week from 2 December 1994 to date and continuing". I see no error in this.

The reference to $627 appears to be taken from the worker's wage schedule in which a claim was made for an award rate of $354.80 per week and to that was added "moneys contributed towards his superannuation fund" totalling $32,610 during the financial year 1991-2. On that basis it was claimed that his pre- injury earnings averaged $627 per week.

Notwithstanding the finding that the judge made, to which I have referred, the actual order was relevantly for $298 per week from 2 December 1994 to date and continuing. That, it would appear, was a proper award, on wage award basis, for a worker with two and then one dependent children. I see no error in what the judge did in this regard.

The objection to the order in respect of the period from 1 October 1994 to 1
December 1994 was not pressed in argument.

THE SECTION 67 AWARD $30,000: 
It was submitted that this was appealably excessive. Having regard to the extent of the pain which the worker suffered and continued to suffer from the back injury, I am satisfied that it was not excessive. I do not think the
Court should intervene in this regard.

For these reasons I am of the opinion that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

HANDLEY JA: I agree with Mahoney P.

POWELL JA: I have read, in draft, the Judgment which has been prepared by Mahoney P in this matter.

I agree with his Honour, for the reasons which he gives, that it was open to
Maguire CCJ to conclude that the Respondent was to be regarded as being totally incapacitated for work.

Once that conclusion is reached, it is clear that the attacks which the
Appellant has sought to mount in respect of the amounts of weekly compensation awarded by Maguire CCJ are totally without substance, for those amounts in no way depended upon his Honour adopting as the Respondent's average weekly earnings the sum of $627.00; on the contrary the amounts incorporated in the formal Award settled by the Registrar of the Compensation Court (see Appeal
Book p.216) - which Award corrects some typographical errors, and some incorrect commencement dates for calculation, appearing in the transcript of his Honour's Judgment (see Appeal Book p.215M-O) - represent no more than the maximum weekly benefits allowable to the Respondent pursuant to [s.37(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s37.html),(c), [79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s79.html) of the Act (see WorkCover NSW Benefits Guide October 1966 Edition p.15) even if his Honour had adopted as the Respondent's average weekly earnings the amount of $358.12 contended for by the Appellant.

I agree with Mahoney P that the amount which Maguire CCJ awarded pursuant to s.67 of the Act was not appealably excessive.

I agree with the orders proposed by Mahoney P.
 * * * 
