

Regina versus Taylor Matter No 72198/98 [1998] NSWSC 762 (14 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
REGINA versus PAUL JOHN TAYLOR /98 July 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: In the application of Paul John Taylor, I regret that I am not prepared to grant bail as having examined the record of the applicant it appears that at a time at which he remained on parole for serious offences he has been charged with further offences of assault in a domestic violence context against his former de facto wife and young child. He is next before the court on 31 July for plea at the Sutherland Local Court. I am informed today that he is pleading not guilty. 
He has a most serious and extensive record, including for personal violence and one conviction for failing to appear. He has given evidence before me and that evidence includes that he intends to live with his new girlfriend's mother who has herself given evidence and acquitted herself in doing so most creditably. He has given evidence that he does not intend to approach the complainant or a Crown witness and is prepared to accept bail on condition that he not do so. He says that he would attend because he respects his girlfriend's mother. He has been involved with that girlfriend for a period of some months, most of which he has spent in custody. The willingness of Ms.
Matai, his girlfriend's mother, to act as surety is most creditable of her and generous. However, in my view, the record of the applicant and the circumstances in which it is said that this offence was committed, are such that I can have confidence that should he have contact with his de facto or the children, circumstances would be such as to create the same climate that it is alleged gave rise to the charges.

I am satisfied that the applicant is likely to commit such further offences if granted bail. These are serious offences of domestic violence, they are accompanied by circumstances, so it is alleged, threatening much more serious violence and I am satisfied that the likelihood of further offences, together with the likely consequences of the commission of such further offences outweighs the applicant's general right to be at liberty.

However, I am refusing bail in this matter in respect of the period between now and 31 July when the matter comes before the Sutherland Local Court and on which occasion the nature of the proceedings and their future conduct will become much more apparent. At present I am told that the applicant is pleading not guilty. I am not aware of what the situation might be for the future at
Sutherland and when the matter might be further listed. That court will be in a better position, as I would hope this court would be, should there be any subsequent application, to ensure the safety by some appropriate mechanism of the de facto wife and children. In those circumstances I would not like it to be thought that s.22A or this refusal by me should stand in the way of the consideration by the Local Court or this court of a future application in which the safety of those persons and the circumstances might be properly dealt with.

But for the moment bail is refused.
 * * * 
