

Regina versus Maharaj Matter No Cca 60558/97 [1998] NSWSC 158 (1 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 May 1998 
REGINA versus PAUL MAHARAJ /97 May 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Beazley JA, Donovan AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEARING DATE: THURSDAY 2 APRIL, 1998 
DELIVERED: Friday 1 May 1998 
FILE NO. 60558/97 
PARTIES: REGINA versus PAUL MAHARAJ 
CORAM: GLEESON CJ, BEAZLEY JA, DONOVAN AJ 
FOR THE APPELLANT: 
COUNSEL: J C PAPAYANNI 
SOLICITOR: RAMRAHKA JENKINS 
FOR THE CROWN: 
COUNSEL: L M B LAMPRATI 
SOLICITOR: S E O'CONNOR 
REGINA versus Paul MAHARAJ 
CRIMINAL LAW - Dishonestly obtaining valuable security by deception - alternative count in indictment - whether alternative charges permissible - whether evidence of operative deception - HELD no material misdirection - alternative counts permissible. 
O R D E R S Appeal against conviction dismissed.  Leave to appeal against sentence granted; appeal dismissed.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ AND BEAZLEY JA: Following a trial in the District Court before his Honour Judge O'Reilly QC and a jury, the appellant was convicted of dishonestly obtaining for himself, by a deception, a valuable security in the form of a cheque in the sum of $50,000. He was sentenced to imprisonment for a fixed term of five months and twenty-six days. He appeals against his conviction. 
This was the appellant's second trial. He had previously been convicted of a different offence, arising out of the same set of circumstances, and had been sentenced to penal servitude for a term of sixteen months, involving a minimum term of twelve months and an additional term of four months. By the time of his second trial he had served six months and four days of that sentence. That accounts for the sentence that was imposed following the second trial. It was equal to the original sentence less the amount of time that had been served.

Following the conviction at his earlier trial the appellant appealed successfully to this court, and a new trial was ordered. (R versus Maharaj, Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported, 14 December 1995).

At the first trial, the appellant had been charged, pursuant to s178A of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , with the offence of fraudulent misappropriation, which carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for seven years. The charge against him was that, having received a valuable security (the cheque for $50,000) upon terms requiring him to account for the proceeds of the same, he had fraudulently omitted to account. The appeal against the conviction at the first trial succeeded on the ground that the trial judge had failed adequately to instruct the jury on the elements of that offence. In allowing the appeal, and ordering a new trial, the court observed that there was ample evidence upon which a jury, properly instructed, could have convicted the appellant.

When it came to the second trial, the Crown repeated the charge under s178A but also charged the appellant, under s178BA, with dishonestly obtaining for himself, by deception, a valuable thing (the cheque for $50,000). The maximum penalty for that offence is imprisonment for five years.

The indictment took the following form. The charge under s178BA, the new charge, constituted the first count. The charge under s178A, which had also been the subject of the first trial, constituted the second count in the indictment, and was expressed as an alternative to the first count.

It may well be that, if the jury had accepted as proved all of the allegations made against the appellant, he could lawfully have been convicted of both offences. However, it is unnecessary to pursue that question, because the case was opened, and later left to the jury, upon the basis that, if they convicted the appellant in respect of the charge under s178BA, there was no need for them to return a verdict in respect of the charge under s178A.

The proceedings against the appellant arose out of a curious business transaction entered into between the appellant and the victim of the alleged fraud, Mr Merlino.

The Crown case was that, in February 1991, the appellant approached Mr Merlino and represented that he could obtain for him, from overseas sources, a substantial loan. Mr Merlino appears to have been a person of little sophistication in matters of commerce. The appellant, for his part, has never been able to give to the police, or anybody else, an account of the transaction which was plausible and coherent.

Mr Merlino, who was in the timber business, gave evidence that, in a conversation he had with the appellant in early February 1991, the appellant told him that he could arrange, from overseas sources, a "soft loan" of $10 million if Mr Merlino "came up with" $100,000. There was no explanation of the meaning of the expression "soft loan". Mr Merlino was told that the loan arrangements would involve the participation of a major insurance company, but he said that the appellant represented to him that the original source of the funds would be the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States of
America. Mr Merlino said that he was unable to raise $100,000, and could only raise $50,000. He had a further conversation with the appellant, and asked whether he could obtain a loan of $5 million for an up front fee of $50,000.
The respondent said that could be arranged.

According to Mr Merlino, the "up front fee" or "deposit" of $50,000 was to be refunded in the event that the loan did not come to fruition.

At the request of the appellant, Mr Merlino obtained a bank cheque for $50,000 payable to Mahasun Finance Corporation Pty Ltd, a company controlled by the appellant, and handed the cheque to the appellant. The cheque was dated 26
February 1991.

No issue was raised, either at the trial or on this appeal, of the kind that was unsuccessfully raised in R versus Parsons (Court of Appeal, Victoria, 24
October 1997, unreported). The fact that the cheque in question was a bank cheque may well have made the case even stronger against the appellant than
Parsons if such a point had been raised.

A letter on the letterhead of Mahasun Finance Corporation Pty Ltd, signed by the appellant as Chairman of that company, dated 26 February 1991, was handed to Mr Merlino as a receipt for the cheque. The letter was in the following terms: "This is to confirm the receipt of fifty thousand dollars, being fully refundable deposit for the procuration of five million dollars soft loan as per loan application.

We further irrevocably guarantee that the full fifty thousand dollars shall be refunded at the draw down of the loan proceeds, or if the loan is not successful." 
There are various uncertainties about the meaning of that document, some of which were examined in the previous judgment of the court. It suffices for present purposes to say that the concluding words appear to mean that, if the loan did not proceed, the $50,000 was to be refunded in full.

The money was paid into the company's bank account. It was withdrawn from that bank account and applied to meet personal expenses of the appellant. No loan was ever arranged. From 1992 to 1994 Mr Merlino attempted unsuccessfully to recover his $50,000. He only managed to recover $5,000. There was a conflict between the evidence of Mr Merlino, and the unsworn statement of the appellant, as to what was said between the two men when Mr Merlino was pressing for either the loan or the return of his money.

In his unsworn statement, the appellant gave an extensive but garbled explanation of what he said were efforts to procure a loan, from overseas sources, for Mr Merlino. He endeavoured to blame Mr Merlino for the fact that the proposed loan transaction did not materialise.

As the earlier judgment of the court demonstrates, the charge under s178A, of fraudulently omitting to account for the proceeds of the cheque for $50,000, involved legal and factual complexities, and it may be inferred that the
Crown's decision to lay, as the primary charge, at the second trial, a charge under s178BA, reflected a desire to avoid those complexities. An allegation of fraudulent failure by a person in a fiduciary capacity to account for the proceeds of a cheque can involve concepts which are not entirely easy to explain to a jury, and there was the problem that the cheque, and its proceeds, went into the bank account of a company, not of the appellant.
However that may be, the Crown evidently decided that it would be simpler to proceed primarily on the basis of an allegation that the appellant had dishonestly obtained the cheque by a deception, even though that offence carried a lesser penalty.

As the case was put to the jury, the second, and alternative charge was explained on the basis that, leaving to one side the participation of the company, the appellant was an agent to obtain a loan of money for Mr Merlino; he received the cheque in a fiduciary capacity; he was obliged, by the terms of the transaction, and by his relationship with the appellant, to account for the proceeds of the cheque; he failed to account for the proceeds of the cheque; and his conduct in that regard was fraudulent.

The first, and primary, charge was put to the jury on the basis that the appellant never had any intention of seeking to obtain a loan for Mr Merlino, and that his only purpose in dealing with Mr Merlino was to relieve him of $50,000 which he never intended to pay back. According to the Crown, "right from the word go it was a scam".

Since the charges were framed in the alternative, and the appellant was convicted of the first charge, this appeal has been concerned only with the first charge.

In order to explain the principal ground of appeal it is necessary to set out the terms of the first charge. They were as follows: "For that (the appellant) on or about 26 February 1991, at Moorebank in the
State of New South Wales, by a deception, namely, by falsely representing to
Anthony John Merlino that a sum of money was required to secure a loan for the said Anthony John Merlino did dishonestly obtain for himself a valuable security, namely, a cheque in the sum of $50,000".

The essence of the Crown case was explained by O'Reilly DCJ to the jury as follows: "The first count you remember I told you it could only be made out if you were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he had a dishonest intention right from the start, that he never intended to do anything about an overseas loan, that he just treated Mr Merlino as a mark, as a suitable mark for a confidence trickster and all he wanted to do was extract the $50,000 and make up for that. The Crown would need to satisfy you about that. And the deception, the
Crown needs to establish a deception, and the deception that is put is that the $50,000 was necessary as, whether you want to call it a deposit or an up front fee or whatever, in the obtaining, or the endeavours to obtain a $5 million loan. What the Crown needs to make out is that there was never any intention to have a deposit or anything at all, it was simply to be an extraction of $50,000 from Mr Merlino." 
The learned judge then went on to explain to the jury the meaning of the concept of dishonesty.

In the written submissions filed on behalf of the Crown in this appeal, the
Crown case was summarised as follows: "Essentially, the Crown case was that the appellant had deceived Merlino into handing over $50,000 by telling him that that amount was required for him to obtain a loan for Merlino, but that in fact, the appellant never intended to secure an overseas loan. He had only wanted to obtain the $50,000 for himself." 
If the essence of the Crown case against the appellant was as summarised in the written submissions of the Crown on this appeal, which are expressed in terms fairly close to the manner in which the trial judge put the case to the jury, then the language in which the count was framed constituted a somewhat oblique method of expressing the substance of the deception allegedly practised upon Mr Merlino by the appellant. What the Crown says it was seeking to establish was that the appellant, never intending to take any steps to seek to procure a loan for Mr Merlino, falsely represented that he had such an intention. For the purposes of s178BA, a deception may include a deception as to the present intentions of the person using the deception.

The substance of the alleged offence against s178BA was dishonestly obtaining the cheque for $50,000 by deception. The particulars of the deception, expressed in the count, were that it was falsely represented to Mr Merlino that a sum of money was required to secure a loan for Mr Merlino. No request for further particulars as to why that representation was false was made on behalf of the appellant. Presumably the chosen method of expressing the particulars of the deception was related to the wording of the letter which was issued by way of receipt for the $50,000, which described the sum as a deposit for the procuration of a $5 million loan. The Crown was alleging that there never was any loan, or any intention to obtain a loan, and it expressed that allegation by saying that it was falsely represented to Mr Merlino that the $50,000 was required to secure a loan for Mr Merlino. Having regard to the way the case was left to the jury, it may have been better if the particulars of the alleged deception had been expressed by saying that the appellant falsely represented that he intended to obtain a loan for Mr Merlino. However, it was not argued at the trial, and it is not argued on this appeal, that the method of expressing the particulars of the deception misled the appellant or his legal representatives. There were a number of ways in which the particulars could have been expressed, but the essence of the Crown case concerning the deception was made clear from the outset.

Prior to the Crown prosecutor's opening there was a motion to quash the count under s178BA on the ground that the Crown should not be permitted to lay alternative charges under ss178BA and 178A. That motion was dismissed. In his judgment on the motion O'Reilly DCJ said: "So that the Crown then assumes the burden, under the proposed first count, of proving that the accused, from the very beginning of the transaction, was acting dishonestly and never intended to do anything about obtaining the loan of five million dollars for Mr Merlino." 
Counsel for the appellant placed primary reliance upon grounds 3 and 4 of the grounds of appeal, which asserted that O'Reilly DCJ should have directed a verdict of acquittal on count 1, and that the jury were given inadequate directions as to the elements of count 1.

The claim that the appellant was entitled to a verdict by direction of count 1 was largely based upon an over-literal interpretation of some answers given by
Mr Merlino in his evidence. It was rightly pointed out that, in order to establish the appellant's guilt, the Crown had to prove that the allegedly false representation was the operative factor inducing Mr Merlino to hand over the valuable security to the appellant. There was ample evidence, including evidence from Mr Merlino, to support the inference that such was the case.
However, on some occasions in the course of his evidence, Mr Merlino said that the reason he handed the cheque over was that he was told the money would be fully refunded if the loan did not go ahead. Mr Merlino was not a man to engage in refined verbal distinctions, and what he obviously intended to say was that his belief that the money would ultimately be refunded if there was no loan was a condition without which he would not have been prepared to hand the cheque over. That, however, is not inconsistent with the proposition that he was induced to hand over the cheque because of the representation that was made to him as to the role the "deposit" or "up front fee" was to play in the proposed loan transaction. That role is described in the letter that was handed to Mr Merlino by way of receipt, and although the description contained in that letter carries its own uncertainties, the substance of the representation that was made to Mr Merlino was that the $50,000 deposit or fee was required by the appellant as part of, and in connection with, a transaction of loan which the appellant intended to arrange, or endeavour to arrange, for the benefit of Mr Merlino. The Crown case was that the appellant never had any such intention, that there never was, and never was intended by the appellant to be, any loan transaction, and that the appellant intended simply to apply the $50,000 for his own benefit, as he in fact did.

There was evidence, including evidence of the conduct of the appellant in relation to the $50,000, and his responses to Mr Merlino's queries about what was happening concerning that loan, which was capable of being regarded by a jury as supporting, beyond reasonable doubt, the conclusion for which the
Crown was contending. O'Reilly DCJ explained the elements of the first charge in a manner that was sufficient for the purposes of the case. Once again, the criticism of the way in which the jury were instructed has been based to a substantial extent upon an unduly strict interpretation of some of the evidence given by Mr Merlino as to what he described as the reason for paying the sum of $50,000. He did not mean to convey that the reason for paying the $50,000 was that he thought he would get it back. That was simply his way of saying what a lawyer would express by saying that the reason for the payment was as explained in the letter of receipt, and he would not have been willing to make the payment but for his belief that the $50,000 would be refunded if the loan transaction did not go ahead.

Grounds 1 and 2 of the grounds of appeal complained about the presence together in the indictment of the first and second counts. This was the subject of the unsuccessful application, at the beginning of the trial, to quash the count under s178BA. The principles of law applicable in this regard were explained by the House of Lords in Reg versus Bellman [[1989] 1 AC 836.
(See] also Reg versus Lockett [[1914] 1 KB 720] and Tsang
Ping Nam versus The Queen [(1982) 74 CrAppR 139).] 
There was no reason why the Crown could not charge the less serious, but more straightforward, offence as the primary charge, and lay the second charge in the alternative. It was noted earlier that it may well have been open to the
Crown to press for a conviction on both counts, but that was not the way the case was conducted or presented. There was a difference in the time at which each of the alleged offences was committed. The first charge related to the time of the obtaining of the cheque, the second charge related to the time of the omission to account for the proceeds of the cheque.

It was argued by counsel for the appellant that there was a necessary legal and factual inconsistency between the two counts. We do not accept that argument, but even if it were correct, it would not have the consequence for which the appellant now contends.

The appellant was not relevantly prejudiced by the manner in which the indictment was framed, or in which the case against him was presented.

The fifth ground of appeal was only faintly argued. It was submitted that
O'Reilly DCJ failed to give the jury adequate instruction as to the meaning of the document on 26 February 1991. If there had been any substance in that complaint it would have been more relevant to the second charge than to the first charge. So far as the first charge is concerned, what was said to the jury about the meaning of the document was adequate to the circumstances of the case.

The final ground of appeal against conviction related to the directions the jury were given as to the distinction between the position of the appellant and the position of the company into whose bank account the cheque was paid.

When O'Reilly DCJ first directed the jury on this subject he made an error which was subsequently drawn to his attention, and which was corrected in further directions. That is not the matter that is the subject of the present complaint.

The charge was that the cheque for $50,000 was obtained by the appellant "for himself". The judge instructed the jury to look at the facts and evidence concerning the relationship between the appellant and the company which he controlled and he said: "You would consider whether the material in the case justifies the conclusion that Mr Maharaj was simply using the company as a vehicle, as his own vehicle." 
The judge gave the jury various references, at different parts of the summing- up, to details of the evidence concerning the relationship between the appellant and the company. He also referred, of course, to the evidence as to the way in which the proceeds of the cheque were applied.

In our view the instructions that the jury were given on this subject were adequate.

The appeal against conviction must be dismissed.

We turn now to the application for leave to appeal against sentence.

It was urged upon O'Reilly DCJ that, because the sentence imposed on the appellant following the first trial had been for an offence carrying a heavier penalty (seven years as against five years), then, quite apart from any other subjective considerations, it would be wrong and unfair to sentence the appellant to a period equal to the unserved portion of the original sentence.
This argument was repeated in this court. We do not consider that O'Reilly DCJ was constrained in such a narrow and technical way. Because the appellant should not have been worse off as a result of his successful appeal, it would have been unfair to impose a sentence which, together with the time earlier served, exceeded the first sentence. But for that consideration, O'Reilly DCJ would have imposed a heavier sentence. He was not obliged to make some further, relatively minor, reduction in sentence to reflect the point now argued.

O'Reilly DCJ took the view, which was open to him, that this was a serious fraud. He paid due regard to the subjective features of the case, including steps taken by the appellant towards rehabilitation. The appellant had given up alcohol and turned to religion. He suffers from certain medical conditions.
He has taken up good works in the Hindu community. We do not consider that the judge failed to give adequate weight to these matters. The sentence imposed was fair.

Leave to appeal against sentence should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

DONOVAN AJ 
I wish to add some comments on the use of alternative charges because I do not think the English law in R versus Bellman [[1989] 1 AC 836] sufficiently explains the principles applicable in this case. Bellman's case concerned the possible rejection of the alternative charges at the time of finding (or not) a prima facie case. This would be at the close of the Crown case. There may be other bases for rejecting alternative charges.

Ground 1 in the present grounds of appeal reads: "His Honour erred in law in not requiring the Crown to elect as to the counts in the indictment." 
Ground 2 reads: "His Honour erred in not finding that there was an abuse of process of the Court and ordering a permanent stay of the proceedings."
The Appellant was charged under s.178BA and 178Aof the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). The details are sufficiently set out in the joint judgment of Gleeson CJ and Beazley JA.
He was charged with charges under both sections in the alternative. Originally the order of charges was s178A as the first charge and s178BA as the second charge, but the Crown at the start of the trial reversed the order. Section
BA required the representation to be false (the word "deception" is used) and the accused to have the dishonest intent at the time the representation was made, that is on 26 February, 1991.

It was submitted that section 178A deals with a transaction which was said to be honest at the time it occurred, but the offender subsequently misappropriates the money or property and the dishonest intent arises later. I do not see that that is necessarily so. In some cases it may be so.

The essence of the Appellant's complaint in the first two grounds of the appeal is that it is not permissible to charge these two offences in the alternative. The [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) has specific provisions for alternative verdicts in some situations. For example [s.115A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s115a.html) specifically permits a jury (for a number of specified charges) to return a verdict of guilty to a lesser charge without an express alternative charge being laid. At common law there were specific offences which similarly permitted an alternative verdict, eg murder, manslaughter. The Appellant's complaint is not that there was an alternative verdict for an offence which was never charged, but rather the two charges should not have been laid and prosecuted. Further, it is said that the learned trial judge should have required the Crown to elect which charge was to proceed. In the absence of that election the trial should have been stayed as an abuse of process.

The Appellant asserts the two charges are inconsistent, that is they have different elements some of which are contradictory. He says that the charges involve contradictory findings. He says that for this reason the charges should not have been allowed to be heard in the alternative. In some circumstances two charges may involve contradictory findings. This is not necessarily so in every case. The Appellant asserts that there are a number of differences in this case and asserts they, or some of them, are contradictory.
One difference claimed is that the first charge required a dishonest intent to be found at a different time from the second charge. Assuming that is so then it would follow that if the jury returned a verdict of guilty on both the present charges there would be an inconsistency which may lead to such verdicts being quashed. That did not happen in this case. The jury returned a verdict of guilty only to the first charge, that is the charge under s.178BA and no verdict was taken on the second charge, the charge under s.178A.

The Appellant says that the differences between the two charges are not only contradictory but fundamental. Apart from the time for dishonest intent the
Appellant asserts that section 178A requires the representation made on 26
February 1991 to be true and s.178BA requires it to be false. He next says the mind of a victim is a relevant element in either charge. It is relevant to the passing of title in the property obtained or later misappropriated. The mind of a victim under s.178BA intends no title or property to pass and under s.178A he intends title to pass. Section.178BA requires the whole transaction to be a sham. Section.178A requires the whole transaction to be genuine. This requires there to be a different state of mind in the victim for each charge, namely intention to pass or not pass title or property. The passing of title seems to me to place a sophisticated method of thought upon the victim both in this case and in cases generally. This would require a legal sophistication which the victim would rarely have. The evidence of any intention of the victim is a matter of inference or interpretation of the evidence for the jury to decide. The evidence of any intention in this case could only come out of the various conversations between the victim, Mr Merlino, and the Appellant and from the documents and in particular the letter of 26 February, 1991. If the intention is relevant at all, that is where it would be found. It may well be that the conversation and the documents could be open to different interpretations, one leading to the passing of title or property and one not leading to the passing of title or property. But the interpretation is a matter for the jury. Further, my view is that it is not an element of the offence under s.178BA that property must pass. Section 178BA uses the word "obtains". It refers to a number of items only one of which is money. It also refers to "a financial benefit". I do not think that a charge under s.178BA would fail simply because no title passed in a financial benefit. Indeed the wording is so wide I consider "obtains" means no more than "gains possession", "uses", "has the benefit of" or the like.

Counsel for the Appellant submitted that obtaining any money or valuable thing or any financial advantage of any kind whatsoever under s.178BA required property to pass. He based this on the meaning of the word "obtains". He referred to comparable English legislation but however that legislation is interpreted, I consider that "obtains" has a much wider meaning than "passing property". It would frequently have a possessory nature. To limit the meaning of "obtain" within s.178BA to circumstances where property passed is to provide an interpretation which is too narrow and is contrary to the wide scope of the wording of the section itself. As I said the section includes the phrase "any financial advantage" and there would clearly be times when a financial advantage does not involve the passing of property or title.

To summarise the list of differences put forward by the Appellant they were: 
BA requires false representation, 178A requires true representation.

BA requires a sham transaction, 178A requires a genuine transaction as at 26 February 1991.

BA requires property to pass, 178A does not.

BA requires dishonesty at 26 March 1991, 178A does not.

BA requires one intent in the mind of the victim, 178A requires a different state of mind.

Counsel for the Appellant in relation to this last submission said that the witness for the crown could not say "I believed A" or "I believed B" and A would satisfy one charge and B would satisfy the other. He continued: "It would be the same as a witness saying A or B committed the crime and the jury being required to convict A or B which would be absurd." 
I agree that the facts in the illustration are not permissible, but I do not think that the analogy is applicable. This is not a situation where there are alternative accused. I point out that there could be no prima facie case in relation to each of the accused if the evidence was ambiguous as in this illustration. The Appellant developed the analogy of charging two individual people for the same offence and offering the jury the opportunity to choose between the two. There is a significant difference between this analogy and the circumstances of the present case. Where two people were charged as above, the Crown would be wilfully charging one person (unidentified at that time) whom the Crown knew was an innocent person. The Crown would be subjecting that innocent person to the serious criminal process of a trial knowing that this was totally unjustified. The Crown in the present case is not doing anything of the sort.

The Crown in this case put the two charges before the jury as being in the alternative. I do not think that they are necessarily alternative charges and that the accused could not have been found guilty of both. For example, although usually for a charge under section178A the representation of the transaction will be genuine and the representation initially made will be true, it may be that the accused could make a false representation intending at all times for the transaction to be a sham and then go on to misappropriate the money. The fact that a fraud may occur later at the time of misappropriation does not exclude the occurrence of fraud at the initial time of the transaction. The two are not mutually exclusive. Accordingly I do not think that as a matter of law the two charges could not be laid and heard.

The question however remains whether, in the circumstances of this case it was appropriate for the Crown and fair to the Appellant for the two charges to be laid.

The principle that two charges or counts can be tried together in one indictment (here in one trial) is well recognised. See R versus Lockett (1914)
KB 720. In R versus Pollitt (1997) 47 Australian Criminal Reports, Beech J recognised that joinder of a substantive charge and a conspiracy could in principle take place, although in the circumstances of the two charges before him he found that the interests of justice did not dictate that the charges be heard together. He therefore ordered the count of conspiracy to be heard separately from the charge of murder (at 179).

The point that arises from Pollit and from Lockett is that it is possible to charge two charges in the present case subject to one matter, namely the trial judge's discretion to ensure fairness and to avoid embarrassment for an accused. A trial judge has a power to require the prosecution to elect. His Honour in this case declined in his discretion to exercise this power and the Appellant submits his Honour was wrong in this decision. The decision involved a discretion. See R versus Lockett at 730 per
Sir Rufus Isaacs CJ relying upon Reg versus Heywood 9 CoxCC479, Reg v
Mitchel 6 State Trials (New series) 599 and Young versus Rex <case>; [(1789) 3 TR 98.] His Lordship said that the principle involved matters of "prudence and discretion" and "that means in substance that if he thinks that the prisoner will be embarrassed by being put upon his trial on an indictment in which there are several counts for distinct felonies, the judge, in order to safeguard the interests of the prisoner and to protect him from any oppression - from any prejudice should either quash the indictment if he thinks it right or should make the prosecution elect upon which of the counts they will proceed." (at )

Later at 731 the Chief Justice set out a passage from Parke B in Rex v
Blackstone <case>; [(1837) 8 C&P 43] where Parke B referred to the old principle that larceny and receiving should not be joined in the same indictment, a principle which has been altered in New South Wales by [s.121](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s121.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). Parke B said that in cases where two charges were not repugnant they could be properly joined in the indictments and he gave the example of forgery and uttering.

The central principle which, as I see it, as laid down in Lockett is that it was for the trial judge to ensure that the prisoner would not be embarrassed in his defence (p.732).
 "In determining whether the overt acts relied upon in support of the offences charged in the counts of the indictment are in substance the same for each offence. It is apparent that if the facts are in substance the same, the overt acts relied upon are the same, and if the overt acts are the same then there is no repugnance in these counts, and the consequence is that they may be charged together in one indictment, and there is no ground upon which we can say that the judge was bound to put the prosecution to its election." 
The overt acts that are said to support the two present charges are not different. However, it may be that the facts alleged may, in some circumstances, be different. The facts which are put forward by the Appellant as being different are what might be called "non overt acts", that is the state of the victim's mind or questions of interpretation about the nature of the transaction arising from the overt acts of the conversations and from the documents. These acts may be different but they are not contradictory. This is so because I believe the two charges may stand together and the accused may have been convicted consistently on both counts. Even if they were contradictory it will not necessarily always follow that it is unfair to an accused if both charges proceed. This will depend on the nature and extent of the contradiction which I will now discuss further.

In Tsang Ping Nam versus R (1982) 74 CrmApp Reports 139 the Privy Council dealt with an appeal by a police officer charged with attempting to pervert the course of justice. He had given evidence at the trial of three colleagues charged with corruption. He had made false statements or committed perjury.
The Crown was unable to prove perjury in relation to a specific statement.
Lord Roskill delivering the judgment of the Board said at 141 that the Crown had averred that it was clear that either the Appellant had committed perjury or had given false information to the investigating officers. Whichever was the case he was guilty of an attempt to pervert the course of justice by his conduct. The Board held that it was illegitimate for the Crown to charge attempts to pervert the course of justice upon the above alternative basis.
That however is an illustration of the common law perjury rule. That rule has been modified in New South Wales by s.392 of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

In Reg versus Bellman [[1989] 1 AC 836] the House of
Lords examined the question. The defendant had been charged with three offences of obtaining property by deception contrary to s.15(1) of the Theft
Act 1968 and three offences of conspiracy to evade prohibition on the importation of controlled drugs in contravention of s.170(2) of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979. The defendant had allegedly obtained sums of money from various individuals by means of false pretences. The pretences were that the money would be used to buy drugs in the United States which would be smuggled into the United Kingdom and sold at a profit. The Crown's alternative case was that if the defendant had not been deceiving those individuals and had in fact been intending to buy drugs in the United States the defendant had conspired with others to evade the prohibition on the importation of controlled drugs. The trial judge in his summing up instructed the jury that the conspiracy counts were alternatives to the counts alleging obtaining property by deception. The judge directed the jury first to consider the conspiracy counts and only if there was an acquittal on the conspiracy counts would be necessary for them to consider the counts of deception. The jury acquitted the defendant on the drug counts but convicted him on the three counts of obtaining property. The Court of Appeal allowed the accused's appeal.

The House of Lords reversed the Court of Appeal decision and held that the primary count and an alternative count which were mutually contradictory might be properly joined in one indictment. The conditions where that would be permitted were where there was a prima facie case established on the primary count and also on the alternative count at the end of the prosecution case. In those circumstance both counts should be left to the jury to determine. This means, in my opinion, that the prima facie case test, if passed, would normally permit alternative counts which were repugnant to be left to the jury. This test cannot be applied until the end of the Crown case. It follows that the Crown may proceed on both charges until the end of the Crown case.
However in my view, a trial judge may, if requested, examine the committal brief to see if there could be a prima facie case as to the various charges and if there is not, reject the alternative charge.

Further, the test does not necessarily mean that in every situation where a prima facie case has been established (or it is expected it will be) in relation to both charges that it is appropriate for the main charge and the alternative charges to be left to the jury. The fact that there is a prima facie case in relation to both is an important factor to be considered by the court, but ultimately it is a question of fairness to the accused, a question of whether there is any embarrassment, a question of whether there are contradictory overt acts, a question of whether the accused may have to prove contradictory matters and, finally, a question of whether the accused may be significantly (or substantially) limited or inhibited in his cross-examination when seeking to reduce the evidence on one point by fear that he may inadvertently establish inculpatory elements of the alternative charge or charges. These matters must be considered before the trial starts and not just at the end of the Crown case.

Of course the question of whether there is a prima facie case concerning both alternative charges is not simply relevant to the question whether alternative charges should be left to the jury. There is a general mandatory principle that if a prima facie case is not made out, even where there is a single charge, the single charge should not be left to the jury. It would seem that
Bellman permits the alternative charges to proceed at least to the conclusion of the prosecution case where there is no prima facie case established at the start of the trial because it is only at that time that the prima facie case is established. At 848G Lord Griffiths said: "An accused is always entitled to have the counts in the indictment considered separately by the judge at the end of the prosecution's evidence and if there is insufficient evidence to provide a prima facie case on any count to have that count withdrawn from the jury. This was the evidential difficulty that faced the prosecution in Tsang Ping - nam versus The Queen, but it does not deal with the problem in a case such as the present where the evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case on either of the two alternative hypotheses and it is for the jury to say on their assessment of the witnesses and the inferences that they are prepared to draw from the evidence as a whole whether they are sure that either hypothesis is correct.

It, of course, goes without saying that if the evidence shows that one of two accused must have committed a crime, but it is impossible to go further and say which of them committed it, both must be acquitted:" see Reg versus Lane CR.App R.5.

I think that the issue of fairness is not entirely limited to the test put forward by Lord Griffiths as I have said above, but the circumstances are infinitely variable. Lord Griffiths noted that counsel had not been able to cite any authority where joinder had been refused on the ground that the facts of the two counts were mutually self-destructive. (P.849) At 847 His Lordship referred to the situation where there was no prima facie case for the alternative charges. He said: "There are, of course, rare situations in which it is clear that the accused has committed a crime but the state of the evidence is such that it is impossible to say which crime he has committed. In such circumstances no prima facie case can be established to support either crime and neither crime can be left to the jury. The classic example arises where a man has given contradictory evidence on oath on two occasions. It is obvious that one statement must be false but in the absence of any evidence to indicate which statement was false it cannot be proved on which occasions the perjury was committed: See Rex versus Harris (1822) Barn. and Ald. 926." 
I accept that repugnancy may require a trial jude to disallow an alternative charge in the circumstances I have outlined above.

I do not see that type of conflict or repugnancy arising in the two charges in the present case. Indeed, as I have said, the two charges may well have both been found against the accused. It was the Crown's choice to proceed with them in the alternative. Next, I note that the overt acts which went to make up the offences were the same in each case. Unlike the perjury example of Lord
Griffiths, here the same transaction is the subject of both charges. Further,
I consider that the basic facts are the same although it may be open to the jury to draw different inferences from the basic facts. Even then the inferences would not necessarily in my opinion be inconsistent, but even if they were I consider that where the inconsistent facts arise only out of the inferential process as in the circumstances of this case, they are not such as to require the Crown to elect and both alternatives may be put to the jury.

On the question of the prima facie case test, I note that at the end of the prosecution case no application was made to the trial judge that there was no prima facie case on either charge and that either charge should be withdrawn from the jury on that basis. Further, I consider that the evidence was capable of supporting each charge and I consider that there was a prima facie case in relation to each charge.

There was nothing in the trial or in the submissions put to this Court which indicated that the accused was embarrassed or prejudiced because he was unable, as a result of the alternative charges to lead evidence in chief to disprove one matter and thereby prove an inculpatory element in the other charge. Indeed, it is hard to see how prejudice could arise. For example, if the accused wished to prove that the original transaction was genuine and thereby avoid the charge under s.178BA it is true that he would then prove what may be an element in the charge under s.178A. Assuming that s.178A could only apply to a situation where the original transaction was genuine (a proposition which I consider doubtful) the proof by the accused that it was genuine is not what I would consider an inculpatory fact. Where the accused is prejudiced because he has to prove an inculpatory fact the situation could, in some circumstances, be different. Here however proving the transaction is genuine is not in reality assisting the Crown to prove the charge under s.178A. Genuineness of the transaction overall is a step in the direction of innocence.

Nevertheless Mr Papyanni, who also appeared for the Appellant at the trial, stated that he had in fact been prejudiced during his cross-examination. He said that, for example, at p.30 of the transcript he had been asking questions of Mr Merlino, the victim, about the loan. Although it does not appear in the trial transcript, he said that he could not ask questions about what Mr
Merlino understood had happened to the $50,000.00. which the Crown said had been paid over to the Appellant pursuant to the deception. There had been cheques drawn for a number of items. One of these cheques was for $27,000.00 and it was asserted by the Appellant that this money had been used to pay to a broker or bank in Japan for the purposes of obtaining the loan. As I understand it Mr Papyanni was here saying that he could not ask questions about that because by doing so he might prove that the original transaction was genuine. That would, so he said, help to establish the charge under s.178A while at the same time helping to disprove the charge under s.178BA. This argument may be superficially attractive, but I do not think that there would have been any prejudice to the accused in establishing that the transaction was genuine. In the general scheme of the trial I consider that this would have assisted to establish in the eyes of the jury that the actions of the
Appellant were not fraudulent. One could argue that this was an intermediate fact on the way to establishing the charge under s.178A, but it was a fact in the accused's favour in the totality of the criminality of both charges because it helped to show an innocent mind at the beginning and from there it could be argued that the innocent mind continued all the way through. Although
I can see circumstances where cross-examination could be inhibited by proceeding on alternative charges, and in such circumstances it may be appropriate for the trial judge to require the Crown to elect, I do not see that that occurred here.

In all other respects I agree with the reasons and orders of Gleeson CJ and
Beazley JA.
 * * * 
