

Regina versus Anthony John Pearson [1997] NSWSC 8 (22 January 1997) 
REGINA versus ANTHONY JOHN PEARSON /97 
WEDNESDAY 22 JANUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT - On application for bail.
 
HIS HONOUR: Anthony John Pearson has applied for bail in respect of a series of charges arising out of an incident on 22 December 1996. The charges include break, enter and commit a felony, assault occasioning actual bodily harm, two charges, assault two charges, malicious damage, resist police, assault police, use offensive weapon to resist arrest, enter dwelling with intent to commit a felony. These charges were preferred about 22 December 1996. The felony the subject of the first charge was, at that stage, assault occasioning actual bodily harm. On 6 January 1997 a further charge of attempted murder was preferred. Bail was apparently granted on 22 December 1996, but refused on 6 January 1997.

The incident on 22 December 1996 has this background according to the Crown.
On Friday 20 December Sylvia Turrif went to her daughter's home at
Collingullie. Her daughter, Lisa, was living in a de facto arrangement with the applicant. When Mrs Turrif went to the home no one was there. She subsequently went to a home at The Rock and following a conversation with the people at that home took two children back to her home at Ganmain, they apparently being children of the daughter Lisa.

About 11 pm on Saturday 21 December 1996 Mrs Turrif received a telephone call from the applicant stating that he wanted the children back. She told the applicant to have Lisa contact her about the children and a short time later
Lisa rang Mrs Turrif and it is alleged by her that Lisa told her not to let the applicant take the children. I interpolate that the contents of that telephone conversation are in dispute. Lisa was going to attend at court and give evidence but illness is said to have prevented her from doing so.

About 1.40 am on the morning of 22 December 1996 the applicant with another man went to the premises of Mr and Mrs Turrif in Ganmain. The applicant attempted to gain entry to the house by the front door and when he was unsuccessful picked up a chair from the front verandah and threw it through the lounge room window smashing the glass.

The Crown alleges that the applicant then entered the lounge room through that window and assaulted Mr Turrif a number of times by punching him about the head, face and body area. According to the Crown the applicant sought the children and when this request was refused by Mr Turrif the applicant continued to assault him, punching and pushing him from the lounge room into the hallway.

At that point Constable Fletcher went to the front door and the applicant walked out to the front verandah.

According to the Crown Constable Fletcher asked the applicant to lie down but the applicant advanced several times on the constable threatening to assault him. The applicant then offered to fight the constable. The applicant continued to advance on the constable, ignoring requests to calm down. He threatened the constable, according to the Crown. The applicant picked up a large rock, again threatened the constable, and threw the rock at him.

The Crown contends that the applicant went back to the front verandah, picked up a chair and threw it through the front lounge room window causing more glass to shatter. He then allegedly threatened Mrs Turrif verbally and placed one of his hands around her throat, gripped it tightly and started to push her backwards. The Crown alleges that the applicant declined to let go of Mrs
Turrif when asked to do so and that the policeman had to take physical action against the applicant to release his hold on Mrs Turrif.

It is the placing of the hands around the throat of Mrs Turrif and squeezing and pushing that constitute the alleged offence of attempted murder. The Crown alleges that the applicant again advanced on the Constable and started to throw punches at him, striking him and knocking his glasses off. The applicant then desisted. Another constable arrived and the applicant was handcuffed.

Mr Turrif Senior received bad bruising and Mrs Turrif suffered extreme soreness to the neck and mouth area which made it difficult for her to talk and swallow.

The Crown alleges that at the time of the incident the applicant was well affected by intoxicating liquor. The applicant received two breaks in one of his arms and a further break in his other arm and he has told me that he suffers from headaches. He says that he was hit across the head with a police baton.

Mr Pearson has told me of the great difficulties he is experiencing in gaol and I readily accept that that is so: both his arms are in plaster and one of his hands is very heavily encased in plaster. The difficulties extend to toileting, showering, shaving and the like and he is vulnerable. I accept that the custody conditions are extremely difficult.

The applicant lives on a property which he leases. It is approximately 35 acres and is portion of a larger property. He breeds horses on that property and the property is in a rural area in a very small country settlement, although the property itself is a large one.

Mr Pearson has effectively had constant employment for many years. He has particular skills in driving heavy road trains of sheep and cattle.

He told me that he had been in the job at Finnemore's for twelve months and he detailed the quality of the horses which he had and the horse equipment. He told me that his car has broken down and as I understood him could not be readily fixed except at some expense and that he had no transport. He relies on a friend who lives nearby, Mr Davenport, to drive him where he wants to go.

Mr Davenport has provided transport. Mr Davenport is prepared to offer to forfeit a sum if the applicant does not comply with his bail undertaking.

The applicant's de facto, Lisa, is presently pregnant and a substantial case has been made out that they could assist each other in their present difficulties if bail were granted.

So far as the applicant's history is concerned there were a couple of matters in 1977 which I think can safely be ignored. They were a long time ago and relatively minor and certainly do not bear upon the matters presently before the court.

In May 1995 the applicant was arrested on a charge of common assault and on 29
August 1995 he was placed on a recognisance to be of good behaviour for two years. The applicant gave evidence that he would stay away from Mr and Mrs
Turrif and that while he and Lisa were anxious to regain custody of the children they would only do so through the court and through their solicitors and that they would not contact the Turrif's direct. It was not in issue that it was probable that that the applicant would attend at court.

Mr Dhanji submitted that with the applicant's arms in plaster and likely to be in plaster for the next three weeks it is improbable that he would be able to do much. He also told me that the grandparents were presently in Gosford. He relied on three references which he tendered. The materials indicate that the
Turrifs are apprehensive and that the police hold fears.

I have not overlooked the evidence of Mr Davenport and Mr Pearson that he would not go to Ganmain where Mr & Mrs Turrif normally live.

Mr Pearson told the court that he did have an alcohol problem. He did not suggest that he was constantly under the influence of alcohol, but on occasions when he drank and drank to excess he did have a problem.

The applicant was on a recognisance at the time of the alleged offences and while I can understand his feelings in relation to the children the ferocity of the attack on both Mrs and Mrs Turrif Senior and the police officer and the applicant's refusal to heed the constable have caused me the gravest concern.

Counsel for the applicant deliberately declined the invitation of the Crown, as he was entitled to do, to adduce any material as to the circumstances of the offence except to say that while Mr Pearson does not dispute that he went to the Turrif's premises, he did dispute some of the other facts.

In the whole of the circumstances, having regard to the ferocity and persistence of the attack and notwithstanding all that can be put on Mr
Pearson's behalf I am of the opinion that bail should be refused.
 * * * 
