

Northern Hardwood Sawmills P/L versus Ble Capital Ltd [1996] NSWSC 114 (8 May )

NORTHERN HARDWOOD SAWMILLS PTY LTD V BLE CAPITAL LTD /95 
Wednesday 8 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced in December 1995 by a mortgagor seeking an order that its mortgagee be restrained from taking possession of a Sawmill at Grafton. For reasons which will appear later, it is not necessary to deal with the detailed facts. Essentially, the basis of the application was that by contract made 8 November 1993, the defendant had, as mortgagee exercising power of sale, sold the Sawmill to the third plaintiff.
The plaintiffs, or one of other of them were in possession of the Sawmill, principally on the basis that that contract was in existence. At the end of
November 1995, the defendant purported to terminate that contract and authorized an agent to take possession of the property.

On 15 December 1995, I made an order restraining the defendant from taking possession of the Sawmill upon the usual undertaking as to damages. I also ordered a timetable for filing of affidavit evidence. I varied this timetable on 31 January 1996 and fixed the hearing for 4 April 1996.

On 4 April 1996, the defendant had complied with the timetable, but the plaintiffs had apparently made no attempt to comply with it at all. On that day, the list was called at 10 am. Appearances in the various matters were recorded and I then dealt with another short matter. The present case was then called on again. At this stage, Mr Lee Aitken of counsel said that the plaintiffs, his clients, wished to discontinue the proceedings. Mr Finch for the defendant, objected, saying that it was no longer possible for the plaintiffs to discontinue as of right. Indeed, there was no right to discontinue at all because the hearing of the proceedings had already commenced. If there was to be a discontinuance, Mr Finch put, it should be on terms that the plaintiffs not sue the defendant again on the present cause of action. Mr Aitken had no instructions to agree to that condition. I reserved my decision. The parties agreed that if there was to be no leave for discontinuance, the only course would be to dismiss the proceedings with costs.

The rules as to discontinuance are now wholly found within Part 21 of the
Supreme Court Rules. Part 21(2) so far as is relevant, provides:- "A party making a claim for relief may, before the beginning of the ... hearing of the proceedings on the claim (but not otherwise), discontinue the proceedings ... with the leave of the court." 
It will be seen that with an immaterial exception, there is no longer any ability to discontinue without leave. Although Part 21 rule 5 of the Supreme
Court Rules provides for consent being given to discontinue, it seems to me this is really no exception as the Court under that rule gives leave to discontinue by consent.

There is thus no right to discontinue as of right, and certainly no right to do so at the time Mr Aitken attempted to do so.

The next question is whether the hearing had been commenced when Mr Aitken made his request for leave to discontinue.

I have not found any direct authority on this matter. There are a series of
American cases which suggest that a trial begins when a jury is called into the box for examination as to their qualifications; see Wilhite versus Agbayani [118 NE (2d) 440] (1954) (Illinois). A criminal trial commences with the arraignment of the accused, see R versus Nicolaidis [(1994) 33 NSWLR 364], 367. It seems to me that a civil hearing begins at least at the time when it is called on for hearing and counsel announce their appearances. This being so, it was too late after the appearances had been taken for Mr Aitken to rise and ask for leave to discontinue.

Had it been competent for Mr Aitken to do so, my view is that leave to discontinue should only have been given on terms that the plaintiffs not sue again. The practice in modern courts is that a person who comes to the barrier and then shies away is not to have the advantage that used to be had under the old rules of non-suit of paying the costs and coming again. As Chitty, LJ said in Fox versus Star Newspaper Co [[1898] 1 QB 636], 639, "after the proceedings have reached a certain stage the plaintiff, who has brought his adversary into court, shall not be able to escape by a side door and avoid the contest. He is then to be no longer dominus litis, and it is for the judge to say whether the action shall be discontinued or not and upon what terms."
See also Robertson versus Purdey [[1906] 2 Ch 615]; Heimann v
Commonwealth of Australia [(1940) 58 WN 2] and Tarleton & Peters Pty Ltd versus McNamara Property Management Ltd,
Young, J, 11 September 1991, unreported, but noted in Mr Leslie's book "Equity and Commercial Practice" para D70:20.

There may be some cases where it would not be just to prevent a party from litigating on the merits. I do not intend by these reasons to say anything to the contrary. However, it seems to me that the case falls fairly and squarely within the general principles I have already adverted to where there is a complete failure of a party to comply with directions for getting the case ready and then there is an application on the morning of the hearing for leave to discontinue.

Accordingly, had there been power to order a discontinuance I only would have exercised that power on condition that the plaintiffs not sue again. As that condition would not have been one which was acceptable to the plaintiffs, the effect would be the same as refusing leave to discontinue.

Accordingly, the only other alternative, that is, dismissal of the proceedings with costs, is the course that must be pursued and that is the order I make.
 * * * 
