

Leeming versus Honeywood and Or [1996] NSWSC 30 (23 February 1996) 
Leeming versus Honeywood & Or /96 
Friday, 23 February 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In substance, the plaintiff is asking for specific performance of an alleged agreement between himself and the first and second defendants, to whom I will refer simply as the defendants, for the settlement of proceedings 16686/85 in the District Court at Sydney in which the defendants were suing the plaintiff for the recovery of $10,000.00 together with interest thereon at 10% per annum from 3 August 1976. In August 1995 the District Court proceedings had been fixed for hearing on 9 February 1996.

The plaintiff claims that the agreement for settlement was arrived at in a telephone conversation between himself and the first defendant at about 7.20pm the previous evening, 8 February 1996. It is common ground that there were in fact two telephone conversations between them that afternoon. There is in fact a record of the second conversation on the Telecom mobile account for the plaintiff's mobile phone which shows a call at 19:17 hours on 8 February 1996 to the first defendant's number which lasted 12 minutes and 7 seconds.

Both the plaintiff and the first defendant have given evidence about the contents of that and the earlier conversation. Neither account goes anywhere near filling up 12 minutes and it is fairly clear that neither account is complete nor, I would add, would it be expected to be complete. However, each deals with what the relevant deponent considered to be the matters of significance.

In order for the plaintiff to succeed it is necessary for him to establish that during that conversation he entered into a legally binding agreement with the defendants for the disposition the following day of the District Court proceedings. In my opinion he has not succeeded in establishing such an agreement for three reasons. The first reason is that on a consideration of the whole of the evidence there is insufficient justification for preferring the plaintiff's account of the critical conversation to that given by the first defendant. I do not propose, in the limited time available this afternoon, to attempt any articulation of an analysis of the whole of the evidence which has been given today, but I draw attention to two particular features of that evidence. The first is that I regard the corroborative evidence of Mr Armitage as unreliable, particularly because his oral evidence was, in significant respects, inconsistent with what was contained in his affidavit. It often happens that oral evidence from a witness is inconsistent with what is in an affidavit, but that is usually accounted for by the lapse of a substantial period of time between the making of the affidavit or the giving of instructions for it on the one hand, and the oral evidence on the other, but Mr Armitage's affidavit was only prepared and sworn this morning.

The second matter is that if the plaintiff had, on the morning of 9 February , believed with any confidence that a binding agreement had been arrived at the previous evening for the settlement of the District Court proceedings, it is difficult to understand why he made no mention of it when making application for an adjournment of the hearing, first to Judge Pain and then to
Judge Garling during the morning of that day. He was apparently driven to support those applications by making what can only be described as misleading statements to those Judges in relation to his solicitor, Mr Cullen. For example, the following appears on the first page of the transcript of the proceedings before Judge Pain: "His Honour: Mr Leeming, do you have any legal representation? 
Defendant: I expected to your Honour, but I have just found out yesterday that my solicitor is doing a court case I believe overseas.

His Honour: What is the name of your solicitor? 
Defendant: Cullen, Jeremy Cullen and I expected him to be here with me today, but due to his circumstances he is unable to attend today." 
And the following appears on the first page of the transcript of the proceedings before Judge Garling: "His Honour: Who is asking for the adjournment? 
Defendant: I am, your Honour. My solicitor, whom I expected to be here with me today, Mr Jeremy Cullen, I am told he is not expected back for another week or so. I expected him to be here today.

His Honour: Mr Cullen is not expected back for a week? 
Defendant: For a week, yes." 
The plaintiff had known for some considerable period of time that Mr Cullen was overseas and was unlikely to be back by 9 February 1996, and on 9 February the plaintiff's belief was that Mr Cullen would not be back for at least fourteen days.

The second reason why I think that the plaintiff's claim has not been established is that even from his own evidence, including particularly that given during cross-examination, I would infer that it was mutually contemplated between the first defendant and the plaintiff that a document was to be prepared by the plaintiff's solicitors and signed before there was a binding commitment. In fact, no such document was prepared and signed.

The third reason is that there is no evidence that the second defendant was a party to any arrangement for settlement reached on 8 February 1996. It may be said, indeed, it has been said by Mr Evatt, that it might be expected that if the first plaintiff agreed to a settlement, then the second plaintiff would also. Be this as it may, as a plaintiff in the District Court proceedings, she would have been a necessary party to any agreement for settlement and although it might have been expected that she would have signed or would have instructed her and her husband's solicitor to have signed the necessary document on the following day, the circumstance that it was necessary to have her bound renders it unlikely that, even on the plaintiff's evidence, it was intended that there be a binding commitment prior to the signing of such a document.

For those reasons, I order that these proceedings be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
