

Mercantile Mutual Insurance Australia Ltd versus Mihaly Csanyi also known as
Michael Csanyi [1996] NSWSC 334 (6 August 1996) 
MERCANTILE MUTUAL INSURANCE AUSTRALIA LTD versus MIHALY CSANYI also known as
MICHAEL CSANYI /95 
TUESDAY 6 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by way of case stated in respect of a judgment given in the Local Court at Manly on 29 November 1994 (T G Cleary Esq LCM) in the sum of $31,146 plus $3,166.19 for interest on a claim arising out of an insurance policy. The relevant facts found by the learned magistrate as set out in the Amended Stated Case are as follows:- "2(a) On 15th February, 1987 the Plaintiff (respondent) attended the
Defendant's (appellant's) premises and completed an application for insurance (Exhibit 1). The Defendant shortly thereafter accepted the Plaintiff's proposal and issued a policy of insurance in favour of the Plaintiff in the form of (Exhibit 3B). It was a term of the policy that: "provided you have paid the premium we will pay the benefit set out in the policy, but subject to the terms and conditions and exclusions which follow." for total disablement the benefit to the Plaintiff would be $500.00 per week for 52 weeks with the exclusion of one week; total disablement is defined as: "where...you become unable to carry out all the normal duties of your usual occupation".
 provided that the amount of benefits payable shall not exceed your earnings; earnings are described as meaning "your average weekly gross income derived from personal exertion".

The policy was renewed and a renewal certificate issued for the period th February, 1988 to 24th February, 1989 (Exhibit 2).

On 5th February, 1989 during the currency of the policy the Plaintiff sustained injury to his left knee when he slipped and fell whilst working at his home.

At the time of proposing for the insurance the Plaintiff informed the
Defendant's representatives that he was not in receipt of wages and that his income was derived from the profit of the sale of his house upon which he was working. The work on the house was to be completed and sold 3 to 4 years hence.

The Plaintiff was not required to produce his income tax return at the time of obtaining the policy of insurance.

Prior to acceptance of the proposal by the Defendant insurer it was mutually known by the parties, that the Plaintiff had no earnings or income in the nature of salary, wages, or other monies.

In the proposal the Plaintiff disclosed that he was a self employed builder who supervised and participated in his occupation with average weekly earnings of $500.00. That weekly income of $500.00 being determined for the purposes of the insurance application and renewals by averaging the estimated improvement to the house, resulting appreciation or appreciated value of the asset he was building.

The Plaintiff had not received wages for work at any time in the past 20 years.

The Plaintiff was assured by the insurer, that he would have no problems in receiving $500.00 per week "for accident, injury etc." 
The value of the efforts of the Plaintiff from personal exertion on an average weekly basis for the 12 months prior to the accident, based on 1989 building rates, exceeded $500.00 per week.

Between 24th February, 1988 and 24th February, 1989 the Plaintiff did not derive any earnings or income by way of salary or wages nor was he in receipt of other monies for his labours in building his house or from any other source by way of personal exertion.

The Plaintiff's work-related accident of 5th February, 1989 has rendered him unable to carry out the normal duties of his occupation as a builder.

The Plaintiff's usual occupation was that of a builder and he had been engaged in that occupation for over 20 years.

The Defendant insurer knew from the outset, that the situation referred to in finding (k) above would arise.

The Plaintiff has not sold (as at the date of trial) the subject house.

The Defendant paid three prior claims made under the policy.

The Plaintiff was totally disabled within the meaning of the policy during the period 5th February, 1989 and 5th February, 1990.

During the 12 months following the accident, the Plaintiff's loss was the inability to continue building his home and his house would not increase in value from his personal exertion. The Plaintiff had no money derived from personal exertion nor could he suffer a monetary loss." 
As appears from his judgment, which was annexed to the Amended Stated Case, the learned Magistrate found that the definition of "earnings" contained within the policy namely "income derived from personal exertion" was ambiguous, that he was accordingly entitled to have regard to the surrounding circumstances as an aid to construction, including the pre-contractual negotiations between the parties, and in the light of those factors he concluded that the respondent's weekly income of $500 (or "earnings") for the purposes of the policy was to be ascertained by averaging the estimated improvement to the house he was building as a self employed builder with a view to appreciation of the asset for resale (judgment at p. 10).

The grounds of his determination were set out in the Amended Stated Case as follows: "3(a) The definition of "earnings" contained within the policy namely "income derived from personal exertion" was and is ambiguous. In the Australian
Concise English Dictionary income is defined as, and I quote: "the money or other assets received, especially periodically, or in a year from one's business, lands, work investments, et cetera." 
Earnings is defined as money earned with no reference to assets in the dictionary meaning. In the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary income is defined, where relevant, as, and I quote: "That which comes in as the periodical produce of one's work, business, lands or investments, commonly expressed in terms of money. Annual or periodical receipts accruing to a person or corporation." 
Earning - with an "s" - is defined as that which is earned by labour. Oddly, earnings is not defined in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary that was made available to me.

I was therefore entitled to admit evidence of pre-contractual negotiations between the parties in aid of construction.

The Plaintiff was entitled to succeed because the presumed intention of the parties when viewed by the reasonable objective person was that the
Plaintiff would be covered for accident or illness during the term of the policy including any period covered by the renewal certificate.

It was mutually known to the parties pre-acceptance that the Plaintiff had no earnings or income from salary, wages or otherwise except from profit from the eventual sale of his house. His weekly income of $500.00 being determined for the purposes of the insurance application and subsequent renewal as mentioned in 2(g) above.

The fact that the house has not been sold was and is irrelevant. To hold otherwise would produce an unjust result.

Where a contract is open to two constructions, it is preferable to apply a construction, which will avoid consequences which appear capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unjust.

Surrounding circumstances in the form of mutually known facts identify the meaning of the phrase "income derived from personal exertion" in the definition of earnings in the policy.

If the meanings of earnings and income attributed to them by the Defendant was accepted, then the policy from its inception would be rendered futile.

By applying the construction that I do, I am giving objective meaning to the policy in order that it will not be rendered manifestly futile and that it accords with the presumed intentions of the parties when viewed by a reasonably intelligent person. It gives weight to the aim, object and commercial purpose of the policy.

The parties negotiated on an agreed basis as to the meaning of "earnings" in the policy document. They have in effect given their own dictionary meaning to the word as a result of their common intention.

Parties may include in their written agreement a definition of a phrase used in that agreement which would indicate they had used that phrase to convey a meaning which it otherwise was not capable of bearing.

The definition of earnings in the policy is capable of meaning "income that is beyond mere monies" and I ascribed that meaning to it.

The fact of payment of the three prior claims cannot be used to construe the policy.

Alternatively, the Plaintiff's Counsel raised the issue of equitable estoppel and the Defendant's Counsel objected on the grounds that it was not raised on the pleadings. I do not believe it was necessary for the Plaintiff to raise the issue on the pleadings.

Having already found for the Plaintiff, it was unnecessary for me to consider the Plaintiff's submissions in relation to the issue of equitable estoppel, but if required to determine the issue, I would have found that the insurer had acted unconscionably in denying the claim." 
The appellant submits that the insurance policy was wholly in writing, its meaning was clear and not ambiguous and "earnings" only covers the periodical receipt of income, and does not include notional income or appreciation in the value of an asset, notwithstanding that such appreciation is brought about by personal exertion.

The policy (described as the "Perfectly Clear Policy") provided that in the event of total disablement the appellant would pay to the respondent the weekly benefits set out in the certificate of insurance, but that such benefits would in no case exceed the appellant's "earnings", which in turn were defined so far as relevant as "average weekly gross income derived from personal exertion (less expenses) averaged over the prior period of twelve months", or over such shorter period as defined.

The words "earnings" and "income" are both words of wide import, and apart from the dictionaries referred to in the Amended Stated Case I note that "earnings" is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary (1981) at 568 as "money earned; wages; profits" and (at 896) "income" as "the returns that come in periodically, especially annually from ones work, property, business, etc; revenue, receipts", and it also gives the secondary meaning of "something that comes in".

I observe that only some of these dictionary definitions refer to the periodicy of the receipts, and in any event the courts ought not be controlled by the meanings given to words in dictionaries: Galcif Pty Ltd versus Dudleys
Corner Pty Ltd & Ors (unreported - Court of Appeal - 16 May 1995) per
Kirby P at 6.

In the legal context, the word "income" is most commonly used (eg taxation, administration of estates etc) in contradistinction to capital, to distinguish repetitive receipts from those of a once and only nature which are commonly referred to as "capital". Notwithstanding this, as Starke J observed in Resch v Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1942) 66 CLR 198] at 213: "Income is as large a word as can be used to denote a person's receipts ...; it signifies that which comes in." 
Even in the income tax field and before the introduction of <case> (a) [Income
Tax Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) (since omitted), which provided that assessable income should include any profit arising from the sale of any property acquired for the purpose of profit making by sale or from the carrying on or carrying out of any profit making undertaking or scheme, it was well established that profits made on the sale of an asset which was not merely the realisation or change of investment but was made in carrying on a scheme for profit-making constituted income: White v Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1968) 120 CLR 191] at 208, McClelland versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1970) 120 CLR 487] at 496.

The learned Magistrate found that the respondent was at the relevant time engaged in building his own house with a view to reselling it at a profit: (Amended Stated Case paras 2 (d)(f)(g)(j)). He was therefore not merely intending to realise an asset but was engaged in carrying on a scheme for profit. Although the moneys to be received in such a manner were accordingly potential profit, such moneys or profits were not going to materialise overnight, but were going to come about by reason of the fact that by his physical exertion he was in the mean time working on the property. In these circumstances, it is irrelevant that the profits on resale had not been received at the time of the defendant's injury on 5 February 1989 because the potential profit on resale, although not received, had been partially "earned" by the personal exertion of the defendant in the work he had himself physically done on the premises, such work being valued by Mr Blake for the twelve months prior to the accident as an amount in excess of $500 per week (Amended Stated Case paragraph 2(j), judgment at p 3).

It follows that "earnings" within the terms of the policy included the value of the defendant's labour in working on his own home which he was intending to sell when complete as part of a profit making scheme; and accordingly no question of ambiguity arises, and it is not necessary or relevant to have regard to the surrounding circumstances.

However, if I am wrong in this construction of the word "earnings", that word in the policy must in my view be regarded as ambiguous. Such ambiguity arises in the present case firstly from the very general nature of the words "earnings" and "income" respectively. Alternatively, such ambiguity is latent and becomes apparent when the surrounding circumstances are examined. It was submitted that the language of the policy was plain and without ambiguity, and that it was only by admitting the oral evidence that the alleged ambiguity presented itself. But that is the nature of latent, as opposed to patent, ambiguity namely that the word or phrase has two or more plausible meanings when read by an ordinary intelligent reader with knowledge of the surrounding circumstances: Burns Philp Hardware Ltd versus Howard Chia Pty Ltd [(1987) 8
NSWLR 642] at 657, State Lotteries Office versus Burgin (unreported, Court of Appeal, 19 May 1993) at 6-7, B & B Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v
Brian A Cheeseman & Associates Pty Ltd [(1994) 35 NSWLR 227] at 235.

The parties to a document can agree on one of two or more possible meanings for a word or phrase in a document, but they cannot agree that the word or phrase should have a special meaning which it is not capable of bearing:
Trawl Industries of Australia Pty Ltd versus Effem Foods Pty Ltd [(1992) 27 NSWLR ]
at 361; and if the words are unambiguous they cannot be ignored or put aside; notwithstanding that the result is considered to be inconvenient or unjust:
Australian Broadcasting Commission versus Australian Performing Rights Society <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] at 109 per Gibbs J but his Honour went on: "On the other hand, if the language is open to two constructions, that will be preferred which will avoid consequences which appear to be capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unjust, even though the construction adopted is not the most obvious, or the most grammatically accurate".

In C E Heath Underwriting and Insurers (Aust) Pty Ltd versus Edwards Dunlop &
Co Ltd <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 535], Deane J at 541-2 (albeit in a dissenting judgment) referred to the "settled rule of construction" that if there be difficulty or obscurity of meaning the words of an instrument are to be interpreted more strongly against him or her whose instrument it is and said that such rule was "particularly applicable to contracts of insurance". His Honour went on: "... the courts should avoid a construction of a policy of insurance which has the effect that the insured, having paid a premium to be indemnified against loss caused by a particular kind of occurrence, is subjected to a new risk of not being insured against a loss of that kind by reason of the ambiguity or obscurity of the language which the insurer has seen fit to use in its policy".

The majority of the Court at 548 found that the relevant policy was not "obscurely worded" in any relevant sense and consequently there was no scope for the application of the contra proferentem rule referred to by Deane J.

The principles relating to the use of extrinsic evidence in the construction of a document were recently summarised by the Court of Appeal in State
Lotteries Office versus Burgin (supra) at 5-7, and see also B and B Constructions
Pty Ltd versus Brian A Cheeseman and Associates Pty Ltd (supra) at 233-6.

In the present case an examination of the surrounding circumstances (including what was said by the negotiating parties with reference to the respondent not having a regular income and working on his own house with a view to realising a profit thereon in a further three or four years time) indicates that the ordinary intelligent reader knowing those facts and looking at the context in which the words were used in the document would realise that in that context the word "earnings" may have more than one meaning. Such (latent) ambiguity entitled the magistrate to look at the surrounding circumstances for the purposes of construing the document, though not for the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the parties: Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v
State Rail Authority of NSW <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] at 352.

Those surrounding circumstances included the nature of the document, namely a personal accident policy to provide income during such period as the respondent was unable to carry on work as a builder, the fact that the respondent was not in receipt of regular income but did supervising work and was building his own house on which he expected to realise a profit in three or four years time, and of which matters he informed the appellant's representative with whom he completed the proposal and from whom he purchased the policy. This examination of the surrounding circumstances is what the magistrate did, and in the light thereof he concluded that the presumed intention of the parties when viewed by the reasonable objective person was that the respondent would be covered for accident or illness during the term of the policy including any renewals thereof, and that it was mutually known to the parties that the respondent had no earnings or income except from profit from the eventual sale of his house and that such surrounding circumstances in the form of mutually known facts identified the meaning of the phrase "income derived by personal exertion" in the definition of "earnings" in the policy (see Amended Stated Case para 3 (c)(d)(g)). Such an approach was open to the magistrate and discloses no error of law.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the magistrate had admitted evidence of pre-contractual negotiations to interpret the contract having regard to one of the parties' alleged actual intentions. If he had done so this would have been an error, but it was not what he did; at both the Amended
Stated Case para 3(i) and page 10 of the judgment the learned Magistrate referred not to the intention of one of the parties but "to the presumed intention of the parties (plural) when viewed objectively by a reasonably intelligent person".

It was also submitted that the respondent had failed to show a loss within the terms of the policy because the house had not been sold, that there was no evidence that prior to completing the proposal in February 1987 the defendant had commenced work on the house, and that there was no evidence of the value of the work which was not done in the year commencing 5 February 1989 (the date of the accident) but in my view, none of these matters was fatal to the respondent's claim. Having determined the meaning of "earnings" for the purpose of the policy the magistrate accepted the evidence of Mr Bate and found that the value of the efforts of the plaintiff from personal exertion (on the building of his house) on an average weekly basis for the 12 months prior to the accident, based on 1989 building rates, exceeded $500 per week (Amended Stated Case para 2(j)). Such a finding satisfied the limit in clause .1 of the Policy and the respondent was accordingly entitled to indemnity.

As to equitable estoppel, the learned magistrate found it unnecessary to consider the issue and made no relevant findings on it; although he said that if required to determine the matter he would have found that the insurer had acted unconscionably. It is likewise unnecessary for me to consider this issue, and in the absence of relevant findings of fact, I am in any event unable to do so.

There are some matters raised in the evidence and exhibits (both of which were annexed to the Amended Stated Case) in submissions which cause concern including the sale of the respondent's building business for $269,000 on 17
May 1989 (some three months after the accident), the nature and extent (if any) of such business during the twelve months prior to the respondent's relevant injury, his periods of unemployment benefits during that twelve month period (namely 14 October 1987 to 27 June 1988 and 11 July 1988 to 4 October ) and whether such periods can be reconciled with the plaintiff working on building his house during such time.

However, this is an appeal by way of Stated Case ([Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) [s )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s101.html), not an appeal by way of rehearing; and I am accordingly confined to the issues raised by the Stated Case namely the construction of the terms "earnings" and "income" in the policy and whether it was open to the learned Magistrate to find that the respondent had shown a loss within the terms of the policy entitling him to indemnity. The limited nature of an appeal by way of Stated
Case was recently discussed by the Court of Appeal in Allen versus Kerr (unreported - 7 August 1995).

For these reasons I am not satisfied that any error of law has been shown and the question raised in the Stated Case should be answered "no". Accordingly the Summons is dismissed and I order the appellant to pay the respondents costs.
 * * * 
