

Australian Convention and Exhibition Services Pty Ltd versus Sydney City
Council Matter Nos Ca 40429/97; Ca 40430/97 [1998] NSWSC 682 (17 December )

Last Updated: 14 January 1999 
AUSTRALIAN CONVENTION & EXHIBITION SERVICES PTY LTD versus SYDNEY CITY COUNCIL 
CA 40429/97; CA 40430/97 December 1998 
Handley JA, Powell JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Land and Environment Court (Sheahan J) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40429/97; CA 40430/97 
LEC 30166/96; LEC 30167/96 
DELIVERED: Thursday 17 December 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 6 November 1998 
PARTIES: AUSTRALIAN CONVENTION & EXHIBITION SERVICES PTY LTD versus SYDNEY CITY COUNCIL 
JUDGMENT OF: Handley JA, Powell JA, Beazley JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: D F Jackson QC/J S Robson 
Respondent: M H Tobias QC/J J Webster 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Deacons Graham & James 
Respondent: Dunhill Madden Butler 
CATCHWORDS: 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT - Darling Harbour Authority Act 1984  - RATEABILITY
OF LAND - [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/)  
LEASE - LAND OCCUPIED BY CONTRACTORS CARRYING ON BUSINESS FOR OWNER 
POSSESSION - LAND OCCUPIED BY CONTRACTORS CARRYING ON BUSINESS FOR OWNER 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 16 
AUSTRALIAN CONVENTION & EXHIBITION SERVICES PTY LTD versus SYDNEY CITY COUNCIL 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT - Darling Harbour Authority Act 1984  - RATEABILITY OF LAND - [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/)  
LEASE - LAND OCCUPIED BY CONTRACTORS CARRYING ON BUSINESS FOR OWNER 
POSSESSION - LAND OCCUPIED BY CONTRACTORS CARRYING ON BUSINESS FOR OWNER 
The Council sought to levy rates on a group of buildings at Darling Harbour vested in the Darling Harbour Authority, a statutory corporation constituted by the Darling Harbour Authority Act 1984 . The Authority conducted the business of a convention and exhibition centre in the buildings through the appellant (the Contractor), and Darling Harbour Convention and Exhibition
Pty Ltd (the Manager) pursuant to the terms of a management deed between the parties. The respondent Council issued a rate notice to the Contractor for the rating year which the Contractor unsuccessfully challenged in the Land and Environment Court. On appeal to the Court of Appeal.

HELD: Allowing the appeals: (1) The Authority was a statutory corporation representing the Crown. (2) The Contractor and Manager were exempt from rates under [s 555(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s555.html) of the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/)  because they occupied the land as agents and contractors of the Authority and not as lessees or licensees conducting businesses of their own. Smith versus Seghill Overseers [(1875) LR 10 QB 422] considered. 
ORDERS 
Appeals allowed with costs.

Set aside the decisions of the Land and Environment Court and in lieu thereof order that the appeals to that Court be allowed with costs.

The respondent to have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if entitled.

AUSTRALIAN CONVENTION & EXHIBITION SERVICES PTY LTD versus SYDNEY CITY COUNCIL 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: Australian Convention & Exhibition Services Pty Ltd is the Contractor, and Darling Harbour Convention & Exhibition Pty Ltd the Manager, under a deed dated 26 October 1992 entered into with the Darling Harbour Authority. This applies to the Convention Centre, the Exhibition Centre, the Link building and the carpark at Darling Harbour (the Centre). The freehold title to these properties is vested in the Authority, a statutory corporation constituted by the Darling Harbour Authority Act 1984 . Section 6(2)(a) deems the Authority to be a statutory body representing the Crown and <case>(b) makes it subject to the control and direction of the Minister. The Authority is therefore the Crown for the purposes of the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) (the Act). See Prospect County Council versus Blue Mountains City Council [(1992) 28 NSWLR 301], 318-9. 
On 8 November 1996 the City Council issued rate assessment notices to the
Contractor in respect of the Centre for the rating year ending 30 June 1997.
The Contractor appealed against the notices to the Land and Environment Court (the Court) in its Class 3 jurisdiction. The appeals were dismissed by Sheahan
J and the Contractor has appealed to this Court. The appeal is limited to questions of law.

The question is whether the Centre is exempt from rating under <case>(a) of the Act which provides that: "The following land is exempt from all rates: 
Land owned by the Crown, not being land held under a lease for private purposes".

The Centre is land owned by the Crown. Lease is defined by par (b) of the definition in the Act's dictionary as including, in relation to Crown land, "a licence, permit, permission, occupancy or authority", subject to certain exclusions not presently relevant. The rateability of the Contractor therefore depends on whether it held the Centre under a lease (or licence) from the
Authority "for private purposes".

The Contractor contended that the deed did not grant it either a lease or a licence, and in particular did not grant it a licence which could attract liability to rates under par (b) of the definition of lease. This could have created difficulties under <case> of the Act which conferred a right of appeal to the Court on "a person who has an estate in land, or who is the holder of a licence or permit for land under the [Crown Lands Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla1989134/) , in respect of which a rates and charges notice is served ...". The Contractor contends that it is not such a person but has purported to appeal to the
Court. The Council has not objected to the competency of the appeal, and the point was not raised during argument. In my judgment the appeals should be determined on their merits. Even if they were incompetent, the Contractor could probably have raised the validity of the assessments as a defence to recovery proceedings, and the Authority may have been a competent appellant under <case>, although the rate notices were directed to the Contractor.

The appeal turns on the construction of the deed as amended by a further deed of 1 March 1993. The Council did not contend that it was a sham or failed to reflect the true legal relationship between the parties. Compare Ex parte
Robert John Pty Ltd versus Fostars Shoes Pty Ltd (1962) 63 SR 260. The deed contained contracts between the Authority and the Contractor, and between the
Authority and the Manager. The rate notices were not issued to, or served on, the Manager and it is not a party to these proceedings, but Mr Jackson QC for the appellant did not attempt to distinguish between the position of the two companies.

The appeals should succeed if the Contractor was not rateable under s (1)(a) even if the Manager was, but the proceedings may have been conducted on an agreed or conventional basis that was not disclosed to the Court. A possible distinction between the position of the two companies was not raised during argument. In these circumstances I will consider the position of both companies.
 [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla1989134/index.html#p4) of the deed contained the Contractor's obligations. By cl 3.1 the Authority appointed it and the Manager the sole operators and Managers of the Centre on the terms of the deed for a term, as amended, of 5 years and 2 months. The
Authority covenanted to pay the Contractor the management fee provided in
Schedule 1. This was based on the operating profit of the Centre, defined in cl 1.1 as the operating revenue minus expenses. The operating revenue meant "all income collected, received or receivable by the Manager on behalf of the
Authority for or in respect of the Centre ...". The expenses which were exhaustively defined were those of operating the Centre whether paid by the
Authority or the Manager, with some exclusions including the management fee and general municipal rates payable by the Authority on the Centre. The management fee was structured to provide an incentive for the Contractor and to reward it if it succeeded in increasing the profits of the Centre.

By cl 4.1 the Contractor, subject to and in accordance with the provisions of annual plans, had "the authority and responsibility" for, the performance by the Manager of the day-to-day management and operation of the Centre, the determination of the operating policy, the supervision and direction of the marketing policy, and "the determination of all terms for the use of or admittance to the Centre and all parts thereof". By cl 4.3 the Contractor must cause the Manager to manage the Centre so as to achieve the objectives of the deed, and perform its obligations.
 [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla1989134/index.html#p5) contained the Manager's obligations. Under cl 5.1 it must manage and operate the Centre in an efficient, professional and diligent manner to achieve the objectives of the deed. Under sub cl (d) it must collect in a timely manner all revenues in respect of the Centre, hold them "on trust for the Authority" and deal with them in accordance with [Part .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla1989134/index.html#p8)
Under sub cl (f), subject to certain exceptions, it may not make or incur any expenditure not authorised under the relevant budget or otherwise approved in writing by the Authority.

Under cl 5.1 (d) the Manager must enter into the contracts authorised or contemplated by the relevant annual plan for the provision of services for the
Centre, and for the acquisition and installation of plant and equipment. Under sub cl (h) it must not, without the Authority's prior written approval, enter into any contracts or agreements in respect of the management or operation of the Centre, other than future bookings, which extend beyond the termination date.

Under sub cl (l) it must engage all necessary staff who, unless the Authority otherwise agrees, are to be employees of the Manager which is to be responsible for their remuneration and other entitlements. The Manager's executive staff are to be full time employees (sub cl (m)). Clause 6.6(a) provides that neither company will enter into contracts as the agent of the
Authority except as expressly provided for in the deed. Sub cl (b) provides that contracts for the acquisition of property must be detailed in an annual plan or have the prior approval of the Authority, and shall be entered into by the Manager as agent of the Authority. Sub cl (c) provides that contracts for the provision of services shall be entered into by the Manager in its personal capacity.

Under cl 8.1 the Authority is to establish "the banking account", defined in cl 1.1 as the banking account in the name of the Authority in respect of the
Centre. Clause 8.2 obliges the Manager to deposit daily into this account all monies received from the operation and management of the Centre. Under cl 8.3 the Authority is to establish the Imprest Account from which the Manager is entitled to make payments "for the purposes of paying debts of the Authority properly incurred by the Manager as agent of the Authority pursuant to this deed". The Manager is to establish the Manager's account to pay debts properly incurred in its personal capacity for which it is entitled to be reimbursed by the Authority.

Clause 8.6 obliges it to maintain full and adequate books of account and other records which are to be the property of the Authority available for its inspection on request. Clause 9.1 entitles the Manager to draw upon its account or the imprest account as appropriate to pay expenses incurred in its personal capacity, or as agent of the Authority, in accordance with the deed and the relevant annual plan. The expenses so payable include the costs, expenses and charges incurred in operating the Centre and (g) "all rates and taxes, charges and assessments payable to any public, municipal, governmental or semi-governmental body or authority levied or assessed on or in respect of the Centre".

Clause 12.5, which was strongly relied upon by Mr Tobias, provides: "Upon expiry or termination of its appointment, the Contractor and Manager shall relinquish to the Authority or as the Authority directs, possession, custody and control of the Centre and any property of the Authority in the possession of or under the custody or control of the Contractor or the Manager ...".

Clause 20.5 provides: "Nothing in this deed will be construed to create or confer a lease or tenancy of any kind or any estate or interest upon or in favour of the Manager or the
Contractor in respect of the Centre or any part thereof and the Authority, the
Manager and the Contractor hereby expressly negative the creation of any such leasehold and tenancy rights and any such estate or interest ... The Authority and its nominees have the right at any time to have access to any part of the
Centre for inspection".

The deed does not, in terms, grant any right of exclusive possession to either the Contractor or the Manager. They are appointed "sole operators and
Managers", but that does not confer a right to exclusive possession. Mr Tobias relied on their obligation under cl 12.5 to relinquish "possession, custody and control" of the Centre, submitting that one cannot relinquish what one never had.

The Contractor and Manager certainly had de-facto possession of the Centre under the deed, but this was not possession to the exclusion of the Authority, but possession on its behalf. The clause does not evidence any right to possession against the Authority.

Clause 20.5, which negatives the existence of a lease, is not conclusive but tends to deny any right to exclude the Authority. It is also important that the Authority has the right "at any time" to access to any part of the Centre.
Although this is limited to access for the purpose of inspection, it shows that the companies have no right to exclude the Authority.

The decisive factor in my judgment is that the companies are managing and operating the Centre as agents for the Authority. The Authority is entitled to the gross receipts and liable for the operating expenses. It is entitled to the nett profits after payment of the management fee and bears the risk of any loss. The Contractor and Manager, although incorporated and employers of staff are in the same position as a natural person employed as a servant or agent to manage a business for another. The case is similar to Austcorp Hotels Pty Ltd v 179 Elizabeth Street Pty Ltd (unreported, 16 December 1993) where this
Court held that a company employed to manage an hotel for another did not have any right to exclusive possession against the owner, and could not maintain a caveat.

This conclusion is supported by the decisions which establish that an employee, required to reside in a house in order to perform his duties, occupies as an employee and not as a tenant. The principle was stated by
Mellor J in Smith versus Seghill Overseers [(1875) LR 10 QB 422] at -9: "Those cases establish the principles by which we must be governed. Where the occupation is necessary for the performance of services, and the occupier is required to reside in the house in order to perform those services, the occupation being strictly ancillary to the performance of the duties which the occupier has to perform, the occupation is that of a servant ... in order to constitute an occupation as a servant, it must be an occupation ancillary to the performance of the duties which the occupier has engaged to perform. Here the occupation is not connected with the performance of the employment, and the appellants, therefore, occupy as tenants".

This and other cases were applied in H A Warner Pty Ltd versus Williams <case>; [(1946) 73 CLR 421] where Dixon J said at 429: "The question is whether the employee occupies the premises as employee, by virtue of his service, so that his occupation ... is that of his employer, or occupies them in the character of a tenant ... if the occupation of the premises is subservient to and necessary to the service then it is that of the master ... The relation of landlord and tenant cannot be created by the appropriation of a particular house to an officer or servant as his residence where such appropriation is made with a view, not to the remuneration of the occupier, but to the interest of the employer and to the more effectual performance of the service required from such officer or servant".

The companies occupy the Centre to perform their duties under the deed. Their occupation is therefore that of the Authority, and neither is a lessee.

It is still necessary to consider whether the companies are licensees so as to be deemed lessees for the purposes of <case>(a). In Sydney City Council v
Garbett Pty Ltd [(1993) 80 LGERA 289], 302-3 I indicated reservations about the extent to which licensees of Crown land can be rateable as deemed lessees under this provision and this case has only strengthened my reservations.

Para (b) of the definition of lease deals with Crown land and in it the word "licence" appears in association with permits and statutory rights of occupation under the Forestry Act 1989 and the Mining Act. This suggests that the licences referred to are those arising under statute. This construction is supported by <case> of the Act which confers a right of appeal against a rates and charges notice on persons who have an estate in land, or who are "the holder of a licence or permit for land under the [Crown
Lands Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla1989134/) ".

There are some contractual licences such as those involved in Wintergarten
Theatre (London) Ltd versus Millennium Productions Ltd [[1948] AC 173] and Playgoers'
Co-operative Theatres Ltd versus The Workers' Educational Association [(1955) 72
WN 374], which might be sufficiently similar to leases to receive the same treatment for rating purposes. However in those cases the licensees conducted their own businesses and were in no sense servants or agents of the owner. Compare Dudgeon versus Chie <case>; [(1955) 92 CLR 342] where a share farmer was held to be a licensee and not a tenant. It is not necessary to express any concluded view on the position of such licences and I do not do so.

The other issue argued was whether the Centre was leased to the companies for private purposes. This question does not strictly arise because the Centre was not leased, but the companies do not occupy the Centre for their own private purposes. They occupy it for the purposes of the Authority so that, through them, it can carry out its statutory functions. So much so that their occupation, as Dixon J explained, is that of the Authority. This is therefore a stronger case, on this issue, for the application of the exemption than
Goulburn City Council versus Haines [(1992) 78 LGERA 281] and
Statewide Roads Ltd versus Holroyd City Council [(1996) 39 NSWLR 115.] 
On a wider perspective, the case for the Council lacked reality as the
Authority, which could not have been made liable directly, was carrying on its own businesses in the Centre through the companies, and under the deed any rates recoverable from the companies would have been paid by the Authority.

In my opinion the following orders should be made: 
Appeals allowed with costs.

Set aside the decisions of the Land and Environment Court and in lieu thereof order that the appeals to that Court be allowed with costs.

The respondent to have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if entitled.

POWELL JA: I agree with Handley JA. 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Handley JA. * * * 
