

Connections Total Fitness for the Family Pty Limited versus Selkirk Pastoral Co
Pty Limited (No. 3) [2014] NSWSC 649 (22 May 2014) 
Last Updated: 23 May 2014 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Connections Total Fitness for the Family Pty Limited versus Selkirk Pastoral Co Pty
Limited (No. 3)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): May 2014  
Decision Date: May 2014  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Slattery J  
Decision: 
Indemnity costs not awarded. Order the defendant to pay the plaintiffs' costs.  
Catchwords: 
COSTS - indemnity costs - whether the plaintiffs are entitled to an order for indemnity costs of these proceedings - whether the defendant's indemnity in respect of the debt obligations of the first plaintiff covers the plaintiffs' costs of these proceedings.  
Cases Cited: 
Andar Transport Pty Ltd versus Brambles <case>; <case> 
Connections Total Fitness for the Family Pty Limited versus Selkirk Pastoral Co Pty
Limited (No. 2) <case> 
Inglis versus the Commonwealth Trading Bank <case>; <case>; <case>  
Category: 
Costs  
Parties: 
First Plaintiff: Connections Total Fitness for the Family Pty Limited (ACN 134 091) 
Second Plaintiff: Connections Health Clubs of Australia Pty Limited (ACN 134 656) 
Third Plaintiff: Peter Sheehy 
Fourth Plaintiff: David Wright 
Defendant/Cross-Claimant: Selkirk Pastoral Co Pty Limited (ACN 085 917 059)  
Representation - Counsel: 
Counsel: 
Plaintiffs: P.Braham SC; A.D. Crossland 
Defendant: N. Beaumont SC; S.E.Gray  - Solicitors: 
Plaintiffs: Karen Watson, Meehans Solicitors 
Defendant: Geoff Lloyd, Caldwell, Martin, Cox Solicitors  
File Number(s): /169953  
Publication Restriction: 
No  
EX TEMPORE JUDGMENT
This is the Court's third judgment in these proceedings. The Court's principal judgment found the plaintiffs had the benefit of an indemnity for certain residual financial obligations after the sale of a gym business, Connections Total Fitness for the Family Pty Limited versus Selkirk Pastoral Co Pty Limited  <case> In the Court's second judgment the Court refused to allow an amendment to the statement of claim in anticipation of the damages and costs hearing in the proceedings: Connections Total Fitness for the Family Pty Limited versus Selkirk Pastoral Co Pty Limited (No. 2)  <case> This judgment should be read with the Court's two earlier judgments.
Today the Court is involved in that damages and costs hearing. The parties have narrowed the issues on damages, sufficiently for counsel on both sides to seek some time to see if a negotiated consensus can be reached today. The matter has been stood down.
But one question will not be resolved: the residual costs issue raised at [160] of my principal judgment: "160. A previously unseen costs question may arise as a result of the Court's findings. The Court has upheld an indemnity, at least for Connections' directors. The question may arise as to whether or not an indemnity cost order should also be made against the defendant in favour of the directors and possibly in Connections' favour."
The parties present the following contest on this issue. The plaintiffs seek an indemnity costs order based on the indemnity on which they succeeded in the proceedings. The defendant resists the making of an indemnity costs order. But there is no issue that the defendant should ay the plaintiffs' costs on the ordinary basis. There is no express entitlement to a costs order on an indemnity basis in the contract that the parties made. So that the matter becomes under Uniform Civil Procedure Rule (UCPR), r 42.5, a matter in the Court's discretion. 
Ordinarily indemnity costs can be awarded under the UCPR, r 42.5 either if the plaintiff makes out a special entitlement to such costs or the defendant is guilty of unreasonable or delinquent conduct. This is not a case of unreasonable or delinquent conduct. Rather the plaintiffs submit that the nature of the contract which has been found in their favour gives them an entitlement to indemnity costs.
First, the nature of the indemnity found is described in [136] and [137] of the principal judgment, as follows: "136. Connections had the benefit of Selkirk's promise to pay its past and future debts. That promise was not contained in the 15 May Memorandum but it was nevertheless in the partly written and partly oral 15 May Agreement. In the oral part Mr Wright and Mr Sheehy received on behalf of Connections the benefit of a promise that Connections' past and future debts would be paid. Mr
Ovenden agreed to take over these liabilities of Connections. But the 15 May
Memorandum is expressed in the form of an indemnity, so that it would be clear that the two directors were also benefited by the promise and that any secondary liability they had in respect of Connections' debts would also be covered. The word "indemnity" was an apt use of language by Mr Ovenden. It referred to the major kinds of liability that Mr Wright and Mr Sheehy might have in respect of Connections' debts: as guarantors of financial leases for equipment used in the business, for their statutory obligations to the
Australian Taxation Office in respect of the tax debts of Connections, and for their obligations under company law to creditors for allowing Connections to trade whilst perhaps insolvent.
When the written and oral parts of the 15 May Agreement are put together the position makes full sense: Selkirk was promising (orally) to pay
Connections' debts, past and future and would also indemnify Messrs Wright and
Sheehy (via the 15 May Memorandum) in respect of any liability they had in respect of those debts."
It is convenient to start with the plaintiffs' contentions. The plaintiffs contend on two broad bases that they should be entitled to an order for indemnity costs in these proceedings in the Court's discretion. First, they rely on the nature of the indemnity the Court has already found: "(2) A declaration that the defendant is liable to indemnify the plaintiffs in respect of the debt obligations owed by the first plaintiff, other than the first plaintiff's debt obligations owed to the second and third plaintiffs."
The plaintiffs submit that the costs order is a debt obligation caught by the indemnity. In my view the defendant's submissions are persuasive: it is not a debt obligation caught by the indemnity. It is an obligation which only arises by reason of the exercise of the Court's discretion under UCPR, r 42.
But the plaintiffs also argue that within the declaration that the costs order is nevertheless an obligation "in respect of the debt obligations [of Connections]" and one caught by the indemnity. The plaintiffs' point to the well-known authorities such as Smith versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 513] Here, the words "in respect of the debt obligations [of Connections]" can apply to a class of debt obligations other than the obligations that are created by the costs orders in these proceedings. So a strict construction of the indemnity will apply it to the defence costs the indemnified parties would incur in defending themselves against the claims of Connections' creditors, rather than to the costs of these proceedings.
No term is ordinarily implied at law into an unsecured indemnity to the effect that the costs of seeking to establish the existence of the indemnity will be indemnified. This is distinct from the situation with a mortgage or charge, a legal incident of which in law is that the mortgagee is entitled to add to the mortgage debt the costs of enforcing it: Inglis versus the Commonwealth Trading Bank [(1973) 47 ALJR 234] Nor is this a case where such a term should be implied in fact: it is not necessary to give business efficacy to the contract these parties made.
In response to these arguments, the plaintiffs say that the Court can infer the result for which they contend from two things: (1) it was not a contract drawn by lawyers; and, (2) the substance of the wider agreement made between the parties was that the plaintiffs would be able to walk away from the gym business without any further residual liabilities.
But, in my view, that is not an answer to the defendant's submissions. Without the assistance of lawyers the parties agreed upon an indemnity which was not sufficiently clear to ensure, in accordance with conventional principles of construction that it covered the plaintiffs' costs of these proceedings. This is yet another consequence of the failure of the parties in these proceedings to engage lawyers to draft their contract.
For those reasons the plaintiffs' claim for indemnity costs does not succeed. But that the defendant should pay the plaintiffs' costs of the principal hearing and this hearing on the ordinary basis is not in dispute. The Court will make that order.
The parties have asked the Court to reserve consideration of the implications of any extant Calderbank letters and this judgment is not designed to preclude further argument about such issues.

After 3.30pm
By consent, the Court makes orders 1, 2, 6(a), 6(b), 7, 8, and 9 and notes 2A, 3, 4 and 5:
Judgment for the first plaintiff in the sum of $129,676.33.
That in respect of debts that the third and fourth plaintiffs have to the following by reason of their guarantee of the debts of the first plaintiff or their liability under statute for these debts: 
The Australian Taxation Office; 
Worker's Compensation nominal insurer; 
Fitness Equipment Finance Pty Limited; 
Technology Leasing Limited or Northern Management Finance Pty Ltd; 
Esanda Finance; 
Flexi Rent Capital Pty Limited; and in respect of the legal expenses in the sum of $10,000 for Local Court
Proceedings no. 273396 of 2013, 2013/253980 and 2013/255403, judgment for the third and fourth plaintiffs in the sum of $186,418.00.

A. The plaintiffs warrant that after making due enquiry, the plaintiffs are not aware of any debts other than the known debts to these creditors referred to in the further amended Statement of claim filed 30 April 2014.
The plaintiffs release the defendant from any and all obligations the defendant has to indemnify the plaintiffs and any of them in respect of the debts the subject of the proceedings identified in the further amended
Statement of Claim filed on 30 April 2014.
That the sum of $99,280.73 held in the trust account of Meehans solicitors being the sum held for the benefit of the defendant in these proceedings is to be released to the plaintiffs in part-satisfaction of the judgment sum in orders 1 and 2 above.
That the third and fourth plaintiffs file notices of discontinuance in the above mentioned local court proceedings commenced by the ATO with there to be no order as to costs in those proceedings as between the parties to the present proceeding.
 (a). That subject to any application that either party wishes to make in reliance on offers of compromise or Calderbank letters, (and such application must be brought within 14 days of today), the defendant shall pay the plaintiffs' costs of the principal hearing and the damages hearing on the ordinary basis.

Should any party wish to pursue the question of whether the orders in 6(a) should be varied by reason of offers of compromise or Calderbank letters.
The proceedings are otherwise dismissed.
 Grant liberty to apply in respect of the implementation of these orders.
That exhibits and subpoenaed material may be returned forthwith; any exhibits returned must be retained intact by the party or person that produced the material until the expiry of the time to file an appeal, or until any appeal has been determined.
 * * * 
