

Regina versus Evan Dunstan Pederick [1996] NSWSC 623 (17 December 1996) 
REGINA versus Evan Dunstan PEDERICK /96 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, STUDDERT J, SIMPSON J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Confession of guilt by appellant leads to conviction - reliability of evidence by appellant in subsequent trial of accessory before fact of murders criticised in accessory's successful appeal - claim by appellant that his evidence in his own trial also unreliable - no evidence on appeal asserting confession and evidence false or explaining why false confession made and false evidence given - appeal dismissed.

RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
The appellant came forward in 1989 and confessed to the police that it was he who planted the bomb in the rubbish bin outside the Hilton Hotel in 1978, which had later exploded killing three people. The appellant said that he had planted the bomb and had attempted unsuccessfully to detonate it when he saw the Indian Prime Minister arrive at the hotel for the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting being held there. He had then departed, leaving the unexploded bomb in the rubbish bin. 
The appellant was a member of Ananda Marga, a religious sect which was opposed to the policies of the Indian Government, and in particular to the imprisonment in India of Baba, the sect's leader. The assassination of the
Prime Minister was intended to demonstrate to the Indian Government the strength of the campaign to secure Baba's release. The appellant implicated a man called Anderson as the person who had instigated the assassination and who had assisted him in it.

The appellant was charged with conspiring with Anderson to murder the Indian
Prime Minister, and with the murder of the three persons who were killed. By the time he came to trial, it was common ground that he could not have seen the Indian Prime Minister at the time when he attempted to detonate the bomb, as he had arrived at a different entrance of the hotel. The Crown suggested that he may well have mistaken the President of Sri Lanka for the Indian Prime
Minister, a possibility which the appellant accepted, although he said that his recollection was different.

The appellant pleaded guilty to the conspiracy, but not guilty of the murders.
The Crown case was that the appellant had acted with reckless indifference to human life, having left the unexploded bomb in the rubbish bin and, knowing or realising that by doing so the death of some person was the probable (or likely) consequence, he was nevertheless prepared to take the chance that such a consequence would follow. The only substantial issue in the trial was whether he was guilty of murder (upon the basis of his reckless indifference to human life) or of manslaughter (upon the basis that his act was an unlawful and dangerous one). The jury found him guilty of murder.

The appellant subsequently gave evidence against Anderson, who was charged as an accessory before the fact of the murders committed by the appellant by his reckless indifference to human life. At a late stage of the Anderson trial, it was discovered that the appellant could not have seen the Sri Lankan President either at the time when he attempted to detonate the bomb, as he had arrived at the hotel earlier in the day. The Crown then changed its case to one in which the appellant must have seen the Indian Prime Minister departing from the Hilton Hotel later that afternoon. The appellant was not recalled by the
Crown to deal with the new theory.

Anderson was found guilty of the murders, and he appealed. The evidence of the appellant was very closely examined in the appeal, and it was described as seriously unreliable in relation to the events of that day. The Court of
Criminal Appeal nevertheless refused to hold that Anderson's verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory, in the sense that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to his guilt. Instead, it held that the trial had miscarried by reason of the way in which the Crown had conducted it.
However, instead of ordering a new trial, the Court exercised its discretion to enter a judgment of acquittal.

The appellant's petition for the review of all four of his convictions was referred by the Attorney General to the Court of Criminal Appeal to be dealt with as an appeal. The appellant's submission was that the evidence given in
Anderson's trial was new evidence which demonstrated that his own convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory. He argued that the evidence which he gave in
Anderson's trial, which did not differ in substance from that which he gave in his own trial, had been demonstrated in Anderson's trial to be unreliable in fundamental respects, and therefore that the evidence which he gave in his own trial should be regarded as also being unreliable. Thus his own trial must be considered to have been conducted on a fundamentally erroneous basis.

In reply, the Crown tendered the manuscript of a book written by the appellant following the acquittal of Anderson on appeal, in which he examined the attacks upon the reliability of his confession accepted by the Court of
Criminal Appeal in the Anderson appeal but maintained his guilt despite them.
No evidence was given by the appellant in his own appeal asserting that his confession was false or to explain how he came to give false evidence. Nor was any evidence given by the appellant explaining away what he had written in the manuscript.

Held 
The evidence given by the appellant in Anderson's trial was that of an accomplice, with an interest in playing down his own part in that crime by playing up the part alleged to have been played by Anderson. The evidence which he gave in his own trial was directly contrary to his own interests. His confession and the evidence which he gave in accordance with that confession were extraordinarily strong evidence against him.

There was no significant possibility that the jury at his trial, acting reasonably, would or ought to have acquitted him if the "new" evidence from the Anderson trial - together with the material now brought forward by the
Crown - had been before them.

The verdicts of the jury were not unsafe and unsatisfactory.

It had not been shown that the plea of guilty to a conspiracy to kill the
Indian Prime Minister was not really attributable to a genuine consciousness of guilt. There was no miscarriage of justice.

The appeal was dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: On 13 February 1978, a highly explosive bomb exploded in a rubbish bin outside the Hilton Hotel, in George Street, where many overseas visitors were staying in connection with the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting being held at that time in Sydney. In May 1989, the appellant (Evan Dunstan Pederick) made a statement to the police implicating himself and another (Timothy Edward Anderson) in what had become known as the Hilton bombing. He was charged with four offences in relation to the bombing, and stood trial in September 1989.

One charge was that the appellant conspired with Anderson to murder the Indian
Prime Minister (Moraji Desai). To that charge he pleaded guilty. The remaining three charges were that the appellant murdered three persons who were in the vicinity of the rubbish bin when the bomb ultimately exploded. To those charges he pleaded not guilty, but he was found guilty by a Supreme Court jury. McInerney J imposed concurrent sentences of penal servitude - twenty years upon each of the murder charges and eighteen years upon the conspiracy charge. A non-parole period of thirteen and a half years was fixed. An application to this Court for leave to appeal against sentence was filed in but was abandoned by the appellant in 1992.

In 1995, the appellant petitioned the Governor pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) seeking a review of his four convictions. If it appears as a result of a consideration of that petition that there is a doubt or question as to any such petitioner's guilt, the Governor may direct that an inquiry be conducted into the relevant conviction, or the Attorney General may refer the whole case to this Court to be dealt with as an appeal under the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/).[1] In the exercise of his discretion, the Attorney General has referred the whole of the appellant's case to this Court to be dealt with as such an appeal. This was a power which the Attorney General previously had pursuant to <case> of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), which had been interpreted as investing this Court with jurisdiction to hear the appeal as if it had been duly instituted by the appellant himself and notwithstanding that his ordinary right of appeal was no longer available to him.[2] Section
L of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) expressly provides that a reference by the Attorney General pursuant to <case>(b) is to be dealt with in the same way.

This Court has so determined a number of such cases referred to it by the
Attorney General, and it has stressed that, once that jurisdiction has been invested in it by the reference, it becomes an issue solely for this Court - independently of the perceived doubt or question as to the appellant's guilt which led to that reference - as to whether the appeal should be upheld.[3]
The appeal against conviction accordingly proceeded before us without reference to the petition to the Governor and, in particular, without reference to the material upon which the petition was based. The grounds of appeal are that all four convictions (including that which was based upon the plea of guilty) were unsafe and unsatisfactory, and that there is fresh evidence. Both grounds were argued together, the appellant's case being that it is the fresh evidence which demonstrates that the convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The evidence which the appellant gave in his trial was that he and Anderson were members of an Indian based religious sect known as Ananda Marga, which was opposed to the policies of the Indian Government and in particular to the imprisonment in India of the sect's leader, a man known as Baba. The appellant said that he had been recruited by Anderson to assist in the construction and detonation of a bomb which would result in the assassination of the Indian
Prime Minister (Mr Desai) when he was visiting Sydney. His belief was that
Baba would create a perfect society, and that his release was the most important thing for the world. The assassination would demonstrate to the
Indian Government the strength of the campaign to secure that release.

Anderson provided the appellant with a suitcase containing about 200 sticks of gelignite, electrical detonators and a radio device by which the detonators could be activated. The appellant built the bomb utilising around twenty sticks of gelignite and, on Anderson's instructions, he placed it in the rubbish bin outside the Hilton Hotel with the intention of exploding it when
Mr Desai was in the vicinity of the bin. The appellant was on the other side of George Street from the rubbish bin at the time when he saw the person whom he believed to be Mr Desai leaving a vehicle outside the Hilton Hotel, and he unsuccessfully attempted to explode the bomb by using the radio device. It appears that the metal liner in the bin had interfered with the radio signal.
When the bomb did not explode, the appellant departed from the scene, leaving the bomb in the rubbish bin. Early the following morning, the metal liner of the bin was removed by a council worker and its contents were tipped into a council truck. The bomb exploded, killing two council workers and fatally injuring a police officer on duty nearby.

By the time the appellant came to trial, it was common ground that the man whom the appellant saw and believed to be the Indian Prime Minister was not in fact Mr Desai, who had arrived at the Pitt Street rather than at the George
Street entrance to the Hilton Hotel. Evidence was given on behalf of the Crown that Junius Jayawardene, the President of Sri Lanka, had arrived at the George
Street entrance of the Hilton Hotel during that afternoon. This evidence was to support the Crown's explanation that the appellant may well have mistaken
Mr Jayawardene for Mr Desai. The appellant gave evidence at the trial acknowledging that he had attempted to detonate the bomb when the man he had mistakenly believed to be Mr Desai arrived at the hotel.

The Crown case was that the appellant had acted with reckless indifference to human life: having left the unexploded bomb in the rubbish bin and, knowing or realising that by doing so the death of some person was the probable (or likely) consequence, he was nevertheless prepared to take the chance that such a consequence would follow.[4] The Crown did not rely upon any intention by the appellant to kill the Indian Prime Minister or anyone else.

There was no issue at the trial that the appellant had placed the bomb in the rubbish bin and had left it there unexploded. He denied being recklessly indifferent to human life in doing so, asserting that he had not realized that it may have exploded accidentally, and that he believed that Anderson, in accordance with a contingency plan, was going to warn the police that the unexploded bomb was still under the rubbish bin. The only substantial issue in the trial was whether he was guilty of murder (upon the basis of his reckless indifference to human life) or of manslaughter (upon the basis that his act was an unlawful and dangerous one), although the jury were also formally directed that they could find the appellant not guilty of both murder and manslaughter.

The new evidence upon which the appellant relies was that given in the subsequent trial of Anderson, who had been charged with the same three murders upon the basis that, having instigated the attempted assassination and actively assisted the appellant in it, he was an accessory before the fact of those murders committed by the appellant by his reckless indifference to human life. He was found guilty of those charges. He had also been charged with the attempted murder of Mr Jayawardene, but he was acquitted of that charge.

What must be established in support of a claim that there is fresh (or "new") evidence is that the absence at the trial of the evidence upon which reliance is placed by the appellant amounted to a miscarriage of justice; this Court will so conclude in favour of the appellant only if it considers that there is a significant possibility that the jury at his original trial, acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant if that evidence had been before them.[5] Relevant to that test is the credibility and the cogency of the evidence put forward,[6] but its credibility and cogency must be considered in the context of the evidence which was already before the trial court, and the appellant must show that it is of such a nature that, in that context, such a significant possibility exists.[7] There is no miscarriage of justice if that evidence was available to be called at the original trial and if the appellant had been content to go to trial without it.[8] He will not be given a second trial simply because the material which he was content to produce at the original trial was unsuccessful in achieving the result which he sought to achieve and because the result at a second trial with the additional evidence may be different. That is not, of course, a universal and inflexible rule, but it will be departed from only in unusual circumstances; those circumstances will ordinarily be related to the strength of the fresh (or "new") evidence in question.[9] 
The appellant has argued that the evidence given by him in Anderson's trial, which did not differ in substance from that which he gave in his own trial, was demonstrated in Anderson's trial to be unreliable in fundamental respects, and therefore that the evidence which he gave in his own trial should be regarded as also being unreliable, to the extent that his own trial must be considered to have been conducted on a fundamentally erroneous basis. The evidence in the Anderson trial is described in considerable detail in the judgment of this Court when allowing his appeal and entering a judgment of acquittal.[10] It is unnecessary to deal with that trial in similar detail in the present judgment. It is sufficient to draw attention to the principal matter upon which the appellant relies in this appeal.

In his evidence for the Crown in that trial, the appellant said that he thought that the man whom he saw arrive at the Hilton Hotel was Mr Desai, and that he had continued to believe that it was Mr Desai until he had been informed that Mr Desai had arrived on the other side of the hotel. He had been told (presumably by the police) that it must have been Mr Jayawardene that he had seen, but he does not in any way unequivocally adopt the suggestion that it was in fact Mr Jayawardene whom he had seen. When shown photographs of Mr
Jayawardene arriving at the Hilton Hotel, he said that that was the scene as he remembered it, but he pointed out that his recollection was that the man he saw was wearing a white cap and that Mr Jayawardene was not wearing one in the photographs. He was nevertheless prepared to accept that he could be mistaken, and that the man he had seen could have been Mr Jayawardene.

After the appellant had given his evidence, it was discovered that it could not have been Mr Jayawardene whom he had seen, as the latter had arrived at the Hilton Hotel in the early morning that day, many hours before the appellant had attempted to detonate the bomb. The appellant identified that attempt as having been made during the afternoon; he estimated that it was between 2.00 and 3.00 pm. The Crown then changed its case to one in which the appellant must have seen not Mr Jayawardene arriving at the George Street entrance of the Hilton Hotel at that time, but Mr Desai departing from the same entrance at about 5.00 pm.

The appellant was not recalled by the Crown to deal with the new theory.[11]
There were a number of problems with this new theory. The whole plan had been to kill Mr Desai when he arrived at the hotel, not when he left. The description which the appellant gave was of the man whom he believed to be Mr
Desai being greeted upon such an arrival. The photographs in evidence of both
Mr Jayawardene's arrival and Mr Desai's departure from the George Street entrance showed a considerable difference in the formality of each occasion.
The appellant had also given evidence that - following his unsuccessful attempt to detonate the bomb, which he had attributed to the intervention of
Baba himself - he had left in a panic and had hitchhiked north until nightfall, when he had gone to sleep in a paddock near Taree. He could not, therefore, have still been outside the Hilton Hotel at the time when Mr Desai departed.

The Chief Justice, who delivered the leading judgment in Anderson's appeal, described the appellant as having been discredited on a very important issue,[12] and as being seriously unreliable in relation to the events of that day.[13] The Chief Justice said that, once it was accepted that the appellant was mistaken in what he said was his recollection of those events, there were no limits to the nature of the mistakes which he may have made except such as are imposed by incontrovertible facts and circumstances.[14] When considering whether the verdicts in Anderson's case were unsafe and unsatisfactory - in the sense that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to his guilt - the Chief Justice described the appellant's evidence as containing a major weakness. His judgment continued:[15] "On any view of the matter, his account of the events of 12 February 1978, and in particular of the circumstances relating to his actual attempt at assassination, is clearly unreliable. He is incapable of giving a description of those events which does not involve serious error." 
Reference was next made to a number of matters which either cast doubt upon the appellant's evidence or which gave it support - to some of which matters I will return. The Chief Justice nevertheless then said:[16] "Although the Crown case against the appellant was one abounding with difficulties, some of them of the Crown's own creation, but others more fundamental, and although it could not be described as a strong case, I do not conclude that it was not reasonably open to the jury, on the evidence before them, to decide that the appellant was guilty. Although there were numerous matters which might properly have caused them to have a doubt about the appellant's guilt, it cannot be said that, acting reasonably, they were obliged to have such a doubt." 
It was, however, held by this Court that, notwithstanding that conclusion, the trial had miscarried by reason of the unfairness to Anderson as a result of the late change in the Crown case and by reason of other matters relating to the fairness of the way in which the Crown had acted. It was therefore held that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory - in the different sense that the trial had miscarried.[17] The distinction between the two different meanings of a verdict being "unsafe and unsatisfactory" was discussed by this
Court in Regina versus Clough,18 the principal distinction being that a conclusion that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory in the sense that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt leads to a judgment of acquittal, whereas such a conclusion in the second sense of the trial having miscarried by reason of unfairness ordinarily leads to a new trial. In
Anderson's appeal, however, this Court exercised its discretion against ordering a new trial - for the detailed reasons given.[19] 
The additional matters casting doubt upon the appellant's evidence upon which he relies in the present appeal may be summarised as follows: 
The appellant's assertion that the then Prime Minister of Australia (Malcolm Fraser) met Mr Jayawardene during the afternoon was denied by Mr
Fraser's evidence that he did not greet any of the visiting heads of government after 1.12 pm.

The appellant's confession to the police that he had placed fifty sticks of gelignite in the rubbish bin was impossible by reference to the size of the bin, and his evidence that he had utilised around twenty sticks - an estimate which he admitted was confusing - appeared to be the result of tailoring his evidence to fit what was possible.

The appellant's claim that Anderson had checked the rubbish bin collection times, to ensure that it would not be emptied after he had placed the bomb in it and before Mr Desai was understood to be arriving, did not accord with the fact proved in the Anderson trial that there was indeed a collection scheduled during that period but the council garbage truck was turned away by the police only at the last moment.

His estimate that between 100 and 200 people were present in the area at the time when he attempted to detonate the bomb is not supported by any of the videos or photographs in evidence.

The appellant also attacked some of the matters upon which the Crown relied as supporting his evidence in the Anderson trial. It is preferable that I deal with those matters when I come to deal with the Crown's response to the appellant's submissions that his convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The attack made on behalf of the appellant was directed primarily upon the reliability of his own confession to the police and of the evidence which he gave in accordance with that confession. It was conceded on his behalf that the argument put at the trial that he was guilty of manslaughter only and not of murder was a hopeless one. His argument can succeed only if the whole of the confession relating to planting the bomb can be rejected as unreliable.

It was submitted that confessions are sometimes made falsely, and our attention was drawn to the rigour with which a confession is examined when it is made by a fellow prisoner that he is guilty of an offence, made after the conviction of another for that offence, when that confession is put forward on appeal by the convicted person as new evidence. It was suggested that a false confession may be made for motives of self-aggrandisement or attention seeking, or by reason of some peculiar mental state. It was argued that any confession made many years after the event should be examined rigorously, because of the possibility that it resulted from such a mental state even though there is no evidence of insanity. It was said that the appellant's confession was not so examined until he gave evidence against Anderson and that, when so examined, it was found wanting to the extent that his convictions should be quashed.

No evidence was given in the appeal by the appellant to assert that his confession was false, or by him or by anyone else to explain why he would have made these particular confessions falsely. Nor has any evidence otherwise before us been pointed to as providing such an explanation. We were nevertheless exhorted to conclude by way of inference that the confession which the appellant made, and the evidence which he gave in accordance with it, must have been false (or, at the least, unreliable) because of the matters to which reference has been made.

It seems to me that the conclusion which this Court is asked to draw in favour of the appellant is all the more difficult to draw because of a number of matters which strongly militate against it: the circumstances in which the confession was made; the appellant's maintenance of the truth of that confession even after this Court gave judgment in Anderson's appeal; the matters which corroborate its truth, many of which are unlikely to have been known to the appellant at the time when he made the confession; the absence of any evidence explaining why the appellant would have made a false confession; and the marginal relevance of the matters attacked in the Anderson trial to the issues which arose or which could have arisen in the appellant's own trial.

What has to be considered, of course, is the cumulative effect of all of these matters upon the conclusion which the appellant seeks to have us draw, that his confession and the evidence which he gave were unreliable.

There is no suggestion that the appellant was known to the police to have been involved in the Hilton Hotel bombing before he gave himself up to the
Queensland police in 1989. The officer in charge of the investigation gave evidence in the Anderson trial that he had never heard of the appellant until he was contacted by the Queensland police to whom the appellant had spoken.

Before going to the Queensland police, the appellant spoke to a priest (and subsequently permitted the priest to give evidence of what had passed between them in the confessional). This was on the day when the appellant learnt that
Anderson had been arrested and charged with the Hilton bombing. He told the priest that it was he who had planted the bomb in the rubbish bin which subsequently exploded. He expressed guilt at having put the bomb in the bin and at his negligence in failing to remove the danger to other people after it had not exploded when he had attempted to detonate it. He said that he had been troubled by what he had done for some time, and that it had been
Anderson's arrest which had precipitated his decision to come forward. He told the priest that he intended to give himself up to the police after making his religious confession. He made financial arrangements through the priest for his wife and two children, for whom he expressed deep concern. He gave the priest a letter of resignation to be forwarded to the government department by which he was employed.

The appellant went to the Queensland police the same day. He told the police that it was really only after a year from the explosion that the realization of what he had done had dawned on him, and that he had lived with his remorse ever since. He said that he had been very torn between his desire on the one hand to confess and his fear of the consequences on the other hand - particularly his fear of the consequences for his young children. (Although he and his wife had been separated for some years, he had a lot of contact with the children and a good relation with his ex-wife.) Hearing that Anderson had been arrested and charged had been the impetus to come forward. He felt to some extent that the police may get on to him anyway, and this was only bringing forward the inevitable, but he had not previously had the courage to do anything. These admissions were repeated to the New South Wales police when they interviewed the appellant the following day.

The appellant gave evidence at his own trial in accordance with his confessions, as already outlined. When giving evidence in the Anderson trial, the appellant denied the suggestion that he had not been outside the Hilton
Hotel, saying: "I suppose you are suggesting what: [that] I gave myself up to the police for a long sentence on a whim? ... Not to mention the destruction of my career and reputation, and disruption of my family life." 
In 1991, after the judgment of this Court in Anderson's appeal had been given, the appellant commenced to write the manuscript for a book entitled "Contradictions". Portions of this manuscript were tendered by the Crown in this appeal. In the Introduction to that book, the appellant accepts that he was forced to re-examine his own attitudes following Anderson's acquittal by this Court. He refers to legal advice which he had received that, if he were prepared to disavow his own evidence, he had a good prospect of success in an appeal against his conviction or in an inquiry into his conviction. He asserts his anger at the accusations of perjury made against him, and that he had no intention of accepting the role of madman being foisted on him. He expresses a view that the bombing remained an unsolved chapter of Australian history and that, with Anderson acquitted and himself convicted on identical evidence, the courts also had been brought into disrepute. It was for these reasons, he said, that it was not only appropriate but essential that he write the book.

In the book, the appellant describes in detail how he constructed the bomb and placed it in the rubbish bin. He takes great care to demonstrate that his confession and his evidence as to doing so were supported by matters of which he could not have obtained knowledge from public sources - for example, the evidence of a man called Trotter, to which reference will be made later, and the ASIO tapes of intercepts on the Ananda Marga organisation's telephone.
When he had placed the bomb in the bin, he said: "The whole thing was strangely anti-climatic, though this was the moment at which the rubbish bin became deadly. Perhaps from this moment the loss of life became inevitable." 
He specifically dealt with the so-called Jayawardene and Desai departure theories. Notwithstanding the problems with each of them, the appellant maintained that he nevertheless placed the bomb in the bin and attempted to detonate it.

The appellant denies assertions made in various published commentaries about the Hilton bombing that he was suffering from some delusion or other psychiatric disorder. He quotes from psychological and psychiatric testing which he had undergone preparatory to his own trial, and again before the
Anderson trial, which support his denial. Dr Milton expressly said that, in his opinion, the appellant was unlikely to have made a false confession. The appellant records a visit by Dr Milton to him after this Court had upheld
Anderson's appeal, during which he was told by Dr Milton that he saw no reason to alter that opinion. He also retained another clinical psychologist to make yet another assessment, but specifically in the light of the inconsistencies which had been revealed in his evidence in the Anderson trial. She reported the absence of "any paranoid delusional thinking whatsoever" and of "any psychotic process at all". She said that the appellant's vagueness of recollection of some of the events surrounding the bombing is explained in terms of the level of anxiety which he was experiencing on the day. The appellant quotes her conclusions: "The question has also been raised as to whether Mr Pederick could have made the whole thing up, and that his whole evidence was therefore a tissue of lies. On the evidence I have before me, and my knowledge of the case, I do not believe this to be so. Also there does not appear to be any motive for Mr
Pederick to have made this story up. Had he not come forward, there would have been little chance of it being found out, unless someone in the Ananda Marga movement had given evidence which had implicated him." 
She states her belief that the appellant had been the victim of indoctrination, and that he could not have fabricated all of his evidence.

In his conclusions at the end of the manuscript, the appellant says that an acceptance of the theory that he was fantasising would be in the face of the evidence. He says that, before he heard of Anderson's arrest, he had long assumed that the Hilton bombing file was closed. The news of the arrest was first broadcast in Brisbane (where he lived) at around midday. He did not leave work until 4.00 pm, and he was in police custody himself by about 8.30 pm. He had had not time to conduct any research. His former wife had given evidence in the Anderson trial, but she had not said that he had kept any press clippings. There were details in his evidence which he could not have discovered from news reports.

The clearest conclusion from this manuscript written by the appellant is that, despite the attacks upon the reliability of his confession accepted by this
Court in the Anderson appeal, he was nevertheless maintaining his guilt.
Shortly before the hearing of the present appeal, the appellant's solicitor informed the Crown from the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions handling the matter that his instructions were that the appellant was the author of the manuscript and that he does not resile from its contents. Again, no evidence was given by the appellant disavowing his confessions or explaining away what he had written in that manuscript.

There is no dispute that the appellant was in fact a member of the Ananda
Marga organisation. He had a motive as such for killing the Indian Prime
Minister, which (as stated earlier) was intended to demonstrate to the Indian
Government the strength of that organisation's campaign to secure Baba's release. This Court is not concerned with any question as to how realistic his expectation may have been that the campaign would be successful. According to the evidence in the Anderson trial, the appellant had himself met Mr Desai in order to press for that release, and Mr Desai had spoken vehemently and insultingly concerning Baba and the Ananda Marga organisation.

There are some remarkable pieces of evidence - both at the trial and on the appeal - which corroborate the appellant's confession in significant respects.
He told the police when he originally confessed that he had been wearing a false moustache so that, after the bomb had been detonated, he would be able to alter his appearance. He spent time on both the Saturday and the Sunday in the vicinity of the Hilton Hotel. (The attempted detonation occurred on the
Sunday.) He was on some occasions on both days wearing the false moustache.
Another man there (a Mr Mumme) gave evidence in the Anderson trial that he had seen a man in the vicinity of the Hilton Hotel, fitting the description of the appellant generally and wearing an obviously false moustache. This man had been so concerned at the time about the peculiarity of a man standing there with an obviously false moustache that he had looked for a policeman. He had reported what he had seen to the police within a week of the bombing. Although there was some confusion as to whether Mr Mumme had seen the appellant on the
Saturday or the Sunday, this was support for the appellant's confession.

Fresh evidence was produced by the Crown from another man in the vicinity of the Hilton Hotel that weekend (a Mr Tsambouris), who did not come forward until after the Anderson trial, and who said that he had observed a man in that vicinity wearing a clumsy disguise, including a false moustache, and that he had challenged that man as to whether his moustache was real and whether he was "from ASIO or something". He identified the appellant from a book of photographs of known members of the Ananda Marga organisation. This supports what the appellant told the police in his original confession, that a man had come up to him on the Sunday asking him why he was wearing a false moustache.
His description of the man fits Mr Tsambouris. In his manuscript, the appellant relied upon this fresh evidence (which was first tendered in
Anderson's appeal) as demonstrating that he was telling the truth. It is indeed strong evidence that he was outside the Hilton Hotel.

There was other evidence in the Anderson trial which supported the appellant's evidence in this respect. He said that Anderson had driven him to the Hilton
Hotel area in a taxi on the Saturday night so that he could deposit the bomb in the rubbish bin. Anderson had driven the taxi, which was yellow, with a "Not for Hire" sign displayed. The appellant had been wearing the false moustache at the time. Another taxi driver (a Mr Trotter) who knew Anderson (but not the appellant), saw Anderson there in a gold coloured taxi displaying a "Not for Hire" sign and carrying a passenger, who left the taxi at the place nominated by the appellant. His description of the passenger, given to the police on the day following the explosion, fitted the appellant (including the moustache) except as to the length of his hair. Mr Trotter said that he had seen the passenger only briefly, and that it had been Anderson whom he had recognized, not the passenger. In his manuscript, the appellant pointed out that the colour of the taxi had not been stated in any publicly available document. On the other hand, the appellant had in his original confession fixed this incident as having happened at about 6.00 pm on the Saturday, whereas Mr Trotter put it as having happened very early on the Sunday morning.
The appellant's evidence in the Anderson trial was that it happened at about .00 am on the Sunday, which fitted in with the evidence of Mr Trotter.

More peripheral to the events outside the Hilton Hotel, but nevertheless demonstrative of the reliability of the confession generally, is the ability of the appellant to have led the New South Wales police to the place in the
University of New South Wales where - he told the Queensland police when confessing (and before he was interviewed by the New South Wales police) - he had left a quantity of gelignite, detonators and other material in excess of what he had needed to make the bomb, a day or so before he attempted to detonate it. He drew a diagram of that equipment - again before being interviewed by the New South Wales police - which is remarkably similar to such equipment found by university staff in 1981, wrapped in a newspaper dated two days before the explosion, in a locker at the University. The appellant was able to take the police in 1989 to the very room at the University where the lockers had been kept in 1978, even though no lockers were there anymore and despite substantial changes to the building following renovations. It is true that he told the Queensland police that he thought that he had left this equipment at the Macquarie University, but the description which he gave matched only the University of New South Wales, and the appellant's initial nomination of the Macquarie University was anything but certain.

There were other matters of a similarly peripheral nature which supported the reliability of the appellant's confession generally - the passport which he had obtained in a false name, the appearance of that false name (in the appellant's handwriting) in Anderson's address book, and the appellant's description of a man sitting on the rubbish bin whilst he was awaiting the arrival of Mr Desai (which was confirmed by the evidence of a man who said that he had been sitting on the bin at the time). These are all discussed in detail in this Court's decision in the Anderson appeal.

Many of the discrepancies to which the appellant has now pointed were explained by him in his manuscript, and none of them led him at the time when he completed the third draft of it (in late 1992) to consider that his confession and evidence were unreliable. A good example relates to the likelihood that the rubbish bin would be emptied by council workers between the time when he placed the bomb in it and the time when Mr Desai was thought to be due to arrive. The appellant makes the point, and a good one, that what is relevant is the expectation which he and Anderson had at the time rather than what was in fact intended by the council itself. He told the Queensland police when he originally confessed that he and Anderson thought that "it was a good bet that the bin was not going to be emptied during that day [Sunday] because there were dignitaries there the whole time". In his evidence in the
Anderson trial, he said: "Anderson had found out ... when the garbage collections were conducted. I can remember we were satisfied it [the bomb] was not going to be collected by the garbage men after we placed it." 
He referred to evidence given at the inquest of a police officer on duty outside the Hilton Hotel that the rubbish bin was in fact emptied a short time before 1.00 am on the Sunday. That officer was not called in the Anderson trial. This confirmed the appellant's own evidence that the bin was almost empty when he placed the bomb in it at about 1.00 am. He concludes this section of his manuscript: "And, by nothing more than an accident, the package was not removed by the scheduled garbage collection on Sunday morning." 
There nevertheless remains a number of discrepancies. Some of them are explicable by errors of perception by the appellant, who was (on his own assertion) suffering from a high level of anxiety at the time. Others are explicable by the long period which elapsed between the events of February and May 1989 when the appellant gave himself up to the police. The appellant gave evidence that, having severed contact with the Ananda Marga organisation, he had attempted deliberately to put out of his mind any memory of his involvement in those events.

It has been submitted on behalf of the appellant that some of the matters of which he gave evidence were put forward as a result of his own suggestibility when being interviewed by the police. It is significant, of course, that the bulk of what the appellant subsequently gave as evidence had formed part of his original confession to the Queensland police (who are not shown to have had any special knowledge of the Hilton bombing, and thus the capacity to suggest things to him), and before the New South Wales police (who did have that knowledge) were brought in to interview him.

It has also been submitted on behalf of the appellant that much of the material stated by him in his confession and in his evidence may have had its origin in the extensive media coverage of the trial of Anderson with two other members of the Ananda Marga organisation (Alister and Dunn) for conspiracy to murder a man called Cameron, the leader of another political organisation (the
National Front), which conspiracy also involved the intended detonation of a bomb.[20] There was subsequently an inquiry into the convictions of all three men for that conspiracy, pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). No attempt was made in this appeal to identify anything published in relation to those proceedings which could have informed the appellant of the material stated by him in that confession. He is, after all, the appellant, and I do not propose myself, in the absence of such identification, to assume that this submission is firmly based. As already stated, the appellant went to some lengths in his manuscript (from which he does not resile) to establish that there were a number of matters of which he had given evidence which were not within the public knowledge.

But, even assuming that there are some matters in the appellant's confession which are objectively false, there is no evidence before this Court which explains why the appellant would have made a false confession, either deliberately or otherwise. Indeed, the only material before us - which comes from the appellant's own manuscript, from which he does not resile - demonstrates very strongly that there is no basis for an explanation that he must have fantasised. The appellant himself has given no evidence in this appeal denying the truth of what he said or asserting some other basis for concluding that he had fantasised. A confession of the nature of this particular confession, made in the circumstances in which it was made and confirmed by the appellant's evidence in his own trial, is extraordinarily strong evidence against him. I am not satisfied that the matters to which our attention has been drawn cast any doubt upon the reliability of his confession as to the basic facts which established his guilt of the three murder charges: that he placed the bomb in the rubbish bin, that he left it unexploded in the bin, knowing or realising that by doing so the death of some person was the probable (or likely) consequence.

It is vital to keep firmly in mind the very limited issues which arose or which could have arisen in the appellant's trial. The Crown case was, as stated earlier, that the appellant had acted with reckless indifference to human life by leaving the unexploded bomb in the bin with the particular state of mind which I have just identified and being prepared nevertheless to take the chance that someone would be killed. It was not part of the Crown case upon that issue that the appellant intended to kill the Indian Prime Minister or any other nominated person. The actual identity of the person who was intended to be killed if the bomb had exploded when the appellant attempted to detonate it was of no direct relevance to the issues raised by such a Crown case. That was, of course, relevant to the appellant's credit as a witness in the trial against Anderson, insofar as he asserted that he had attempted to kill someone at Anderson's instigation and with his assistance. But Anderson was only charged as an accessory before the fact. The appellant never suggested that Anderson was directly involved in his own decision to leave the unexploded bomb in the bin.

When the appellant gave his evidence against Anderson, he did so as an accomplice in the crime which Anderson was alleged to have committed.
Accomplices form a suspect category of witnesses,[21] because they have an interest in playing down their own part in that crime by falsely accusing others or by playing up the part of other participants (including the person against whom they are giving evidence). That is why juries are warned that the evidence of an accomplice may be unreliable.[22] When the appellant gave evidence in his own trial, there was no such basis for thinking that his evidence may be unreliable, because the evidence which he gave of the part which he played in the Hilton bombing was directly contrary to his own interests.

Thus what made the appellant's evidence unreliable as a witness against
Anderson, as seen by this Court in Anderson's appeal, does not necessarily make that evidence unreliable when the appellant gives it in his own trial, and particularly when he now makes no attempt to explain how he came to give that evidence in that trial or to give evidence denying its truth. The position remains that his confession and the evidence which he gave in accordance with that confession are extraordinarily strong evidence against him. I am not satisfied that there is any significant possibility that the jury at his trial, acting reasonably, would or ought to have acquitted him if the "new" evidence from the Anderson trial - together with the material now brought forward by the Crown - had been before them.[23] And nor am I satisfied that, having regard to this "new" evidence, the verdicts of the jury were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Insofar as the applicant's plea of guilty to the conspiracy to murder Mr Desai is concerned, the appellant can succeed in his appeal only if he obtains leave to withdraw that plea, and leave will be granted only if he is able to establish that a miscarriage of justice has occurred.[24] There must be shown to be some circumstance which indicates that the plea of guilty was not really attributable to a genuine consciousness of guilt.[25] For good reasons, courts approach applications to withdraw pleas of guilt with caution bordering on circumspection.[26] The appellant relies upon the same material in support of his appeal against his conviction for the conspiracy to establish a miscarriage of justice. For the reasons which I have already given in relation to that material, I am not satisfied that a miscarriage of justice occurred by reason of that plea of guilty.

I propose, therefore, that the appeal against conviction be dismissed. The appellant also sought leave to appeal against the sentence imposed upon the conspiracy charge, but only on the basis that, as the judge took the appellant's attempt to detonate the bomb into account in that sentence, that sentence would have to be adjusted (as the Crown concedes) if this Court were to accept that the confession was unreliable. In the light of the views which
I have already expressed, however, it is unnecessary to consider that sentence. I proposed that leave to appeal against sentence be refused.

I should add this. The appellant in his manuscript drew attention to what he recognized could wrongly be seen as an apparent contradiction in this Court's acquittal of Anderson and his own conviction upon identical evidence. In truth, no such contradiction exists, as a careful reading of my judgment should make clear. What should also be made clear at this stage is that the decision of this Court to reject the appellant's appeal cannot validly be interpreted as casting doubt upon its previous decision to acquit Anderson. At the risk of repetition, I point out that this Court did not conclude in its previous decision that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to
Anderson's guilt, and that it entered a judgment of acquittal rather than order a new trial only because of the various discretionary considerations (including the manner in which the trial had been conducted by the Crown), which are identified in its judgment.[27] 
PROPOSED ORDERS:
The appeal against conviction is dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence is refused.
 
STUDDERT J: I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL in its draft form. I agree with the orders proposed and with the reasons expressed by his Honour.
 
SIMPSON J: I agree with the orders proposed by Hunt CJ at CL and with his reasons therefor.
 [1] [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), s 474C(1)(a), (b).
 [2] Rex versus Gunn (1942) 43 SR 23 at 26. This Court does in any event have inherent jurisdiction to go behind an abandonment to ensure that any miscarriage of justice does not go unremedied: Grierson versus The King <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 431] at 437; Regina versus Bell [(1987) 8 NSWLR 311] at -315; Regina versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] at 246.
 [3] Regina versus Johann Ernst Siegfried Pohl (CCA, 17 December 1993, unreported) at 2; Regina versus Douglas Harry Rendell (CCA, 22 June 1994, unreported) at 3; Regina versus Patrick John O'Connor [(1995) 80 A Crim R ] at 222. Other cases in which this Court has considered matters referred to it pursuant to <case>(b) are Regina versus George John
Selewski & Ors (CCA, 19 June 1996, unreported) and Regina versus Fadil
Asanovic (CCA, 29 October 1996, unreported), but they contain no statement of principle.
 [4] [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), [s 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s18.html);
The Queen versus Crabbe <case>; [(1985) 156 CLR 464] at 468-469.
 <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 392] at 399, 402; Mickelberg versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259] at 273, 301-302.
 [6] Gallagher versus The Queen (at 395-396, 399, 401-402, 408-409);
Mickelberg versus The Queen (at 301).
 <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 659] at 670, 676-677; Gallagher versus The Queen (at 397, 410);
Mickelberg versus The Queen (at 302); Regina versus Gregory Mark Hemsley (CCA, 8
December 1996, unreported), at 5.
 [8] Lawless versus The Queen (at 666, 675); Mickelberg versus The Queen (at ); Regina versus Asfour [(1992) 60 A Crim R 409] at .
 [9] cf Gallagher versus The Queen (at 395); Regina versus Goonan [(1993) 69 A
Crim R 338] at 341-342.
 [10] Regina versus Anderson [(1991) 53 A Crim R 421.] [11] The transcript records an inquiry by the Crown prosecutor of counsel for
Anderson as to whether he wanted the appellant recalled for further cross- examination, and the response was in the negative.
 [12] (53 A Crim R at 435).
 [13] (at 444, 453).
 [14] (at 438).
 [15] (at 444).
 [16] (at 449).
 [17] (at 449).
 [(1992) 28 NSWLR 396] at 407-408.
 <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 315] at 323.
 [22] Regina versus Farley (1837) 8 C & P 106 at 108 <case>; [[173
ER 418] at 419]; "The corroboration of accomplices", JD Heydon, [[1973] Crim LR 264] at -266.
 [23] As to the relevance to a new trial application based on "new" evidence of facts which were not in existence at the time of the original trial (such as the appellant's manuscript), see Regina versus Gregory Mark Hemsley (CCA, 8
December 1995, unreported) at 10.
 [24] Regina versus Chiron [[1980] 1 NSWLR 218] at 238;
Regina versus Ferrer-Esis [(1991) 55 A Crim R 231] at ; Regina versus Boag [(1993) 73 A Crim R 35] at -37.
 [25] Regina versus Boag (at 37); Regina versus Warfield [(1994) 34 NSWLR ]
at 214.
 [26] Regina versus Liberti [(1991) 55 A Crim R 120] at .
 [27] (at 453).
 * * * 
