

Uniting Church of Australia Property Trust versus Macquarie Radio Network
Pty Limited Matter No 3784/97 [1997] NSWSC 345 (28 August 1997) `  
Uniting Church of Australia Property Trust ` `v Macquarie Radio Network Pty Limited` ` 3784/97` `28 August 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 -UNITING CHURCH OF AUSTRALIA PROPERTY TRUST versus MACQUARIE RADIO NETWORK PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute within a company in which the plaintiff holds a 15 per cent interest. The plaintiff feared that if the directors' meeting today went ahead, its equity holdings in the company would be watered down very substantially. 
Yesterday it sought an order seeking to restrain the holding of a directors' meeting. This court has said over and over again that it is only in the most extraordinary situations that the court will restrain people from meeting and discussing problems, and the court will never assume that people are going to meet with cast iron preconceived ideas nor that they are not likely to act otherwise than in accordance with their duties. Accordingly, yesterday's application was almost doomed to failure and it failed.

When the matter was called on this morning, there was an attempt to talk the matter out, which failed. The plaintiff then filed a notice of motion seeking an interlocutory injunction to prevent the relevant defendants from dealing with any participating notes issued by the first defendant company. I was hearing this matter when a telephone message came through to the effect that the meeting, which was held at 10 o'clock this morning, had not resolved to issue the participating notes. The matter then became academic.

My view is that these proceedings were just premature. Mr Biscoe QC, who appeared with Mr Robson for the plaintiff, strongly resisted and resented that conclusion. He says that in a quia timet action, one does not have to wait to see one's property destroyed before making an application to the court, and if a defendant has been threatening demolition and then repents at the last moment, the plaintiff is entitled to its costs because there was a very real threat.

I would agree with that submission, but I would disagree that that case has any analogy with the present. Had there been serious resistance to an extraordinary general meeting's resolution on 2 March 1997, which gave or purported to give the directors authority to issue participating notes, there has been some four months to commence an oppression suit. That was not done.
The plaintiff did ask the defendants for an undertaking not to deal with the notes that might be issued for a period so that the plaintiff could approach the court. That undertaking was refused together with an indication that the relevant defendants did not consider that the plaintiff was entitled to ask for it. I do not, myself, consider that the mere fact that someone asks for an undertaking and it is refused shows that there is a sufficient threat. I do not consider that merely because directors of a company have been appointed by particular shareholding groups necessarily means that they will not carry out their duties to act in the best interests of the company as a whole.

I note that from time to time, companies take short cuts, but normally if shareholders authorise something to happen, which the directors do not have power to do, the next stage is the directors consider the matter and if they resolve to go ahead, some officer of the company has to prepare a document and have it sealed under the common seal of the company in the presence of the directors and secretary. Even assuming that the document was prepared by the secretary before the meeting, there is usually a short period of time in which the court can be approached. I just think that the whole case was premature.

So that the plaintiff, having not now pressed for an order because, as things turned out, it was unnecessary, is to pay the costs of the defendants' of the interlocutory application. The exhibits today can be returned and the matter can stand over to the Registrar's list on 29 September 1997 at 9.30 am.

The proceedings are to continue by way of pleadings. The evidence is to be by affidavit. The plaintiff is to file a statement of claim no later than 4
September 1997 and, thereafter, pleadings in accordance with the Rules.
 * * * 
