

Allied Express Transport P/L versus Hill and Anor [1997] NSWSC 57 (28 February )

ALLIED EXPRESS TRANSPORT P/L versus HILL & ANOR /96 February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
Case stated under s.101 of [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/): No error of law.
 
Whether a statement amounts to a warranty or a representation found to be a question of either fact or mixed fact and law:- 
Bullock versus Glasson <case>; [(1915) 15 SR 91] noted.
 
On whether a warranty:- 
J.J. Savage & Sons Limited versus Blakney <case>; [(1969-1970) 119 CLR 435] applied.

Held on the words used a warranty.
 
On question of damages: 
McDonald versus Dennys Lascelles Limited <case>; [(1933) 48 CLR 457] applied.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
Mr and Mrs Hill took proceedings in the Local Court at Wagga Wagga seeking to recover damages from Allied Express Transport Pty Limited, ("Allied"), for breach of contract. The circumstances giving rise to the proceedings can be stated quite shortly. At all material times Mr and Mrs Hill carried on business in partnership as haulage contractors, the business being conducted and the work of the business being carried out by Mr Hill. In February 1992
Allied was seeking the services of a sub-contract carrier to deliver Arnotts' biscuits to towns throughout the Riverina area of New South Wales and it authorised one of its employees, Mr Keith Shea, to obtain the services of such a sub-contractor. Mr Hill responded to an advertisement and, ultimately, on 28
February 1992, he entered into a contract, on behalf of himself and Mrs Hill, with Mr Shea, on behalf of Allied.

The contract was partly in writing. Exhibit 1 before the Magistrate, Mr P.V.
Johnson LCM by whom the claim was heard and who has stated the present case pursuant to [s.101](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s101.html) of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), set forth eight groups of towns to which the biscuits were to be delivered in an eight week cycle. There was to be a delivery of biscuits to eight different groups of towns in eight consecutive weeks, i.e. to one group of towns in each week. After each eight week period the sequence would re-commence, so that the group of towns visited in the first week would be re-visited in the ninth week and so on in the same sequence. It was anticipated that the deliveries would take from three to four days each week. It was not in issue that Mr and Mrs
Hill were to be paid $1,000 per week. The issue was whether the number of kilometres to be travelled, averaged over the eight week period, was limited to 800 kilometres per week.

Mr and Mrs Hill's case was that at the time the contract was entered into Mr
Shea said to Mr Hill that they would be paid $1,000 per week for an average of kilometre per week. Mr Hill worked out that that threw up a figure of $1.25 per kilometre and asserted he asked Mr Shea what happened on all kilometres over 800 to which Mr Shea replied "There won't be any".

The case for Allied was that Mr Shea agreed with Mr Hill to pay $1,000 per week irrespective of the number of kilometres travelled.

After 28 February 1992 Mr Hill carried out deliveries for thirty seven weeks.
He travelled 8,026 kilometres in excess of 29,600 kilometres, that being 800 kilometres per week for thirty seven weeks.

The Magistrate found that the conversation between Mr Hill and Mr Shea was in the terms for which Mr Hill contended, and that the statement made by Mr Shea that there would not be any kilometres over 800 was promissory in nature and amounted to a warranty. He found that as Mr Hill had travelled in excess of kilometres per week Allied had breached its contract with Mr and Mrs Hill and that they were entitled to recover $10,032.50, being $1.25 per kilometre for each additional one, and, in addition, $345 for 645 kilometres travelled in a utility at $0.53.3 per kilometre. These figures totalled $10,377.50. He ordered that Allied pay this amount, interest in the sum of $3,570.43 and costs to Mr and Mrs Hill.

Allied, being dissatisfied with this decision as disclosing error in point of law, requested the Magistrate to state a case, which he did on 26 April 1996.
A Summons, to which the Stated Case is annexed, was filed on 24 May 1996.
Annexures to the Stated Case are the Magistrate's judgment, the transcript and the exhibits. The issue raised by the Stated Case is whether the Magistrate's determination was erroneous in point of law.

The Stated Case 
In paragraph 1 of the Stated Case the Magistrate set forth his determination and, in paragraph 2, the facts he found. In relation to the contract he found:- "The contract between the Appellant and the Respondent was formed at this meeting and was constituted partly by writing, partly by conversations and partly by conduct. The written part was constituted by Exhibit 1. The oral part was constituted by conversations between Mr Hill of the Respondent and Mr Shea of the Appellant at both the Thursday and Friday meetings. The part constituted by conduct included the conduct of the parties at the meetings and subsequently. I found Mr Shea to have said to Mr Hill at the Friday meeting that the Appellant would not be required to travel more than 800 kilometres per week. I found Mr Hill to then have said: 'What happens on all kilometres over 800?' And Mr Shea to have replied: 'There won't be any'. Both Mr Hill and Mr Shea discussed the run which Mr Hill would do the following week, which included to Hay and back on the Monday." 
The Magistrate found that:- during March, April, May and June 1992 Mr Hill rang Mr Shea every week and, in some of those telephone conversations, complained that he was driving more than 800 kilometres per week and requested more money, which Mr Shea refused to pay; in July 1992 Mr Hill sent Mr Shea a letter setting out all the kilometres he had travelled and showing that the average was more than 800 and that Mr
Shea refused to pay any further money "and said the contract was for $1,000 per week and not for kilometres"; in October 1992 Mr Hill caused a meeting to be held between Allied, himself and the Transport Workers' Union representative and that Mr Hill believed the latter was pursuing the matter on his behalf, which caused a delay in bringing the proceedings; in November 1992 Arnotts moved its depot from Junee to Wagga Wagga, which meant that Mr Hill, who lived in Junee, would have to travel each morning to
Wagga Wagga to begin work whereupon he ceased working for Allied; and during the period of engagement Mr Hill drove to the towns and travelled the kilometres as shown in his diary.

In paragraph 3 of the Stated Case the Magistrate set forth the grounds of determination. He found, firstly, that considerable cost was involved for Mr and Mrs Hill before the delivery process could be commenced, which included the fitting of a pan tech to a truck for the proper carriage of the biscuits; and, secondly, that Mr Hill had no time when the contract was made to calculate how far he would be required to travel on each delivery run and:- "It is reasonable to conclude that his decision was made following the statement by Mr Shea about the 800 km per week. As there was no evidence of any other basis on which Hill would have made the decision of that day, I found Mr Shea's statement to be the basis on which the Respondent entered the contract on the Friday to begin the following Monday." 
Mr Hill gave evidence of the conversation he had with Mr Shea at Tpp.6 and 20. At Tp.6 he said:- "Mr Shea said to me at that meeting on Friday morning that I would be paid $1,000 a week for an 800 kilometre average, and I did a little bit of mental arithmetic and come up with a figure of $1.25 a kilometre. When he said it, immediately after he said it, I asked him what happened on all kilometres over 800. He said there won't be any." 
At Tp.20, in cross-examination, Mr Hill said:- "And I was invited to go to this meeting on Thursday afternoon at the Old Wagga Inn .. I never accepted that job until after Mr Shea told me, when he spoke on Friday with me, that I would be paid $1,000 per week for 800 kilometre average and I immediately asked him about all the kilometres that were over 800 which he replied to 'There won't be any' and we shook hands on the deal. That is when, as far as I am concerned I accepted the job. And I went away from that meeting believing I was going to do an average of 800 kilometres for $1,000 and some weeks I would work three days and some weeks I worked four days and there was one week when I worked five days." 
There was evidence, Tp.7, that Mr Hill did not try to calculate the distances on 28 February 1992 but "accepted Mr Shea at his word that I would travel an 800 kilometres average per week".

The second ground of determination was that the statement made to Mr Hill by
Mr Shea that travelling would be no more than 800 kilometres per week amounted to a warranty. The Magistrate said:- "I formed the view that this statement was 'promissory and not merely representational' according to the objective test to be applied in these circumstances laid down in J.J. Savage & Sons Pty Limited versus Blakney <case>; [(1970) 119 CLR 435] at 442." 
The Magistrate said he formed this view because Mr Hill had only been given Exhibit 1 on 28 February 1992, when the statement was made, and whilst the document showed distances from one place to another these had been taken from a road map and did not include travel within the towns from shop to shop. The Magistrate was satisfied that whether the contract was to be financially viable depended on how many kilometres Mr Hill would travel each week and that it was essential for him to know that before entering into it, and he found that Mr Hill entered into the contract on a Friday and started on the following Monday and had no time to check distances but relied on what Mr Shea told him. 
The Magistrate found, and this was not in issue, that Mr Shea had authority to contract with Mr and Mrs Hill on behalf of Allied; that he presumably knew what the contract involved; and that his representation to Mr Hill shortly prior to the contract being entered into induced Mr Hill "to sign up".

In paragraph 4 the Magistrate set forth the contentions on behalf of Allied amounting to matters said to constitute error in point of law. In sub- paragraph (a) eight sub-paragraphs appear alleging error of law in making eight findings of fact on the basis that "each was unsupported by any evidence".

The first finding of fact asserted to be unsupported by any evidence was that
Mr Hill was told by Mr Shea that he would be paid $1,000 per week for no more than 800 kilometres per week. In the light of the evidence this challenge is somewhat difficult to understand, because it seemed clear from the evidence to which I have referred that there was evidence before the Magistrate from which such a finding could be made. The error was said to be that the Magistrate did not refer to 800 kilometres being on "average", which the evidence showed.
There was no doubt the Magistrate understood that he was concerned with an average and he referred to it expressly in his first determination. It was submitted on behalf of Allied that the significance was that this showed the
Magistrate left the "average" out of account when he came to consider whether the statement made by Mr Shea was promissory or representational.

It was contended there was no evidence that Mr Hill bought and fitted a "pan tech" to his truck and that a considerable cost was involved for him in accepting the cartage contract with Allied. I was not pointed to any evidence to support these findings, save that Mr Hill seems to have borrowed and fitted the "pan tech". In themselves, however, it was conceded that these findings were essentially irrelevant to the simple case propounded by Mr and Mrs Hill, save to the extent that they reflected on whether Mr Hill acted reasonably by continuing to fulfil the contract when informed by Mr Shea that Allied would not pay for extra kilometres. Damages were not claimed on the basis of any expense incurred in setting up to carry out the contract.

The fourth and fifth matters as to which it was said there was no evidence were that Mr Hill had no time to calculate how far he would be required to travel on each delivery run. The evidence was that Mr Hill relied upon Mr
Shea, and the reasonable inference is that there was no opportunity for him to check not merely the distances between various towns but also the number of kilometres which would be travelled within each town. By way of example, in cross-examination, at Tp.24, Mr Hill said:- "I give you an example sir, it's 40 kilometres from Junee to Wagga on the road map. 40 kilometres from Junee to Wagga and if you have ever looked at my kilometres you will find that I have come to Wagga and done my deliveries and covered 140 kilometres, now that's 60 kilometres driving around Wagga." 
There was, in my opinion, evidence from which the Magistrate was entitled to draw the inference.

The sixth matter about which it was said there was no evidence, such as to constitute an error in point of law, was that Mr Shea, despite his protestations that he was from Sydney and did not know the area, must be assumed to have greater knowledge of distances involved than Mr Hill. Bearing in mind that Mr Shea was offering a contract on behalf of Allied I do not see why the Magistrate could not have drawn the inference that he was aware of, or should be assumed to be aware of, the distances to be travelled. This was a finding of fact committed to the Magistrate.

The seventh basis on which it was asserted that there was no evidence to support a finding was the Magistrate's finding that it would be necessary for
Mr Hill to do the complete number of runs before he knew the average number of kilometres he would travel during his employment with Allied. It seems to me to follow from the evidence to which I have just referred concerning Wagga
Wagga that it was open to the Magistrate to make this finding; a finding which also demonstrates that the Magistrate had the question of "average" well in mind.

The eighth basis on which it was said that there was no evidence to support the finding was that Mr Hill had invested a considerable amount of his money to be able to deliver the biscuits, including purchasing a pan tech to install on the back of his truck, and that without the job and without the income his financial circumstances would have been difficult. This was, essentially, a repetition of the second and third matters to which I have referred. In any event, as was conceded on behalf of Allied, the financial circumstances of Mr and Mrs Hill were, at best, only relevant to whether Mr Hill had acted reasonably continuing with the contract after Mr Shea said that he would not pay more than $1,000. These findings could have no relevance to the contractual issues or the quantum of damages having regard to the limited claim for damages.

As I have sought to say Mr and Mrs Hill's case was that Mr Hill entered into an agreement whereby he would be paid $1,000 per week for travelling on an average, spread over the eight weeks, not more than 800 kilometres per week.
It mattered not, so far as I can see, what his financial position was. If that was the contract into which he had entered and he was required to travel more than 800 kilometres per week on average then Mr and Mrs Hill were entitled, prima facie, to damages for breach of the contract.

The next basis on which it was asserted that there was an error of law was that there was no evidence to support the finding that:- "... it is reasonable to conclude that his (Mr Hill's) decision was made following the statement by Mr Shea about the 800 km per week. There was no evidence of any other basis on which Hill would have made the decision on that day." 
In my view the evidence to which I have referred at Tp.20 is evidence from which the Magistrate could draw the conclusion. Eventually I did not understand the contrary to be put.

It was nextly contended that the Magistrate was in error in finding that a considerable cost was involved to Mr Hill in accepting the cartage contract with Allied and that he had to have his vehicle prepared and incurred other costs. I have considered this point, although, as I have said, it does not seem to me, with respect, that it was a finding necessary to determine the issues raised in the proceedings.

The fourth error asserted is that:- ".. The statement by Shea regarding the 800 kilometre maximum was promissory in nature and amounted to a warranty. At most, this statement can only be regarded as an innocent misrepresentation, not a warranty." 
Was The Statement Promissory? 
It was readily enough conceded on behalf of Allied that this was the crucial point in the proceedings, and that if the Magistrate's decision on it could not be shown to be in error then, subject to a question as to damages, Allied could not succeed on the stated case. It was not disputed by Allied that the Magistrate was entitled to find that the conversation was in the terms as to which Mr Hill gave evidence. That finding was clearly on a matter of fact and was not sought to be impugned before me.

The next question is whether the finding that the conversation was promissory was one of fact, mixed fact and law or law. Initially the submission of Allied was ambivalent on this point, although ultimately it was submitted that the construction to be placed on the conversation was a question of law.

In my opinion there is doubt about this. The issue is whether, viewed objectively, the finding should be that what was said was a promise, giving rise to a warranty, or merely a "representational" statement. In Bullock v
Glasson <case>; [(1915) 15 SR 91] it was argued before the Full Court on behalf of the defendant that no evidence had been put before the jury entitling them to find, as they did, that a warranty had been proved. There was an issue whether the statement by an auctioneer amounted to a warranty. At p.96 Gordon J, in the decision of the
Court, said:- "In my opinion there was evidence before the jury entitling them to find the alleged warranty proved. If a vendor at time of sale makes a statement of fact as to the character and condition of the subject matter of the proposed sale, and especially when such fact (as in this case) is peculiarly within his own knowledge, and more especially if he repeats such statement during the course of the sale, there is evidence for a jury that he meant such statement to be accepted by the eventual purchaser as a statement of fact for the accuracy of which the vendor agreed to bind himself, and that the purchaser by the act of purchasing so accepted it." 
It was held to be a question for the jury to decide whether the statement amounted to a warranty. That means that the Full Court treated the issue as one of fact. I have no conceptual difficulty with this. Many ultimate findings require the application of primary facts to a legal standard or requirement e.g. whether a party was negligent. Similarly it is not an alarming proposition to say that the tribunal of fact should decide whether the parties entered into a contract, notwithstanding that it would have to decide whether the primary facts gave rise to a concluded contract. Hence it seems to me that the question as to whether the statements made were representational or promissory is one either of fact or of mixed fact and law. If that be so the
Magistrate's decision is not open to attack. The question of what constituted a question of law was considered recently by the High Court in Collector of
Customs versus Agfa-Gevaert Ltd <case>; [(1996) 71 ALJR 123.] 
But if I am wrong in that view, it is necessary to consider whether there was an error of law.

The Magistrate relied upon the decision of the High Court of Australia in
J.J. Savage & Sons Pty Limited versus Blakney <case>; [(1969-1970) 119 CLR 435] in considering whether, on a proper view of what was said, there was a promise that no more than 800 kilometres on average would be travelled. In a joint judgment the High Court said, at p.442:- "There is no need to resort to cases decided upon different facts and circumstances in order to determine the significance in this case of the actual words used by the respondent. The words in themselves tend, in our opinion, against the inference of a promise that the boat would in fact achieve the nominated speed.
 
The Full Court seems to have thought it sufficient in order to establish a collateral warranty that without the statement as to the estimated speed the contract of purchase would never have been made. But that circumstance is, in our opinion, in itself insufficient to support the conclusion that a warranty was given. So much can be said of an innocent misrepresentation inducing a contract. The question is whether there was a promise by the appellant that the boat would in fact attain the stated speed if powered by the stipulated engine, the entry into the contract of purchase of the boat providing the consideration to make the promise effective. The expression in De Lasalle versus Guildford that without the statement the contract in that case would not have been made does not, in our opinion, provide an alternative and independent ground on which a collateral warranty can be established. Such a fact is but a step in such circumstances towards the only conclusion which will support a collateral warranty, namely, that the statement so relied on was promissory and not merely representational." 
In Ross versus Allis-Chalmers Australia Pty Limited [(1980) 32 ALR 561] a similar question arose and Savage was applied. All the judgments made it clear that one must look at what was said in the particular context. Aickin J, at p.569, suggested that the distinction between a representation is "clear enough in law", but that it is one "which laymen would probably find hard to understand, since it depends on niceties of language in conversations recounted, often years afterwards, by persons who would not have been conscious of the significance of the particular words used at the time". His Honour noted the criteria as being somewhat unreal and based on fine distinctions and said:- "However, these are the criteria upon which this particular point depends and they propound a test which the plaintiff's account of the conversation with Preston does not meet." 
There is a suggestion in his Honour's reasons that it is a matter of fact.

I have set out the evidence at pp.6 and 20 of the transcript. If it is for me to decide whether the Magistrate was correct in concluding that what Mr Shea said was promissory and not representational, I am satisfied that the statement by Mr Shea that there would not be any kilometres in excess of 800 kilometres per week on the average over the eight week period was promissory.
There was no qualification in the words "there won't be any" and there is no basis upon which that statement by Mr Shea could be treated as an estimate or, to use the words in Savage, representational. It was a definite statement made as the parties were considering the terms of the contract and, importantly, when Mr Hill was seeking confirmation as to the basis of payment.
I am satisfied that the words constituted a promise that for $1,000 per week
Mr Hill would be required to travel no more than 800 kilometres on an average over each eight week period. I am, accordingly, satisfied that the Magistrate was correct in coming to the conclusion he did.

It was submitted on behalf of Allied that various matters militated against this conclusion and that they had to be taken into account in evaluating the conversation. Once again this submission tends to point to an issue of fact, rather than law. Firstly, it was submitted that the word "average" indicated an opinion or an estimate. I disagree. The average was a fixed figure over the eight trips and it was stated to be a figure which, in that context, would not be exceeded. Secondly, it was submitted that Mr Hill had the necessary expertise to work out his kilometres and Mr Shea did not. But the Magistrate made factual findings to the contrary of this. He was of the view that Mr Hill could not work out the figures before travelling the routes, which was after he entered into the contract, and Mr Shea, who was offering the contract, must be assumed to know what they were. Thirdly, it was submitted the parties did not work out how any additional amount was to be calculated. That does not avail Allied. Rather it points in the opposite direction, viz to the position that the parties never thought this would be relevant because of the warranty.

For the first of these reasons the Magistrate's finding is not open to attack in these proceedings. However, if it can be considered by me, as a point of law, I am satisfied the Magistrate came to the correct conclusion.

The Damages 
It was nextly asserted that the Magistrate was in error in law in holding that the breach of warranty was the cause of Mr and Mrs Hill's loss or damage because Mr Hill was the author of the loss in continuing with the contract. I do not agree that this gave rise to any error of law. There was evidence on which the Magistrate could find that throughout the period of the contract there was a dispute between Mr Hill and Mr Shea as to Mr and Mrs Hill's obligations under the contract. The issue for determination by the Magistrate was what those obligations were, which he decided favourably to Mr and Mrs
Hill. Thus the question was what was the cause of that loss or damage. The cause was that they had entered into the contract, which required Mr Hill to travel no more than 800 kilometres on average per week, for which they were paid, whereas, in fact he was required to travel further for which he was not paid.

It was submitted that it was not reasonable for Mr Hill to continue performing the contract when he was told he would not be paid for the kilometres actually travelled. But there was much evidence that Mr Hill was seeking the additional payment and I can see nothing unreasonable in the way he acted in all the circumstances. If this matter was raised before the Magistrate it was a matter of fact for him to consider. There was an abundance of evidence on which the
Magistrate could have concluded that Mr Hill acted reasonably: the contrary was barely suggested. Rather the submission was that in point of law the
Magistrate should have found that he did not act reasonably. Even if that was a relevant enquiry I do not consider it gives rise to any point of law.

It was nextly contended that the Magistrate was in error in law in holding that Mr and Mrs Hill were not able to rescind the contract, and in failing to hold that by their conduct in continuing to make deliveries they affirmed it on the terms contended for by Mr Shea. In my view it was unnecessary to consider whether this was a case in which those questions arose. There was no suggestion that the contract was rescinded. The action was one for breach of contract and, as Dixon J said in McDonald versus Dennys Lascelles Limited <case>; [(1933) 48 CLR 457], at pp.476-477:- "When a party to a simple contract, upon a breach by the other contracting party of a condition of the contract, elects to treat the contract as no longer binding upon him, the contract is not rescinded as from the beginning. Both parties are discharged from the further performance of the contract, but rights are not divested or discharged which have already been unconditionally acquired. The rights and obligations which arise from the partial execution of the contract and causes of action which have accrued from its breach alike continue unaffected." 
The general principles, which are well known, were stated by Jordan CJ in O'Connor versus S.P. Bray Limited <case>; [(1936) 36 SR 248.] At pp.260-261 his Honour said:- "In the realm of contract, a breach of contract by one party always gives the other party a right to recover damages for the breach. It may be so serious as to give him the right, if he chooses, to treat himself as discharged from further performance of the contract and to treat the contract as at an end: Wallis versus Pratt [[1910] 2 KB 10];03 at 1013. He need not do so; he may recover damages for the breach, and insist that the contract be otherwise performed; but if he chooses to avoid the contract, and communicates that choice to the other party, the contract is effectually avoided, and he can no longer treat it as a source of continuing obligations, although he may recover damages for past breaches." 
This case was not concerned with any question of such an election, even if that would have been relevant. This case was concerned with the right of Mr and Mrs Hill to recover damages pursuant to the accrued right for the breach of contract which occurred. The principles to which I have referred were not in issue.

In my opinion the case raised by Mr and Mrs Hill before the Magistrate was one for damages for breach of contract and that was the simple basis upon which the damages, on the way in which the Magistrate formulated them, were justified in point of law.

Variation Or New Contract 
The final matter, which was said to constitute an error in point of law was the failure by the Magistrate to hold that by the conduct of the parties after March 1992 the contract was varied, or a new contract was entered into, to the effect that the alleged warranty that no route would be greater than 800 kilometres was omitted from it.

There was no evidence to support this assertion. Nor was the case fought before the Magistrate on the basis just suggested. Indeed, Mr Hill said in cross-examination, and without objection, that because of the dispute about the contract he expected Mr Shea to negotiate "to come to some other arrangement, cancel that contract and we'll start again, but he didn't do that". This evidence was quite contrary to the submission made.

It was submitted that Allied could have terminated the contract without notice and that it refrained from doing so because Mr Hill continued to perform it.
Immediately the submission was made it was conceded, very properly in my view, that there was not a shred of evidence to support a conclusion that Allied kept the contract on foot for this reason, nor from which such an inference could be drawn.

In these circumstances I do not see any basis on which it can be said at this stage that some new contract was entered into either by way of variation or by the creation of a new contract. The critical question for the Magistrate to determine was what the contract was and he did so in the light of his acceptance of Mr Hill's evidence and his conclusions in relation to it.

Conclusions 
In my view the Magistrate's determination was not erroneous in point of law.
Question 5 in the Stated Case should be answered "No" and, accordingly the
Summons must be dismissed with costs.

I order that:- 
The question asked in the Stated Case be answered "No".

The Summons be dismissed.

The appellant pay the respondents' costs of the Summons.
 * * * 
