

Salim versus Ingham Enterprises Pty Ltd Matter No Ca 40792/95 [1998] NSWSC 23 (12 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
ALI SALIM versus INGHAM ENTERPRISES PTY LTD 
CA 40792/95; DC 1833/94 March 1998 
Handley JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: District Court of New South Wales - Civil Jurisdiction - Judge Rummery QC 
FILE NO/S: CA 40792/95; DC 1833/94 
DELIVERED: 12 March 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 3 February 1998 
PARTIES: Ali SALIM versus INGHAM ENTERPRISES PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT OF: HANDLEY JA, BEAZLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: D J Durston 
Respondent: J O Anderson 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Michell Sillar 
Respondent: Worthington Storey 
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACT - claim for balance owed on account - appeal against finding that company entered contract as agent and vehicle for principal - undisclosed principal 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 14 
Ali SALIM versus INGHAM ENTERPRISES PTY LIMITED 
The respondent sued the company, of which the appellant was a director, for the balance owed on an account for purchases of chickens. In the course of the trial the respondent was granted leave to add the appellant as a defendant.
The trial judge entered judgment for the respondent holding the appellant to be the alter ego of the company and that the company entered into the contracts on behalf of the appellant as his agent.

The appellant claimed that the trial judge wrongly inferred that the company entered into the contracts on behalf of the appellant.

Held: 
That the appellant was liable as the principal. There was evidence to permit the inference that the company had the appellant's authority to enter into the contracts. No error by the trial judge demonstrated. Contra Beazley JA that the company cannot be said to be the agent and vehicle for the appellant.

Gardiner versus Heading [[1928] 2 KB 284] 
Teheran-Europe Co Ltd versus S.T. Beltan (Tractors) Ltd [[1968] 2 QB 545] 
Maynegrain Pty Ltd versus Compafina Bank [[1982] 2 NSWLR 141] applied 
Salomon versus A Salomon & Co Ltd [[1897] AC 22] 
ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs 
ALI SALIM versus INGHAM ENTERPRISES PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Stein JA. 
SALIM versus INGHAM ENTERPRISES PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Rummery DCJ in which his Honour entered a verdict for the respondent against the appellant in the sum of $58,316.81. This amount represented the balance outstanding, together with interest, for the supply of live chickens from the respondent allegedly to the appellant from September 1986 to July 1989. 
Background Facts 
The appellant and his family operated a business from a small farm. The appellant, trading as "Halal Chickens", commenced purchasing goods from the respondent in 1980. Initially, trade between the appellant and the respondent was conducted on a cash payment basis. In 1981, the appellant acquired a company, Pilani Pty Ltd and became one of its directors. On 3 February 1982, the appellant made an application for a credit trading account with the respondent. On this document, the appellant represented that he, together with his wife, was the proprietor of a business known as "Halala Chicken". The form indicated that the business had been established since January 1982. By letter dated 9 February 1982, the respondent refused the application for a credit trading account, but "hoped" that this would not affect "continued trading" on a COD basis. On 3 July 1984, the name of Pilani Pty Ltd was changed to Halal Chickens Pty Ltd.

In 1987, what I will generally describe as the Halal account, became "delinquent" and was placed on a cash basis. This continued until late 1988 or early 1989. The account again became "delinquent" in January 1989. The respondent thereafter only supplied chickens on the basis of cash before delivery. This arrangement continued until 19 July 1989, which was the date on which the respondent last supplied birds to Halal Chickens. The past indebtedness had not been cleared at the time that the trading relationship ceased.

The respondent commenced action in the District Court against Halal Chickens
Pty Ltd to recover the amount outstanding. The appellant gave evidence that company monies were banked into his personal account, and that payments to the respondent towards the purchase of chickens were made from his account. The respondent then sought, and was granted, leave to amend its statement of claim to add the appellant as a defendant.

The Trial Judge's Findings 
The trial judge found that the initial trading relationship was between the respondent and the appellant. He further found that there was no evidence that the respondent ceased to trade with the appellant and commenced to trade with
Halal Chickens Pty Ltd. The trial judge noted that a great number of the respondent's invoices were addressed to the company, with the name of the appellant immediately following the name of the company. His Honour concluded from the evidence that: "whilst [the appellant] used the company as a vehicle with which to make purchases from the [respondent] the activities of the body corporate in that respect were as his agent, either acting on his own account or on behalf of the business known as Halala Chicken of which he was co proprietor with his wife. The body corporate being as I have said [the appellant's] alter ego the inference is overwhelming that the body corporate had authority to enter into contracts of purchase of chickens from the [respondent] on behalf of its principal [the appellant]." 
The appellant, while not taking issue with his Honour's finding that the company was the appellant's alter ego, submitted that the inference that the company entered into contracts on behalf of the appellant denied the effect of incorporation. See Salomon versus A Salomon & Co Ltd [[1897] AC 22.] 
The Rule in Salomon 
There is force in the appellant's submission. Salomon established the principle of the separate legal identity of a corporate body. As Lord Halsbury
LC said at 30: "[I]t seems to me to be essential to the artificial creation that the law should recognise only that artificial existence - quite apart from the motives or conduct of individual corporators." 
The rule in Salomon, and therefore, the effect of incorporation, has "remained the same, notwithstanding the proliferation of conglomerates, holding companies and subsidiaries": Briggs versus James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd [(1989) 16 NSWLR 549] at 568 per Rogers AJA.

In light of the decision in Salomon, and the numerous cases which follow, it is difficult to maintain the proposition that the doctrine of agency can be imported into the relationship between a company and its controlling director.
Indeed, the decision in Salomon rejected the proposition that a company was merely the agent for its incorporators. In J H Rayner (Mincing Lane) Ltd v
Department of Trade and Industry [1988] 3 WLR 1033, Kerr LJ at 1098-1099 said: "In submitting that when entering into contracts the ITC nevertheless contracted as agent for its own members, the plaintiffs are therefore faced with the fundamental jurisprudence enshrined in the decision of the House of Lords in Salomon versus A Salomon & Co 
Ltd [[1897] AC 22.] The crucial point on which the House of Lords overruled the Court of Appeal in that landmark case was precisely the rejection of the doctrine that agency between a corporation and its members in relation to the corporation's contracts can be inferred from the control exercisable by the members over the corporation or from the fact that the sole objective of the corporation's contracts was to benefit the members. That rejection of the doctrine of agency to impugn the non-liability of the members for the acts of the corporation is the foundation of our modern company law. The fallacy of the existence of any such agency relationship is particularly clearly exposed in the speech of Lord 
Hershell, at pp 42-43, but there is no need to cite from it." (An appeal to the House of Lords was dismissed: [[1990] 2 AC 418.)] 
The Australian cases are to the same effect. In Dennis Willcox Pty Ltd versus FCT [(1988) 79 ALR 267] at 274, Jenkinson J, after considering all the relevant authorities, stated: "Neither the circumstance that a company is completely subject to the ownership and the direction of another person nor the circumstance that that other person exercises directorial control of the activities of the company in ways which minimise the manifestations of the company's separate legal identity will justify, in my opinion, a conclusion that acts in the law formally done by the company are to be regarded, for purposes of the kind here in question in relation to Australian income tax law, as acts in the law done by that other person." 
See also Donnelly versus Edelsten <case>; <case>; [(1988) 82 ALR 530], Lockhart J said at 543: "The separate legal personalities of the Wynyard companies and Mr 
Wynyard must be respected unless it is shown that the cases fall in one of the particular situations in which the courts have been prepared to lift the corporate veil... There is no suggestion that this case is within such categories, and the possibilities that the companies may or may not have had an independent source of income, and that Mr Wynyard may or may not have used company funds for his own purposes in breach of fiduciary duty, do not in themselves justify disregarding the separate legal personalities of company and shareholders." 
See also Dalco versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation [(1988) 82 ALR .] 
The fact that a company is under the unrestricted control of a person does not make the company an agent for that person. Since Salomon, "traders and creditors have known that they do business with a corporation at their peril if they do not require guarantees from members of the corporation or adequate security": J H Rayner (Mincing Lane) Ltd versus Department of Trade and Industry [[1990] 2 AC 418] at 482 per Lord Templeman.

The manner in which the respondent issued its invoices and receipts leaves me in no doubt that the respondent knew and understood that it was dealing with the corporate entity Halal Chickens Pty Limited. The fact that the appellant's name appeared below that of the company does not evidence agency. It bears no greater significance than to identify the individual at Halal Chickens Pty
Limited with whom the respondent was dealing. The obvious deficiencies in the appellant's business and accounting procedures should not be allowed to obscure this fact. The payment advices sent to the respondent were also clearly marked as being from the company. The name of the appellant does not appear on these documents at all. There can be no suggestion from these documents, therefore, that the appellant held himself out as being the contracting party. It is not relevant, in my opinion, that there was no evidence to determine from which date precisely it commenced to trade with the company. The respondent's invoices that were tendered at trial, are addressed to "Halal Chickens Pty Ltd", with the name of the appellant immediately below. Accordingly, it cannot be said that the company was merely the agent and vehicle for the appellant.

In my opinion, the appeal should be allowed with costs.

Ali SALIM versus INGHAM ENTERPRISES PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: The respondent (Inghams Enterprises Pty Limited) had sued Halal Chickens Pty Ltd in the District Court for a balance claimed to be owed on an account for purchases of live chickens between September 1986 and July 1989. The appellant, Mr Ali Salim, is a director of Halal Chickens Pty Ltd. He gave evidence at the trial. After he gave evidence the respondent sought and was granted leave to amend its claim to add Mr Salim as a defendant. The joinder of the appellant is not challenged in the appeal. The trial judge entered judgment for the respondent against Mr Salim in the sum of $58,316.81 on 16 November 1995. 
Under the heading in the judgment `With whom was the plaintiff trading?'
Rummery DCJ said: 
There is evidence from Mr Salim that the company was his alter ego, that company monies were banked into his account at his bank and payments were made from his account towards the purchase of chickens from the plaintiff, which were invoiced in the name of the company.

On behalf of the appellant, Mr Durston of counsel makes it clear that his
Honour's finding that the company was Mr Salim's alter ego is not disputed.
Rather, it is submitted that to draw the inference that the company entered into contracts for the supply of chickens on behalf of its director Mr Salim denies the effect of incorporation. Reliance is placed on Salomon versus A Salomon & Co Ltd [[1897] AC 22.] He submits it was an inference not open to his Honour.

In my opinion there are three possibilities. First, that the company was the contracting party. Second, that Mr Salim himself and not the company, was the contracting party. Last, that the company was the agent and vehicle for Mr
Salim, who was the principal. It is the last of these alternatives that his
Honour found.

While some of the voluminous documentary evidence tendered at the trial reveals inconsistencies and the evidence of Mr Salim is highly confused, the following facts are tolerably clear.

The appellant (and probably his wife) trading as Halal (or Halala) Chickens commenced buying goods from the respondent in 1980 (AB 401 and 526). The trade continued on a cash payment basis and in February 1982 Mr and Mrs Salim (trading as Halala Chickens) made an application to the respondent for credit.
This was refused although the letter of refusal noted that it would not affect the continuation of trading on a COD basis.

The appellant bought a company, Pilani Pty Ltd in late 1981. Its name was changed to Halal Chickens Pty Ltd in July 1984. It is common ground that
Pilani Pty Ltd did not trade with the respondent. However, the appellant submits that for the period in question (September 1986 to July 1989) the principal was the company Halala Chickens Pty Ltd and not Mr Salim.

His Honour found that the value of chickens sold in the period in question was $916,776.40 of which $866,488 had been paid leaving a balance outstanding of $50,288.40. He entered a verdict against Mr Salim for this amount together with interest.

During the relevant period most of the respondent's invoices for the goods supplied are directed to `Halala' or `Halala Chickens'. By contrast the statements from the respondent are directed to Halal Chickens Pty Ltd and
Ali Salem (sic) (eg AB 443 and 445). These are documents which emanated from
Inghams. On the other hand, when making payments the appellant regularly forwarded a document which, although it contained the printed word `invoice', was clearly not an invoice but an attempt to record the balance Mr Salim believed was owing. These documents were headed with the printed words `Halala
Chickens Pty Ltd'.

The appellant and his wife operated a business from a small farm at 26
Bellfield Avenue Rossmore. The two sons of the appellant were also engaged in the business. The land and farm was owned by the appellant and his wife. It is apparent that the company did not run the business during the relevant period.
It paid no rent for the farm nor wages for the appellant or his family who were working in the business. Neither Mr Salim, nor his wife, drew any moneys from the company. It appears that the family's living expenses came out of the farm income, as did interest payments on the mortgage of the farm property.
The income from the business was deposited to the personal banking account of the appellant and his wife. The chickens purchased for the business were paid for out of the personal banking account of the appellant and his wife and not by the company. Some of the earlier payments were made by the appellant in cash or by bank cheque. The company did not lodge any tax returns during the relevant period or indeed until 1994. The appellant himself did not lodge any personal tax returns for the years between 1985 and 1994 except for the year
A truck was used in the business by Mr Salim and by `his driver'. It seems that this was owned and operated by the Salims and not by the company.

As his Honour observed, there was no evidence that on and from a certain date
Inghams ceased to trade with the appellant and commenced to trade with the company. On the other hand, there was ample evidence that income from the farm business went into the appellant's bank account and payments were made to the respondent by the appellant from his bank account.

There was evidence in the respondent's case from its credit officer, Mrs Wall, that she dealt with Mr Salim. She was accepted as a credible witness. On the other hand, his Honour did not find the evidence of Mr Salim to be satisfactory and the evidence in the plaintiff's case was preferred.

It seems to me that there was abundant evidence upon which it could be found that Mr Salim was personally the contracting party and the real principal.
Assuming that the respondent contracted with the appellant believing him to be the agent of the company when in fact he was contracting as the principal, the respondent would still be entitled to judgment against the appellant.

In Gardiner versus Heading [[1928] 2 KB 284] at 290
Scrutton LJ (with whom Sankey LJ and Romer J agreed) stated: 
But if a man who contracts with another thinking he is a principal, may, on finding he is in truth an agent, sue the real principal, why should not the reverse hold good also? Why should not a man who contracts with another, thinking he is an agent, sue him when he finds out that he is the real principal? There seems to be no reason why he should not, provided the supposed agent has not expressly contracted as agent so as to exclude his liability as a principal party to that contract.

It is patent that an undisclosed principal may be sued upon a contract even though his existence might not have been disclosed Teheran-Europe Co Ltd v
S.T. Beltan (Tractors ) Ltd [[1968] 2 QB 545] and
Maynegrain Pty Ltd versus Compafina Bank [[1982] 2 NSWLR 141] at 151.

In my opinion, the preferred basis for the decision is that Mr Salim was in fact the principal and the company had nothing to do with the transaction.

Nevertheless, there was also more than sufficient evidence to find that the appellant was the alter ego of the company, a finding which is unchallenged. I do not see that the inference drawn by the trial judge denied the effect of incorporation and breached the rule in Salomon versus A Salomon & Co Ltd.
There was sufficient evidence for his Honour to infer that the company had the authority of the appellant to enter into contracts for the purchase of goods from the respondent (if indeed it did so) as agent for Mr Salim, the principal. Either way the appeal must fail.

I would propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
