

Regina versus Fabio Benjamin Garcia [1996] NSWSC 100 (6 May 1996) 
REGINA versus Fabio Benjamin GARCIA /94 May 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, IRELAND J, DOWD J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - proceeds of crime - money laundering - taxation evasion - pervert the course of justice - conspiracy - Notice of Contention - [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), [s 5A(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5a.html) 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Ireland J in relation to the appeal and application for leave to appeal by the appellant, for the reasons which he has given.

The Crown filed a document which is called a Notice of Contention. No such procedure is known in this Court, but it was clearly enough based upon the procedure adopted for the Court of Appeal by the Supreme Court Rules, Pt 51 r , whereby a respondent to an appeal is required to give notice of any contention that the decision from which the appeal is brought should be affirmed on grounds other than those relied upon at first instance.

As the appeal is to be dismissed, there is nothing in the Notice of Contention which needs to be dealt with. Concern was nevertheless expressed by the Crown that the ruling made by Blanch J which was attacked in that Notice will be regarded by judges of the District Court as binding: cf Regina versus Carey [(1990) 20 NSWLR 292] at 298-299. For that reason, the Crown asked that this Court deal with the points raised by the Notice so that the errors said to have been made by the judge will not perpetrated.

The Notice of Contention certainly does raise some issues of importance. The directions which the judge gave as to the obligation of the Crown to establish actual knowledge as to the source of the cash in relation to <case> of the [Proceeds of Crime Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) do not appear to sit well with this Court's judgment in Regina versus Buckett [(1995) ALR 669] (notwithstanding that that case dealt with <case>), and should obviously be treated with caution.

However, if this Court were to deal with the Notice of Contention when (as is the case) it is unnecessary for it to do so, what is said would be no more than obiter. There is a procedure which was open to the Crown which would have overcome that problem - namely, a Stated Case pursuant to [s
A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5a.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). As with [s
A(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5a.html), it is necessary that such a Case be stated by the Crown in such a way that the material facts upon which the ruling was given are set out and the question or questions asked will permit this Court to give a decision which will provide a precedent by which guidance is furnished in relation to other trials in the future: Regina versus J [(1987) 9 NSWLR 615] at 626.

That procedure was not followed in the present case, and it is not, in my opinion, appropriate to resolve the accuracy of the directions given where what is said will be merely an obiter dictum.

IRELAND J: The appellant, Fabio Benjamin Garcia, appeals against conviction and seeks leave to appeal against severity of sentence in respect of four counts upon which he was indicted with the co-offender Paul John Casey and a fifth count upon which he was indicted alone, as follows:-
Between about 1 November, 1987 and about 31 December, 1989 at Sydney in the State of New South Wales and elsewhere, they did conspire with each other and with Ian Hall Saxon and divers other persons to commit an offence against a law of the Commonwealth, namely Section 81 of the [Proceeds of Crime
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/), 1987.
Between about 1 November, 1987 and about 31 December, 1989 at Sydney in the State of New South Wales and elsewhere, they did conspire with each other and with Ian Hall Saxon and divers other persons to defeat the execution of a law of the Commonwealth namely the Income Tax Assessment Act, 1936.
Between about 24 April, 1989 and 20 June, 1991, at Sydney in the State of
New South Wales and elsewhere, they did conspire with each other, Garry Morton and divers other persons to pervert the course of justice in relation to the judicial power of the Commonwealth.
Between about 8 January, 1989 and about 24 April, 1989, at Sydney in the
State of New South Wales, they did dispose of money reasonably suspected of being the proceeds of crime.
Between about 8 January, 1989 and 16 February, 1989, at Sydney in the
State of New South Wales, he did dispose of money reasonably suspected of being the proceeds of crime.

The appellant and the co-offender pleaded not guilty to each count before
Blanch J in the Supreme Court. After the original indictment was presented and a jury empanelled, that jury was discharged and a further indictment was presented on the following day, 20 September. The trial proceeded until 17
October, 1994 when the jury returned verdicts of guilty in respect of each count.

The appellant brings his appeal on the following grounds:- 
As to Conviction: 
That his Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that counts 1 and 2 in the indictment were to be considered as alternative to each other;
That the verdict of the jury in relation to count 1 in the indictment was against the weight of the evidence and unsafe and/or unsatisfactory.
 
As to Sentence: . That the sentence imposed in relation to count 1 in the indictment was manifestly excessive;
That his Honour erred in failing to take into account adequately the principles of parity in determining the structure of the overall sentence.

The facts which the jury necessarily accepted and upon which the trial judge proceeded to sentence include the following. The co-conspirator, Ian Saxon, was a substantial drug dealer who had imported large quantities of cannabis resin into Australia and, by its sale, generated large amounts of cash.

A witness who testified under the pseudonym of "Andrews", a former associate of Saxon, had been dealing in drugs and making sales on behalf of Saxon since about 1987.

In the early part of 1989, Andrews participated in the importation of ten tonnes of cannabis resin into Australia under the direction of Saxon in conjunction with Garry Morton (the co-conspirator named in count 3 in the indictment) whose boat the "Rolling Thunder" put to sea from Crowdy Head on the north coast of New South Wales on 7 January, 1989 to rendezvous with another vessel about one hundred nautical miles off the Australian coast. On board were Andrews, Lloyd Saxon (brother of Ian) and Garry Morton.

At the rendezvous, approximately five hundred canvas bags of cannabis resin, each containing twenty kilograms, was loaded onto the "Rolling Thunder" which returned to the Australian coast entering the Hawkesbury River where the contraband was transferred to a houseboat anchored near Cottage Point.

The witness Andrews (to whom an immunity had been granted) also gave evidence of his role, at the request of Ian Saxon, in the distribution and sale of cannabis resin imported on that occasion.

The evidence indicated that the value of the imported cannabis exceeded $100 million dollars on the retail market and that Saxon received a quantity of cash considered to be between $70 million and $80 million.

The trial judge noted two other indicators of the amount of cash involved, being first that the police executed a search warrant on a garage in Carr
Street, Coogee rented by Lloyd Saxon and on those premises found $5.5 million in cash, and secondly the evidence of a witness who testified under the pseudonym of "Bennett", and to whom immunity had also been granted, to the effect that in late 1989 he was given approximately $7 million in cash by
Saxon over a period of about two weeks to send overseas.

In the early 1980's, the appellant commenced a legitimate gold dealing business in Sydney known as "Citizen's Gold Bullion Exchange Pty Limited" . Paul John Casey was employed in that business as Office Manager but later assumed the role of Operations Manager. In early 1989, the appellant was charged with offences concerning unrelated matters. He was later discharged by a magistrate in Queensland in respect of those matters after which, in about mid 1989, he left Australia to reside in the United States. Thereafter the appellant Casey assumed control of the conduct of the business of CGBE through a company called "Patlock Pty Limited" of which he was a director.

The Crown case was that the appellant, together with Casey, operated an "unofficial banking business" through CGBE (and later Patlock), through which they facilitated the laundering by Saxon of substantial sums of cash which had been derived from the proceeds of the sale of narcotics.

The Crown alleged that Saxon and also Morton would come to the premises occupied by CGBE and Patlock and deliver large quantities of cash in brief cases. No record was made of Saxon's or Morton's connection with these funds.

In respect of counts 1 and 2 in the indictment, it was alleged that after its arrival the Saxon money was banked and/or subsequently used for the purchase of gold from various dealers in Sydney. Thereafter the gold was exported to
Hong Kong, where it was sold on arrival and the evidence established that on the majority of occasions such sales were effected at a loss. The proceeds of those gold sales were then directed to one of a number of bank accounts operated by Saxon or his associates overseas, including accounts in the United
Arab Emirates and in Jersey.

The evidence adduced by the Crown disclosed that seven such shipments involving approximately $2.5 million were sent overseas for Saxon's benefit.

Whilst the majority of the funds transferred in this manner were those of
Saxon, the evidence established that there was some "intermingling" of moneys belonging to Saxon with other funds, indicating that the appellant and Casey were providing a similar service on a much smaller scale to clients other than
Saxon and Morton. The activities were carried out by the appellant and Casey without disclosing Saxon's involvement, and hence the Crown allegation that they were providing a "money laundering service" to assist Saxon in the disposal of illegally obtained income.

In respect of count 3, the Crown alleged that following the arrest of Morton for his role in the importation in January, 1989 proceedings pursuant to the [Proceeds of Crime
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) were instituted against him by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.
Morton was ordered to file a Statement of Assets. Those assets included an apartment at Noosa Heads, Queensland which, on the Crown case, had been purchased with moneys raised from the sale of cannabis resin imported in
January, 1989.

The Statement of Assets was ordered to be filed on or before 27 July, 1990 and by informal arrangement between the DPP and Morton's solicitors this time was extended to 1 August, 1990. An exchange of letters by facsimile in late July between the appellant (resident in USA) and Casey, together with documents seized from Garcia, included a letter from Casey to the appellant making reference to "hearing this Wednesday re: standing of assets". This, the Crown alleged, was a reference to the deadline for filing of the Statement of Assets by Morton in the Supreme Court proceedings. The documents seized also included a letter prepared and signed by the appellant dated April, 1989 purporting to document a loan made to Morton to finance the purchase of the Noosa Heads property. This letter, on the Crown case, was a fabrication especially compiled to give an appearance of legitimacy to the purchase of the Noosa property and hence to mislead the court in respect of the source of the funds used for the purchase. In convicting on count 3, the jury accepted the Crown case.

Count 4 related to the circumstances of Morton's purchase of the Noosa Head property for $550,000, which was paid through a company Turfella Pty Limited of which the appellant and Casey were directors. The Crown called evidence that Morton, as well as Saxon, brought cash into the premises of CGBE in early
The funds to enable the cheque to be drawn by Turfella came from various deposits of cash, mostly in $20 denominations, with organisations associated with CGBE. It was alleged by the Crown that such money was part of the proceeds of the sale of narcotics which had been delivered in cash to CGBE and that accordingly the applicants had disposed of money which was reasonably suspected to be the proceeds of crime.

Count 5 related to the circumstances of the payment of repairs to the "Rolling
Thunder", the evidence disclosing that two cheques totalling $180,000 both drawn on the account of CGBE were used to pay for repairs carried out to that vessel. As with the Noosa Heads property purchase, the evidence disclosed that funds for the payment of these repairs also originated from cash deposits of predominantly $20 denominations. It was the Crown case that these two payments were made by the appellant in the name of CGBE to conceal Morton's access to large sums of cash derived from the earlier importation.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that a conviction in relation to the first count must necessarily have also resulted in a conviction in relation to the second count. That is to say the activity of laundering money of necessity involved concealment from the authorities, i.e. the Australian Taxation
Office. Hence, so it is argued, there is duplicity.

The submission was made that had the first and second counts been left to the jury in the alternative they, the jury, could have acquitted the appellant on count 1 and convicted him on count 2 due to the lesser state of knowledge required on the part of the appellant on the latter count. The force of this submission is not evident. It was still open to the jury to have come to that conclusion in the way in which the case was left to them, and there is nothing to suggest that they would have been more likely to have done so if the two charges had been put in the alternative.

Counsel for the Crown submitted that, although the Crown Prosecutor in outlining the Crown case at the trial stated that the "transactions" engaged in by the appellant were to launder the drug money that Ian Saxon was generating and alternatively to defeat his income tax obligations, the Crown cases relating to the first and second counts were more precisely defined during the course of the trial.

The matter was fully ventilated in argument before the trial judge who, with respect to count 1, confined the Crown (over its objection) to an allegation that the cash was derived from drug related activity and ruled that matters relating to defeating the income tax laws were relevant only to count 2. The jury was directed accordingly. The Crown case was thereafter that there were two separate offences committed, not that one was the alternative to the other.

Even if, as the Crown asserts, the judge was in error in adopting this course (an issue which need not be decided), the constraints imposed restricted the
Crown case and favoured the appellant from a tactical point of view. That was conceded on appeal.

The Crown submitted, therefore, that counts 1 and 2 in the indictment are not properly to be regarded as alternative counts and accordingly there is no duplicity, albeit the evidence in support of both counts was essentially the same.

I agree with the Crown contention. There was no duplicity. There is nothing to stop a prosecutor laying two different charges arising out of the same facts:
Regina versus Thomas [[1950] 1 KB 26] at 31-38;
Australian Oil Refining Pty Ltd versus Cooper [(1987) 11 NSWLR 277] at 282;
Saraswati versus The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1906) 3 CLR 682] at 685; SPCC versus Tallow Products Pty Ltd [(1992) 29 NSWLR ]
at 528-529.

That is not to say that, in sentencing, the fact that the same acts have given rise to different charges of which the offender has been convicted should not be taken into account. On the contrary, this is an important factor, and in this case due weight was given to this aspect by the trial judge when he came to sentence the appellant.

Ground 1 is accordingly not made out.

In support of the second ground of appeal, the appellant submitted that count is essentially reliant on circumstantial evidence as to the actual knowledge of the appellant of the source of Saxon's money being from drug sales, whereas by contrast there was direct evidence (from Quad Duong) that the appellant had made an admission to him (albeit disputed by the appellant) relating to tax avoidance.

Additionally, so it is argued, there was evidence from each of the indemnified
Crown witnesses Andrews and Bennett which was exculpatory of the appellant in relation to count 1 "in a circumstantial sense".

Reliance is placed on: the evidence of Andrews regarding Saxon's statement that money was couriered overseas; the evidence of Bennett that $6 million in cash was sent off-shore in two weeks through foreign banks on Saxon's behalf,
Bennett being told by Saxon that this money came from concerts; the evidence of Detective Sergeant Shorrocks that Caradina Pty Limited, of which Saxon was a principal, was the developer of a property at 185 Darlinghurst Road; the evidence of Mrs McTaggart that Morton had said the money he paid in cash for repairs to the "Rolling Thunder" had come from ticket sales.

Hence it is submitted that the conviction on count 1 is contrary to the evidence adduced in the Crown case which lends itself to the inference that the admission to Quad Duong that the money was from ticket sales, laundered to avoid tax (consistent only with count 2), represented the appellant's state of mind concerning the source of the Saxon funds.

The Crown submits, as to ground two, that there was evidence upon which the jury could be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had the required knowledge in relation to the first count, and that the assertion by him in his unsworn statement to the jury of his belief, that Saxon was a "businessman and entertainer" deriving the cash from that source, is patently incredible.

Reliance is placed by the Crown on the following: the evidence of Quad Duong as to the frequency (once or twice per month) of Saxon's deposits of large sums of cash with CGBE; the personal involvement of the appellant in the various transactions and the banking of Saxon's cash and the making of arrangements for shipping of the gold to Hong Kong.

In addition, the Crown relies upon the payments by CGBE of the costs of incorporation of Caradina Pty Limited, of which Saxon was a director, and the payment by CGBE and Fabcal Corporation (of which the appellant was a director) of the overdraft obligations of Caradina; the fact that the majority of the cash deposited by Saxon was in $20 notes; the absence of any commercial justification for the majority of the gold sales in Hong Kong being loss transactions; and the involvement of CGBE in payment for the Noosa property and repairs to the "Rolling Thunder" concealing the source of cash from
Morton, who had no entertainment connections to explain the cash source.

There was also the evidence of Michael Chugg an executive in the business of importing overseas celebrities for concert tours. He had known Ian Saxon for twenty years and had employed him as a freelance lower echelon tour manager.
Mr Chugg's evidence disclosed the strictly limited amount of cash available to
Ian Saxon from his entertainment industry activities or to anyone else engaged in the touring of celebrities where in reality tickets are sold in advance through box offices such as Ticketek and Bass and the moneys held in trust until the end of the artist's engagement. An inference that the appellant was aware of the nature of this restriction upon the cash available to Saxon arises from the intricate business and personal relationship which he had had with Saxon.

It is significant that there was no suggestion by the appellant that Morton had been in the entertainment industry or in any other business generating a legitimate cash flow which would have suggested to him that the dealings with
Morton were merely to avoid taxation on legitimate earnings.

The huge amounts of cash which the appellant dealt with on behalf of Saxon and
Morton make it difficult to think of any source for the money other than drugs. In the vast majority of cases, the cash transactions were in excess of $100,000 and in some there was over $200,000 in cash. Certainly the appellant's unsworn statement to the jury did nothing to suggest an explanation for the source of the funds consistent with anything other than drugs.

Notwithstanding the force with which Mr Drake on behalf of the appellant emphasised the absence of direct evidence of knowledge in the appellant of the drug related source of the moneys provided by Ian Saxon and Garry Morton, the jury, upon consideration of the whole of the evidence relating to the association between Ian Saxon, Garry Morton, the appellant and the latter's close associate Casey, were in my opinion well able to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of the appellant on the first count. This was so notwithstanding the constraints imposed by the trial judge's directions limiting the first count to drug related activity.

It must be recognised that, absent admissions, an accused's state of knowledge can only ever be gleaned from evidence of surrounding circumstances.

In considering whether a verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, this court must ask whether, upon the whole of the evidence, it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty - M -v-
Regina [(1994) 181 CLR 487], applying
Whitehorn -v- The Queen <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 657] at 686; Chamberlain -v- The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 521] at pp 532, 621; and Knight -v- The Queen <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 495] at pp 504-505, 511. See also Regina versus McKnoulty [(1995) A Crim R 333] at 338-339.

I see no basis upon which the jury ought to have found the appellant not guilty. Nor do I accept that there is any significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. In my view, based upon my own consideration of the evidence which the jury were able to rely on, it was clearly open to them to convict the appellant on the first count, and the verdict was not unsafe or unsatisfactory.

No challenge is mounted to the jury's verdict on the second count in the indictment.

In view of the conclusions reached as to grounds one and two, it is unnecessary to consider the matters addressed in the "Notices of Contention" advanced by the Crown.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that on the first count a sentence of 8 years 6 months out of a maximum of 20 years is manifestly excessive and the non-parole period of 6 years "crushing".

The subjective matters pertaining to the appellant's prior good character are relied upon and his age of 58 years.

The principles of parity of sentence, by reference to the sentences imposed on
Lloyd Saxon and Garry Morton, are called in aid and, as to the money laundering, comparison is invited to the sentences imposed on Mr R J See as illustrating error in sentencing in the present case.

To my mind these arguments are untenable. The sentences imposed by Dunford J upon Lloyd Saxon, Garry Morton and R J See were considered in depth by Blanch
J in determining the sentences to be imposed on the appellant. His Honour was at pains to analyse the structure of the sentences imposed on the three other offenders, and he took into account the relevant overlapping aspects as well as the distinguishing features between the activities of Morton and Lloyd
Saxon on the one hand and the large scale, entirely different, professional money laundering operation engaged in by the appellant on the other, as explaining the sentences which he imposed in the present case. The circumstances were not so much the same as to require direct parity between the sentences imposed. I am in agreement with the approach adopted by the trial judge, and I see no disparity in the light of the different considerations to which he pointed. Nor do I see any error in the exercise of the judge's sentencing discretion in fixing the non-parole period.

The maximum penalty prescribed for an offence (by a natural person) under S 81 is a fine of $200,000 or imprisonment for 20 years or both. Counsel conceded that the amount of money involved in the transactions giving rise to the offence under S 81 exceeded any case of which he was aware.

Counts 1 and 2 were appropriately dealt with by the imposition of concurrent sentences, as were those imposed with respect to counts 4 and 5.

The actions of the appellant under the third count, which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 5 years, was appropriately dealt with as a separate and discrete matter, warranting a sentence cumulative upon that imposed for the first count.

In the approach adopted by the learned sentencing judge, no error has been demonstrated. In the circumstances of this case, the sentences fall squarely within the wide discretion available.

I propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed, leave be granted to appeal against sentence but the appeal dismissed, and an order be made that time served is to count.
 
DOWD J: I agree with the orders proposed by Ireland J on the appeal and the application for leave to appeal by the appellant, and with the reasons given.
 * * * 
