

Chew versus Waddy: Estate Violet Ruby Cowley [1996] NSWSC 356 (16 August 1996) 
CHEW versus WADDY ESTATE VIOLET RUBY COWLEY /96 
Friday 16th August 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES PROBATE DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: A caveat was lodged concerning the estate of the late Violet Ruby Cowley. It is now common ground that I should order that this caveat cease to be in force. However, I do have to decide a question of costs.

The deceased died on 27th February 1996 aged 83. Apparently she had at some time been married, but the name of the spouse is not now known; and apparently she left no children. Her main asset was a unit at Darlinghurst said to be valued at about $100,000.00. She executed a will on 24th February 1996 appointing the plaintiff, Jan Chew, her executrix and sole beneficiary. It appears that Jan Chew may have been living in the deceased's unit at the time, because that is the address specified in the will document for the plaintiff.
An earlier will of the deceased dated 4th February 1983 had appointed the defendant, Jane Waddy, executrix and sole beneficiary.

According to the defendant's affidavit, she was on 22nd February 1996 advised by the plaintiff that the deceased had been found in a coma and had been admitted to Sydney Hospital in a critical condition. The evidence suggests that the deceased's condition remained critical over ensuing days. On 24th or th February, the deceased was transferred to St. Vincent's Hospital because her condition had deteriorated. It appears that the deceased was unconscious for much of the time she was at St. Vincent's Hospital. On 27th February the deceased died. On that day also, the plaintiff told the defendant that the deceased had made a will three days before.

On 29th February 1996 (two days after the death), the plaintiff's solicitor caused to be published the usual notice that application would be made for probate after 14 days. On 4th March 1996 the defendant spoke to a person who turned out to be one of the witnesses to the deceased's will, and this person told the defendant that the deceased had made the will at St. Vincent's
Hospital or maybe at Sydney Hospital; and this person also gave the defendant the address of the plaintiff's solicitor.

On 6th March 1996, the defendant spoke to the plaintiff's solicitor, and told him that she had a will in which she was the sole beneficiary and executor; and asked to see the will executed in February 1996. The solicitor refused this, saying "It is none of your business". Thereafter, a solicitor who had drawn up the 1983 will tried three times to speak to the plaintiff's solicitor, and was unsuccessful.

The defendant subsequently instructed her present solicitors; and on 22nd
March 1996 they telephoned the plaintiff's solicitor and were told that an application for probate had been filed that day. On the same day, the defendant's solicitor then lodged a general caveat on behalf of the defendant.
Subsequently the defendant's solicitors caused subpoenas to be issued to the hospitals where the deceased had been treated, returnable on 17th April 1996.

On 7th May 1996, the plaintiff's solicitors advised the defendant's solicitor by telephone that he had statements from eleven witnesses and a hospital report; and on 8th May 1996, the defendant's solicitor wrote requesting copies of these statements and report.

On 3rd July 1996, the plaintiff's solicitor requested the defendant's solicitor to remove the caveat, and advised that an application that it cease to have effect would be made after seven days if it was not removed. On 5th
July 1996, the defendant's solicitor sent a letter repeating the request made on 8th May 1996. On 9th July, the present application for an order that the caveat cease to be in force was filed; and on 12th July, the plaintiff's solicitor wrote to the defendant's solicitor saying, in effect, that he was not obliged to supply the plaintiff's solicitor with the documents requested.

The defendant now says that as a result of investigations and the advice of her lawyers, she seeks the withdrawal of the caveat.

The defendant says that the deceased had spoken to her two or three weeks before she died about her being the executrix and sole beneficiary; and also says that she did not understand how the deceased could have made a new will on 24th February 1996, when she was then in a critical condition in hospital.
She says that she believed the only way she could get time to investigate the matter was to lodge the caveat. The defendant also points to the statement, in the plaintiff's affidavit in support of the probate application, that she was not aware of the existence of any other document purporting to contain testamentary intentions of the deceased or of circumstances raising doubt about her entitlement to probate.

I should say at once that I do not consider those assertions in the plaintiff's affidavit to be improper in the circumstances. The existence of a prior will revoked by a will which the plaintiff believes to be valid does, I think, justify the first assertion to which I have just referred. The mere expression of concern by someone else does not necessarily amount to circumstances raising doubt as to entitlement to probate.

The circumstance that notice of intention to apply for probate was lodged two days after death is somewhat surprising, but is not by itself suggestive of any impropriety. As regards the defendant's solicitor's refusal to give the plaintiff access to the will, it seems to me that it is not unreasonable for a solicitor upon instructions from his or her client to take such an attitude, at least unless the person seeking access to the will demonstrates a real interest in the matter, and also some reasonable cause for suspicion.

In any event, the authorities do make it clear that, prima facie, the onus is on a person lodging a caveat to be able to make out a matter occasioning doubt when any application that the caveat cease to be in force comes to Court; and the authorities do not suggest that it is an answer for the caveator to say that the person seeking that the caveat cease to have effect did not co- operate in providing evidence which may raise doubt about the will: see for example the unreported decisions of Powell,J. in d'Apice v. Farrell, (15/5/92), Ragary v. Pusztai (19/6/92), and Hetherington v. Sawyer (28/8/92).

It is certainly desirable to avoid unnecessary delay and expense in relation to estates, and certainly the lodging of a caveat without reasonable cause will tend to produce these results. On the other hand, there may be circumstances in which some reasonable and courteous communication between interested parties, before a probate application is lodged and/or before the step of lodging a caveat is taken and/or before an order is sought that a caveat cease to be in force, will avoid the incurring of unnecessary costs and delay.

Although the defendant in this case did not have evidence sufficient to show doubt at the time, I do not think I can hold that it was unreasonable for her to put on a caveat in the unusual circumstances of this case, where the will was made by a person in a critical condition in hospital three days before death, where she had peremptorily been denied access to the will, and where steps to obtain probate were begun only two days after death.

On the other hand, I do not think those matters alone would justify an order in her favour. The further matter which, together with those matters, persuades me that she is entitled to a limited order in her favour relates to the circumstances in which this application was actually brought. There was an outstanding request for material which had been sent to the plaintiff's solicitor. Without responding to that request, the plaintiff's solicitor gave notice that this application would be brought after seven days. Very shortly after that notice was given, the defendant's solicitors reminded the plaintiff's solicitor of the request. This application was then filed before any reply was given; and on 12th July 1996, after the application was filed, a reply was finally given denying the request.

Although, consistently with what I have said before, there was as I see it no obligation on the plaintiff or her solicitor to provide the information sought by the defendant, in all the circumstances of this case I think the unwillingness to give that information should have been communicated before this application was brought; so that the defendant would then have been in a position to decide whether or not to persist with the caveat in the light of that communication.

In all the circumstances, I think the appropriate order is that the plaintiff pay the costs of the defendant incurred as a result of the bringing of the application that the caveat cease to be in effect, except those costs associated with reaching agreement to the consent order.

I make orders in accordance with the short minutes of order which I initial and date.

I order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs arising out of the bringing of the notice of motion filed 9th July 1996, apart from those costs referable to the reaching of agreement for, and the making of, the order that the caveat cease to be in force; and in particular, the costs order does extend to costs of preparing the affidavit of the defendant and the contested hearing before me today.
 * * * 
