

Westpac Banking Corporation versus Hodgson Pastoral Co. (Torry Plains) and Ors
No. 4299 of 1995 Banking and Financial Institutions - Moratorium - Mortgages -
Liens - Contracts [1996] NSWSC 11 (12 January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
BRYSON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 8 December 1995 #DATE 13:12:1995 (Revised 14:12:1995) #ADD 12:1:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiff     R. McColl SC and J. Stevenson 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff   Henry Davis
York 
Counsel for the Defendants    D. Higgs SC and R. Hollo 
Solicitors for the Defendants   Walsh James
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
BRYSON J These observations relate to the matters in contention in this litigation which were argued on Friday 8 December
Most issues in the proceedings arise on the terms of documents or on facts the substance of which is not open to contention.
I was told that there may also be an estoppel issue which would require decision of some disputed facts.
The argument related to three questions which I will state broadly, although there were subsidiary questions: 
First, whether the plaintiff <case> for relief can be determined, or even considered, before the mediation process required by the [Farm Debt Mediation
Act 1994](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/) has been completed; secondly, the meaning and operation of Special Conditions, especially para , in the Facility Agreement of 26 July 1993; thirdly, the meaning and effect of the provisions of cl. 11 of Memorandum
V581852 which contains standard clauses incorporated in each mortgage.
The first defendant, which I call Hodgson Pastoral Co. is the bank's customer and has credit regulated principally by the Facility Agreement of 26
July 1993, as affected by subsequent arrangements and decisions taken by the bank. Hodgson Pastoral Co.'s indebtedness to the bank is secured by mortgages over lands in the Western Riverina, some owned by Hodgson
Pastoral Co. and some by other defendants. These lands are in various ownerships and are worked together in very extensive agricultural and pastoral operations.
The Facility Agreement replaced an existing secured loan facility of $6.2m. Tile agreement was reached with the consent of the second and third defendants. In 1994 the facility was increased by $500,000 by agreement.
At a meeting in January 1995 of representatives of the parties a budget was prepared which showed the contemplated manner of conducting Hodgson
Pastoral Co's business in 1995. In this contemplation the current account with the plaintiff would remain in credit and operations should achieve a net income over 12 months for Hodgson Pastoral Co. of approximately $1.9m. Hodgson
Pastoral Co. was then unable to pay $500,000, the increase of 1994, which was then due. It was also contemplated that properties would be sold. The bank gave approval for continuance of the term loan subject to a number of terms which included that Torry Plains would be sold by auction by 31 August, that a working account would continue on a strictly credit basis and that otherwise the terms and conditions of the facility were to remain. Negotiations for agreement on the terms of documents to give effect to this approval broke down in September , and on 19 September the bank sent Hodgson Pastoral Co.
documents under [s.8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s8.html) of the [Farm Debt Mediation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/), to which the first defendant responded on 9 September requesting mediation. Then the Rural
Assistance Authority was advised of the need for mediation by the plaintiff on September.
On 30 October 1995 the plaintiff sent a letter to each defendant asking each to provide a preferable lien over any crop which was to be harvested, and to confirm in writing that the proceeds of the sale of any crop would be credited to Hodgson Pastoral Co's account with the bank. On 13 November 1995 the defendants' solicitors informed the bank that the defendants would not be executing crop liens, that the crops had already been mortgaged and that any lien in favour of the plaintiff would be in breach of existing obligations.
These proceedings were commenced as a consequence.
There is a huge wheat crop, stripping is under way and either already has or very soon will produce a flow of cash payments, which the bank claims to be entitled to receive or control. The mediation process under the [Farm Debt
Mediation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/) has not yet been completed, so that enforcement action by the bank is proscribed.
A number of charges over property of Hodgson
Pastoral Co. have been registered. Three charges in favour of Victorian Producers Co-operative
Society over livestock have been registered under the Corporations Law with the Australian Securities Commission but these do not conflict with any security claimed by the plaintiff.
On 24 October Barrier Engineering registered a Fixed and Floating charge over Hodgson Pastoral Co's assets to secure $100,000 with interest of $4,000; this is said to be secured by a crop lien over a wheat crop on 4,000 hectares of land there described. Mr
Hodgson's affidavit says that the defendants have given a crop lien to Seedex Pty Ltd.
Since August 1995 Hodgson Pastoral
Co. has given the Australian Wheat
Board orders, which according to their terms are irrevocable, authorising AWB to pay stated sums of money to the Victorian Producers Co-operative Society and to Barrier Engineering. These were:  August 1995  $160,000 for
Victorian Producers Co-Operative
Society.
 October 1995 $104,000 to Barrier Engineering Co.
 November 1995 $150,000 to Victoria Producers Co-Operative
Society.
 November 1995 $246,800 to Barrier Engineering Co.
On 10 November 1995 the crop lien to Barrier Engineering Co. was varied to secure the increased amount.
It is clear and undisputed that no consent was sought from Westpac for these securities or authorities.
Claims , 2 and 3 in the Amended Summons raise the second question and seek declaratory relief and an injunction which would compel Hodgson
Pastoral
Co. to apply all income derived by any of the defendants from the mortgaged lands in the way referred to in the Facility
Agreement: "In addition to the above conditions, we advise the following special conditions will apply to the facility: a) No capital expenditure is to be undertaken without the prior consent of the Bank.
b) All income derived from the Properties must be credited to your account with the Bank and any diversion of funds or further borrowings arranged without prior approval of the Bank will constitute a default entitling the Bank to terminate the facility.
c) Full budget control is to apply strictly in accordance with budgets provided. No excesses will be permitted and the Bank's approval will be required prior to issue of any cheques.
d) Any surplus funds derived over budget must be credited to your account with the Bank in permanent reduction of the facility,"
In my opinion the bank's claim to be entitled to equitable relief compelling Hodgson Pastoral
Co. to perform this arrangement specifically by paying all moneys due into the bank account referred to depends on its being shown that the meaning and effect of these Special Conditions are that Hodgson
Pastoral Co. agreed to give the bank a charge over the income and other future payments referred to. Unless the Special Conditions create a charge or some security interest analogous to a proprietary interest in the income as received, there is no ground upon which an injunction to enforce the arrangement can be granted. Unless the Special Conditions have the meaning and effect of a promise by Hodgson Pastoral Co. to perform the Special Conditions they cannot be enforced by equitable remedies either; it is not enough that an agreement should provide that if a certain condition is fulfilled stated consequences will follow.
The Special Conditions contain no express reference to a promise, or any language which conveys, in a direct way, a promise by Hodgson Pastoral Co.
that the events referred to in paras (a), (b), (c) and (d) will happen, or that it will bring it about that they do happen. Nor is there any statement to the effect that the bank is to have a charge over or an interest in income which is to be paid into the account under para (b). This last observation is true, as to express provisions, at each stage, before Income is credited to the account, while it Is in the account and subject to budget control by the bank over cheques, and also later when any surplus is credited in permanent reduction of the Facility. Notwithstanding the absence of any direct expression of the idea that there must be a charge, the overall nature of the scheme of control and the bank's part in it would,
I would think, mean that the bank had a charge over any income which in fact was paid into the bank account, and would be entitled to apply any surplus in that account in reduction of the Facility, subject to exercise in good faith and for the purposes of the arrangement of the bank's powers to authorise the issue of cheques. In the absence of any similar regime imposing controls or giving powers to the bank over income before it is paid into the account it is not in my opinion correct to treat the Special Conditions as containing by implication an arrangement that the bank would have a charge over income before that happened.
I am also of the view that, on the true meaning and effect of the Special
Conditions, in the context of the Facility letter as a whole, including the defendant's agreements endorsed on it, there is no promise, either made directly (as is plainly so) or indirectly or by implication that Hodgson
Pastoral Co. will comply with the Special Conditions or with para (b), or that it will see to it that they are compiled with. Simply the fact that these
Special Conditions are referred to as conditions would suggest, on the literal meaning of the word "condition" that what the passage states is some events which must happen if some other fight provided for by the Facility letter is to exist or to continue. However this is not a clear guide, as people do not always or even usually use "condition" in a strict way, in bank correspondence or in other every day communications. Taking the Facility letter as a whole including the words of acceptance which refer to "terms and conditions".' the language used does not distinguish carefully between conditions and other contractual provisions. Paragraph (b) does spell out the consequence of any diversion of funds, namely a default entitling the bank to terminate the
Facility, and no other consequence is indicated.
I am of the view that the Special Conditions should be taken at their face value, and it would not be correct to imply into them some further assurance or contractual promise by Hodgson Pastoral Co.
that the conditions would actually be fulfilled, or that the regime provided for would actually be followed. What is actually said in para (b) to be the consequence of not complying is quite enough to make the whole regime fully effectual and to exclude any need to make any further implication. At face value the provisions mean that the facility may be terminated if the Special Conditions are not complied with and Hodgson Pastoral Co. does not see that its income goes into the account, accept budgetary control by the bank and obtain approvals of cheques, and credit any surplus funds in reduction of the facility. The whole arrangement is rational and effective as it stands, and there is no room for any further obligation or for the implication of some contractual promise which might be enforced by an equitable remedy.
On consideration of the second question then, the bank should not succeed, irrespective of the effect of the [Farm Debt Mediation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/).
The third question relates to cl. 11 in Memorandum V581852 which is in these terms: "11. That as to such parts of the mortgaged premises as are or may consist of agricultural horticultural or pastoral lands the
Mortgagor will clear and keep cleared therefrom all noxious growths which in the opinion of any Manager or any person authorised by him or by the Bank shall or might lessen the value or utility of such lands for agricultural horticultural or pastoral purposes respectively
And will use all reasonable measures and erect and keep in repair all rabbit-proof and other fencing necessary for exterminating and keeping such lands free from rabbits and other noxious animals And will at the cost and expense of the Mortgagor whenever required by the Bank so to do execute in favour of the Bank by way of further security for the moneys hereby secured a preferable lien on every then ensuing crop of agricultural or horticultural produce on the said lands every such lien to be in such form and to contain such powers provisions and agreements as the
Bank shall require. And also will not without the written consent of the Bank give any preferable lien or other security on or over any such crop to any other person."
The wheat crop was planted some months ago, around June 1995 and is referred to as "the winter crop" in every-day language. Etymology would suggest a connection between the word "crop" and the action of cutting, reaping or stripping but every-day usage applies the word "crop" and its derivatives to wheat while it is in the growing stages, even months before stripping, as well as to the wheat grains produced by the process. The defendants' argument was to the effect that the "then ensuing crop" referred to in cl. 11 refers to a crop which exists wholly in the future, and that from the time of sowing onwards, the growing wheat is not the "then ensuing crop".
It would be excluded in this argument because it was the present crop, not the then ensuing crop.
I do not accept this view of the meaning and effect of cl. 11. In my view the "then ensuing crop" can be wheat which has not yet been sown, but it also can be wheat which has been sown and is growing towards the stage of stripping or (to be etymologically correct) cropping the wheat from the plants at the completion of the growing cycle. The words "then ensuing" look forward to the process of stripping, reaping or cropping, and not to the next occasion when the whole process of crop production is undertaken. In my view it cannot be correctly attributed to the parties that, for example in the case of wheat to which cl. 11 would most frequently apply, they intended that any requirement by the bank that it should be granted a registered lien could only be made in the interval between stripping (about mid-summer) and sowing (towards mid-winter) or if made later could only be made in respect of the process for the following year and not the current year. If cl. 11 had that effect it would work very awkwardly and for much of the year would not work at all in relation to the annual cycle of 12 months contemplated by the Liens on Crops and Wool and Stock Mortgages Act, see s.9. Although a requirement for a lien might well be made before the crop was sown, the exigencies of the annual agricultural cycle and the needs for expenditure months before expected receipts which the cycle generates mean that the period while wheat is growing towards harvest is a period when it is highly likely that the need for credit, and for security for credit would come under consideration, and it would be a very strange arrangement if the parties, by using the expression "then ensuing crop" intended that at that stage the bank could only make a requirement for a lien for the following year and not for the current year.
In the result the bank has a contractual fight to obtain a registered crop lien under cl. 11. This is a fight to a security interest in property, and is appropriately enforced by specific performance and protected by injunction.
My views on the third question mean that the first question must be addressed. The operation of the legislation on litigation was reviewed by
Lindgren J in Frank Underwood and Ors v. Commonwealth
Bank of Australia and
Ors. (FCA unreported 2 March 1995) where Lindgren J held (at 7) that an action to recover a money judgment for tile debt which mortgages secured was not enforcement action and incurred no proscription.
In the [Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/) enforcement action is a key concept.
What is forbidden by [s.8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s8.html) and void under [s.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s6.html) is enforcement action. Relevant definitions in [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s4.html) are: "Definitions
In this Act: 'enforcement action', in relation to a farm mortgage, means taking possession of property under a farm mortgage, the sale of property under a farm mortgage, or any other action to enforce a farm mortgage including the continuing of action already commenced to enforce a farm mortgage but does not include: the completion of the sale of property held under a farm mortgage in respect of which contracts were exchanged before the commencement of [section 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s6.html); or the enforcement of a judgment that was obtained before the commencement of that section; 'farm' means land on which a farmer engages in a farming operation, 'farm debt' means a debt incurred by a farmer for the purposes of the conduct of a farming operation that is secured wholly or partly by a farm mortgage, 'farm mortgage' includes any interest in, or power over, property (comprising a, farm or part of a farm or farm machinery used by a farmer in connection with a farming operation, or both) securing obligations of the farmer (whether as a debtor or guarantor); 'farmer' means a person (whether an individual person or a corporation) who is solely or principally engaged in a farming operation and includes a person who owns land cultivated under a share-farming agreement and the personal representatives of a deceased farmer; 'farming operation' means: a farming (including dairy farming, poultry farming and bee farming), pastoral, horticultural or grazing operation, or any other operation prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this definition".
 .
It was contended that the Facility Agreement is not a "farm mortgage" as defined but it is not necessary for me to decide that as for other reasons I am not prepared to make any order enforcing the Facility Agreement, It is clear that the first defendant is a farmer as defined and that the debts to the plaintiff were incurred for the conduct of a farming operation and is "farm debt" as defined - see subs.5(1).
The mechanism of the Act is that enforcement action is forbidden for a stated period until a mediation can be held. The operation of the legislation can be excluded by the Rural Assistance Authority under [s. 11.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s11.html) The functions of the mediator, stated in [s. 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s13.html), do not include any power to determine or alter the rights of parties, or any power for the mediator, or for the Rural
Assistance
Authority to take any measure for the interim preservation of rights of either party. No, express provision of the Act provides either for the alteration or the preservation of the situation in which the rights of the parties were when the mediation process was initiated.
However the terms of [s.22(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s22.html) show a contemplation that some other notice might be incorporated in a notice initiating a mediation. The plaintiff's counsel contended that a notice under [s.57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) is an example of such a notice, and it well could be. Whether or not that is right, it seems clear from s.22 that the Act contemplates that there might be some other relevant notice of importance for the parties' rights contemporaneous with a notice to initiate mediation.
The plaintiff's counsel contended that "enforcement action" is action which will have the effect of dispossessing the farmer of the farm. She contended that this result appears from a consideration of the whole of the legislation, including the definition of enforcement action, with the object of the legislation stated in [s.3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s3.html) thus:- "Object
The object of this Act is to provide for mediation concerning farm debts before a creditor can take possession of property or other enforcement action under a farm mortgage."
In my opinion, the purposes of the legislation must be considered and given effect in the construction of "enforcement action" and understanding what enforcement is forbidden.
The purposes of the legislation are not to be understood solely from [s.3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s3.html), but appear from [s.3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s3.html) taken with the provisions of the legislation as a whole.
Counsel offered as illustrations that to appoint a receiver to take possession of mortgaged property is enforcement action, but that seeking a judicial order to establish the existence of a right to security, or to ensure that moneys subject to a security or an agreement as to their application should not be applied in some other way is not enforcement action. It was further contended that enforcement action does not include steps taken to improve or confirm a secured position, such as by requiring the farmer to execute a crop lien which the farmer is already obliged to execute under a previously existing security. nor does it preclude taking steps preliminary to the enforcement of a security. It was contended that the legislation does not preclude action which has the effect of confirming the existence of rights, although it leaves the plaintiff in a position where it is disabled from enforcing those fights, at least for the time being. Counsel contended that the opportunity to bring proceedings and obtain an order to ensure that rights are preserved is not taken away by the legislation, whereas any measure which had the effect of dispossessing the farmer from possession of the farm is forbidden until the mediation procedures have been fulfilled. Some of counsel's illustrations related to the claim based under the Special
Conditions in the Facility Agreement for the proceeds payable by the AWB on delivery of wheat; but it is not necessary for me to come to a conclusion on these.
The plaintiff's counsel referred me to a number of cases in which words derived from "enforce" have been considered by courts. In no case was the legislation an apparent model for any provision in [Farm Debt Mediation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/), or even generally similar in text. With one exception, the cases relate to legislation which was obviously passed with the object of permanently changing the fights of persons.
Mayfair Trading Co. Pty Ltd v. Dreyer and Ors <case>; [(1958) 101 CLR 428] related to the Money Lenders Act 1912-1948 (Western Australia). A number of provisions of that Act were considered including provisions in s.9 to the effect that no contract for repayment of money lent by a money lender and "... no security given by the borrower ...
shall be enforceable ..." unless there was a memorandum of a prescribed kind. These words were given a very wide application, extending to extra judicial remedies as well as enforcement in litigation. See particularly Dixon CJ at 448-449, where his Honour said "The words 'enforce', 'enforceable' and 'enforcement' when used in relation to a security may be properly applied to the exercise of any of the remedies which the security may give" and gave illustrations for the extension of these expressions to extra-judicial remedies.
In Pavey and Matthews Pty Ltd. v. Paul <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 221] the legislation under consideration was the Builders Licensing Act 1971 . Section 45 provided in relation to a building contract that "A contract".. is not enforceable ..." except in stated circumstances. At 226 Mason and Wilson JJ said "As a matter of ordinary legal usage the words 'enforceable' and 'unenforceable' may refer either to the judicial and curial remedies available for the enforcement of a contract or to all the remedies available for the enforcement of a contract, including such remedies as the contract itself may provide." Their Honours gave illustrations including a reference to Mayfair
Trading Co. v. Dreyer. At 228 their Honours said "In the present case the New
South Wales Court of Appeal attributed a broader operation to s.45 by invoking the usual meaning of the expression 'to enforce', which is 'to compel observance of: see Reg. v. Bates [(1982) 2 NSWLR 894] at 895. The force of this approach to the problem is not to be under estimated because, as we have seen, the effect of the action on a quantum meruit is to enforce the plaintiff's claim in some circumstances in which an action on tile contract would succeed, proof of the contract being an element in the quasi-contractual claim.
However, it seems to us that in the context of a provision such as s.45 with its injunction that the contract shall not be 'enforceable', it is more appropriate to look to the more precise legal meanings that have been assigned to the term in comparable situations where a contract or a security is expressed to be unenforceable."
This their Honours proceeded to do with the observation at 229 "The consequences of the respondent's interpretation are so draconian that it is difficult to suppose that they were intended. An interpretation that serves the statutory purpose yet avoids a harsh and unjust operation is to be preferred." At 261 Deane J distinguished decisions on money-lending legislation, referring to textual differences and the different history of that legislation. Deane J's judgment appears to turn on the view that the legislation showed no intention of depriving a builder of an ordinary common law right to bring a quantum meruit claim for work which he had actually done and which had been accepted. Overall, the High Court treated s.45 as dealing only with the subjects with which it expressly dealt with, that is the enforcement of the building contract, and did not give "enforceable" an extended meaning which would extend to rights which existed under the common law and did not proceed on the basis of the enforcement of the building contract, although its existence was an element in them.
Counsel also referred me to case law dealing with s.4 of the Trade Union
Act 1871 of the United Kingdom.
There are not useful textual analogies between that legislation and the [Farm Debt Mediation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/), the common elements being their incidence on contractual rights and the use of a derivative of the word "enforce" - "4. Nothing in this Act shall enable any court to entertain any legal proceeding instituted with the object of directly enforcing or recovering damages for the breach of any of the following agreements..." (specifying some agreements relating to trade unions.) In Amalgamated
Society of Carpenters v. Braithwaite and Ors. [(1922) 2 AC 440] this was held not to prevent the success of action for injunctions to restrain a threatened expulsion from the union where on the construction of its rules the plaintiffs were not liable to be expelled in the circumstances. An epitome of the reasons was given by Lord Buckmaster at 451 "To construe a rule is not directly to enforce any agreement between the members....".
I was also referred to In re John Jones Ex Parte National Provincial Bank [(1932) 1 Ch 548], which of all cases cited came closest to the present problem, as it related to the United Kingdom moratorium legislation, s. 12 of the
Agricultural Credits Act 1928, which had operation only until 1 January 1931 and provided that during that period "an agricultural charge created in favour of the bank shall be enforceable only in respect of moneys advanced in addition to ... " (the advance on August 1928 when the legislation was passed). It was contended that the form of demand given on 3 September 1930 constituted enforcement action and for that reason the bank was not, after 1
January 1931, entitled to enforce the securities in respect of the whole debt.
The Divisional Court rejected this view and Clauson J said at 554: "In my view the notice was a step, preliminary no doubt, to enforcement, but not a step which enforced the security: It was a step taken with a view to the subsequent enforcement of the security. The notice had the effect of changing the security and making the security more advantageous to the mortgagee than it had been before. That does not seem to me to be an enforcement of the security. Suppose that the mortgagee was in a position to bring pressure to bear, by reason of his position as mortgagee, upon the mortgagor to give him additional security, it would be a misuse of language to call that an enforcement. In the same way, it seems to me that the doing of an act which may make his position stronger is not an enforcement of the security. The enforcement of the security took place in my judgment when, an agent for sale having been appointed, the agent sold. It is possible the enforcement of the security began when he took possession with a view to sale. It is not necessary to answer that for the purpose of this case." Decisions under s.4 of the Trade Union Act were notcited.
The defendants' counsel contended that the operation of the Act is such that where a creditor seeks to enforce a term of the farm mortgage or to claim an interest or exercise any power over a farm or part of it arising out of the farm mortgage, that is the very type of activity which the Act defines as "enforcement action" and by s.6 that activity is rendered void. He contended that enforcement action extends to compelling
Hodgson Pastoral Co. to execute a lien under a right conferred by cl. 11, which is incorporated in each mortgage. He contended that ancillary remedies could be clamied, for example a
Mareva injunction, of which he said that the right to it could be established without reference to the mortgage, and he contended that that example should be distinguished from this case because what are sought here are the very things for which the mortgage provides. He contended that rights would be available to obtain judicial orders to preserve or prevent the dissipation of assets and accepted as an example that an injunction to stop the borrower from entering into other transactions which would alter the priority of the plaintiff <case> would not be enforcement of the farm mortgage. It was his contention that the legislative prohibition goes further than simply preventing the final step, the actual sale of the property under a power of sale or the final lunge for possession. He contended that this was shown by the terms of s. 11. The defendants' counsel made a number of contentions against the bank's entitlement to enforce the Special Conditions in the
Facility Agreement with which, in the circumstances, I am not required to deal.
There are some general considerations which to my mind assist discernment of what is intended by enforcement action in the legislation.
The legislation overall does not in my view show any intention to make a permanent change in the rights of the parties. To the contrary, its effect is to bring the parties together for a mediation, the likely outcome of which could be expected to be an agreed course of action which would give effect to their fights, and do so with regard to other interests and claims of each party which the other was prepared to recognise, and to which the other party was prepared to accommodate enforcement of rights. A mediation, among other things, offers the opportunity for the parties to see and a mediator to point out aspects of the parties' interests and overall commercial situation which might lead them to agree to some resolution which was different to proceeding to enforcement in the manner which a court would require. The legislation has some of the characteristics of moratorium legislation, not as its primary object but as an incident of a need to create an opportunity for a mediation to take place in an effective manner by deferring other action for a period, after which the legislation ceases to have any effect and each party is in a position to enforce its rights and to have its position regulated according to law.
The legislation does not in terms forbid the bringing of all legal proceedings, or the taking of any step in any legal proceedings. The prohibition relates to enforcement action only.
I do not find it possible to see any way in which the purposes of the legislation would be served by a construction which gave the farmer an opportunity to alter the rights of a creditor, such as for example by creating securities which were to have priority over some security which he had already agreed to give to the creditor. It is very common for securities to be created in terms in which they are entirely equitable and it is difficult to conceive of them as existing, or to give any effect to them except in the context of bringing litigation to declare their existence and to restrain conduct which would defeat their effectiveness. Very usually it would also be true of securities and charges which have been created under the general law or the statute law and which do not depend on equitable principles that they could be readily defeated if there were no access to the courts to restrain conduct which would defeat them.
If all litigation and all endeavours to obtain judicial orders establishing the existence of securities and charges are prohibited by the prohibition on enforcement action and for the whole period when the prohibition is in effect the operation of the legislation would, in my view, be extremely harsh and unjust. Legislation with the stated object found in s.3 would be found actually to disable secured creditors and destroy the effect of their securities by enabling their debtors to take actions which have the practical effect of destroying them. A debtor who had no more than a contractual obligation to create a security could defeat that obligation by actually creating other securities during the period available for mediation.
A debtor who had actually created a security but was exempt from an injunction could defeat the security in a practical way by dispositions of property during the period available for mediation. It Is in my view unlikely, indeed hardly possible that it was the intention of the legislature to provide means for destroying or seriously prejudicing the positions of secured creditors, or to enact legislation which had a harsh and unjust effect. Indeed tile legislation would work very adversely to farmers and people in rural industry generally if it created a serious disability for secured creditors to an extent which tended to impede access to rural credit. It is possible for some applications of the legislation which could be defended as within the literal range of "enforcement action" to produce results which were so unjust as to be absurd.
I am not called on for a complete or exhaustive exposition of "enforcement action" and of the action which falls outside that expression and is avaiable, and I would find that rather difficult.
Finally what is required of me is an opinion whether the grant of orders to which the plaintiff is otherwise entitled falls within or without "enforcement action" as defined. I can readily see extreme cases which would not cause any real doubt; execution of a writ of possession resulting in delivery by the Sheriff of physical possession of a farm or farm machinery would no doubt be such, and I would think that an appointment, either by the court or by a mortgagee, of a receiver and manager to take possession of and manage a farming enterprise, or a receiver to receive proceeds coming due from the sale of produce to the farming enterprise would also be an enforcement action. Direct dispossessory action could not raise any doubt. What are before me however are claims for declarations establishing the existence of security interests and injunctions to prevent conduct which would defeat them.
It is possible and indeed quite common to refer to the initiation of any proceedings to establish or protect rights under a mortgage as enforcement of the mortgage. The plaintiff's claims relating to cl. 11 of the standard condition of the mortgage are within the literal reach of "enforcement action" as an ordinary piece of language. When however those words are set in their context in the [Farm Debt Mediation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/) they do not in my opinion extend to the remedies claimed by the plaintiff or to the making of an order upholding them.
The legislation would in my opinion prevent the plaintiff from asking for obtaining or giving effect to a writ of possession, or any process which specifically enabled the plaintiff or a receiver or manager or any officer appointed by the Court to take control physically of the crops subject to the lien, or, attach any moneys into which such crops were converted. That stage is prohibited by the legislation, to which the court would give effect by declining to hear an application or by staying execution. An injunction restraining conduct which would defeat rights of the plaintiff is however not prohibited in my opinion.
The defendants' counsel contended that
I should withhold an equitable remedy in respect of the claim for a registrable lien on tile ground of hardship to third parties, as it appears that other persons have or claim to have crop liens or irrevocable orders on moneys which are the proceeds of crops, and their positions might be prejudiced by an order requiring the first defendant to grant a registered preferable lien over a crop.
In my opinion there is no relevant hardship. No decision in this litigation can establish priorities between persons claiming under the various documents granted by the defendants and the bank, or establish the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of any of the irrevocable orders. There may be a conflict of priorities and it might be quite elaborate. An element in the conflict which might become important is that some or perhaps a considerable part of the wheat crop has already been harvested; ordinarily a statutory lien would, I would think, be ineffective except as to wheat which had not at the time of its registration been harvested. There is little or no room for knowledge or constructive knowledge of the plaintiff <case> to a preferable lien to have any place in a competition of priorities unless the person allegedly in competition with the bank was shown to have knowledge, at a time of taking its crop lien, of the bank's requirement of 30 October 1995. In the absence of some such matter I find it difficult to see how the bank would obtain priority over any other person who now holds a registered crop lien. I am not at present concerned nor am I able to resolve any question of competing priorities which might arise under these arrangements should the bank obtain and register a lien. I see that elaborate questions could be involved, but the questions before me are in the limited context of the bank's claim to be entitled to the grant of a registrable lien. However whatever the true position may be, there is no substantial ground of hardship for withholding relief.
In my opinion claims 7, 8, 9 and 11 in the Amended Summons may be granted.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/11.html  
