

Brescia versus QBE [2007] NSWSC 598 (6 July 2007) 
Last Updated: 6 August 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Brescia versus QBE <case> 
This decision has been amended. Please see the end of the judgment for a list of the amendments.  
JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 50082/05  
HEARING DATE{S): 28th, 29th, 30th, 31st May, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th ,8th, 12th, th, 14th, 15th, 22nd, 26th June 2007  
JUDGMENT DATE: 6 July 2007  
PARTIES: 
Brescia Furniture Pty Limited 
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited 
Mercantile Mutual Insurance (Australia) Limited  
JUDGMENT OF: Hammerschlag J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
A.J. Sullivan QC with I.R. Pike (Plaintiff) 
M.L. Williams SC with J.V. Gooley (Defendants)  
SOLICITORS: 
Sparke Helmore (Plaintiff) 
A.R. Conolly & Company (Defendants)  
CATCHWORDS: 
INSURANCE - Industrial special risk policy providing cover against property damage and consequential loss of profits - property destroyed by fire - refusal of indemnity by insurer on basis of insured's failure to take reasonable precautions as required by the policy and on basis of s56(1) [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth) for fraudulent stock and business interruption claims - insured seeks damages for breach - whether insured took reasonable precautions and test to be applied - whether fraud established in stock and business interruption claims - whether reinstatement value, indemnity value or difference between market value before and after event applies - quantifying loss - extent of insured's obligation to act with reasonable dispatch after termination of policy by effluxion of time - availability of consequential damages where policy not terminated for breach  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth)  
CASES CITED: 
Stuart versus Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance of New Zealand Limited (No.2) [(1988) 5 ANZ Insurance Cases 60-844] 
Moss versus Sun Alliance Australia Limited <case>; [(1942) 42 SR 231] 
Legal & General Insurance Australia Limited versus Eather <case>; [(1999) 47 NSWLR 716] 
Entwells Pty Ltd versus National and General Insurance Co Ltd [(1991) 5 ACSR ] 
Fraser versus BN Furman (Productions) Limited; Miller Smith & Partners (A firm)
Third Party [[1967] 1 WLR 898] 
Albion Insurance Company Limited versus Body Corporate Strata Plan No. 4303 [1983] VR 
Plasteel Windows Australia Pty Limited versus Sun Alliance Insurance Limited [(1989) 5 ANZ Ins Cas 60-918] 
Caff versus McHenland Nominees Pty Limited (t/a Confoil Containers) [(1984) 3 ANZ
Ins Cas 60-575] 
The Committee for the time being of the Casino Show Society versus Lyn Maree Norris [(1984) 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-580] 
Aluminium Wire & Cable Co Limited versus Allstate Insurance Co Limited [1985] 2
Lloyd's Rep 280 
Cee Bee Marine Ltd versus Lombard Insurance Co Ltd <case>; [(1989) 5
ANZ Ins Cas 60-937] 
Mason versus Century Insurance Co Ltd [[1973] 2 NZLR 216] 
Hing versus Security & General Insurance Company (N.Z.) Ltd [(1985) 4 ANZ Ins
Cas 60-696] 
Kelly versus The National Insurance Company of New Zealand Ltd (1995) 8 ANZ Ins
Case 61-239 
Jones versus Dunkel <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1862) 15 ER 589] 
Spina & Spina versus Mutual Acceptance (Insurance) Ltd [(1984) 3 ANZ Ins Cas -554] 
British Traders' Insurance Company Limited versus Monson <case>; [(1964) 111 CLR 86] 
CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited (1997) 187 CLR 384 
New Zealand Shipping Co versus Societe des Ateliers et Chantiers de France [1918-19] All Rep ER 552 
Alghussein Establishment versus Eton College [[1991] 1 All ER 267] 
Athlone Pty Ltd versus General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corporation [(1985) 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-648] 
Lawson versus Zurich Australian Insurance Limited (Rolfe J, 30 July 1996, unreported) 
CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Ltd [(1995) 8 ANZ Ins Cas -232] 
Tricontinental Corporation Ltd versus HDFI Ltd <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] 
Russell Young Abalone Pty Limited versus Traders Prudent Insurance Company Limited [(1993) 7 ANZ Ins Cas 61-182] 
Kassem versus Colonial Mutual General Insurance Co Ltd <case> 
Judd & Judd versus Suncorp Insurance & Finance [(1988) 5 ANZ Ins Cas -832] 
Green versus AMP Life Limited <case>; [(2005) 13 ANZ Ins Cas 90-124] 
Motor Accident Mutual Insurance Pty Limited versus Kelly [(1998) 10 ANZ Ins Cas -420] 
Tropicus Orchids Flowers and Foliage Pty Ltd versus Territory Insurance Office <case>; [(1998) 148 FLR 441] 
Ferrcom Pty Limited versus Commercial Union Assurance Co of Australia Limited [(1989) 5 ANZ Ins Cas 60-907] 
Wenham versus Ella <case>; <case> 
The Commonwealth versus Amann Aviation Pty Limited [(1991) 174 CLR 6]  
DECISION: 
Verdict for the plaintiff  
JUDGMENT:  - 48 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
COMMERCIAL LIST  
HAMMERSCHLAG J  JULY 2007  /2005 BRESCIA FURNITURE PTY LIMITED versus QBE INSURANCE (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED & MERCANTILE MUTUAL INSURANCE (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED  
JUDGMENT  
INTRODUCTION  HIS HONOUR: On 11 March 2005 at about 9.15am, the plaintiff's furniture showroom and warehouse at 202-206 Parramatta Road, Ashfield, New South Wales (the "building") together with all furniture in it, was destroyed by fire. I shall refer to the plaintiff as Brescia.  Brescia held insurance with the defendants in the form of an Industrial
Special Risk (ISR) Industry Policy ("the Policy") providing cover against property damage [(Section )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s1.html) and consequential loss of profits [(Section )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s2.html) for the period 30 June 2004 to 30 June 2005.  Brescia sought indemnity from the defendants in respect of its loss. The defendants refused indemnity.  Brescia now sues for damages for breach of the contract of insurance. The defendants put both liability and quantum in issue.  Mr A J Sullivan QC together with Mr I R Pike of Counsel appeared for
Brescia. Mr M L Williams SC together with Mr J V Gooley of Counsel appeared for the defendants.  
BACKGROUND  Brescia is a company associated with the Brescia family, the patriarch of which is Mr Antonio Brescia. At the time of the fire his two sons Messrs
Vittorio Brescia and Moreno Brescia and his stepson Mr Bruno Brescia were active in its business of importing furniture and furnishings for retail sale.
I shall, for ease of reference, refer to each by his first name with no disrespect intended.  At all times material to the issues in these proceedings Mr Gregory Cortese has been Brescia's financial controller.  Brescia also has a showroom in Cabramatta. The building was, however, its flagship premises.  The building had three levels, a basement level used for bulk storage and furniture assembly, a "ground floor" showroom and a "first floor" which had a studio and which was also used to hold furniture and to store mechanisms. I shall refer to the first floor as the roof level because this was the term used in the evidence. It is also sometimes referred to as the third level.  When Brescia acquired it in about 1988, the building had a flat concrete roof. In around 1997 a new sloped roof was constructed with Ashfield Municipal
Council ("the Council") approval. At this time the building already had an additional useable area on the roof level in the form of a studio and storage area.  The construction of the sloped roof formed a new roof cavity or void over the warehouse section which became part of the third level. This area was also serviced by a goods lift.  The new roof cavity came to be used as a storage area for furniture. It is not in dispute that such use needed development consent from the Council and it was not obtained. Council approval for the new roof structure did not make reference to the use of the roof space.  Access to the roof level was exclusively via the goods lift or a lift-up attic type ladder which went through an aperture between the roof level and the showroom below.  In about 1997 Brescia installed fire hose reels in the building including two in the roof level. In addition there were about 40 portable fire extinguishers located throughout the building which were serviced regularly.  In the course of Brescia's business, items of furniture needed to be repaired or restored including by french polishing. French polishing involves the application of materials which are (and the residues of which are) flammable. Their use requires ventilation.  From at least 1988 french polishing was done in a spray booth in the basement level of the building ("the old spray booth"). Between 1998 and 2002 the french polishing was done by Mr Baez and from 2002 was done by Mr Paul
Coulson. Mr Coulson was the principal french polisher at the time of the fire.  The original ventilation for the old spray booth was a steel exhaust duct behind a grill in the wall of the old spray booth. It passed through the wall of the building and ran vertically up its side. This was the position as at
The duct had an exhaust fan, the location of which is not clear from the evidence. The outlet faced neighbouring apartments in Chandos Street.  In early 2002 Brescia was informed by the Council of complaints from nearby residents about odours emanating from the exhaust duct.  There was not to that point, nor had there ever been, any filtration system to inhibit the escape of flammable residues from the old booth into its exhaust.  Because of the residents' complaints, Brescia obtained a quote from Climate
Control Installations Pty Ltd ("Climate Control") to re-route the ducting to run across the roof of the building to face Parramatta Road. Brescia dealt with Mr Kim Stockham of Climate Control.  In discussion with Council officers it emerged that a development application was required for the work contemplated.  On 22 September 2002 Brescia obtained development consent from the Council for the extension of the ducting, for a new exhaust fan and for acoustic installation. A provision of the consent (clause 12) was that:  "The existing spray booth is only to be used for minor touch-ups and small paint job (sic) to be carried out on the premises. Any variation of the existing furniture work activities requires further consideration by Council prior to commencement of work on premises".  Condition 15 of the development consent foreshadowed an acoustic report to identify steps which might prevent the likelihood of future offensive noise nuisance and air impurities.  The works were carried out in early January 2003.  In May 2003 Brescia received complaints about the operation of the exhaust fan and arranged for modifications to the exhaust system.  On 8 July 2003 Brescia received letter from the Council conveying a complaint that the fan was being used for extended hours throughout the day as opposed to its sporadic operation in the past. The letter referred to a verbal assurance that the Council had received from Brescia that only spraying for minor repairs was carried out. The letter further stated that any intensification or expansion of this use would be subject to Council approval.  The asserted intensification of use was denied in a letter dated 29 July from Brescia's solicitors to the Council.  A further letter from the Council dated 18 August 2003 asserted that the ducting and fans were causing unacceptable noise levels at the property boundary and required Brescia to provide an acoustic consultant's report with recommendations aimed at alleviating the alleged nuisance. Brescia obtained a consultant's report from Koikas Acoustics Pty Limited.  In October 2003 Brescia employed Climate Control to install two attenuators and to move the duct to run under the roof inside the roof level.  It is apparent that Council officers were aware of this work. It is also not in issue that no development consent was obtained for it, nor was Brescia informed that one was required.  On 30 January 2004, the building was inspected by an Occupational Health and Safety Consultant, Barbara Atkinson, for workers compensation premium discount purposes. The audit was completed over one day. She conducted her inspections in the company of Mr Cortese and for some of the time, in the company of Bruno. She was shown the old booth. She was shown correspondence concerning complaints from neighbours about the smells and noises generated from the old booth. She was not shown the roof level. A number of documents including one entitled "Correct Working Procedures" were apparently brought into existence by Mr Cortese in collaboration with Ms Atkinson. The "Correct
Working Procedures" document has a sub-heading: "Department: French
Polishing". It has a series of numbered paragraphs concerning safe operation of the spray booth. No. 5 is "Start spray booth"; No. 6 is "Make sure no electrical appliances are in spray booth".  In a letter from the Council dated 10 March 2004 Brescia was informed of complaints from nearby residents regarding noise and odours emanating from the building. The letter refers to an inspection carried out by Council officers in February 2004 which revealed that:  "... no environmental control equipment/filtration system was installed to the furniture spray booth air extraction in duct system to prevent a (sic) air pollution to the environment".  
The letter referred to the problem having been pointed out to Bruno at the time of inspection for his urgent attention to rectify the problem. The letter required Brescia to consult with an acoustic consultant and environmental consultant.  A letter dated 15 March 2004 from Brescia's solicitors to the Council advised that filters were installed immediately after the issue had been brought to Mr Brescia's attention (presumably Bruno).  Thus for a period of the order of sixteen years there was no filtration system to trap flammable materials emitted from the old booth by the french polishing done in it. Some of the ducting from the old booth was exposed to the unfiltered accumulation of flammable residues for a long time.  In about August 2004, following continued complaints regarding noise and vapours emitted by the ducting and exhaust fan for the old spray booth,
Vittorio, Moreno and Bruno determined a solution involving the erection of a new spray booth with ducting running completely inside the building up to the roof and connecting to the existing outlet and exhaust fan which at that time faced Parramatta Road.  In about September 2004 Brescia built the new spray booth ("the new booth") near to the old one.  The new booth was installed by Mr Xian Wen Wu who owns and operates a company called CW Ventilation Services Pty Limited. Mr Wu gave evidence of conversations with Bruno who said he wanted the ventilation ducting for the new spray booth to go straight up through the building slabs and out the roof.  No separate or further development consent or building approval was obtained from the Council for the construction of the new booth, nor for the installation of the ducting for it. Bruno gave evidence that he knew a development application was required. In an interview with a fire investigator on 21 March 2005, Bruno said of development consent that they "just hadn't got round to it basically". Before me he said that he thought that the installation would have been covered by the original development application.  In about September 2004 Mr Wu installed the ducting for the new spray booth. It went straight up into the roof level along to a plenum box and up and out through the roof of the building. He installed two fans under the roof designed to provide the air flow in the new spray booth. There was a connection between the two duct systems at the point of the plenum box in the roof level. The ducting from the old booth was square. The ducting from the new booth was tubular. Various witnesses used the description square or round to denote the difference. References (where they occur) to "the square ducting" are thus to the old booth ducting, and references to "the round ducting" are references to the new booth ducting.  There was evidence from Mr Wu, disputed by Bruno, of conversations where
Bruno, according to Mr Wu, said he would look after Council requirements for this work and during which, according to Mr Wu, Mr Wu told Bruno that there must be no smoking and no fire in the spray booth, that electrical power tools must not be used in it or within two metres of it and that they could not take the risk of causing a spark from any electrical machine like a drill.  Mr Wu arranged for an electrician Mr Jin Zhou to do the electrical work required for the new booth.  There is an issue between the parties as to whether, there was, on the side of the new booth, a warning sign in a form asserted to be that usually used by
Mr Wu.  The sign is A4 page size and is headed "WARNING". It has seven numbered sentences. Numbers 2 and 3 are as follows:  "No heaters, electrical tools or any machinery to be used inside the spray booth. 
No welding or grinding is to take place inside the spray booth for any type of work that can generate a source of ignition."  In December 2004 Brescia obtained an acoustic report from the Acoustic
Group after complaints from nearby residents about mechanical plant noise from the exhaust system.  By early December 2004 it was decided to have the ducting from the old spray booth connected internally to the new booth ducting.  In early January 2005 that work was done by Mr Stockham who was asked to connect the old duct system to the new one. There is no record of any quotation from Climate Control for this work.  In a letter dated 1 June 2005 from the plaintiff's solicitors to the defendants' solicitors providing further particulars, they stated:  "The old ducting was in the process of being removed at the time the fire occurred in early 2005."  Bruno gave evidence that he instructed Mr Stockham to disconnect it. He did not however, go up into the roof after Mr Stockham's January work. He knew Mr
Stockham had disconnected it. He said he assumed Mr Stockham had capped the end of the old duct work because he had asked him to.  It is not in issue that Council permission under the relevant planning laws was required but not obtained in respect of the re-routing of the old ducting beneath the roof level, the installation of the new booth, the installation of ducting for the new booth and the installation of the ducting which ultimately joined the two installations.  There is an issue between the parties whether the square duct was left open in the roof level, or whether it was capped in some way.  Bruno decided that the hole in the wall of the old booth should be bricked up so as to stop fumes passing from the old booth into the decommissioned ducting, to prevent access through the hole in the wall for security reasons and to prevent the escape of fumes.  On 11 March 2005 he instructed a long-time Brescia employee Mr Vito Di
Napoli to brick up the hole. It was Mr Di Napoli's last day before retirement.  Mr Di Napoli came back with the information that there was a problem with the grill over the hole. It had been attached to the wall of the old booth by way of metal hinges welded so that the grill could not be removed. Mr Di
Napoli and Bruno tried to open it without success. Mr Di Napoli then said he would get a grinder and cut the hinges. Bruno left Mr Di Napoli to do it.  Mr Di Napoli applied an angle grinder to the grill. The use of this spark generating device was a catastrophic error which had catastrophic consequences.  There is no issue that the use of the angle grinder was the source of ignition for the fire which destroyed the building. Its sparks ignited flammable residues in the immediate vicinity.  It is also not in dispute that the fire most probably spread via one or both of the ducts into the roof level where furniture was stored. There is an issue as to the relative importance played in that spread by the respective routes to the roof and what was in the roof level area at the time.  Fire fighters were quickly on the scene. Evidence was given by two of them, officers Dryburgh and Bailey. Officer Dryburgh said he thought the fire fighters had effectively extinguished the fire in the old booth and that the building was out of danger. They were about to withdraw from the scene when heavy black smoke was observed coming from the rear roof. Officer Dryburgh returned to the booth to observe a plume of driven flame which he likened to the "after burn" or jet of fire one might observe shooting from the back of a fighter aircraft. The plume failed to respond to hose streams. This indicated to him a possible "large fire load" in the roof area.  By this time the showroom was heavily smoke logged and according to officer
Dryburgh there was fire "along the rear half of the eastern showroom wall".  The goods lift could not be used to get up into the roof level and the ladder could not be used because of heavy smoke and the fire at the rear of the showroom.  The fire lasted for about three days.  All that now remains of the building is the concrete slab of its once basement level.  Brescia lost its trading premises and its trading stock (furniture) and had its business operations interrupted.  Brescia took some steps preliminary to reinstating the building but did not proceed beyond clearing the debris, drawing preliminary plans, retaining consultants and taking steps to obtain development consent.  In late March 2005 Brescia located possible alternative premises at unit 4, -492 Gardeners Road, Alexandria ("Alexandria"). It made an offer to purchase Alexandria and retained a town planner to provide advice on obtaining necessary approvals to use Alexandria as a retail furniture showroom.  On 5 April 2005 Brescia lodged a claim with the defendants seeking indemnity.  In late April 2005 Brescia determined not to proceed with the purchase of
Alexandria.  Also in April 2005 Brescia leased a warehouse at 423 Victoria Street,
Wetherill Park ("Wetherill Park").  On 23 May 2005 in the absence of the defendants having accepted indemnity,
Brescia commenced these proceedings seeking then only a declaration that it was entitled to indemnity.  In their defence dated 18 July 2005 the defendants denied indemnity.  In about September 2005 Brescia entered into a lease for alternate premises at level 1, 265 Parramatta Road, Auburn ("Auburn") for two years.  By amended summons dated 7 September 2005, Brescia added a claim for damages. It filed a further amended summons on 5 April 2007 to reflect that it sues as trustee for the Brescia Family Trust. The further amended summons made no substantive amendments to its claim.  
THE ESSENTIAL TERMS OF THE POLICY  [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s1.html) of the Policy is entitled "Property Damage". It contains clause 2 entitled "Extent of Cover" which provides that:  "Provided the Insured has paid or agreed to pay the premium, the insurer will indemnify the Insured against Damage occurring to Property Insured during the
Period of Insurance and shall apply the additional cover referred to in clause up to the value of Limit(s) and Sub-Limit(s) of Liability referred to in the
Schedule, but subject to:...  .3 the amount of the indemnity being calculated in accordance with the Basis of Settlement clause 4."  "Property Insured" is defined to mean "all tangible property both real and personal of every kind and description belonging to the Insured."  "Damage" is defined to mean "physical loss, damage or destruction".  Clause 4 is entitled "Basis of Settlement". It provides as follows:  "For the purpose of this clause 4:  .1 REINSTATEMENT VALUE is the cost necessary to replace, repair or rebuild the Property Insured to a condition substantially the same as but not better or more extensive than its condition when new.  .2 INDEMNITY VALUE is the cost necessary to replace, repair or rebuild the
Property Insured to a condition substantially the same as but not better or more extensive than its condition at the time that the Damage occurred taking into consideration age, condition and remaining useful life.  .3 On buildings, machinery, plant and all other property and contents other than those specified in 4.9 to 4.17 below, the Basis of Settlement shall be the Reinstatement Value and provisions of 4.4 to 4.8 shall apply."  Clause 4.4 has its own heading to the following effect:  "Reinstatement Provisions applying to buildings, machinery and all other property other than property referred to in 4.9 to 4.17."  Under that heading, clauses 4.4.1 to 4.4.4 provide as follows:  .4.1 The replacement, repair or rebuilding may be carried out upon any other site(s) and in any manner suitable to the requirements of the Insured, but subject to the liability of the Insurer not being thereby increased.  .4.2 Such work must be commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch, failing which the Insurer shall not be liable to make any payment greater than the INDEMNITY VALUE.  .4.3 Where any Property Insured is damaged in part only, the liability of the
Insurer shall not exceed the sum representing the cost which the Insurer could have been called upon to pay by way of REINSTATEMENT VALUE if such property had been totally destroyed.  .4.4 The Insurer shall not be liable to make any payment beyond the INDEMNITY
VALUE of the Property Insured until a sum equal to the REINSTATEMENT VALUE has actually been incurred by the Insured in the replacement, repair or rebuilding of the property, provided that where the Insured repairs or rebuilds any
Damaged Property Insured at a cost which is less than the cost of reinstatement but greater than the value of such property at the time of the
Damage, then the cost so incurred shall be deemed to be the cost of reinstatement."  Clause 4.9 is under the heading "Provisions applying to specific items of property" and provides:  "In the case of raw materials, supplies and other merchandise not manufactured by the Insured, the Basis of Settlement shall be the replacement cost calculated at the time and place of replacement, provided that replacement shall have been carried out with reasonable dispatch, or if not replaced the original cost to the Insured of such property of the INDEMNITY VALUE, whichever is the lesser."  Claims 4.21 is under the heading "Election to Claim Indemnity Value" and it provides as follows:  "The Insured may elect to claim the INDEMNITY VALUE of any property and, if so, the Insurer will pay that value or may, at its option, replace, repair or rebuild the property or any part in accordance with the INDEMNITY VALUE, but including the extra cost of reinstatement as set out in Clause 4.5."  [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s2.html) of the Policy is entitled "Consequential Loss of Profits Insurance". Clause 9.1 provides that the Insurer will indemnify the Insured in accordance with the provisions of clause 10 (Basis of Settlement) against loss resulting from the interruption of or interference with the Business, provided the interruption or interference is caused by damage to:  "9.1.1 Any building or other property or any thereof used by the Insured at the Premises for the purpose of the Business."  Clause 10 provides that the Insured is indemnified with respect to actual loss of Gross Profit calculated in the manner set out in the Policy.  Clause 14 is entitled "Conditions Applying to [Sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s1.html) and [2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s2.html)".
Clause 14.2 is headed "Precautions to Prevent Loss" and provides that:  "The Insured shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent Damage to
Property Insured which may give rise to a claim under this Policy."  Clause 14.3.8 provides that:  "If the Insured is in breach of any of the Provisions of this Policy, the
Insurer may refuse to pay a claim."  
BRESCIA'S CLAIM  Brescia puts its claim as a common law claim for damages for breach of the insurance contract.  The asserted breaches are the defendants' refusal to acknowledge indemnity and to pay, in accordance with their obligations what it asserts is its valid claim.  It is not in dispute that the defendants have never acknowledged indemnity.  It is not in dispute that Brescia never purported to terminate the Policy for breach or repudiation by the defendants.  It is settled law that the failure within a reasonable time by an insurer to pay, or an unreasonable delay in payment or admission of liability without payment, is a breach of the contract of insurance: Stuart versus Guardian Royal
Exchange Assurance of New Zealand Limited (No.2) [(1988) 5 ANZ Insurance
Cases 60-844] at 75,279; Moss versus Sun Alliance Australia Limited [(1990) 55
SASR 145] at 146.  It follows that, if Brescia's claim or part of it is valid, then the defendants are in breach.  Brescia's claim has the following components:  a loss of the value of the building (being either its reinstatement value or its indemnity value);  b loss of its trading stock;  c the loss it incurred from the interruption to its business;  d loss of plant and equipment;  e the cost of employing consulting engineers;  f the cost of removing debris;  g the cost of extinguishing the fire;  h the cost of claim preparation; and  i consequential loss incurred from delay on the part of the defendants in conferring indemnity which delay caused Brescia not to acquire a property at
Alexandria but rather to lease premises at Auburn which were not as advantageous, and which delay in turn caused a delay in the re-opening of its flagship premises.  Apart from the claim for consequential loss from delay, it is common cause between the parties that the Policy would, if the existence of each component is otherwise established, respond to it.  Amounts to be attributed to some of the components or parts of them have been the subject of agreement.  I proceed now to consider the validity of Brescia's claim.  
THE ISSUES  
The defences in bar  The defendants plead three defences in bar to the entirety of Brescia's claim.  Firstly, they say that Brescia, in breach of its obligations under clause .2 of the Policy, failed to take reasonable precautions to prevent the
Damage to the Property Insured. They say that fulfilment of that obligation is a condition precedent to their liability to indemnify and that Brescia, having failed to fulfil it, is not entitled to indemnity.  Secondly, they say that Brescia's stock loss claim is made fraudulently within the meaning of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s56.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth) ("the Act") and that they are entitled, as a result, to refuse payment of the claim (that is Brescia's entire claim).  Thirdly, they say that Brescia's claim for business interruption is made fraudulently within the meaning of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s56.html) of the Act and that they are entitled, as a result, to refuse payment of the claim (that is Brescia's entire claim).  
The Further Issues  If Brescia is not wholly precluded by any of the defences in bar, the following are the issues between the parties.  With respect to loss of the building, Brescia says it is entitled to its reinstatement value and as a fall-back position to its indemnity value. The defendants say that on general principles, Brescia's claim is limited to the amount which is the difference in the market value of the site and premises before the fire and after the fire (which amount is substantially less than indemnity value which is in turn substantially less than reinstatement value).
In the alternative they say that Brescia is entitled only to indemnity value and not to reinstatement value because Brescia did not, as is required by clause 4.4.2 of the Policy, commence replacement or rebuilding and carry it out with reasonable dispatch. The parties are at issue also with respect to the quantum of the relevant value (whichever it is).  The parties are at issue as to the value of the stock (that is furniture) asserted by Brescia to have been destroyed. This issue overlaps with the second defence in bar which is that the stock loss claim is fraudulently inflated.  The parties are at issue with respect to the amount claimed for business interruption. This issue overlaps with the third defence in bar which is that the business interruption claim is fraudulently inflated.  On the consequential loss claim the defendants dispute that such a claim is available as a matter of general principle. They further dispute that their alleged delay was the reason Brescia did not proceed to purchase Alexandria or to reinstate the building. They say that the losses claimed were not in consequence of their failure to indemnify and were not reasonably in contemplation of the parties at the time of the Policy's inception. They put quantum in issue.  
The order in which the issues will be dealt with  I will deal firstly with the defence of failure to take reasonable precautions which, if successful, would defeat Brescia's entire claim.  Next I will deal with the defences of fraudulent claims for stock loss and business interruption, which will include dealing with those claims generally.  Thereafter I will deal with issues specifically relating to the loss of the building, that is the Policy response to it and any issue of quantum that may follow according to that response.  I will then deal with the consequential loss claim.  Finally, I will deal with any remaining issues.  
THE REASONABLE PRECAUTIONS DEFENCE  The defendants rely on a number of matters individually and cumulatively in support of their contention that Brescia failed to take reasonable precautions to protect its property from damage which failure they say entitles them to refuse to pay the claim.  Before considering the matters put by the defendants it is necessary to consider how clauses 14.2 and 14.3.8 operate.  On the face of the provisions, the reasonable precautions must be such that failure to take them may give rise to a claim under the Policy. Breach of the obligation to take them will entitle the Insurer to refuse to pay a claim.
Although clause 14.2 relates to a time before a claim has arisen, clause .3.8 presupposes a claim having been made. It seems clear that a claim which may be refused must have a relationship with the failure to take reasonable precautions. That is, the failure to take the precautions concerned must have given rise to the claim. The defendants did not put otherwise.  
The Law  Provisions such as clause 14.2 of the Policy have been the subject of judicial consideration in Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom and the United States.  Three precepts can be derived from authorities binding on me:  a firstly, where the onus lies depends on the proper construction of the provisions of the policy. If the provision is a condition precedent to indemnity ordinarily the onus lies upon the insured to bring itself within such a condition. If the provision is properly speaking an exclusion, the onus will ordinarily lie on the insurer: Kodak (Australasia) Pty Limited versus Retail
Traders Mutual Indemnity Insurance Association <case>; [(1942) 42 SR 231];
Legal & General Insurance Australia Limited versus Eather [(1986) 6 NSWLR ];  b secondly, although on their face such provisions import the objective yardstick of reasonableness, because the commercial purpose of this type of policy is to protect against negligence, the test of existence of risk is determined by the perception of the insured. The test is whether the insured perceived and deliberately courted the risk. The enquiry is in relation to the insured's perception of risk whether foolishly held or not: Legal &
General Insurance Australia Limited versus Eather at 395 and following; and  c thirdly, in order to attribute a state of mind to a company, the collective states of mind of officers of the company relevantly connected with it are treated as being the state of mind of the company. A division of function amongst officers of company does not relieve it from responsibility determined be reference to the knowledge possessed by each of them: Brambles Holdings
Ltd versus Carey [(1976) 15 SASR 270] at 279;
Krakowski versus Eurolynx Properties Ltd (1995) 183 CLR 563 at 582-583; VACC
Insurance Ltd versus BP Australia Ltd <case>; [(1999) 47 NSWLR 716] at 726; Entwells Pty Ltd versus National and General Insurance Co
Ltd [(1991) 5 ACSR 424] at 427 and following.  As to onus, it was put for Brescia that breach of clause 14.2 operates to permit refusal of the claim because clause 14.3.8 entitles the insurer to do so. For clause 14.3.8. to apply a breach must be established and the onus, on ordinary principles, requires the person asserting a breach (here the insurer) to prove it.  There is force in this submission. However, because of the facts I have found (as occurred in Legal & General Insurance Australia Limited v
Eather), the question of onus is of no real significance in the present proceedings. The defendants did not put that onus has a significant role to play in this case.  As to construction and operation of reasonable precautions provisions, in
Fraser versus BN Furman (Productions) Limited; Miller Smith & Partners (A firm) Third Party [[1967] 1 WLR 898] at 906
Diplock LJ said:  "... What, in my judgment is reasonable as between the insured and the insurer, without being repugnant to the commercial purpose of the contract, is that the insured, where he does recognise a danger should not deliberately court it by taking measures which he himself knows are inadequate to avert it.
In other words, it is not enough that the employer's omission to take any particular precautions to avoid accidents should be negligent; it must be at least reckless, that is to say, made with actual recognition by the insured himself that a danger exists, and not caring whether or not it is averted."  That approach has been followed in this jurisdiction in, amongst others, see Legal & General Insurance Australia Limited versus Eather; VACC
Insurance Limited versus BP Australia Limited; Albion Insurance Company Limited v
Body Corporate Strata Plan No. 4303 <case>; [[1983] 2 VR 339] at 345; Plasteel Windows Australia Pty Limited versus Sun
Alliance Insurance Limited [(1989) 5 ANZ Ins Cas 60-918] at 75,884; Caff versus McHenland Nominees Pty Limited (t/a
Confoil Containers) [(1984) 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-575] at 78,458; The Committee for the time being of the Casino
Show Society versus Lyn Maree Norris [(1984) 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-580.]  In Albion Insurance Company Limited versus Body Corporate Strata Plan No.
 McGarvie J delivering the main judgment of the Victorian Full Court put it as follows at 344-5:  "The insured is in breach of the condition if, through a lack of concern and desire to prevent bodily injury, he deliberately adopts a course of action or inaction which he realises exposes him to the risk of someone being injured by the recognised danger.  
The test is whether the insured deliberately courts the danger by refraining from taking any measures or by taking measures which he knows to be inadequate to avert it. The word "deliberately" indicates intentional, considered action or inaction. The verb "court" suggests action or inaction which invites the danger of accident. The test requires more than a recognition of the danger and failure to take any measures or any measures known to be adequate to avert it. It requires that this be due to a deliberate decision to court the danger."  In Aluminium Wire & Cable Co Limited versus Allstate Insurance Co Limited [1985] 2 Lloyd's Rep 280 at 287, Mr M Collins QC sitting as a Deputy Judge of the High Court of England, assessed the circumstances in that case against the requirement that there was a perception by the insured of a specific risk of fire attendant upon the particular operation in the particular place at the particular time. The learned presiding judge found the insured to have been negligent but dismissed any allegation that he acted deliberately, or recklessly, or that he adopted an attitude which was careless of risk in the knowledge that he was insured.  In New Zealand there have been statements expressing preference for an objective test (of recklessness or gross irresponsibility). See for example,
Cee Bee Marine Ltd versus Lombard Insurance Co Ltd [[1990] 2 NZLR 1]; Haines
House Haulage Co versus Goldstar Insurance Co <case>; [(1989) 5
ANZ Ins Cas 60-937]; Mason versus Century Insurance Co Ltd [[1973] 2 NZLR 216]; Hing v
Security & General Insurance Company (N.Z.) Ltd [(1985) 4 ANZ Ins Cas -696] at 74,142; Kelly versus The National Insurance Company of New
Zealand Ltd (1995) 8 ANZ Ins Case 61-239.  An objective approach has also apparently been favoured in Canada and the
United States: see D Kelly and M Ball Principles of Insurance Law, 2nd Ed
Sydney, Butterworths at 12,247.  Mr Williams put as a formal submission that the subjective approach test was wrong. He accepted however, that I am bound by Legal & General
Insurance Australia Limited versus Eather. I propose to follow it.  The exercise required is accordingly, to examine the evidence of Brescia's knowledge and conduct, and to consider any inferences to be drawn from that evidence so as to determine whether Brescia recognised a danger and deliberately courted it by intentional and considered action or inaction: see
Kaye J in Caff versus McHenland Nominees Pty Limited (t/a Confoil Containers) at ,459.  I was referred to the statement of Cole J in Plasteel Windows Australia
Pty Limited versus Sun Alliance Insurance Limited at 75,884 that a court may find that an asserted position of an insured that subjectively it did not perceive a risk should be rejected and that the court may be influenced in such rejection by a circumstance that a reasonable person could not have held such a view.  In Caff versus McHenland Nominees Pty Limited (t/a Confoil Containers) Kaye J at 78,460 said (obiter because the insured failed on a basis not requiring a decision on the point) that the requirement of the condition to take reasonable precautions was not directed to injuries suffered in a particular manner. The precautions required to be taken were to prevent injury to all persons engaged in any manner in connection in operation of the machine in that case and to take reasonable precautions to prevent injuries.  
Brescia's Mind  At the outset it is necessary to determine whose state of mind is to be treated as the mind of Brescia.  Vittoria, Moreno and Bruno each gave evidence of their respective roles within Brescia.  Vittorio described Brescia as a small family business. The evidence showed that he, Moreno and Bruno each participated in its decision making.  The defendants put that the relevant directing mind was that of Bruno at all times, although the knowledge of Vittorio is also to be taken into account on some aspects. No submission was directed towards Moreno's role and no submission was put that Mr Cortese's mind was relevant.  Vittorio described himself as the managing director and as substantially involved in the oversight of the entire company's activities. He is involved in all major decisions and whilst he has never been formally appointed, having regard to his father's decreasing role (because of ill health) in the day to day operations of the company, he has gradually assumed the role of managing director. This evidence was not challenged. For present purposes it is clear that Vittorio's conduct, knowledge and perception is properly to be taken as that of Brescia.  Some effort was made on behalf of Brescia to limit and restrict the attribution to Brescia of Bruno's knowledge and perception.  Bruno described himself as employed as warehouse manager, which involved organising and assisting in the unloading of containers of furniture, checking them and ensuring minor repairs or touch-ups as required were carried out, organising delivery and provision of service calls to customers and generally overseeing and managing the warehouse and its staff. The storage of furniture in the roof level was also within his field of endeavour.  Where Bruno was unable to resolve problems he would inform Vittorio. He maintained that he was not responsible for the repair, maintenance and upkeep of the building.  The responsibility for carrying out the Council's requirements with respect to the spray booths fell on Bruno. He played a part in liaising with
Council officers and with the contractors who did the work. His activities with respect to the old booth, that is with regard to the attempt to remove the grill which caused the fire, were within his ordinary activities as warehouse manager. Mr Di Napoli was acting on his instructions.  For present purposes it is clear that Bruno's conduct, knowledge and perception is similarly to be taken as that of Brescia.  Accordingly, I proceed on the basis that the individual and collective conduct, knowledge and perceptions of Vittorio and Bruno are to be considered to be those of Brescia in the present case.  
Did Brescia Court the Risk?  The defendants put that Brescia knew of the risk of fire, both before and on 11 March 2005, yet deliberately courted that risk in:  a using the roof level for storage having failed to obtain Council consent, knowing that Council would not have permitted it without significant and expensive modification;  b using such of the spray booth system as was constructed without Council consent knowing that Council would not have permitted it without significant and expensive modification;  c using the old booth until 2004 without filters with no adequate system of cleaning or maintaining the booths and ducts so as to reduce the risk of fire;  d using the building (particularly the roof void, but also the spray booths) without adequate fire protection;  e using the booths and ducts connected internally after January 2005;  f failing to disconnect and/or cap the old duct; and  g using the angle grinder which caused the fire.  It was put that Brescia's conduct demonstrated a systemic disregard by it of its obligations under relevant safety legislation and a willingness to flaunt risk in the interest of saving money. It was also submitted that a prime example of this attitude was what was described as Brescia's "cavalier attitude to the Correct Working Procedures" document created by Mr Cortese.  Mr Williams described the approach of relying on the historical and systemic perspective rather than on the critical events on 11 March 2005 as novel. In final submissions he made it clear, however, that that reliance should not be seen as detracting from reliance on the events on the day of the catastrophe.  As a response in limine to the way the defendants put it, Mr Sullivan submitted that each of the matters sought to be relied upon (with the exception of the use of the angle grinder) could not be a failure to take reasonable precautions within the meaning of the clause 14.2 of the Policy because the facts relied upon had occurred prior to the inception of the
Policy on 30 June 2004. It followed, he put, that those matters could not ground an asserted breach of an obligation which was not in existence at the time of the conduct constituting that breach. I do not accept this submission.
As at 11 March 2005 each of the matters relied upon by the defendants (with the possible exception of the use of the booths without filters until 2004) represented an existing and continuing state of affairs which may have played some role in giving rise to Brescia's claim under the Policy.  It is accordingly necessary to consider Brescia's perception, through
Vittorio and Bruno of fire risk in relation to those matters and whether through them Brescia recognised such risk as they posed and deliberately courted that risk by intentional considered action or inaction: Caff v
McHenland Nominees Limited (t/a Confoil Containers) at 78,489.  The matters put by the defendants (although not transparently so structured) entail a three step approach: firstly, the assertion of a series of facts which they contend constitute the risk or reflect systemic disregard for fire safety; secondly, the assertion that Brescia (through Vittorio and
Bruno) knew those facts; and thirdly, the asserted conclusion that Brescia (through Vittorio and Bruno) perceived that risk and determined deliberately to court it.  Self-evidently, if the evidence does not establish the primary fact contended for (including that it in fact represented a fire risk), the second and third steps do not arise with respect to it.  It is thus necessary to examine the primary facts contended for so far as they arise in each of the matters put and to consider Brescia's perception of any fire risk attendant upon each of them and upon all of them.  The approach I have taken is to consider the matters put by the defendants in turn, examining the primary facts asserted, Vittorio's and Bruno's knowledge of those facts and then, their perception (if any) of the risk entailed.  
Using the roof level for storage without Council consent  There is no dispute that Council consent should have been obtained (but was not) for the storage of furniture in the roof level.  There is also no dispute that the roof level was used for the storage of furniture.  There is a dispute as to how much furniture was stored there.  Vittorio and Bruno both gave an estimate of 90 pieces. The defendants contended for a finding that at the time of the fire, the roof level was "full of furniture" stored on floor to ceiling racking for a pending sale.  The defendants placed reliance on a conversation recorded by officer
Dryburgh in an incident details report prepared by the officer on 14 March from notes which he had taken and in which he recorded "we were informed that it was an area of approximately 10,000 square metres of storage area with floor to ceiling racking full of furniture for pending sale." The officer was cross-examined. He could not recall exactly who said it to him out of a small party of Brescia management present, one of whom was someone called "Joe". It may also have been Vittorio.  Vittorio denied having any such conversation and "Joe" transpired to be Mr
Giuseppe Screnci, also known as Joe Brescia (Bruno's brother and Vittorio's and Moreno's step-brother) who, after officer Dryburgh's evidence, swore an affidavit. He was cross-examined and he too denied the conversation.  The officer's note is obviously inaccurate in that the roof level was nowhere near the size of 10,000 square metres. There is also no evidence, but rather denials, of any impending sale as at 11 March 2005.  The defendants placed substantial reliance on the expert evidence of Mr
Gudmann (a metallurgist) who inspected and analysed the debris after the fire and took some photographs of what there was in the roof level. Mr Gudmann conducted a post-fire examination on 5, 6 and 7 April 2005 which included identifying and quantifying what had been burnt. He did a detailed grid search of the rooftop level. His analysis revealed, on an assumed consumption rate for combustible materials, stock and furniture items in the order of approximately 8.6 - 21.5 tonnes, which he described as a substantial quantity of combustible stock and furniture items. Self-evidently this is a fairly large range. A photograph was relied on to support the existence of floor to roof racking which showed steel tubing structures. Mr Gudmann described these as metal frames. There was no evidence elicited from anybody who knew what they actually were. Their form was unfamiliar to me and they might or might not once have been constituent components of racking. In my view, the evidence fell substantially short of establishing that there was floor to ceiling racking or of permitting any remotely reliable estimation of how many pieces of furniture were in the roof level.  Whilst I do not consider that officer Dryburgh's evidence was other than honestly given and that he considered that someone had said something to him on the day, I accept the denials of Vittorio and Mr Screnci that they made the statements concerned.  A submission was put that it was adverse to the credit of Vittorio and
Bruno that each estimated about 90 pieces and that each maintained that their estimations were independent. There was, however, nothing to suggest that their evidence in this regard was not truthfully given.  I do not consider that the evidence established that the roof level was full of furniture, that is, as having had materially more than 90 pieces, that there was floor to ceiling racking or that the floor was full pending a sale.  In any event, the issue as to the amount of furniture in the roof level diminished in significance when the fire conflagration experts called by the parties agreed that whether there were approximately 90 pieces or more than that, would not have altered the course which the fire took.  There is no issue that the fire which started in the old booth spread to the roof level and ignited the furniture stored there. There was a dispute as to what route it took, that is, through which of the ducts it spread.  Brescia called one expert on fire conflagration, Mr Anthony Cafe, a chartered chemist with extensive experience in the inspection of fire damaged buildings. The defendant called three: Mr Jeffrey Gudmann, who has extensive experience in the field of fire origin and cause determination, materials failure and the provision of technical and scientific input into failure investigations; Mr Richard Duggan a consulting mechanical engineer specialising in mechanical building services including air conditioning, heating and ventilation and industrial ventilation and Mr Ian Moore a metallurgist with additional qualifications in engineering, building fire safety and risk engineering. He likewise has extensive experience as a fire and risk specialist. A report from each expert was admitted into evidence.
Prior to the hearing they met in accordance with directions of the Court and produced a document reflecting their points of agreement and points of disagreement.  Their viva voce evidence was taken concurrently and their respective positions made clear. There was also cross-examination.  I should say that I found each of these experts to be an impressive witness and I was assisted by their clearly significant expertise. The concurrent process spawned frank and open debate and concessions properly made in it produced what I consider to be a clear conclusion supported by the probabilities. It also manifestly saved time.  It ultimately emerged that there was consensus between them that the fire went from the old booth to the roof area via one or both of the square and the round duct.  Mr Cafe's opinion was that the fire could have first spread through to the roof level via either the square or round duct. There was, as he saw it, fire damage inside the round duct which indicated that fire had spread up through it which could have initially spread onto the roof top level by igniting a combustible material such as bitumen or sarking. In other words, on obtaining sufficient heat, the round duct could have ignited surrounding material by conduction.  Mr Gudmann fairly accepted that the round duct was a possible route but considered that the square duct was the far more probable one. There were a number of reasons why in his view the round duct was not the route and a number of reasons why the square duct was. As to the round duct, his view was that it displayed only moderate heat effect within it. After the fire the insulated wiring running to the motor in the plenum box was still substantially intact. This he considered to be inconsistent with exposure of the round duct to high temperatures. It also displayed no oxidation of metal which results from the application of very high temperatures to metal, whereas parts of the round duct did reveal oxidation. The relative quantity of flammable residue in each of the ducts was also a significant factor. Clearly the square duct revealed a greater quantity of flammable residue than did the round one. This was because the square duct had been in operation far longer than the round one and for a substantial period of time the square one did not have a filter. In Mr Gudmann's opinion the round duct revealed minimal residue, more of the nature of sooting. The fire originated at the base of the rises of the square duct and its preferential route would be up that path.  Mr Moore utilised a computer model known as the Fire Dynamic Simulator ("FDS"). Mr Cafe made a number of points which he considered impaired the reliability of the model. His view was that the issues here are too complex to be computer modelled. Mr Moore readily accepted the model had limitations and was not intended accurately to record the history of the fire over the three days that it burned, but it showed the important physical phenomena which were involved.  In simple terms the model demonstrated that with no capping on the square duct, that route was more likely than through the round duct. Mr Gudmann made the point that if it had been sealed, ready access to the combustible materials in the roof area would have been prevented. Mr Moore's modelling reached the same conclusion.  Mr Duggan opined that the square duct was more probably the route because of its proximity to the source of ignition. The sparks from the angle grinder would, from the angle at which it would have been used, have gone directly into the grill and onto the ground. The round duct was, by contrast, some distance away. The route through the square duct was much easier from the point of ignition than it was through the round duct. The older construction of the square duct meant it would not hold up as well in a fire.  It was not accepted by Brescia that the square duct was not capped.
However, in my view there should be a finding that it was uncapped. Leaving aside matters of dynamics of the fire spread, there is no physical evidence that it was capped. If it had been capped the work would have been done by Mr
Stockham and he was not called. Given the possibility of his legal exposure I do not think it would be fair to conclude that he is in Brescia's camp for the purpose of drawing an inference that his evidence would not have helped
Brescia: Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] at 312 and 319. However, the evidence is left in the state that there is nothing to suggest that the square duct was capped and a number of considerations pointing to the fact that it was not.  In my view the route of the fire from the point of ignition to the roof area was via the square duct for the following reasons: firstly, Mr Cafe accepted that if the new ducting had been competently constructed and sealed it would not be a path for the fire except by conduction. There was no evidence (he accepted) of any holes or combustible seals. Secondly, the evidence of what was found in the round duct was not sufficient in my view, to indicate that it reached a temperature high enough to be a source of fire by conduction, which conclusion is consistent with Mr Moore's modelling. Thirdly, there was no evidence in my view of the presence of bitumen sufficient to have been ignited by the heated round duct or that it had ignited sarking.
Fourthly, there was no evidence of the square duct having been blocked so that the most likely explanation for the after-burn was the substantial fire in the roof causing pressure in the roof which was consistent with the square duct having been the pathway. Finally, Mr Cafe's conclusion was it seemed to me at the level of possibility. The defendants' experts' conclusion revealed a cogent probability.  Self-evidently, the presence of furniture in the roof level was combustible material which if there was to be a fire would increase the magnitude of it as compared to if there were no furniture there.  Turning then to the respective knowledge and states of mind of Vittorio and Bruno with respect to the necessity for Council consent to store furniture in the roof level and to the risk created by having done so.  Each of Vittorio and Bruno swore affidavits in the proceedings and each was cross-examined.  Vittorio denied on affidavit being aware of the need to obtain Council consent to use the roof level or for the removal of the old ducting and the installation of the new ducting and the construction of the new booth.  In his oral evidence he said there was always a storage area in the studio where they had all the archives. On being asked whether there was any reason why there was no disclosure to the Council that they were using the area for storage, he responded that he did not think they had to. He did not accept that he knew that this is a matter which should have been brought to the
Council's attention.  He said that at the time the roof was constructed they did not have the intention of using the void created for storage.  Vittorio swore on affidavit that he did not consider there was any factor contributing to the risk of fire to the building that had not reasonably and sufficiently been addressed by precautions taken by Brescia, and that he did not consider the creation of the roof cavity in any way increased the risk of fire to the building.  He said he did not think there was a risk greater than the risk they had every day.  He was cross-examined about the fact that the fire hose reels stored in the roof could not be accessed safely if there was a fire in the roof. His evidence was that he thought they were doing the right thing by installing the fire hose reels.  An attack on Vittorio's credit was made although he was not confronted with any suggestion that his evidence was in any respect untrue.  The attack was, in my view, unsuccessful.  I did not form any impression that Vittorio was other than a truthful witness.  I will deal with various specific points sought to be made by the defendants about his evidence when I deal with the issue to which that evidence relates.  Mr Sullivan submitted, and it is well established, that if it is to be suggested to a party that his case is false, even fraudulent, it is a basic obligation of procedural justice to confront that party fairly with such a suggestion, and to clearly identify such a contention, rather than raise it accidentally, peripherally and nonchalantly in the course of litigation:
Ghazal versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales [(1992) 29 NSWLR ]
at 344 to 345. He drew attention to the fact that Vittorio had not been so confronted. In forming my view of Vittorio's credit I have left this out of account because it was, I thought, fairly apparent from the defendants' fraud defences and the opening that his evidence was not to be embraced: State Rail
Authority of New South Wales versus Brown <case>; [(2006) 66 NSWLR 540] at 546 and following.  I have assumed, although it was neither put nor otherwise established, that there is a fire safety consideration lying behind the necessity for
Council consent.  I accept Vittorio's evidence that he did not know that Council consent was required for the storage in the roof or at any time perceived any particular risk of fire with respect of the storage of furniture in the roof. There is nothing to suggest that he deliberately courted any such risk.  Bruno denied that he was conversant with the development application which had been made in 1996 when the new roof was constructed. He denied that he knew that the application was to create a new roof and any awareness of the need to obtain Council consent to use the roof void area. He too denied knowing that a development application was required for consent to use the roof void area or for the removal of the old ducting and the installation of the new ducting and the construction of the new booth. He denied knowing that the storage of furniture in the roof level was illegal or knowing that it represented a fire hazard.  A sustained attack was made on the credit of Bruno. I did not find Bruno's evidence to be satisfactory in every respect as will appear below.  However, I consider that the general attack on his credit also failed. As with Vittorio, he was hardly, if at all, confronted on the matters I was urged not to accept, but I have similarly left that out of account in forming my view. Part of the attack concerned answers he gave to the effect that he could not recall. I did not find those answers implausible.  With respect to the roof level issues he was entirely undented by cross- examination and I accept that he did not know that Council consent was required for storage of furniture in the roof level and that he did not perceive or court any fire risk with respect to the storage of furniture there.  Also, it was not put to him that any risk from the roof level storage was a matter within his perception on 11 March 2005, and in my view there is no basis for a finding to the contrary.  A submission was made that there was a deliberate decision to withhold information from Council officers about the roof storage and also from Barbara
Atkinson. So far as Barbara Atkinson was concerned, nothing was put to either
Vittorio or Bruno about any withholding from her. Mr Cortese was cross- examined about her but it is not suggested by the defendants that his mind is to be attributed to Brescia for this purpose. There is also no basis for a finding that anything was deliberately withheld from the Council. Council officers attended the building in relation to the ducting. I find that there was no deliberate withholding of information from the Council by Brescia.  I find that neither Vittorio nor Bruno perceived any fire risk with respect to the furniture stored in the roof. I find that neither deliberately courted any such risk.  
Use of the spray booth without filters until 2004 with no adequate system of cleaning or maintaining the booths and ducts and of reducing the risk of fire  The evidence established that there was no filter for the old booth until (when the Council required its installation) and that both Vittorio and
Bruno were aware of this.  The evidence also established that there must have been deposited in the old duct flammable residues.  So far as the filter is concerned, Mr Coulson spoke about a filter with
Bruno a few times and asked him to have a filter installed. Mr Coulson did not know how many times he was asked, but said that they were talking about getting the other (that is the new) spray booth and Bruno said he would look into it. The defendants contended for a finding that Bruno ignored many requests over the years from Mr Coulson for a filter system in the booth. The evidence did not establish this.  The correspondence from the Council which led to the installation of the filter referred to a system "to prevent air pollution to the environment".
There is no reference in any of the communications between Brescia and the
Council to any consideration relating to fire risk. The complaints from neighbours related to noise and vapour issues which were disturbing them.  It was not suggested to Mr Coulson that there was, or in what manner there was, any deficiency in cleaning of the booths which was a function which clearly was his. There was some cross-examination about the floor being slippery but nothing emerged from it. Mr Coulson never hosed the spray booth out nor took buckets of water in there and cleaned it, but he did put water on the grate to hold the dust down when spraying tables. It was not put that he should have hosed it out or that this was the appropriate course to take.  Nothing was put in final submissions about deficiencies in cleaning the ducts or in their maintenance. Mr Coulson cleaned out the grate or the ducting behind it as far as he could reach into it. It was put to him that his cleaning process would not eliminate any residues which had accumulated on the vertical surfaces of the ducting. His response was once you hit the grate with a hand "most of it just falls off" being only a powder or just a dust.  The ducts, that is both old and new, always had extraction fans.  Mr Coulson's evidence was that one would not smell odours indicating he had been working in the spray booths if the fans were on.  Vittorio gave evidence (which I find inherently plausible and I accept) concerning the release of fumes through the ducting to the effect that if they were "going up there, it's gone".  Bruno denied knowing that the old ducting contained residues of lacquer and that the booths had not been cleaned and were in a highly flammable and hazardous condition.  I find that neither Vittorio nor Bruno perceived any fire risk connected with the use of the old booth on the basis that it was without filters until
The evidence does not establish that the booths were not adequately cleaned or maintained.  I should say that I do not consider it to be obvious that flammable residues posing a fire risk would remain deposited in the old duct, which always had an extraction fan.  As with the storage of furniture in the roof level, it was not put to
Bruno that the absence of filters until 2004 or the cleaning and maintenance of the booths and ducts were within his perception on 11 March 2005, and there is no basis for a finding to the contrary.  I find that neither Vittorio nor Bruno perceived any fire risk with respect to the use in general of the unfiltered booth. Save for the absence of a filter, the evidence did not establish any deficiency in cleaning or maintenance. Neither Vittorio nor Bruno had a perception of risk in relation to cleaning and maintenance. I find that they did not consciously court any fire risk with respect to the use of the old booth generally.  
Use of the building (particularly the roof void, but also the spray booths) without adequate fire protection  The issue of use of the roof level for storage of furniture has been dealt with above.  In addition, the defendants put that Brescia took "perfunctory and ineffectual steps to control fire in the roof". The evidence established that
Brescia's fire control steps did not comply, as at the date of the fire, with the requirements of the Building Code of Australia ("BCA") in that the building required and did not have, sprinklers to be installed throughout, including the roof void. It was not clear, however, what those requirements were at the time the building was constructed or when Brescia acquired it. It was not put to Vittorio or Bruno that they were aware of this non-compliance.  The evidence established that the cost to make the building BCA compliant would, together with GST, be just over $1M.  Vittorio was cross-examined about access to the roof level and how one might get access to the fire hose reels if a fire broke out in the roof. It was put to him that he knew that the first thing you do not do in a fire is get into a lift. He at first denied knowing that, which I found implausible but he immediately accepted that "I have seen it" which I took to be a concession that he understood the implications of using a lift in a fire. He denied knowing that there was no safe way of getting access to the fire hose reels in the event that there was a fire in the roof. He accepted having ignored the possibility that one would have to get into the roof to use the fire hose reels. He said he thought they were doing the right thing by installing hose reels but that the area was used on a very minimal basis.  He said he would go there more often than the warehouse people. He emphasised that it is his property, he loves it and looks at it all the time.  Although there was some access to the roof level through the ladder arrangement, the fire protection measures in the roof were inadequate.  However, whilst what was done in the roof level by way of fire protection may not have complied with applicable BCA standards, Brescia's behaviour is not that of a person deliberately courting a perceived risk. It is consistent rather with a lack of perception of any such risk.  I find that neither Vittorio nor Bruno perceived any risk with respect to the fire protection measures in the roof level or the spray booths. They did not deliberately court any such risk.  
Use of the booths and ducts connected internally after January 2005  There was no issue between the parties that the duct work done beyond that contemplated by the Council consent of 22 September 2002 required further consent, and that none was obtained.  It was neither put nor established that alleviation of fire risk lies as one of the considerations behind the requirement for consent, but I have assumed that it does.  Vittorio's evidence was that he thought the approval they had was sufficient. This was on the basis that they had been given approval to put the ducting on the outside so once they still had complaints from the neighbours they thought putting the ducting inside was okay. He said he turned his mind to the question (that is of the necessity for consent) before the work was done.  A submission was made that his answers on this topic were unsatisfactory (although he was not challenged on his answers). I reject the submission. I do not see his view as inherently improbable and I consider there to be no reason why I should not accept his evidence as truthful.  In this regard Bruno is in a somewhat different position. He was interviewed by an investigator, Mr King, on 21 March 2005. During that interview he was asked whether any building application was put in to install the new ducting, to which he replied that the original application for the ducting was done through the Council but when the ducting was redirected through the showroom floors it was not done through Council. His reason was "we just hadn't got round to it basically". In his oral evidence he said this answer would have been incorrect and he did not get a copy of the record of interview to go over to see what was actually said by him. He further said that he thought the new ducting would have been "covered by the original DA".  Although he was not confronted as to which of the answers was the correct one, he gave evidence that he believed he was telling the truth during the interview. I do not accept his answer that he thought the new booth and ducting would have been covered by the original DA.  In the context of these proceedings, however, I do not consider this to be a significant finding because I otherwise considered Bruno to be a truthful witness whose evidence generally sat favourably with the evidence of other witnesses who I have accepted, and with what I consider to be the inherent probabilities on various issues.  Moreover, it was not put to him that he had any perception that the failure to obtain consent had any adverse safety issues with respect to fire.
Indeed, the internal duct work was carried out to reduce noise and the emission of vapours which had been causing a nuisance to neighbours.  In the context of their case on Brescia's knowledge or state of mind, the defendants contended for a finding that Mr Wu had affixed the warning sign.  The following witnesses gave evidence that there was no warning sign in the terms asserted by Mr Wu at or near the booths: Vittorio, Bruno, Mr
Cortese, Mr Coulson, Mr Baez (a french polisher and whose oral evidence was taken on the telephone from Uruguay), Mr Bellos and Mr Tortura. Brescia placed particular reliance on the evidence of Mr Coulson which was, in effect, unchallenged that, when after the fire, the sign warning against use of electrical appliances was put up at the Wetherill Park premises of Brescia, it was the subject of laughter.  Against this there was the evidence of Mr Wu. Mr Wu's evidence was unsatisfactory in a number of significant respects. Mr Wu deposed to three affidavits. In his first affidavit he deposed to the fact that such signs were put up in every booth installed by him.  Brescia then put on affidavit evidence referring to various installations carried out by Mr Wu where there were no signs. This spawned a further affidavit in which he modified his version to one of affixing signs only where the entire installation was done by him. There was however, evidence from witnesses who were not cross-examined and a statement of agreed facts which established that installations at other premises (Bovis Lend Lease, Australian
Hammer Supplies, Active Radiators, Kenny's Automotive Paints, North Shore
Glass and The Australian Museum Trust) completely done by Mr Wu did not include the affixing of such a sign. This significantly eroded Mr Wu's credit.  Mr Wu gave evidence concerning the affixing of a sign at an organisation called Staging Rentals. His initial version was that he was passing this customer where he had installed a spray booth and needed to use the toilet facilities and took the opportunity to see whether there was a sign. However, a version deposed to in a subsequent affidavit, was that his visit was to check out the sign and he used the toilet incidentally.  He also gave evidence that to use the toilet at Staging Rentals he had to pass the spray booth he had installed. However, from the uncontradicted evidence of a Mr Dunn from that organisation, it is clear that Mr Wu's evidence cannot be correct. The plan in evidence indicates that the toilets are in opposite direction from the spray booth when one enters the relevant premises.  I did not find Mr Wu a satisfactory witness and I do not accept his evidence that he put the sign up at Brescia. I accept the evidence of each of the witnesses who gave evidence for Brescia that no signs were affixed. Where his evidence conflicts with Bruno, I prefer Bruno.  It also warrants comment that Mr Wu did not say that he himself affixed the sign but that he observed it. The person who affixed the sign would appear from the evidence to be Mr Li who worked for him. Mr Li was not called.  It was urged upon me on behalf of Brescia that there should be an adverse inference drawn against the defendants from the failure to call Mr Li. I am not satisfied that he is in their camp. However, the fact is that there is no evidence from him to assist the defendants.  There was also evidence from Mr Wu about a conversation with Bruno in which he says he discussed with Bruno that electrical appliances should not be used in or near the booth. That discussion is denied by Bruno. Mr Wu's evidence was that the discussion took about ten minutes. In cross-examination of him it was revealed it was most unlikely to have taken anything like that time.  The defendants also called Mr Zhou, an electrician, in support of Mr Wu's evidence. However, that evidence turned out to be of no assistance to the defendants because Mr Zhou ultimately said he did not read English and could not and did not read any signs.  I find on the balance of probabilities that the sign was not affixed.  Given this finding, the asserted presence of such a sign cannot play any role in the perception of Vittorio or Bruno.  The defendants also contended for a finding that, contrary to Council consent, there was an intensification of the use of the spray booths.  On 8 July 2003 the Council, in its letter of that date, referred to condition 12 of the Development Consent of 23 September 2002 which had required the existing spray booth to be used only for minor touch-ups and small paint jobs. It also provided that any variation of the existing furniture work activities required further consideration by Council prior to commencement of work on the premises. Brescia's solicitors denied any intensification of use in their letter of 29 July 2003. The further letter from Council of 18 August 2003 referred to unacceptable noise levels. Council acknowledged in its letter of 16 March 2004 that Brescia were corporate citizens of high standing who had expended a good deal of money to address noise and vapour issues emanating from the premises.  The evidence did not, in my view, establish intensification of use prior to the installation of the new booth.  The new booth was constructed because the old one was too small. Mr
Coulson gave evidence, which I accept, that he suggested the new booth because most tables were too big to fit in the old spray booth and in some circumstances, he had to take them out to spray them. There were also some sideboards they had trouble getting into the old booth. However, the pattern of work had been constant since he started in 2002.  There is no evidence that the amount of french polishing done after the installation of the new booth was any greater than that done before. There is no suggestion that such work as was required before the new booth was not being done with the old one.  Whilst it was not put in issue that development consent was required for the new booth, the evidence did not establish that there was any intensification of use.  It was not put to any witness that the intensification, if there was any, was attendant with any perception of fire risk. The evidence did not establish any perception of any such risk on the part of Bruno or Vittorio.  It seems to me that the new booth with new ducting, filters and extraction machinery represented a decrease in fire risk rather than an increase.  
Failure to disconnect and/or cap the duct  I have dealt with whether the old duct was disconnected or capped. In addition, Mr Sullivan fairly conceded that such a capping would not have been effective and ultimately accepted that the evidence fell short of establishing that the old duct was capped.  There is no evidence to suggest that Vittorio had any knowledge of the state of the old duct in the roof level.  The evidence of Vittorio, which I accept, was that he did not perceive that the risk of fire to the building was increased in any way by the various duct works, by the decommissioning of the old ducting or by the creation of the roof cavity.  During his oral evidence, Bruno said he had requested Mr Stockham to cap the duct. In submissions, the defendants described Bruno's evidence as a belated and unconvincing assertion that the old duct should have been capped and that he told Mr Stockham to do it without discussing it with any of his brothers.  However, the defendants also submitted (presumably in order to establish perception by Bruno of a risk attendant upon not capping it), that this conversation should be found to have occurred.  There are two difficulties for the defendants in this regard. The first is that Bruno also said he assumed Mr Stockham would have capped it, evidence which it follows should also be accepted. Further, Bruno gave evidence that he did not know Mr Stockham did not do it, so that it cannot be said that he had any awareness that Mr Stockham had failed to act in accordance with instructions. The line taken by the defendants is inimical to their challenge to Bruno's credit and it is ultimately inconsistent with any perception of risk on his part.  In the context of Mr Stockham, the submission was put that the absence of documentation and Council consent, together with the fact that Mr Wu was not retained to correct the ducting, showed a makeshift and illegal scheme. I reject the submission. There was nothing to suggest the scheme was makeshift.
The absence of documentation says nothing of illegal construction. Mr Wu himself constructed the new booth without consent and there was documentation.  Reliance was placed by the defendants on a letter written by Brescia's solicitors to the defendants' solicitors on 1 June 2005 providing further particulars and which made the following statement in answer to a request:  "The old ducting was in the process of being removed at the time the fire occurred in early 2005"  
It was submitted that Brescia gave false instructions to this effect. However, the only witness who was cross-examined on this response was Bruno who said the answer was not right and that he had no idea who gave the instructions to the lawyers. He was asked whether it was Mr Cortese or Vittorio and he said he did not know. The issue was left there and neither Vittorio nor Mr Cortese were asked about it. There is accordingly no basis for a finding relevant to the honesty of any witness with respect to the response.  There was evidence that the roof level in the vicinity of the old ducting was not easily accessible. It was not put that Vittorio or Bruno observed it uncapped or knew that it was.  I find that both Vittorio and Bruno were unaware of the state of the old duct in the roof void and did not perceive any fire risk with respect to it.
They accordingly could not deliberately have courted, and accordingly did not court, any such risk.  
Use of the angle grinder  It is clear that Vittorio had no role in the ignition of the fire on 11
March 2005.  There is no evidence to suggest he knew of any plan to remove the grill or of the proposed means of doing so.  The defendants' submissions concerning the use of the angle grinder are that Bruno knew that Mr Coulson's work on the morning of the fire generated flammable residues and that a grinder would emit sparks when it struck metal and that he deliberately courted danger when he gave Mr Di Napoli the fateful instructions.  Bruno's positive affidavit evidence was that it did not occur to him that there was any risk of a fire occurring as a result of Mr Di Napoli carrying out the work to remove the grill. He could not smell any fumes and vapours whilst he was in the old booth on that day and he did not think the booth had been used for spraying on that day. He did not see any chemicals or other flammable materials on the floor of the spray booth prior to the fire.  Bruno was interviewed by Mr King, the insurance investigator, on 21 March , before the defendants had refused indemnity. He told the investigator he did not think that using the angle grinder was a risk otherwise he would not have "got them to do it". In his affidavit evidence he said it did not occur to him that there was any risk of fire as a result of the work to remove the grill.  Under cross-examination he accepted that he knew that potentially dangerous residues were generated by use of the spray booth, that he knew the old spray booth had operated until 2004 without a filter and that he knew the angle grinder would emit sparks when it struck metal. He also knew that Mr
Coulson had been working for an hour or two in the morning before the fire started.  He accepted an understanding that the work being done by Mr Coulson was likely to have generated flammable residues but limited his concession to if
Mr Coulson had been spraying at the time.  Mr Coulson's evidence was that there would have been no odours because the fans had been in operation.  Bruno denied that he knew that the use of the angle grinder was likely to ignite the residues.  I find that Bruno did not appreciate the risk that was undertaken by use of the angle grinder. Apart from the fact that I accept his evidence, I consider that there are a number of factors which are significant and which support this conclusion.  The building was the flagship of his family's profitable business. Why would he knowingly risk their enterprise?  The store was open for business as it was a normal trading day. Members of his family were there. Why would he put them at risk?  Why would he put the senior Mr Di Napoli's safety at risk?  There was valuable property including personal property in the building.
Why would he put it at risk?  It is highly and inherently improbable in my view that a man in Bruno's position would have consciously taken what transpired to be the risk he did.  Paradoxically, the building was destroyed in the course of Bruno seeking to protect it by having the grill bricked up.  The defendants grappled with none of these considerations in submissions.  The defendants' submitted that there should be a finding of systemic disregard by Brescia of its obligations under safety legislation and a willingness to flaunt risk in the interest of saving money.  They put (relying on a passage of cross-examination of Mr Cortese) that the "cavalier approach" to the Correct Working Procedures is a prime example of this attitude.  I do not accept this submission. Firstly, the passage of cross-examination relied on did not concern that document. Secondly, Mr Cortese's evidence displayed no disregard for anything. The evidence in general disclosed no systemic disregard. The Correct Working Procedures document concerns actual safe operation of the booth, that is, with respect to its use while french polishing is being done.  In my view at no time did Vittorio or Bruno deliberately court any risk.  I find that Brescia did not breach clause 14.2 of the Policy and that clause 14.3.8 was not enlivened.  The defendants' first defence in bar fails.  
THE STOCK LOSS CLAIM AND RELATED DEFENCE OF FRAUD  In these proceedings Brescia has claimed an amount of $3,909,544.00 as damages representing the value of the furniture it lost in the fire.  There is no issue that the fire destroyed what stock Brescia had on hand at the time.  The controversy between the parties is as to the value of that stock and more particularly, what part of it was damaged or unsaleable.  The defendants' position is that Brescia has grossly overstated the value of its stock by ignoring a substantial amount of damaged or unsaleable furniture and that it has done so fraudulently, that is, it is putting forward a claim which is false and which it knows to be false.  Section 56 of the Act is in the following terms:  "56 Fraudulent claims  
Where a claim under a contract of insurance, or a claim made under this
Act against an insurer by a person who is not the insured under a contract of insurance, is made fraudulently, the insurer may not avoid the contract but may refuse payment of the claim.  
In any proceedings in relation to such a claim, the court may, if only a minimal or insignificant part of the claim is made fraudulently and on-payment of the remainder of the claim would be harsh and unfair, order the insurer to pay, in relation to the claim, such amount (if any) as is just and equitable in the circumstances.  
In exercising the power conferred by subsection (2), the court shall have regard to the need to deter fraudulent conduct in relation to insurance but may also have regard to any other relevant matter."  The defendants put that Brescia's damages claim is one under a contract of insurance and is made fraudulently so that they may refuse payment not only of the stock loss component of Brescia's claim but the entirety of it.  
The issues  The initial issue which arises under this head is accordingly one of fact, namely what the value was of the stock which Brescia lost in the fire.  If that value is less than Brescia's claim for its loss, the following further issues arise:  a whether either the entirety or the stock loss component of the claim which
Brescia makes in these proceedings is "a claim made under a contract of insurance" within the meaning of <case> of the Act;  b if so, whether the claim is made fraudulently; and  c whether the difference is only a minimal or insignificant part of Brescia's claim and whether non-payment of the claim would be harsh and unfair and if so, whether there should be an order to pay in relation to Brescia's claim such amount as is just and equitable in the circumstances.  The onus of establishing the value of the stock as part of its damages claim rests on Brescia.  The onus of establishing fraud rests on the defendants. The allegations are serious. Whilst the civil standard of balance of probabilities applies, the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process by which the requisite degree of satisfaction is obtained: Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] at 362-363.  
The value of the stock  Brescia's principal lay witness on this issue was Mr Cortese. Vittorio was cross-examined briefly. He said he relied on Mr Cortese with respect to this claim. Bruno was not cross-examined on the issue.  Brescia's starting point is an Inventory Stock Report No. 110305 VA dated March 2005 ("the Report") pertaining to the period ending 31 March 2005.  Mr Cortese described the process of bringing the Report into existence in his affidavit of 30 March 2006. That evidence was not challenged.  The Report is a 217 page document itemising deliveries of all stock received at the building. The information was entered by Brescia's stock controller, Ms Ngo, who worked under Mr Cortese's supervision. Each item has a description and a stock code.  There is a costing for each item which incorporates freight, duty, insurance, cartage and Brescia's margin to obtain a cost price for each item.  From 16-18 March 2005, that is, shortly after the fire, Brescia conducted a stock take under the supervision of Mr Cortese at the Cabramatta warehouse and showroom following which the Report was adjusted to take into account discrepancies identified during the stock take.  Mr Cortese's evidence was that to the best of his knowledge the Report detailed the quantities of furniture located in the building at the time of the fire.  Mr McKenzie, an expert accountant retained by Brescia and who gave evidence, reviewed a sample of 85 stock items to ascertain what adjustment was required to bring the figures in the Report into line with replacement cost.
He did not, however, make any separate adjustment for age, condition and remaining useful life.  The defendants attacked the asserted value of the stock on the basis that sufficient allowance for damaged and unsaleable items was not made.  They went further, however, asserting that the value claimed was fraudulent, that is known by Brescia to be false as an overstatement.  The approach taken by Brescia in reaching the total was that there was minimal damaged or unsaleable stock and what there was, was capable of repair to make it saleable. It contended that the proper approach to ascertain its value was therefore to deduct from the full value of its recorded stock the cost required to put the damaged or unsaleable items into a saleable state.  Mr Cortese's evidence was that stock is classified as damaged or unsaleable if, as at the end of the financial year, it is not then in a current condition to enable it to be sold to a customer wanting to purchase a complete and undamaged item of furniture. This does not mean, however, that stock will not ever be able to sold, which is otherwise only able to be sold at a greatly reduced value. He gave various examples of why the classification of stock as damaged or unsaleable can be temporary and how it sometimes is that only one component of a large suite of furniture is unsaleable but has the effect of rendering the whole suite incomplete until the single component is rectified. His evidence was that in the ordinary course of events, stock which is classified at the end of the financial year as damaged or unsaleable is quickly turned into stock which then becomes saleable.  The amount and value of damaged and unsaleable stock in the building at the time of the fire was determined by Mr Cortese by extrapolation from the after fire stock take of damaged and unsaleable items that remained, which was done to adjust the stock report. The exercise yielded a figure as the value of stock (before repair) in the building which was lost in the fire.  Mr Cortese then by reference to the time and material cost involved in making good the amount of damaged and unsaleable stock estimated that cost to be $53,903.  After adjustments which were not in dispute and after deduction of the cost to repair, the value reached was $3,909,544.00.  The defendants attacked Brescia's claimed stock figures on a number of fronts.  In aid of their attack, the defendants called two expert witnesses, Dr
Miller and Mr Dolman. Dr Miller is an accountant with extensive experience in adjustment and large and complex insurance claims. Mr Dolman is an accountant who specialises in forensic accounting and litigation support.  
The defendants' angles of attack  The first angle of attack was that Brescia's approach here was inconsistent with its approach taken in previous years in its own internal financial accounts. The documents available were, however, very limited by reason of the destruction caused by the fire. Nevertheless, handwritten workings prepared by Mr Cortese for the years ended 30 June 2001, 2002, 2003 and 2004 revealed adjustments made by him to closing stock figures for damaged and unsaleable stock of over $1M in 2002 and 2003 and $2.1M in 2004.  The second angle of attack, again based on the views of Dr Miller and Mr
Dolman, was that Brescia's figures did not make sufficient allowance (by way of reduction) for ageing stock.  The third angle of attack was based on an analysis carried out by Mr
Dolman of the gross profit of Brescia on the basis that there was no damaged or unsaleable stock for the years 2003, 2004 and 2005. The analysis he performed was to take Brescia's figures for each of those years and to "back out" of them the damaged stock adjustment which appeared in its financial accounts for each of those years and to determine Brescia's gross profit in percentage terms for each of those years, and then, for 2005 (that is the financial year during which the fire occurred) to add back Brescia's stock loss claim in full to yield a gross profit. This analysis showed a gross profit for 2003 of 43.8 per cent, for 2004 of 50.9 per cent and (with the stock claim added back) for 2005 of 57.3 per cent. From this Mr Dolman concluded, the stock claim must be an overstatement because the 2005 figure so adjusted displayed an unlikely jump in profitability.  
Inconsistencies with previous years  Mr Cortese's evidence was that he performed the handwritten calculations to work out the amount of stock on hand at the end of the financial year for taxation purposes.  He explained the process which had taken place with respect to stock takes in previous years. During those years stock take count sheets were brought into existence for the Ashfield showroom, the Ashfield warehouse, the
Cabramatta showroom and the Cabramatta warehouse. Bruno was in charge of the
Ashfield warehouse stock count and Vittorio for the showroom. Such an exercise is directed towards determining a figure for closing stock at the end of the relevant financial year.  In that process notes of the items which in Bruno's or Vittorio's opinion were damaged, were made. Mr Cortese would then calculate the value by listing those items and multiplying them by their unit cost to reach the total cost of all damaged items.  The reports were destroyed in the fire. All that remains are the single page documents with Mr Cortese's handwriting showing his calculation of an amount for damaged and unsaleable stock.  In the ordinary course, stock which is classified at the end of the financial year as damaged or unsaleable, is quickly turned into stock which then becomes saleable. He gave various examples of this such as furniture which arrives incomplete from Brescia's overseas suppliers but where the missing piece subsequently comes.  There is, as Mr Sullivan correctly pointed out, a tax advantage to be derived from the provision (or write-off) for damaged and unsaleable stock because it reduces the closing figure for stock at the end of the financial year. It accordingly brings about a reduction on revenue account. However, the advantage is one of deferral only, because the opening stock figure for the following financial year is lower and furniture repaired and sold during that financial year will come back into account as revenue in that year.  In the 2004 handwritten calculations of Mr Cortese, the figure for damaged and unsaleable stock was 40 per cent of the value of stock after adjustments including Brescia's mark-up and for the residual effects of (the now defunct) sales tax. That percentage is 35 per cent for 2003 and 28 per cent for 2002 and 22 per cent for 2001.  The 2004 estimation is an exact percentage of the stock figure after adjustment.  The defendants put, supported principally by Dr Miller, that the stock value claimed by Brescia as damages should be reduced by 40 per cent in line with the taxation treatment Brescia took for 2004. The figure according to Dr
Miller should thus be 60 per cent of ($3,909,544.00 plus $53,903.00) which results in $2,378,068.00.  
Ageing stock  The defendants' submission was that the Court would not be satisfied that there was some $3.9M worth of stock present at Ashfield at the time of the fire. The proposition was that there was a considerable quantity of old stock not being replaced because it was not selling and the level of write-offs was increasing.  There was produced after the fire a report as to the age of stock as at 31
October 2004 by retrieval, with the assistance of a computer expert (Mr Peter
McLoughlin), of such information as was available after the fire. Mr Cortese was not entirely happy with the report but it was the best that could be done.  Complex analyses and counter-analyses from Mr McKenzie on the one hand and
Dr Miller and Mr Dolman on the other also based on such financial information as was available were admitted into evidence. They were intended either to support or to undermine Brescia's stock claim by reference, amongst others, to unsaleability as a consequence of age.  Mr McKenzie accepted that he relied on advice and explanations of Brescia, that is, Mr Cortese, but if there was a result inconsistent with his own analysis he would re-check the information or use his own analysis. Mr Cortese left it to him to do his own calculations. The stock valuation report did not allow him readily to establish as a starting point the original cost of items as historical price list records were destroyed in the fire. Current invoices were used because there were no other records they could rely on. From this, the value of stock in the report was determined.  In the defendants' final written submissions directed to the question of ageing stock, it was put that Mr Cortese's records demonstrated that 83 per cent of stock was more than 4 months old and 60 per cent of the stock at
Ashfield was damaged. In final oral submissions it was put that the compelling inference from the objective evidence, particularly Mr Cortese's handwritten notations which indicated a progressive increase in damaged or unsaleable stock, was that there was a considerable quantity of old stock, that a lot of old stock was not being replaced because it was not selling and that there was no explanation why the level of damaged or unsaleable stock increased significantly in each of the four years before the fire.  It was put to Mr Cortese whether it was ever a matter of concern to him that a very significant quantity of the stock had been purchased in some cases two or three years before the relevant time. His response was "if it was bread
I would be concerned, but it was furniture and furniture doesn't go off." He was asked "Does it go out of fashion?", to which he responded "No". He was not further challenged. No evidence to the contrary was led by the defendants.  Mr McKenzie's assessment of the value of the stock was not reconciled with other returns or financial statements of Brescia. He did his own calculations.
He was restricted to looking at current invoices because there were no other records to be relied upon. There were no purchase records prior to November or historical price list records. For this reason he was unable to calculate the original costs of nearly all of the items in the stock report because the records were destroyed in the fire.  On the basis of figures produced by Mr Cortese, Mr McKenzie accepted that .3 per cent of the stock was over 28 months old and 83 per cent over 4 months old. It was put to him that the figures revealed a significant stock ageing. His response was that "significant" depends on what industry one is talking about. In the furniture industry he could understand why stock could get that old. Stock in the showroom or on display would age but it is still there on display for sales purposes. He added that he would have liked to have better figures if he owned the store but that the figures were not totally unsurprising.  Vittorio was cross-examined briefly on a list of aged stock contained in an analysis of Mr McKenzie derived from Mr Cortese's affidavit of 30 March
That analysis showed that 75 per cent of Brescia's stock was purchased in the 24 months prior to 31 October 2004 and 25.4 per cent was more than 2 years old. It was put to him that the aged stock analysis showed a "very, very high level of old stock for a retail furniture operation". He disagreed. He did agree that the analysis as at October 2004 showed a very significant proportion of unsaleable stock. However, his evidence was that the level and age of stock is something that was determined by Mr Cortese and Mr McKenzie.  In the end, the position distilled into a contest between Mr Cortese's factual evidence that there was no significant level of permanently damaged or unsaleable stock on the one hand (supported by Mr McKenzie but significantly reliant on Mr Cortese) and the analyses of Dr Miller and Mr Dolman on the other based largely on Mr Cortese's writings which he explained.  I deal with my assessment of Mr Cortese below.  
Gross profit  Mr McKenzie took issue with Mr Dolman's conclusion.  Firstly, he pointed out that the figures added back (that is for damaged stock in each of the years) did not line up with the actual financial reports for those years. Mr Dolman accepted this but said he did other calculations which resulted in an even bigger gap, but these calculations did not find their way into evidence.  Secondly, he took issue with the appropriateness of Mr Dolman's methodology, including his percentage gross profit derivations. In each of and 2004 Mr Cortese's calculations after deducting for damaged and unsaleable stock yielded a particular figure which was reflected in the year end accounts and which bore a relationship to the starting figure for Mr
Cortese's calculations. So, for example, for the year 2003 Mr Cortese's starting figure was $7,906,451.00 which after adjustments, including for damaged and unsaleable stock, ultimately yielded a closing stock figure of $2,499,222.00 being 31.6 per cent of the starting figure. In 2004 the closing stock figure was $2,280,456.00 derived from a starting figure of $7,875,377.00, that is, 29 per cent of the starting figure. Mr McKenzie's view was that to avoid distortion (having regard to the intrusion of the various adjustments to yield the final figure) the sound approach was not to add back as revenue for 2005 the full amount of Brescia's stock loss claim but rather, to add back a percentage of the starting stock for 2005 in line with the percentage of the starting stock figure that found its way into the Brescia's accounts for the previous years examined by him and Mr Dolman.  That figure was 32.2 per cent.  Taking a starting figure of Ashfield damaged stock prior to sundry adjustments of $6,290,187.00 (apparently agreed between Mr McKenzie and Dr
Miller as to derivation) and applying 32.3 per cent to that figure, Mr
McKenzie's opinion was that the add back to derive gross profit for 2005 was not Brescia's full stock loss claim but rather the figure of $2,023,664.00.
This exercise yielded a gross profit percentage for 2005 of 49.7 per cent rather than the 57.3 per cent yielded by Mr Dolman's approach, which showed nothing out of the ordinary.  After the experts were cross-examined there was a brief session of concurrent testimony at the end of which Mr McKenzie and Mr Dolman remained in disagreement.  The exercises of these witnesses when properly characterised were directed to testing the validity of Brescia's stock loss claim. Irrespective of their financial analyses, resolution of the issue ultimately depends on whether the direct evidence of Mr Cortese should be accepted or not.  It seems to me that the scope for disagreement between Mr McKenzie and Mr
Dolman derives from the fact that there is a disconformity between the stock value contended for by Brescia in these proceedings which is full value (less costs of repair) and the closing stock value which appeared in its financial statements for earlier years which made a significant allowance for damaged and unsaleable stock.  The difference in substance between the two approaches is that Mr
McKenzie's approach allows for an adjustment in an attempt to align the claim here with the approach taken in previous financial years whereas that of Mr
Dolman does not.  It seems to me that very little is to be derived by choosing between the two approaches because Brescia's stock loss claim depends on acceptance of Mr
Cortese's evidence and the defendants' fraud defence depends on the rejection of that evidence together with the attribution to Brescia of fraudulent intent.  Similar considerations apply to Dr Miller's thesis.  
Mr Cortese  Turning then to Mr Cortese.  In his affidavit of 30 January 2007 Mr Cortese responded to and denied the defendants' allegation of fraud. He was cross-examined at some length, and, as with Vittorio and Bruno, his credit attacked.  Mr Cortese was subjected to a somewhat aggressive cross-examination which, in my view, he entirely withstood.  Brescia's figures indicated that of the four locations where stock was kept - being the Ashfield warehouse, the Ashfield showroom, the Cabramatta warehouse and the Cabramatta showroom about 60 per cent of the stock was held at the Ashfield warehouse.  If the 2004 figure for damaged and unsaleable stock of $2,104,979 (being per cent of the adjusted cost as referred to above) was constituted by permanently damaged or unsaleable stock it would mean that something in the order of 50 per cent of the stock at Ashfield was in that state. The defendants handed up as an aid to submissions a comparative table reflecting
Brescia's opening stock and closing stock figures from 2002 to 2005 and Mr
Cortese's unsaleable stock adjustment figures showing the amount provided for damaged stock as a percentage of total stock. As Mr McKenzie pointed out, the per cent figure for 2004 was a round figure estimation. It is inherently unlikely, in my view, that this was accurate and indeed, both parties called its accuracy into question. This, it seems, provides some support for Mr
Cortese's position that the 40 per cent did not relate to stock in a permanently damaged or unsaleable state.  It was put by the defendants that Mr Dolman's analysis resulted in two alternative inferences, one that it was highly likely that the furniture was not there in the first place, and the second, that it was damaged or unsaleable. This perhaps of itself creates a difficulty for the defendants when they are alleging fraud.  The Brescia stock report was compiled by Mr Cortese and the defendants have not, in my view, put any reasonably acceptable basis for asserting that the stock described in it was not in existence.  Neither Dr Miller nor Mr Dolman had relevant expertise to ground an opinion as to the saleability of imported Italian furniture in this country.
Mr Dolman's evidence was that he had made inquiries through a contact of his with Harvey Norman Furniture in recent weeks but did not rely on these inquiries with respect to the preparation of his reports. It was put by the defendants that Mr McKenzie also lacked that expertise. It was not put, neither could it have been, that Mr Cortese was in that position. No evidence was led by the defendants from anybody who had that expertise.  I prefer Mr Cortese's evidence to the conclusions sought to be drawn from the respective analyses of the amount and ageing of Brescia's stock performed by Dr Miller and Mr Dolman.  The description of any of his evidence as evasive, casual, contradictory or unconvincing is, in my view, inapt.  The only parts of his evidence identified as falling within that description on behalf of the defendants in final submissions were:  a his evidence about the signs on the spray booths which amounted to a lack of recollection as to how many signs there were;  b evidence that he never discussed increasing levels of damaged stock or aged stock with Vittorio, and that he was not concerned about this; and  c his evidence that he did not give instructions to Mr McKenzie that there was no damaged or unsaleable stock.  Dealing with each submission in turn:  a this is a matter of little moment in my view given that lack of recollection as to a matter of that nature is entirely understandable;  b this is not inherently unlikely. More importantly, nothing to the contrary was put to Vittorio; and  c this proposition arose from a statement to that effect in one of Mr
McKenzie's reports. Mr McKenzie was cross-examined upon it. His understanding was that there were stock items that Brescia had on hand in an unfinished stage, had parts missing or had slight damage but had an explanation from
Brescia that they were easily rectified so that they did not form part of damaged stock in his understanding.  Part of the attack on his credit was in relation to advertising expenses which I deal with below. Not only did that attack fail, Mr Cortese's version was corroborated by objective contemporaneous material.  I formed a favourable impression of Mr Cortese. I did not form the view that he was being anything other than entirely truthful and I accept his evidence.  I find for the Brescia on the stock loss claim in the amount of $3,909,554.00.  
Fraud  It follows from what I have said above that the defendants' assertion of fraud fails.  There was no attempt made to implicate any of Vittorio, Bruno or Moreno in any fraudulent intent. Even if Brescia had not established the stock value I have found, there was no basis established, let alone any proper basis, for a finding of fraud.  As a consequence of my finding, it is not necessary to consider the operation of <case> of the Act.  It is, however, noteworthy that these proceedings started out life as a claim for a declaration that Brescia is entitled to indemnity. The claim for stock loss is a claim for damages made in proceedings in this Court which was manifestly always going to be the subject of close scrutiny.  In my view, a claim contemplated by <case> is a claim made extra-curially by an insured on an insurer with dishonest intent to induce a false belief in the insurer for the purpose of obtaining payment or some other benefit under the policy.  Section 56(2) talks of "proceedings in relation to such a claim" which, in my view, indicates a distinction between a claim and proceedings in relation to it.  The prosecution of the cause of action in these proceedings for damages after refusal by the defendants of indemnity is not, in my view, a claim under an insurance contract for the purposes of <case> of the Act.  It follows, in my view, that even if I had found that the stock loss claim was inflated to the knowledge of Brescia, the defendants would not have had the benefit of <case>.  
THE BUSINESS INTERRUPTION CLAIM AND THE RELATED DEFENCE OF FRAUD  Under clause 9.1 of the Policy the defendants indemnified Brescia in accordance with clause 10 (Basis of Settlement) against loss resulting from the interruption of, or interference with, the Business for the Indemnity
Period specified in the Schedule, which in this case, it is common cause, is months.  The Basis of Settlement is that the indemnity is for actual loss of Gross
Profit plus Cost of Working (the additional expenditure incurred to avoid reduction in turnover in consequence of the damage) less sums saved in respect of expenses which would have been payable out of Gross Profit.  There is also a provision for the reduction of cover in the event of underinsurance.  There is, except for one matter of contention, agreement between the parties as to all the elements in the calculation of this claim. Those elements are:  * Loss of Gross Profits $3,214,617  * Add increase in Cost of Working $829,120  * Less savings - advertising in dispute  * Less savings - payroll $626,653  * Less savings - other $185,009  Brescia contends that $564,849 would have been saved in respect of advertising. The defendants contend that the figure is $1,184,631. In other words, the defendants assert that Brescia would have spent $619,782 more in advertising than it says it would have.  Once again the defendants assert not only that Brescia's claim is inflated but that it is also fraudulently made.  One difference between the fraud allegation with respect to the stock loss claim and the fraud allegation here is that the stock loss claim concerned the value of assets in existence whereas the dispute here is as to an amount that would have been saved in the future.  What is here in issue is what Brescia would have done with respect to advertising had the fire not happened.  An immediate difficulty for the defendants is that for that claim to be fraudulently false it is necessary to find that when it was made Brescia knew it would in the future spend more than it says it was intending to spend.  During the financial year ended 30 June 2004, Brescia's total advertising expenses were $1,890,261. Of that amount $1,469,925 was attributable to radio and television advertising, while the remainder of $420,336 was attributable to other advertising media including local and ethnic newspaper advertising, magazine advertising, sponsorship and advertising signs.  The evidence established that each year around January or February,
Brescia holds a meeting attended by Vittorio, Moreno and Mr Cortese to decide its advertising budget.  In his affidavit of 30 January 2007, Vittorio gave evidence that it was his intention at the 2005 meeting to reduce Brescia's advertising expenditure for the remainder of the calendar year as compared to 2004. His evidence was that there was agreement to reduce television advertising and radio advertising and a budget determined. There was also agreement not to renew magazine advertising and to stop advertising in local and ethnic newspapers.  For some years, at the behest of Antonio, Brescia had sponsored Club
Marconi. On 28 November 2005 Brescia informed Marconi that it would not be renewing their sponsorship contract.  Also, for some years Brescia had paid the Parramatta Trust for an advertising sign at Parramatta Stadium. Vittorio gave evidence that some time late in 2004 or early in 2005 he told Mr Cortese that he did not want Brescia to renew that sponsorship.  In his affidavit of 30 January 2007, Moreno swore substantially to the same effect concerning the advertising budget meeting in early 2005. He also gave affidavit evidence about a conversation with Vittorio some time in 2004 to the effect that he did not want Brescia to do any more magazine advertising.  Mr Cortese in his affidavit of 30 January 2007 also deposed to the January meeting in terms effectively indistinguishable from the versions of Vittorio and Moreno.  Brescia accordingly put that its advertising costs which would have been incurred during the indemnity period would have been substantially less than those incurred in the period to 30 June 2004. Mr Cortese set out in his affidavit his methodology and process for estimating the savings Brescia would have made.  He was not challenged on any of the detail. Rather, the defendants' attack took a different course.  It was put that on the probabilities there would have been no reduction in
Brescia's advertising costs because advertising expenditure is a critical prerequisite for the generation of sales revenue and there is a direct correlation between the two, that is, if advertising is reduced, so is sales revenue. It followed, it was put, that Brescia would not have reduced its advertising expenditure because it would not have been prepared to risk the reduction in revenue.  It was also put that the budget meeting to which Vittorio, Moreno and Mr
Cortese deposed were concocted and the fact that they were prepared to swear them without corroborating notes was fatal.  In my opinion there was no proper basis for the attack nor for the submission.  Vittorio was cross-examined about the conversation and that Moreno used effectively the same terms in his affidavit to describe the conversation. He was asked whether he was concerned to put forward an explanation for the significant reduction in advertising expenditure, which he denied.  Moreno was cross-examined briefly on the meeting. He denied discussing with Vittorio or Mr Cortese what he was going to put in his affidavit. He was asked to explain why all three have almost precisely the same words recording the conversation if it was not discussed between them what was going to be deposed to. He said he could not explain it. His evidence was that he gave his version of the conversation, without any notes or prompting, to his solicitor.
The extent of the challenge put to him was a question "Are you really telling the truth about that, Mr Brescia?".  Mr Cortese produced a note of the amounts proposed to be allocated during the 2005 advertising budget meeting. This document was brought into existence before the fire and somewhat remarkably was not the subject of any challenge in cross-examination.  He was challenged on his recollection of the budget meeting conversation and referred to the document. His evidence was that he produced what he described as a "little item" straight after the meeting. The "item" referred to has two columns showing amounts for television, radio and other advertising and which are directly corroborative of his, Vittorio's and Moreno's version of that meeting.  It was put to him that it was not until 30 January 2007 that he swore his affidavit concerning the meeting. He was also asked whether he discussed the meeting before he swore the affidavit with either Vittorio or Moreno.  Insofar as a point was sought to be made about the timing of the affidavits about the meeting, that point can shortly be disposed of. As was pointed out on behalf of Brescia, the assertion of fraud was only made for the first time (in these proceedings) in December 2006. The affidavits came thereafter.  It was also put that the terms of the discussion were suspicious because of the very similar terms in which the deponents to it described it. In my view (leaving aside the fact that the affidavits in these proceedings are clearly the creation of the lawyers, not the witnesses) the similarity springs from the fact that the conversation, simple as it was, took place in the terms alleged.  I find that the conversation took place. I find that Brescia proposed to and would have reduced its advertising expenditure and I accept the evidence of Mr McKenzie who calculated the amount of the savings to be $564,849.  The assertion of fraud fails and fails by a large margin.  The defendants provided by way of submission a documentary analysis of
Brescia's advertising expenditure intended to demonstrate the clear correlation between advertising expenditure and revenue. The submission was made on the basis of financial information which was not put in issue by
Brescia. The submission demonstrated that in 26 monthly periods, when advertising either increased or decreased turnover went in the same direction.
Twice there was an increase in advertising expenditure but a reduction in turnover and three times a reduction in advertising expenditure but higher revenue.  No submission was put that assessment of the business interruption claim should take into account any reduction in revenue which might be expected to have occurred if Brescia made the savings which it contended for, and in respect of which I have found in its favour. Counsel made it clear that the only use to which the analysis was put in submission was to support the probability that Brescia would not have reduced its advertising expenditure as it claimed it would have.  I should add that whilst the document demonstrated a statistical probability that reduced advertising would lead to reduced revenue, the evidence from Vittorio, Moreno and Mr Cortese was that there are a number of considerations which counter that conclusion. For example, television stations may offer discounts, the cost of free to air advertising has dropped since the expansion of pay television and development of internet advertising, and a smarter spend may outdo a larger one. There was to be an undoubted reduction from the termination of sponsorship of Club Marconi and dispensing with the sign at Parramatta Stadium.  Given my finding that Brescia would have reduced its expenditure after the
January 2005 meeting and that the defendants do not say a finding to that effect should reduce the revenue applicable to the business interruption claim, the submission as to the correlation, whilst I took it into account in reaching the conclusion on the facts that I have reached, ultimately has no effect on the business interruption claim.  The experts agreed on the arithmetic outcome depending on my finding with respect to advertising.  On the basis of that agreement, the amount of Brescia's loss for business interruption, having regard to my findings is $2,013,442.  Brescia is entitled to a verdict in that amount.  
LOSS OF THE BUILDING  
Market Value  The first proposition put by the defendants was that neither reinstatement value nor indemnity value as provided for in the Basis of Settlement clause applied, but that Brescia was restricted to the difference between the market value of the property before the fire and its market value after it.  On any basis that difference is less than indemnity value in this case (which in turn is less than reinstatement value).  The proposition was put on the basis that on ordinary principles an insured has a right to be indemnified only to the true extent of his loss and that the overarching rule with respect to property damaged in a fire is that the loss does not exceed the difference between the market value of the property before and after the event.  For this proposition the defendants relied on a passage in MacGillivray on Insurance Law 10th Ed (2003) par 19-21 that:  "Where the building is burned the loss is the difference in the market value of the site and premises before the fire and the site and premises after the fire; if part of that loss is the depreciation in the value of the site, that may be recovered on a policy which purports to insure the building."  I was also referred to Lucas versus The New Zealand Insurance Co Limited <case>; [[1983] 1 VR 698.]  This submission does not find favour with the Court. The passage in
MacGillivray on Insurance Law does not, nor does it purport to, deal with a policy on specific terms such as the present one. In par 19-10 the learned authors refer to the example of a "valued policy" under which the amount recoverable by the assured is the agreed value.  Lucas versus The New Zealand Insurance Co Limited provides no support for the defendants' proposition. It is to the contrary. At 700 to 701 Crockett J made it clear that the measure of market value is a prima facie one. It is not the value in an abstract sense that is to be assessed but the value of the property to the insured. As His Honour put it, relying on Bowen LJ in
Castellain versus Preston (1883) ll QBD 380 at 400, for example, the property in question may have a value to the insured beyond the market value because it was held by him for the purpose of using and enjoying it as a house or in carrying on his business: Grant versus Aetna Insurance Co <case>; [(1862) 15 ER 589.]  Here there is a Basis of Settlement clause which provides two alternative consensual methods of determining the value of the loss of the insured when the risk comes home. Brescia is entitled to the benefit of the terms of its contract.  Moreover, there is nothing in the authorities which supports the proposition that some overarching general principle displaces reinstatement or indemnity value provisions such as the one in the Policy. Authority cited to me is to the contrary of any such proposition: see Spina & Spina versus Mutual
Acceptance (Insurance) Ltd [(1984) 3 ANZ Ins Cas 60-554] at 78,346 per Macrossan J.  The general principle is clearly that the insured is only entitled to the value of his loss but the assessment of his loss must proceed on the basis of the agreed valuation of the property: British Traders' Insurance Company
Limited versus Monson <case>; [(1964) 111 CLR 86] at 93.  Notwithstanding this conclusion I will nevertheless determine the amount of the loss on the basis suggested.  Evidence was received from two experienced valuers, Mr Blackwell called by the plaintiff and Mr Taylor called by the defendants.  Their evidence was taken concurrently and I found both to be impressive witnesses.  They were agreed on the appropriate valuation methodology to be applied with respect to this exercise.  Before its destruction the building housed a business.  The valuers first valued the building on the basis of the capitalisation of expected net rental income in order to determine the market value of the site as at 10 March 2005. This methodology involves the assessment of the net rental value and the application to it of a market based capitalisation rate.  They were agreed that an appropriate capitalisation rate to be applied is .875 per cent.  Then they valued the land after the fire in its "unimproved" state.  Mr Blackwell's opinion was that the rental value for the showroom was $180 per square metre. Mr Taylor came to the figure of $150 per square metre. They were agreed that the warehouse storage area should come in at $75 per square metre and on the agent's commission that should be deducted so as to achieve a net return.  Both applied orthodox valuation methodology looking at rentals of comparable properties and applied their respective judgments to what variations were applicable so as to bring the comparables into line with the building. They both took as their prime comparable the development at the corner of O'Riordan and Doody Streets, Alexandria - called the HomeMaker
Centre, a refurbished two storey industrial building which operates as a bulky goods retail centre. The range of rentals yielded there is from $220 per square metre down to $185 per square metre.  Each valuer also considered the property at 13 Parramatta Rd Lidcombe, a refurbished warehouse, and well-presented showroom yielding $119.45 per square metre.  The debate which took place during the concurrent evidence process revealed that Mr Blackwell placed significant weight on the Parramatta Road frontage of the building and the high volume of traffic on Parramatta Road together with its good parking.  For these reasons, whilst the building did not have the benefits of being clustered within one development with other retail businesses as with the
HomeMaker Centre, Mr Blackwell's judgment was that the rental obtainable for the building was slightly less than the lowest rental at the HomeMaker Centre.  Mr Taylor considered that the lack of clustering had more significance and therefore considered there should be a larger discount compared to the rentals obtainable at the HomeMaker Centre.  Mr Blackwell considered that there was, what might be described as a form of clustering along Parramatta Road.  On balance on this issue, I prefer the evidence of Mr Blackwell having regard to the significant benefits of being in the Parramatta Road commercial vicinity and the good parking which the building had to offer. I therefore accept Mr Blackwell's assessment of the pre-fire value of $10,860,000 as opposed to Mr Taylor's of $9,595,000.  On the post-fire value, the difference between Mr Blackwell and Mr Taylor boiled down to two factors, bulk discount and development potential.  The valuers agreed that there is a general principle that as the site increases in size there is often a diminution or decrease in the average rate per metre applied.  Mr Blackwell's view was that there should be a bulk discount for the building as compared to the comparable transactions considered by both valuers on the basis that this was a substantially larger site. Mr Taylor's view was that the bulk discount comes into play when one is talking of a property double the size or considerably larger than the comparable transaction being examined, and the site here did not meet that criterion.  They differed on development potential. Mr Blackwell considered that the site here falls away at the rear which would be a negative factor in redevelopment whereas Mr Taylor considered that the sloping aspect was a potential advantage because basement parking might be more easily facilitated.  On the post-fire value I prefer Mr Taylor's view on the basis that the subject land is not significantly larger than the comparable transactions considered and also, that redevelopment with basement parking would be a distinct advantage.  Accordingly, I find the post-fire value to be $9,500,000 in accordance with Mr Taylor's view and not $8,750,000 as opined by Mr Blackwell.  Thus damages, if they were to be assessed on the basis of the difference between pre and post-fire market values would be $1,360,000.  
Reinstatement Value versus Indemnity Value  The parties agreed that if reinstatement value is the applicable measure, the cost of reinstatement would be $13,242,707.  This is the measure contended for by Brescia.  Under clause 4.4.2 of the Policy, replacement, repair or rebuilding must be commenced and carried out with reasonable dispatch, failing which the
Insurer shall not be liable to make payment greater than the indemnity value.  The defendants put that Brescia has failed to do so, and therefore (in the alternative to what was put as to market value) it is not entitled to any payment beyond indemnity value.  In response Brescia put three things.  Firstly, it was submitted that the obligation to act with reasonable dispatch lay upon it only for the period the Policy was on foot and the Policy terminated by effluxion of time on 30 June 2005. It had acted with reasonable dispatch between the date of the fire and the date the Policy expired. It followed that there was no obligation beyond that date to act with reasonable dispatch and its right to reinstatement value had accrued at the date the
Policy expired.  Secondly, it was put that the defendants were in breach of their obligations under the Policy to confer indemnity so that they were either impermissibly seeking to take advantage of their own wrong and it was therefore not open to the defendants to rely on the failure by Brescia to act with reasonable dispatch.  Thirdly, it was put that what was reasonable dispatch was informed by the circumstances which pertained between the parties at the relevant time, a critical aspect in the assessment of what was reasonable was the fact that the defendants had refused Brescia indemnity so that it was reasonable for Brescia not to proceed to reinstate.  During the period March 2005 to May 2006, Brescia took a number of steps.
The unchallenged evidence established that its steps included debris cleaning, demolition and make safe works, obtaining estimates to rebuild, retaining architects and town planners with a view to obtaining development consent and seeking legal advice. It paid in excess of $340,000 in respect of those steps.  It was put by the defendants that the steps which Brescia took were taken because the Council required Brescia to take them. Reliance was placed on a letter dated 15 April 2005 from the Council to Brescia, in which the Council set out a series of matters to be resolved as a matter of urgency having regard to the state of the site and the remaining structures on it. Acting urgently, albeit at the instance of the local authority, seems to me to be indicative of due dispatch rather than to negative it.  I find that Brescia acted with reasonable dispatch up to and including 23
May 2006 (that is well beyond the Policy expiry date of 30 June 2005), being the date on which it appointed the Turnbull Group as town planners to review a legal report it had concerning existing use rights and to write to the Council regarding those rights.  However, Moreno's evidence established that nothing has been done since at least January 2007.  Leaving aside the possible intrusion of the defendants' breach into the assessment of the reasonableness of Brescia's conduct, in my view Brescia has failed to act with reasonable dispatch in carrying out reinstatement work since at least January 2007, and that is the present position.  As to the first proposition, that the obligation to act with due dispatch extended only for the policy period, Mr Sullivan put that the requirement applied only during the policy period, that is until 30 June 2005. He submitted that the Policy terminated by effluxion of time immediately upon the passing of that day at which moment all rights and obligations, other than those which had accrued at that point, were dissolved. At that moment Brescia had an accrued right to indemnity under the Policy being reinstatement value because it had, to that point, acted with due dispatch. Thus he put, upon termination of the Policy any obligation further to act with due dispatch came to an end so that Brescia was left with a right to reinstatement value as the appropriate measure of its damages without any concomitant obligation to act with due dispatch.  In support of this proposition, Mr Sullivan cited a passage from the decision of the High Court in CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club
Limited (1997) 187 CLR 384 at 403, which was concerned with a provision indistinguishable from the one in this case. The passage, from the joint judgment of Brennan CJ and Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ is as follows:  "Proviso (i) under the heading "REINSTATEMENT AND REPLACEMENT" indicated that the work of repair and restoration of the Club premises was to be undertaken by or on behalf of the Club. It did so by stating that the work might be undertaken in any manner suitable to the requirements of the Club, but then imposing an obligation to commence and carry out the work "with reasonable despatch". In the events that happened after the first fire, the Club lacked the financial resources to do so. The primary judge so held. Be that as it may, the Club had not commenced any such work when the Policy expired ten months later, nor, if it matters, at the time of the third fire fourteen months later. It is true that, in this period, CIC had denied liability, but the Club's case is not that there had been a repudiation which it had accepted. Rather, its case is, as counsel put it to this Court, that "the promise [to make payment] still attached when the third fire occurred.
However, by that stage, the period of "reasonable despatch" spoken of in proviso (i) had passed. The result is that, as the proviso then stipulates,
CIC is not "liable to make any payment greater than the indemnity value of the damaged property at the time of the happening of the damage"."  Support for the proposition put, it was argued, is to be derived from the words that "The Club had not commenced any such work when the policy expired ten months later, nor, if it matters, at the time of the third fire fourteen months later", on the basis that the necessary implication was that the Club was under no obligation to reinstate after expiry of the policy because "if it matters" can only mean that it did not matter.  I do not accept this submission. The Court was not considering the question which is under consideration here. The finding was that at no time had the Club acted with reasonable dispatch and therefore was not entitled to reinstatement. It says nothing of the notion that it would have been entitled to reinstatement after the policy had expired had it then not acted with reasonable dispatch. The period between the expiry of the policy and the third fire did not matter, not because the Club had no obligation to act with reasonable dispatch but because it had by then even, still not acted at all.  The submission is, in my view, also unsound in principle.  The logical consequence of the argument would be that if the risk occurred at the 11th hour on the last day of the Policy period the Insured would have a right to reinstatement value shorn of the obligation to reinstate.  The right to reinstatement value always had inherent in it the burden of having to act with due dispatch.  Under clause 4.4.4 the Insurer is not liable to make any payment beyond the indemnity value until a sum equal to the reinstatement value has actually been incurred by the Insured.  It follows that unless the Insured has by the date the Policy expires incurred such a sum, the right to be paid the reinstatement value has not then accrued to it.  In my view the right to reinstatement value could not and did not accrue without Brescia incurring a sum equal to it. Brescia never terminated the
Policy for breach. It seeks the money value of the obligation in respect of which the defendants are in breach. Whilst the Policy was still on foot
Brescia could not have recovered reinstatement value without incurring an equal sum. The nature of the defendants' obligation has not altered by reason of any termination and Brescia accordingly is in no better position now to claim reinstatement value than it was when the Policy was on foot.  Whilst the Policy period may have expired, the Policy itself, that is the rights and obligations of the parties as were enlivened and affected by the risk insured under it coming home during the Policy period, still bind them as a matter of contract. The respective rights and obligations under the Policy, arising out of the risk insured occurring, are no different now to what they were between the date the risk occurred and the date the Policy period expired.  As to the second proposition, that the defendants are seeking to take advantage of their own wrong, there is a general presumption that, in the absence of clearly expressed provisions in a contract, a party in default under a contract cannot take advantage of his own wrong: New Zealand Shipping
Co versus Societe des Ateliers et Chantiers de France [[1918-19] All ER Rep ]; Alghussein Establishment versus Eton College [[1991] 1 All ER .]  I was referred to the decision of this Court in Athlone Pty Ltd versus General
Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corporation [(1985) 3 ANZ Ins Cas -648] at 78,993 in which Foster J held with respect to policy terms indistinguishable from the present, that wrongful refusal by an insurer to accept the insured's claim by being in a breach of contract, effectively prevents reliance by the insurer on the provision. Mr Sullivan also cited
Lawson versus Zurich Australian Insurance Limited (Rolfe J, 30 July 1996, unreported) at 8, a decision of Rolfe J as support for that proposition, but a careful reading of that decision indicates that Rolfe J may have taken a different view to Foster J and that the decision may have turned on a concession by the defendant in that case.  The learned authors in MacGillivray on Insurance Law at 19-22 submit that the requirement that the insured should commence and carry out the work of reinstatement with reasonable dispatch should only operate if the insurers, in accordance with their contractual obligations, accept that reinstatement is the appropriate measure of indemnity.  The High Court in CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Ltd in the passage extracted, referred to both the fact that the Club lacked the financial resources to reinstate and that the insurer had denied liability but, as is the case here, the insured had not terminated by accepting the insurer's repudiation. Hence, their respective rights and obligations remained unaffected.  The defendants placed reliance on what was said in the decision of the
Court of Appeal in CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Ltd [(1995) 8 ANZ Ins Cas 61-232] by Kirby P at 75,564-5 and by Powell JA at 75,596.  Kirby P said the following:  "It has been suggested than an insurer may not be entitled to rely upon a condition precedent to its liability to pay if the insurer by its "conduct, such as the declining of liability, indicates to an insured that compliance with a condition precedent, whether of liability or quantum, is dispensed with": Edwards & Anor versus AA Mutual Insurance Co (1985) 3 ANZ Insurance
Cases 60-688 (NZHC) at 79,172. See also City Realties (Holdings) Ltd versus The
National Insurance Company of New Zealand Ltd [(1986) 4 ANZ Insurance Cases -695] at 74,139-140; TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd versus Hayden Enterprises
Pty Ltd [(1989) 16 NSWLR 130 (CA).] Even if that be so, it has long been accepted that a party, in breach of contract, is not disentitled from relying upon its subsequent contractual rights where the breach in question does not entitle the innocent party to terminate the contract. In such a case the contractual obligations of both parties continue to operate. The innocent party it entitled to damages for the breach, nominal or otherwise. See, for example, Freeth & Anor versus Burr [(1874) 9 LR CP .]
While every breach of contract is actionable (in that it founds an action for damages) it is not the case that all breaches of contract will disentitle the party in breach from asserting its other and subsequent rights. Only breaches justifying termination ought properly to be considered as completely disentitling. Other less serious breaches are capable of remedy by an award of damages. Here Cole J held that the appellant's conduct did not constitute a repudiation and did not, therefore, entitle the club to terminate the contract. Those findings were not challenged. In those circumstances the appellant was entitled to rely upon proviso (iv)."  
Powell JA said the following:  "Nor am I able to share the tentative view expressed by Cole J (see Appeal
Book p. 928) - to support which view his Honour prayed in aid the decisions in
Edwards & Anor versus A.A. Mutual Insurance Company (1985) 3 ANZ Insurance
Cases 60-699 at pp. 79,171-3; City Realties (Holdings) Limited versus The National
Insurance Company of New Zealand Limited (supra); to which might be added a reference to Athlone versus General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corporation and Challenor Insurances Pty Limited [(1985) 3 ANZ Insurance Cases -648] at p. 78,933 - that "if proviso (iv) (sic) has the effect contended for by the insurer, it is doubtful having regard to the insurer's breach" - semble, failure to admit the claim - "whether it is entitled to relay (sic) upon that proviso.  
On the contrary, so it seems to me, the fact that, in a case such as this, the conduct of an insurer may have made it difficult for an insured to fulfil such a condition precedent does not disentitle the insurer to rely upon the non- fulfilment of that condition precedent unless his conduct has been such as to justify a finding that, by that conduct, the insurer waived or dispensed with, fulfilment of that condition precedent."  It seems to me that save for my finding that Brescia had acted with reasonable dispatch and was so acting at the expiry of the Policy, Brescia's position in this case is indistinguishable from that of the insured in CIC
Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Ltd.  The juridical distinction between cases where a party has been held not entitled to take advantage of its own wrong and this case may be that the reasonable dispatch requirement here is a condition precedent to the insured's right to reinstatement value and that condition requires full and literal performance by the insured: see Tricontinental Corporation Ltd versus HDFI Ltd [(1990) 21 NSWLR 689] at 718  Thus, given that I have found that the first proposition put by Brescia should be rejected, it is not entitled, on the basis of the decisions of both the High Court and the Court of Appeal in CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown
Football Club Ltd, to reinstatement value.  As to the third proposition, that the defendants' breach informs what is reasonably to be expected from Brescia, there is direct support for it in the dissenting judgment of Gaudron J in CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown
Football Club Ltd. Her Honour said the following:  "In my view, the outcome of this appeal turns on proviso (iv) to the
Reinstatement and Replacement Memorandum, not proviso (i). By proviso (i) the insured's rights are limited to recovering the indemnity value of the damaged property unless "[t]he work of rebuilding, replacing, repairing or restoring ...[is] commenced and carried out with reasonable despatch". What is "reasonable" for the purposes of the proviso necessarily depends on all the circumstances of the case.  
It is not reasonable, in my view, to require an insured person to commence and carry out rebuilding and repairs in circumstances where the insurer is wrongfully denying liability under a policy of insurance of the kind involved in this case. Accordingly, in my view, proviso (i) does not operate in this case. I should add that my conclusion in this regard does not depend on the concession to that effect by counsel for the appellant during the course of argument."  An outcome in accordance with the reasoning of Gaudron J is in my view a fair and reasonable one but I am bound to follow the majority view. But for that, I would have followed the approach of Gaudron J.  It follows that Brescia fails in its quest for reinstatement value but is entitled to indemnity value.  
Indemnity Value  The only issue between the parties with respect to indemnity value (if that be the correct measure, which I have found,) was the approach to its assessment.  Four expert loss adjustors were called, two by each party. Messrs Dobinson and Madden by Brescia and Messrs Moon and Anderson by the defendants. Somewhat unusually there was consensus between the two experts for Brescia and Mr Moon for the defendants. Mr Anderson took a different view. The difference centred upon the appropriate methodology to determine how "age, condition and remaining useful life", should be taken into consideration in the determination of indemnity value. In other words, what approach should be taken in determining what discount from replacement value should be given to reflect the age, condition and remaining useful life of the building as it stood before its destruction.  The approach of the majority was to identify what the new building would require and its cost and then to deduct from it the value of the benefit from each item which Brescia would receive by virtue of getting a new building rather than having the old one. This is often referred to as betterment. It is the approach which was approved by Macrossan J in Spina & Spina versus Mutual
Acceptance (Insurance) Ltd at 78,347.  Mr Anderson took a different approach which was to calculate the cost involved in rebuilding pre-margin items. His method was to make an assessment of the full life of the building and of its remaining life, then work out in percentage terms what was left and finally to apply that percentage to the cost to rebuild and to the margin items.  Mr Anderson's approach involves an assessment of the life expectancy of a building which, in my view, leaves substantial margin for error. It also assumed that a number of costs included bore a direct relationship to the total cost which is self-evidently not the case.  Although the majority accepted that they have observed loss adjustors adopt Mr Anderson's approach, I consider that the better approach in the circumstances of this case is the betterment one and I adopt it.  There was agreement as to the quantum which would be yielded by the different approaches. On the betterment approach and on the assumption that there is still a concrete slab on the land which can be used (which I find to be the case here) the indemnity value is agreed at $9,120,757 inclusive of
GST.  Brescia is entitled to a verdict in that amount.  
LOSS OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT  The quantum of this claim is agreed at $1,657,110.90.  Brescia is entitled to a verdict in that amount.  
THE COST OF CONSULTING ENGINEERS  The quantum of this claim is agreed at $3,203.  Brescia is entitled to a verdict in that amount.  
THE COST OF REMOVING DEBRIS  The quantum of this claim is agreed at $492,318.63  Brescia is entitled to a verdict in that amount.  
THE COST OF EXTINGUISHING THE FIRE  The quantum of this claim is agreed at $58,911.03  Brescia is entitled to a verdict in that amount.  
THE COST OF CLAIM PREPARATION  The quantum is agreed at $50,000.  Brescia is entitled to a verdict in that amount.  
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES  
The case put  In addition to its loss represented by the amount of the indemnity due under the policy, Brescia claims the consequential loss it says it suffered by reason of the defendants' failure to acknowledge indemnity either within a reasonable time or at all.  It puts this claim on the basis of what is often described as the second limb of the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale [(1854) 9 Exch 341] at 354.
The first limb of the rule is that loss is recoverable if either it may fairly and reasonably be considered as arising naturally, that is according to the usual cause of things from the breach. The second limb is that loss is recoverable if it may reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties at the time they made the contract as the probable result of the breach of it.  Relying on the second limb, Brescia says it suffered loss beyond the amount of the indemnity under the Policy in two ways.  Firstly, it says that had the defendants acknowledged their obligations it would have rebuilt the building. The building would have been ready to reopen for business by 3 December 2006. Because of the defendants' failure to acknowledge their obligations (which failure continues) Brescia did not reopen by 3 December 2006 and it has still not reopened at Ashfield. It claims the loss of profit it would have made and would now be making as damages.  Secondly, it says that after the fire it had the opportunity to purchase new trading premises at unit 4, 476-492 Gardeners Road, Alexandria ("Alexandria") which would have operated whilst the building was being rebuilt. It says it forewent this opportunity because of the defendants' failure to acknowledge liability. Instead it leased smaller less desirable premises at level 1, 265 Parramatta Road, Auburn. It puts that the trading results from Auburn were poorer than they would have been from Alexandria and claims the difference, for so long as the building is not rebuilt, as damages.  It was not put in issue that had the building been rebuilt it would have been open for business by 3 December 2006.  The evidence also established that Brescia had the resources to buy
Alexandria if it wanted to and that its assets and the family resources were such that it could have rebuilt the building. However, Vittorio's evidence was, and I accept, that it would not have been wise to do so not knowing what was happening with this case. He also said that he would have done whatever he could to get the building rebuilt as quickly as possible if the insurers would have paid. I accept this evidence.  Vittorio was not challenged on his evidence that Brescia would, but for the non-admission or denial of indemnity, have proceeded with the purchase of
Alexandria rather than lease Auburn. Mr Dolman considered it probable that there were reasons other than the uncertainty of the position with respect to insurance which caused Brescia not to proceed with the Alexandria purchase. I accept Vittorio's evidence over Mr Dolman's ex post facto analysis. Even if other factors played a role in Brescia's decision not to proceed with
Alexandria, the evidence established that the defendants' conduct clearly played a material causative role: Wardley Australia Limited versus State of
Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514.]  The evidence also established that the attributes of Alexandria were superior to those of Auburn. They were larger premises and situated directly opposite a Harvey Norman showroom whereas Auburn is in the Auburn Home Mega
Mall, one of 40 stores in a three level centre in an area with less advantageous socio-economic status. A submission was made with respect to
Vittorio's credit that he had referred in his affidavit evidence to a Harvey
Norman Store and corrected it to a MegaMart store in his oral evidence. There was a Harvey Norman Store rather than a Mega Mart store at the time of his affidavit but not in March and April 2005. Vittorio apologised and accepted his error. It seemed to me that this enhanced rather than eroded his credit.  
The defence put  The defendants resist the consequential damages claim on a number of bases. Firstly, they say that as a matter of legal principle such consequential damages are not available where the claim arises out of the breach by an insurer of an obligation to give indemnity where the insured has not terminated the contract of insurance for breach.  Secondly, they say that Brescia's claim does not satisfy the requirements of the second limb in Hadley versus Baxendale because the damages claimed are too remote. They cannot, it is put, be reasonably supposed to have been in the contemplation of the parties at the time of the Policy as being the probable results of the breach of it.  Thirdly, they say that on the facts here the damages claimed were not caused by their breach but rather by Brescia itself which could have both acquired Alexandria and rebuilt the building out of its own resources but decided not to do so.  Fourthly, they put quantum in issue.  
Availability of consequential damages  The defendants placed heavy reliance on the decision in Russell Young
Abalone Pty Limited versus Traders Prudent Insurance Company Limited [(1993) 7
ANZ Ins Cas 61-182], a decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of
Tasmania, in which Underwood J with whom Green CJ agreed, said the following at 78,039:  "It appears that from the outset, the proceedings were permeated by a failure to come to grips with the fundamental distinction between a claim for indemnity under a contract of insurance and a claim for damages at large consequential upon acceptance of wrongful repudiation. The particulars do not make that distinction. It is not apparent on the pleadings and was obscured in the submissions put to the learned trial judge during the argument on the admissibility of the evidence of loss or rental and diminution of capital value."  His Honour also said the following at 78,040:  "If an insured elects to accept the insurer's wrongful repudiation, the damages are measured in accordance with the principles laid down in Hadley v
Baxendale (supra). If an insured does not accept the repudiation the contract remains on foot entitling him or her to recover only in accordance with its terms. See Steven Taylor versus J Thomas & Son.; VACC Insurance Co Ltd (Third Party) (supra); Shelbourne & Co versus Law Investment & Insurance
Corp Ltd [1898] 2AB 626; Maurice versus Goldsbrough Mort & Co Ltd [[1939] AC .] The nature of a claim against an insurer who fails to pay but does not repudiate the policy is discussed in F & K Jabbour versus Custodian of Israeli Absentee
Property [[1954] 1 WLR 139] at 143 et seq. Pearson J examined a large number of authorities and concluded that such a claim is one for damages but that the expression has a different meaning in claims for a failure to indemnify under a policy of insurance, for the only wrong has been a failure to pay a sum due under a contract. The method of calculating this sum is usually provided for in the contract itself. This decision is referred to by the editor of
McGregor on Damages (15th edn) at 1, where it is said that actions (inter alia)to recover money under insurance policies are to be distinguished from claims for damages for breach of contract and are outside the scope of the book. However, as I understand it, this does not mean that an insured seeking to recover money under a contract of insurance is denied the right to recover interest for late payment."  A similar approach was adopted by Powell JA in CIC Insurance Limited v
Bankstown Football Club Limited at 75,596-75,598 and again in Kassem v
Colonial Mutual General Insurance Co Ltd <case>
It was also taken by Carter J in Judd & Judd versus Suncorp Insurance &
Finance [(1988) 5 ANZ Ins Cas 60-832.]  This approach was referred to apparently with approval by Campbell J in
Green versus AMP Life Limited <case>; [(2005) 13 ANZ Ins Cas 90-124] at 86,632. That case involved a life insurance policy with an obligation on the insurer to make periodical payments while the insured remained totally disabled. At 86,661 His Honour said:  "For so long as the contract remains on foot, that will continue to be AMP's obligation. The only way in which the plaintiff would be entitled to a lump sum for the present value of net future benefits under the contract is if the plaintiff has, and has exercised, a right to terminate the contract for repudiation."  In the Court of Appeal in CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club
Limited a different view was taken by Kirby P and Priestley JA at 75,565 and ,571 respectively. The view taken by Kirby P was that whether or not general damages are recoverable for the breach of an insurance contract is to be ascertained by the application of general principles of contract law and His
Honour concluded, at 75,566 that:  "A claim for general damages for unreasonably tardy payment arising from or the belated recognition of an entitlement to insurance indemnity is by no means heterodox."  Priestley JA said:  "On the basis that the appellant's obligation was to pay the respondent's repair/reinstatement costs when incurred, statements by the appellant that it would not pay such costs, when incurred, which had the practical effect of preventing the respondent getting the benefit of the appellant's promise and obligation, should, in my opinion be treated as breaches of contract, so that any damage that can be proved to flow from them would be payable by the appellant to the respondent."  The decision in the High Court was determined on different grounds and the
Court did not express a view on the point.  In Motor Accident Mutual Insurance Pty Limited versus Kelly [(1998) 10 ANZ
Ins Cas 61-420] at 74,715 and following, Rolfe AJA, with whom Stein JA and
Fitzgerald AJA agreed, applied the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale without reference to the approach taken in Russell Young Abalone versus Traders Prudent
Insurance Company Ltd.  Also, in Tropicus Orchids Flowers and Foliage Pty Ltd versus Territory
Insurance Office <case>; [(1998) 148 FLR 441], at 486 and following, Mildren J, considered the controversy and concluded that if the insurer fails to pay within a reasonable time it is in breach and the insured may sue for the indemnity under the policy, and for damages for breach of contract. His Honour held further that regardless of whether or not the action is for monies due under the policy or for damages for breach, where the policy is still on foot the insured may also claim damages for loss of the use of the money in accordance with the rule in
Hadley versus Baxendale.  In Ferrcom Pty Limited versus Commercial Union Assurance Co of Australia
Limited [(1989) 5 ANZ Ins Cas 60-907], Giles J considered a claim for damages in accordance with
Hadley versus Baxendale and held that in appropriate circumstances loss due to late payment of a debt might be recoverable if it constituted special damage within the contemplation of the parties under the second limb in that case.
There was no suggestion that such a claim was available only if the policy had been terminated for repudiation.  In an article written by Stanley Drummond entitled "Damages for
Consequential Loss When the Insurer Fails to Pay" [(2005) 16 Insurance Law
Journal 1], the learned author in a compelling analysis of the authorities describes as a misconception the idea that repudiation and acceptance of repudiation are prerequisites for an award of damages for consequential loss where the insurer either refuses to pay a valid claim or fails to pay it within a reasonable time, in breach of its contractual obligations.  The learned author's conclusion is that where an insurer breaches the contract by failing to pay a valid claim, the insured's entitlement of damages is governed by the ordinary rules of contract law which means that damages for consequential loss are available in accordance with the rule in Hadley v
Baxendale. He identifies the origin of the asserted misconception and traces its development through a number of authorities.  I consider that I am bound by the decision of the majority of the Court of
Appeal in CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited and by the approach taken in Motor Accident Mutual Insurance Pty Limited versus Kelly.
Even if I did not consider myself to be so bound, I consider that approach to be correct.  The breach by an insurer to meet its obligations to indemnify is no different to a breach by any other citizen of a contract. The general principle remains that when assessing damages for breach of contract the plaintiff should be put in the position that he or she would have been in but for the breach, that is, the position if the contract had been performed;
Wenham versus Ella <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 454.]  If the contract remains on foot the plaintiff can recover, on ordinary principles, including the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale, such amount as is necessary to put him in the position in which he would have been. But his damages must in that case be assessed on the basis that the bargain is still on foot.  If the contract is terminated by him accepting the defendants' repudiation, the damages are assessed on the basis that the bargain has been lost: see Ronnoc Finance Limited versus Spectrum Network Systems Limited [(1997) NSWLR 624] at 628 and following.  By way of example, one of the consequences of terminating is that where there is a contractual right to have instalments paid over a period of time, on termination, damages will be assessed by valuing the right that has been lost so that they will be determined on the basis of the net present value of the lost right. If the contract remains on foot the plaintiff does not become entitled to a lump sum for the present value of net future benefits under the contract but will be entitled to damages equivalent to the amount of each instalment which the defendant fails to pay from the time that it is in breach with respect to that instalment plus such further loss which it suffers as a consequence of the failure to pay, determined in accordance with the rule in
Hadley versus Baxendale.  Whether the contract is on foot or not plays no role in whether or not
Hadley versus Baxendale applies to a particular breach. It seems to me that the
Court in Russell Young Abalone Pty Limited versus Traders Prudent Insurance
Company Limited mistook the requirement for termination as a prerequisite for loss of bargain damages to be a prerequisite for the application of Hadley v
Baxendale to breach of a contract of insurance. There is no principle from which such a distinction is to be derived.  I agree with the conclusion reached by Campbell J in Green versus AMP Life
Limited at 86,661 but for the reason that the contract there remained on foot and the claim was for damages to be assessed on the basis of a lump sum for the present value of net future benefits under the contract. On those facts on ordinary principles the plaintiff was not so entitled, but not because the breach of an insurance contract is to be treated according to some principle different to that which applies to any other contract. The plaintiff was not so entitled because he had not terminated. Damages were accordingly not to be assessed on the basis that his future instalment benefits were to be notionally accelerated and valued now.  I accordingly reject the defendants' submission that consequential damages are not available here as a matter of principle.  
Contemplation of the parties and causation  Clearly, the actual contemplation of the parties extended to the facts that the building was used by Brescia to trade and that occurrence of the peril might cause consequential loss of profits. A premium was paid for consequential loss of profits insurance. It is accordingly, not difficult to suppose that at the time of the Policy the parties had in their contemplation that if the defendants unjustifiably delayed the acknowledgement of their liability to indemnify Brescia in respect of its losses it would inevitably suffer loss of trading profits as a consequence: cf Kirby P in CIC Insurance
Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited at 75,566.  The defendants placed reliance on the decision in Ferrcom Pty Limited v
Commercial Union Assurance Co of Australia Limited in which Giles J declined to award consequential damages. The plaintiff had sought to recover damages for the costs of repairing and salvaging a mobile crane which overturned while lifting a load at Darling Harbour in Sydney and was damaged. It also claimed an amount for lost profits resulting from the inability to hire out the crane.
The Court awarded as damages the cost of salvage and repairs. It held that, however, the plaintiff had not brought itself within the second limb of
Hadley versus Baxendale because it did not show that the insurer knew or ought to have known that if it did not provide indemnity the crane would be out of operation beyond the normal repair period because the insured could not afford to pay for the repairs or for some other reason or that it was foreseeable, necessarily within the contemplation of the parties, that that would be so.
There was no claim by the insurer for the cost to it for funding the repairs to the crane or the cost of funding its business with borrow money as result of the loss of money paid by it for the repairs.  In my view, the decision in Ferrcom Pty Limited versus Commercial Union
Assurance Co of Australia Limited turns on its own facts and is distinguishable from the present case. Here the Policy expressly contemplates loss of profits from business interruption caused by damage to property and it contemplates a regime for reinstatement of a building which houses a profit generating business. The terms of the policy in Ferrcom Pty Limited v
Commercial Union Assurance Co of Australia Limited concerned one piece of equipment and there was no consequential loss of profits cover. What may reasonably be supposed to have been within the contemplation of the parties there does not assist with the equivalent exercise here.  The defendants do not plead any failure by Brescia to mitigate its damages, in respect of which the onus would have been on them: TCN Channel 9
Pty Limited versus Hayden Enterprises Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR 130] at 158 per Hope JA.  It was not unreasonable for Brescia not to reinstate in the face of the position taken by the defendants firstly in not indemnifying and then in refusing to. The Policy contemplates payment of indemnity value initially and then when a sum equal to reinstatement value has actually been incurred, payment to the insured of reinstatement value.  It could not fairly be said, in my view, that acting reasonably in the ordinary course of its business Brescia should, in the circumstances, have proceeded to reinstate to reduce the loss of profits it would have made if the insurance contract had been honoured: see TCN Channel 9 Pty Limited versus Hayden
Enterprises Pty Limited at 158 per Hope JA and 161-162 per Priestley JA.  Whilst I have held that Brescia is not entitled to reinstatement value even though it did not reinstate because of the conduct of the defendants, I have also found that it would have reinstated had indemnity been conferred.  It follows, in my view, that the loss of trading profits suffered by
Brescia by the delay in reopening the building, was brought about by the defendants' breach.  This fact is not altered by the fact that Brescia could have, if it wished to, rebuilt from its own resources but determined not to. If it had unreasonably chosen not to, that fact may have grounded a contention of failure to mitigate, but as I have said that contention was not put and its decision not to rebuild was not unreasonable anyway.  In my view, the loss which has been suffered as a consequence of the delay in reopening Ashfield is a loss recoverable under the second limb of Hadley v
Baxendale.  The position is, however, different with respect to Alexandria. In the exercise of its own judgment Brescia determined not to purchase Alexandria but rather to lease Auburn. Even though I accept Vittorio's evidence that a driver of this decision was the uncertainty brought about by the defendants' conduct, it does not seem to me to be reasonable to suppose that the parties would have contemplated a delay or refusal of indemnity would affect Brescia's judgment so as to conclude a lease rather than a purchase, when both options were available to it and it had the financial means to take either. In addition, it seems to me that any damages with respect to Alexandria flow from Brescia's judgment not to do the optimal thing. I do not consider that the parties would objectively have had in their contemplation loss being suffered out of the exercise by Brescia of a business judgment to lease rather than to buy. In any event, the evidence does not establish that there were not better alternatives than Auburn.  In my view, the Alexandria claim falls outside the second limb of Hadley v Baxendale and it fails.  
Quantum  Having regard to the above finding, it is not strictly necessary to consider quantum with respect to the Alexandria claim. However, given the length of these proceedings and the complexity of the issues involved, I consider it appropriate to record some of my findings with respect to
Alexandria quantum. The parties were agreed that if Alexandria commenced operations by 28 June 2005 (which I find on balance to be the case) the loss calculated to 7 March 2006 is $430,073. Thereafter the principal matters in dispute were what level of profit Alexandria would have yielded. The first integer in this calculation was a view and an assumption by Mr McKenzie that
Alexandria would have turned over the equivalent of 65% of the sales at
Ashfield. Mr Dolman's response was that the figure was arbitrary, which it no doubt is, but having regard to the fact that Mr McKenzie was not cross- examined and that the exercise is of its nature inexact, I would accept Mr
McKenzie's assumption. The remaining integers in dispute are the same in respect of the delay in reopening of the building and they are dealt with below.  I accordingly turn to the quantum of the damages suffered by Brescia as a result of the delay in reopening of the building.  The exercise involves an assessment of what profit, if any, would have been earned by Brescia trading from the building from 3 December 2006 onwards.  Quantum was the subject of reports once again by Mr McKenzie for the plaintiffs and Mr Dolman and Dr Miller for the defendants.  The parties, however, chose to direct no cross-examination to these witnesses on their opinions, and I accordingly received no assistance: cf
Manly Municipal Council versus Skene  <case> at pars 20 -23.  The parties' submissions on the subject could at best be described as scant.  The Court is accordingly in the position of having to do the best it can approaching the exercise pragmatically having regard to the fact that Brescia bears the onus of establishing the extent of its loss on the balance of probabilities: The Commonwealth versus Amann Aviation Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64] at 118 to 120.  Mr McKenzie's approach, reflected in his reports of 26 October 2006, was to calculate the loss in two stages. Firstly, as a lump sum for the period from the fire up to 28 February 2007 (being the end of the month in which the trial of this matter was originally intended to commence) and secondly, on a continuing basis per month thereafter. The experts referred to the first period as "the lump sum period" (and I will use the same terminology). I will refer to the period after the lump sum period as the continuing loss period.  The indemnity period was twelve months from the fire which is covered by
Brescia's business interruption claim. I am accordingly only concerned with the period from 12 March 2006 onwards. The applicable part of the lump sum period is therefore from 12 March 2006 to 28 February 2007.  Because of the division of the loss period as described above, together with the facts that judgment in this matter has been delivered some months after 28 February 2007 and that the ultimate calculation of damages depends on findings which are dealt with below, there will have to be a further calculation to reach a final result.  The principal elements of Mr McKenzie's calculation (reflecting an orthodox approach to this type of exercise) are:  a the determination of an assumed turnover (sales) that would have been generated in the period being considered;  b the application to that figure of an assumed rate of gross profit to yield an amount of gross profit for that period;  c the addition to the amount of gross profit of an amount representing the increase in costs incurred by Brescia during that period which it otherwise would not have incurred; and  d the deduction from the amount of the total of costs which Brescia saved during that period and which it otherwise would have incurred.  The parties are at issue as to what the sales would have been, as to the rate of gross profit that should be applied and as to the expenses that would have been incurred but which have not.  
Sales  The financial material showed that there had been a continuing decline in
Brescia's sales up to the date of the fire. For any period thereafter it can reasonably be assumed (in the absence of any evidence pointing the other way) that the decline was a trend which would have continued. Dr Miller with whom
Mr Dolman agreed, considered that there should be adopted a 10.3 per cent rate of decline for the first year from the fire and a 17 per cent declining trend in the two years from the fire. Mr McKenzie opined that the rate to be adopted throughout was minus 3.3 per cent.  Part of the difference between them relates to the period of time examined. Dr Miller placed emphasis on recent movement in turnover whereas Mr
McKenzie focussed on the movement of turnover in the year preceding the loss compared to the three years before the loss. Mr McKenzie's opinion was that the best indication of the likely pattern of turnover decline is that experienced more recently and that comparison to past figures when these are remote in time is unhelpful. Mr McKenzie considered that Dr Miller's approach overstated the magnitude of the decline. Mr Dolman in agreeing with Dr Miller relied on the fact that there was a significant fall in sales at Auburn and
Cabramatta for the 12 months following the fire and that there was a 17 per cent fall in the second year following the fire in the sales at Auburn and
Cabramatta compared with the 12 months following the fire. Mr McKenzie considered that post-fire turnover at Cabramatta and Auburn had limited relevance when considering the prospects at Ashfield. There had also been a "fire sale" at Cabramatta which he considered distorted any comparison. Looked at in isolation the decline at Auburn was not 17 per cent but 5.5 per cent.  It seems to me that there is merit in both sides of the argument.
Comparisons at different locations are relevant but clearly not definitive.
Periods adopted for statistical analysis can be argued to be too long or too short.  The one matter of agreement between the experts is that there was a declining trend.  In the end result it seems to me having regard to the fact that Auburn declined at a rate greater than Mr McKenzie's assumed rate, that a rate in excess of 3.3 per cent should be applied. However, it also seems to me that there is merit in Mr McKenzie's position that the Auburn rate of 5.5 per cent is a good pointer that 17 per cent is too high. Both Dr Miller and Mr Dolman took the view that the appropriate rate for the first year from the fire was .3 per cent.  In my view the appropriate rate, adopting a pragmatic approach, is somewhere in the middle range between 5.5 per cent and 17 per cent for the period from 12 March 2006. This would be consistent with the rate taken by Dr
Miller and Mr Dolman for the preceding year remaining close to constant for the next year.  In my view, the rate of 11 per cent should be adopted.  
Gross profit rate  Mr McKenzie took the view that the gross profit rate to be applied throughout was 47.84 per cent whereas Mr Dolman considered 41 per cent to be the appropriate rate.  Mr Dolman based his view on the rate of gross profit derived from the management accounts of Brescia for the period from July 2006 to February 2007, that is after the fire.  Mr McKenzie's figure is the product of his reconstruction of the profit and loss account in his assessment of the business interruption claim taking into account the inaccuracies in the stock valuations in Brescia's financial statements.  Significantly in my view, for the year immediately after the fire Dr
Miller and Mr Dolman calculated the gross profit rate to be 49.93 per cent which is higher than Mr McKenzie's rate for that period.  It seems to me that a reduction to 41 per cent for the period thereafter is too high and Mr McKenzie's figure albeit slightly lower than the figure for the preceding year adopted by Dr Miller and Mr Dolman, indicates some decline but not a radical one, which I consider to be more likely closer to reality. I have also taken into account the fact that I accept Mr Cortese's evidence with regard to the way stock was dealt with in Brescia's accounts.  The rate of 47.84 per cent is to be adopted.  
Advertising  Mr McKenzie calculated expenses on the basis that Brescia would have incurred the same advertising expenditure as it would have incurred had there been no fire. Mr Dolman considered substantially more would have been spent on advertising. His view was that 11.3 per cent of turnover was the appropriate figure. This controversy reflects the dispute about what Brescia would have spent on advertising which I have considered earlier in this judgment in the context of the business interruption claim.  Having regard to the findings which I have made in that regard, McKenzie's figure for advertising is to be adopted.  
CONCLUSION  These proceedings were characterised by attacks on the credit of the three principal witnesses for the plaintiff which attacks failed and by claims of fraud which did not come close to success.  Brescia is entitled to a verdict in the following amounts.  
Indemnity value - loss of building $9,120,757.00  
Loss of stock claim $3,909,554.00  
Business interruption $2,013,422.00  
Plant and equipment $1,657,110.00  
Consulting Engineers $ 3,203.00  
Removable of debris $ 492,318.63  
Claim preparation $ 50,000.00  
Extinguishing the fire $ 58,911.03  
Total $17,305,275.66  In addition Brescia is entitled to a verdict in respect of its consequential loss which the parties envisaged might require further calculation. The parties are to bring in Short Minutes reflecting the outcome of that calculation in accordance with my findings.  I will hear the parties on costs.  I will stand the matter over so as to enable Short Minutes to be brought in, submissions on costs to be made, and for the parties to bring to my attention any further issues which require to be dealt with.  
AMENDMENTS:  /08/2007 - Insertion of word "not" in third sentence of paragraph 248. 
Rearrangement of word "if" in third sentence of paragraph 485 - Paragraph(s) and 485  
LAST UPDATED: 2 August 2007 * * * 
