

Kezarne Pty Ltd versus Sydney Asbestos Removal Services Pty Ltd t/as Royce
Roofing Services Matter No 2893/98 [1998] NSWSC 535 (25 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 November 1998 
KEZARNE PTY LTD [A/c No. 003 417 089] versus SYDNEY ASBESTOS REMOVAL SERVICES PTY LTD [A/c No. 002 661 789] t/as ROYCE ROOFING SERVICES /98 September 1998 
Austin J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
TITLE OF COURT: Supreme Court of New South Wales (Equity Division) 
FILE NO: 2893/98 
DELIVERED: Sydney, 25 September 1998 
HEARING DATES: 10, 17 September 1998 
PARTIES: KEZARNE PTY LTD [ACN 003 417 089] versus SYDNEY ASBESTOS REMOVAL 
SERVICES PTY LTD [ACN 002 661 789] t/a ROYCE ROOFING SERVICES 
JUDGMENT OF: AUSTIN J 
CATCHWORDS: 
Corporations - Companies - Creditor's statutory demand - Failure of accompanying affidavit to comply with Court rules. 
Corporations Law, ss459(3), 459J 
Supreme Court Rules , Part 80A, r15 
B & M Quality Constructions Pty Ltd versus Buyrite Steel Supplies Pty Ltd [(1994) 15 ACSR 433]; <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 308]; [16 ACSR 596]; <case>; [(1997) 25 ACSR 675]; [16 ACLC 12] 
Kalamunda Meat Wholesalers Pty Ltd versus Reg Russell & Sons Pty Ltd <case>; [(1994) 51 FCR 446]; [128 ALR 149]; [13 ACSR 525]; [12 ACLC 391] 
L M & W J Taylor Pty Ltd versus Armour Timber & Trading Pty Ltd [(1996) ACSR 231]; <case>; [[1994] 2 VR 290]; [11 ACSR 362]; [11 ACLC 1062] 
Polaroid Australia Pty Ltd versus Minicomp Pty Ltd [(1998) 16 ACLC 529] 
Portrait Express (Sales) Pty Ltd versus Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd [(1996) 132
FLR 300]; [20 ACSR 746]; [14 ACLC 1095] 
Spencer Constructions Pty Ltd versus G & M Aldridge Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 76 FCR 452]; [147 ALR 444]; [24 ACSR 353]; [15 ACLC 1001] 
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff: S Burchett 
Defendant: B Skinner 
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff: Whitfields 
Defendant: Robert Storey 
Number of Pages: 13 
KEZARNE PTY LTD [ACN 003 417 089] v

SYDNEY ASBESTOS REMOVAL SERVICES PTY LTD [ACN 002 661 789] t/a ROYCE ROOFING SERVICES 
JUDGMENT 
AUSTIN J: The Plaintiff seeks an order under s459G of the Corporations Law that the Defendant's statutory demand under s459E be set aside, on three grounds. First, the Plaintiff claims there is a genuine dispute between it and the defendant about the existence of the debt. Secondly, the Plaintiff claims that aspects of the Defendant's conduct in respect of the statutory demand constitute an abuse of process. Thirdly, the Plaintiff claims that the affidavit fails to comply with the Court's rules and consequently there is "some other reason why the accompanying demand should be set aside" under s459J(1)(b). 
The Plaintiff asserts that there is a genuine dispute between it and the
Defendant about the existence of the whole of the debt to which the demand relates and consequently the Court must set the demand aside under s459H(3).
There is no contest between the parties as to the test for determining whether a "genuine dispute" exists for the purpose of s459H. Earlier formulations in the case law were usefully reviewed by the Full Federal Court in Spencer
Constructions Pty Ltd versus G & M Aldridge Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 76 FCR 452]; [147 ALR 444]; [24 ACSR 353]; [15 ACLC 1001]; see also Equuscorp Pty Ltd versus Perpetual Trustees WA Ltd <case>; [(1997) 25 ACSR 675] In Spencer
Constructions the Full Federal Court said that in considering an application to set aside a statutory demand, a court will not determine contested issues of fact or law which have a significant or substantial basis (at 463). Having reviewed other cases, their Honours concluded (at 464) "In our view a ´genuine' dispute requires that: ? the dispute be bona fide and truly exist in fact; ? the grounds for alleging the existence of a dispute are real and not spurious, hypothetical, abusory or misconceived." 
The Defendant claims to be owed $68,812 by the Plaintiff for work done and materials provided to the Plaintiff as its subcontractor on a building site in
Unwins Bridge Road, Sydenham. Applying the Spencer Constructions test, the
Plaintiff submits that there is a genuine dispute as to the existence of the debt for three reasons. First, the Plaintiff contends that no money was payable to the Defendant at the time when the statutory demand was issued because on the Defendant's own evidence, money owed to it for work done was not payable until 30 days from certification by the site architect, and this had not occurred at the time of issue of the demand. The Defendant disagrees with this analysis of the facts and submits that the parties had reached an arrangement whereby all outstanding invoices would be processed so that payments would be received by the end of the month of May 1998, and the statutory demand was issued when this arrangement was not honoured by the
Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff's second basis for alleging a genuine dispute is that on its version of the facts, it engaged the Defendant to perform work in the role of disclosed agent of the owner of the development site, on the basis the
Defendant would be paid by the owner and the work would be subject to the approval of the owner's representative on the site, the architect. The arrangements were entered into on the Plaintiff's behalf by Mr Commisso, a consultant who (in the Plaintiff's submission) was not authorised to enter into any arrangements binding the Plaintiff personally to any subcontractor for the site. Most of the evidence at the hearing before me related to this issue. The Defendant submits that the evidence of Mr Commisso and of Mr Roach (an estimator engaged by the Defendant) showed that the contract under which the Defendant worked was a contract between the Plaintiff and the Defendant, and the only issue was whether payment under the contract would be made to the
Defendant not by the Plaintiff but by a third party.

The Plaintiff's third basis for alleging a genuine dispute was that the work was said to be incomplete or defective. The Defendant led expert evidence to rebut these contentions.

The Defendant submits that the contractual arrangements were so clear that it could not even be said that there was a genuine dispute as to the existence of the debt, satisfying the test in the Spencer Constructions case.

The Plaintiff's second challenge to the statutory demand is based on claims of abuse of process. The Plaintiff claims that it was an abuse of the process of the Court for the Defendant: to sue upon the alleged debt in the District Court while concurrently issuing a statutory demand for the same debt; to issue a statutory demand knowing or having reasonable grounds to know that the debt is genuinely disputed; to issue a statutory demand without giving the alleged debtor a reasonable time or opportunity to consider and verify that the debt is payable, and to pay it.

The Defendant submits that it is not an abuse of process for a creditor concurrently to sue for recovery of its debt and to issue a demand which may establish the basis for proving the debtor's insolvency in winding up proceedings. The two kinds of proceedings are for different purposes. The
Defendant also denies that it was aware or had reasonable grounds to know that the debt was disputed at the time when the demand was issued. It denies that there was anything abusive or oppressive in its issuing a demand shortly after the expiry of the period which it had earlier set for payment.

The Plaintiff's third ground for contending that the demand should be set aside is that the accompanying affidavit fails to comply with the Court's rules. I have decided that the Plaintiff should succeed on this ground, for reasons which are set out below. It is therefore unnecessary for me to resolve the Plaintiff's claims on its first and second grounds and I shall not attempt to do so. Though evidence (including cross examination, noting Mibor
Investments Pty Ltd versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [[1994] 2 VR 290], 295; <case>; [11 ACSR 362], 1066 per Hayne J)has been adduced with respect to the first two grounds, and some of the evidence is inconsistent, there are no issues of credit which I need to resolve in case the matter goes further. I feel I should remark, however, that on the evidence before me, I may not have set aside the demand on either the "abuse of process" or the "genuine dispute" ground, even taking into account the very low threshold set by the case law for the establishment of the latter ground.

Defects in the Affidavit Verifying the Defendant's Claim 
The Defendant's statutory demand and an accompanying affidavit by Michael John
Gollop were each dated 3 June 1998 and were served on the Defendant on 4 or 5
June 1998. The statutory demand itself complied with s459E(2) and Form 509H, except that the four notes which appear after the schedule in the printed form were not included in the statutory demand. However, the Plaintiff acknowledges that the omission to include the notes at the end of the form does not provide a ground for setting aside the demand under s459J(1)(a), because it cannot be said that substantial injustice would be caused by this omission: see
Kalamunda Meat Wholesalers Pty Ltd versus Reg Russell & Sons Pty Ltd <case>; [(1994) 51 FCR 446]; [128 ALR 149]; [13 ACSR 525]; [12 ACLC 391.] 
An affidavit verifying a statutory demand must accompany the demand unless the debt claimed is a judgment debt. The affidavit must verify that the debt is due and payable by the company, and must comply with the rules: s459E(3).
"Rules" are defined in s9 to mean the rules of the Federal Court or the rules of the Supreme Court of New South Wales or in another jurisdiction, as the case requires.

Part 80A, r15 of the Supreme Court rules includes the following provisions: "15 (1) An affidavit referred to in s459E(3) must: subject to subr(2), be made by the creditor or, where there is more than one creditor, by one of them; set out the facts entitling the deponent under paragraph (a) to make the affidavit; state the source of the deponent's knowledge of the matters stated in the affidavit concerning the debt or debts; state that the deponent believes those matters to be true; and state that the deponent believes that there is no genuine dispute about the existence or amount of the debt or debts to which the demand relates.

In the case of a creditor which is: a corporation - an affidavit by a member or officer of the corporation having knowledge of the facts so far as they are known to the corporation is taken to be an affidavit by the creditor; the Crown - an affidavit by an officer of the Crown having knowledge of the facts so far as they are known to the Crown is taken to be an affidavit by the creditor; and a company to which a liquidator or provisional liquidator has been appointed - an affidavit by the liquidator or provisional liquidator is taken to be an affidavit by the creditor.

An affidavit under this rule must: be in accordance with the prescribed form; contain the statement headed ´Important Note' set out in the form; and not state a proceeding number." 
Mr Gollop's affidavit is sufficiently short that the substantive part can be set out in full. It is as follows: "1. I am a Director of Sydney Emergency Asbestos Removal Services Pty Ltd t/a Royce Roofing Services (´the creditor').
To my knowledge, the amount of $68,812 is due and payable by Kezarne Pty
Ltd (´the debtor') to the creditor.
KEZARNE PTY LTD (ACN 003 417 089) is indebted to the creditor in the amount set out in the attached Statutory Demand for $68,812 being for work done and materials provided up to May 1998 by the creditor to the debtor at the debtor's request." 
The Plaintiff alleges that there are six defects in the affidavit, arising out of failure to comply with r15(1)(c), (d), (e), 15(2)(a), 15(3)(a) and (b).

The Defendant's counsel admits that the affidavit does not comply with Part
A, r15 and Form 154FA. He says that the practical reason for this is disclosed in the affidavit's heading, which refers to Order 71, r36A, the
Federal Court rule which was superseded on 31 March 1996, well before the statutory demand in this case was issued. In his submission, the fact that the affidavit does not comply with the current Supreme Court rule (nor with the current Federal Court rule, namely Order 71, r36AB, which is now substantially identical with the Supreme Court rule) does not justify setting aside the demand, unless the deficiency has caused substantial injustice. He refers to
Spencer Constructions Pty Ltd versus G & M Aldridge Pty Ltd, cited above.

In that case, the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia (Northrop,
Merkel and Goldberg JJ) noted the distinction drawn by s459J between a defect "in the demand", which is only to be set aside if substantial injustice will be caused by the defect unless the demand is set aside, and any other defects, including a defect in relation to the demand rather than in the demand itself (at 458). On the Full Federal Court's view, defects in relation to the demand are to be dealt with under s459J(1)(b) and (2), rather than under s459J(1)(a), and therefore it is not necessary for the debtor to prove that substantial injustice will be caused unless the demand is set aside. Of course, as a differently constituted Full Federal Court pointed out in Equuscorp Pty Ltd v
Perpetual Trustees WA Ltd <case>; [(1998) 16 ACLC 12], 27, the ´other reason' for the purposes of s459J(1)(b) may itself involve substantial injustice if the notice is not set aside, but it need not do so.

In the Spencer Constructions case there was a complaint that the affidavit accompanying the statutory demand complied with the wrong set of court rules.
The Full Court held that this contention, if true, would constitute a defect in relation to the demand which could be set aside, if there were reason to do so, under s459J(1)(b). However, the mere fact that the affidavit did not comply with s459E(3) and the rules would not itself be a sufficient reason for setting the demand aside. As the Full Court observed (at 458), strict compliance with the statutory provisions in respect of a defect in or in relation to a demand is not a pre-condition to the validity of the demand. In their view, "the ultimate issue is whether, construing the relevant provisions in their context (including their scope and purpose), there is a legislative intent that either strict or substantial compliance with the relevant requirement is a pre-condition to the validity of the action taken." 
In reaching their view as to the proper construction of s459J, the Full Court referred to two decisions of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, namely B & M Quality Constructions Pty Ltd versus Buyrite Steel Supplies Pty Ltd [(1994) 15 ACSR 433]; [13 ACLC 88] and Portrait Express (Sales) Pty Ltd versus Kodak (Australasia)
Pty Ltd [(1996) 132 FLR 300]; [14 ACLC .] According to the headnote in the Spencer Construction case, the Full Federal Court disapproved of the decision of McLelland CJ in Eq. in the B & M Quality
Constructions case. In my view this is correct only in one limited respect, and in all other respects the Full Federal Court's judgment is consistent with
McLelland CJ in Eq.'s approach. Therefore the headnote is rather misleading.
Since the point is germane to the present case, further elaboration is needed.

In B & M Quality Constructions Pty Ltd versus Buyrite Steel Supplies Pty Ltd,
McLelland CJ in Eq. set aside a statutory demand where the supporting affidavit failed to comply with the predecessor of Part 80A, r15(2)(a) because it was made by a licensed commercial agent rather than by a "a member or officer of the [creditor] corporation having knowledge of the facts so far as they are known to the corporation". He found that the departure from this requirement was a matter of substance, since the requirement is designed to serve the public interest as well as to protect the company against unwarranted demands, by endeavouring to ensure within practical limits that the person who must put his or her oath or solemn affirmation to the relevant matters is a person associated with a creditor who is most likely to have direct knowledge of those matters. He continued (at 435): "It is important in this regard to bear in mind that the relevant matters include not only a belief as to the existence of the amount of the debt, but also a belief as to the absence of any genuine dispute about the existence or amount of the debt. The express requirement in the rule that the person making the affidavit deposed to his or her belief that there is no genuine dispute is a significant mechanism for filtering out cases where there is in fact such a dispute, so as to prevent such cases from reaching the courts on such an application as the present with a consequent waste of time and resources." 
He found that the defendant's failure to comply with the rule, going to the heart of what Part 80A, r15 was intended to achieve, provided sufficient "other reason" for the purposes of s459J(1)(b) why the demand should be set aside. The B & M Quality Constructions case was followed in Delta Beta
Pty Ltd versus Everherd Vissers [(1996) 20 ACSR 583] D
Nicholson J) and in L M & W J Taylor Pty Ltd versus Armour Timber &
Trading Pty Ltd [(1996) 19 ACSR 231] CJ in Eq.).

This reasoning is consistent with the Full Federal Court's view that where the complaint is not about a defect in the demand itself, the question is whether the matter complained of provides some "other reason" sufficient to justify setting aside the demand under s459J(1)(b). The Full Federal Court indicated that the ultimate issue is one of legislative intent. McLelland CJ in Eq.'s judgment helpfully goes further, by spelling out the matters of public interest which the statutory demand procedure is intended to serve, and drawing attention to the role of the affidavit in the legislative scheme.

It seems to me that McLelland CJ in Eq.'s reasoning stems from an underlying approach to Part 5.4 of the Corporations Law which has been consistently supported by the courts since the 1992 amendments. The clear pattern of Part .4 of the Corporations Law is that the statutory demand procedure should not be used, and a winding up order should not as a matter of discretion be made, on a debt which is genuinely disputed. Santow J has recently described this proposition as a "basic principle": Polaroid Australia Pty Ltd versus Minicomp Pty
Ltd [(1998) 16 ACLC 529], 536; see also Mibor Investments Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth Bank of Australia. The basic principle is reflected in s459E(3), which seeks out a measure of assurance that the debt relied on in the demand is a genuine one by requiring either that there be a judgment for the debt, or that the debt be verified by an affidavit which attests that there is no genuine dispute. The same general point is made in the explanatory memorandum to the [Corporate Law Reform Bill ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/bill/clrb1992235/), paragraph 686 (which in turn refers to the Harmer Report). The explanatory memorandum states that a demand may be set aside if the Court is satisfied (inter alia) that there is a substantial dispute as to whether the debt is owing. In turn the
Harmer Report (Australian Law Reform Commission, General Insolvency Enquiry,
Report No 45, vol 1, p73) states that: "the Commission considers that the existing, largely unregulated, procedure in relation to notices of demand too often produces disputes about the debt on the hearing of a winding up application. The Commission is anxious that this should be avoided." 
The point of difference between the Full Federal Court and McLelland CJ in Eq.
is this: McLelland CJ in Eq. construed the word "defect" in s459J(2) as referring to a "defect in the demand" of the kind dealt with in s459J(1)(a).
Therefore, if the court is proceeding under s459J(1)(b) because the complaint is not about a defect in the demand itself, his Honour would take the view that s459J(2) is irrelevant. In the Full Federal Court's view the word "defect" in s459J(2) is wider than the expression "defects in the demand" in s459J(1)(a) (76 FCR at 756), and consequently s459J(2) is relevant to an application under s459J(1)(b) based on a defect in relation to but not in the demand, such as a defect in the accompanying affidavit.

As long as it is clear (and, with respect, the Full Federal Court's judgment makes it clear) that a defect in the demand itself cannot be dealt with otherwise than under s459J(1)(a), the difference between McLelland CJ in Eq.
and the Full Federal Court as to the construction of s459J(2) may not be of any great significance. As McLelland CJ in Eq. observed (at [15 ASCR )], if a defect in the accompanying affidavit is (contrary to his view) a defect for the purposes of s459J(2), the court's intervention to set aside the demand in circumstances such as those before him would not be "merely" because of the defect, but rather on the basis that the defect operated in the particular circumstances in a manner which provided good reason for intervention.

In Spencer Constructions the Full Federal Court also referred to Portrait
Express (Sales) Pty Ltd versus Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd, cited above, though without comment. In the Portrait Express case the principal defect, both in the statutory demand and in the accompanying affidavit, was that some of the amount claimed was not yet payable. Additionally, however, the affidavit failed to comply with [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/bill/clrb1992235/index.html#p80a) r15 of the Supreme Court Rules , though it substantially complied with the Federal Court rule then applicable, namely Order 71 r36A. The demands were issued in February 1996, just before Order 71 r36A was replaced by Order 71 r36AB, which is substantially identical with the current NSW Supreme Court rule. The affidavit in that case was very similar to Mr Gollop's affidavit in the present proceedings, though it was slightly more informative.

Bryson J held that the affidavit failed to comply with Part 80A r15(1) in three respects, namely that it failed to state the source of the deponent's knowledge of the matter stated in the affidavit concerning the debt, the deponent's belief that that matter was true, and the deponent's belief that there was no genuine dispute about the existence or amount of the debt.
Referring to the B & M Quality Constructions case, he held that the requirements of subr15(1) which in the case before him were not met, were no less significant than the requirement that verification be made by a member or officer of the creditor company.

Bryson J expressly approved the view of McLelland CJ in Eq. that the reference to a "defect" in s459J(2) is a reference to a defect in the demand itself, and does not encompass a defect in the accompanying affidavit. However, in my opinion, it was unnecessary for Bryson J to reach a conclusion on this point in the case before him, and his reasoning is otherwise consistent with the
Full Federal Court's judgment in Spencer Constructions. Bryson J said (14
ACLC at 1104): "The Court should not act under para (b), which is discretionary, unless the decision to do so is supported by some sound or positive ground or good reason which is relevant for the purposes for which the power exists." 
He continued (14 ACLC at 1105): "I see a clear distinction between a defect in a demand as a ground for setting aside the demand, and a defect in an affidavit purportedly verifying the demand as a ground for setting aside the demand. An affidavit which is incorrect has a different and higher order of importance to a demand which is incorrect. There are some deficiencies in procedure which the Court should not allow to be successful, whether or not they have any higher practical significance in terms of justice between the parties in this case. ... [It] seems to me that the opportunity ought to exist for the Court to register clearly and appropriately the importance of the requirement of verification of demands. I cannot see the requirement of verification and the responsibilities in relation to it which fall both on the officer swearing the verification and on the creditor as no more than another form to fill in, errors in which the debtor can have put right on application to the Court." 
These observations were cited with approval by the Full Federal Court in
Equuscorp Pty Ltd versus Perpetual Trustees (WA) Ltd <case>; [(1998) 16 ACLC 12], 28, a case where (as in Portrait Express) there had been an overstatement of the amount in the demand and affidavit, but no other failure to comply with the rules of court.

In my opinion, if (contrary to Bryson J's view) s459J(2) extends to defects in the affidavit, the reasoning in these paragraphs is still applicable. The
Court should not act under s459J(1)(b) unless, in Bryson J's words, there is some good reason relevant to the purposes for which that provision exists - or in the Full Federal Court's words in Spencer Constructions, a reason relevant to the "legislative intent". Disregard of the Court's rules with respect to verification raises issues which go beyond a "mere" defect of the kind referred to in s459J(2), for the reasons set out by Bryson J.

In the present case, Mr Gollop's affidavit fails to comply with Part 80A, r15 (and for that matter, Order 71, r36AB) in at least five of the six respects which were advanced by the Plaintiff.

First, the rule requires that the affidavit must state the source of the deponent's knowledge of the matters stated in the affidavit concerning the debt (Pt 80A r15(1)(c)). The deponent states that he is a director but does not purport to link his directorship with his knowledge of the debt. In this respect the deficiency in the affidavit is the same as in the Portrait
Express case.

Secondly, the affidavit fails to comply with the requirement that it must state that the deponent believes those matters (that is, the matters stated in the affidavit concerning the debt) to be true (Part 80A, r15(1)(d)). While the affidavit asserts that the amount is due and payable for work done and materials provided, it is not in the form required by subparagraph (d). Again, this was held to be a defect in a similar affidavit in the Portrait Express case.

Thirdly, the affidavit fails to state that the deponent believes there is no genuine dispute about the existence or amount of the debt to which the demand relates, as required by Part 80A r15(1)(e). It is true that the deponent swears that the amount claimed is "due and payable" and that the debtor is indebted to the creditor in that amount. But none of this is sufficient to convey the idea that the deponent has considered whether there is a genuine dispute about the debt. Again, this was one of the defects identified in the similar affidavit in the Portrait Express case.

Fourthly, while the affidavit is by an officer of the corporation, it does not depose to whether that officer has knowledge of the facts as far as they are known to the corporation. It is arguable that the affidavit should disclose on its face that the deponent is a member or officer who has knowledge of the facts so far as they are known to the corporation, so that those reading it (including the debtor) can determine whether the affidavit should be taken to be an affidavit of the creditor. The contrary argument is that r15 does not literally require that these matters be set out in the affidavit, and the evidence which emerged at the hearing indicates that Mr Gollop was an appropriate deponent because he is the managing director of the Defendant, and though he was not the person who primarily dealt with the Plaintiff he had become aware of the relevant facts before the affidavit was sworn. It is unnecessary for me to resolve this matter in view of the other deficiencies in the affidavit, though I am inclined to the view that this affidavit did not say enough to comply with r15(2)(a), whatever precisely may be required to comply with that provision.

Fifthly, the affidavit did not comply with r15(3)(a) because it was not in accordance with Form 154FA. If this were the only defect, I would not regard it as sufficient to justify setting the demand aside. Mere formal non- compliance would not prejudice the debtor, provided that the other requirements of r15 were satisfied, so that there was a true and appropriate verification of the demand and of the absence of a genuine dispute. On that basis, there would be no "other reason" for setting the demand aside under s459J(1)(b), whether or not one were to regard non-compliance with Form 154FA as "merely" a "defect" for the purposes of s459J(2).

Sixthly, the affidavit did not comply with r15(3)(b) because it did not contain the "Important Note" which is set out in the form. In Besser
Industries (NT) Pty Ltd versus Steelcon Constructions Pty Ltd <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 308]; [16 ACSR 596]; [13 ACLC 544], Branson J dealt with a case where there was no suggestion that omission of the Important Note caused injustice or disadvantage to the applicant. She held that the omission of the note was a defect for the purposes of s459J(2). This conforms to the Full Federal Court's view in
Spencer Constructions but is contrary to the views of McLelland CJ in Eq. in
B & M Quality Constructions and of Bryson J in Portrait Express.
Branson J held, further, that if she were to set the demand aside on this ground, she would be doing so "merely because of a defect" and therefore contrary to subs(2). She did not consider that the omission of the note in the circumstances of the case constituted an appropriate "other reason" for acting under s459J(1)(b). If the only defect in the affidavit in the present proceedings had been failure to include the Important Note, then I may well have been able to reach a conclusion similar to Branson J's. The question would be whether the omission of the note had any significant effect in the circumstances of the case. If it did not, then there would be no sufficient reason for acting under s459J(1)(b) quite apart from whether s459J(2) had any application.

My conclusion, therefore, is that Mr Gollop's affidavit did not comply with
Part 80A, r15 in at least five of the six respects identified by the plaintiff. It is immaterial whether the non-compliance was produced by reliance on an outdated precedent of the affidavit accompanying a statutory demand, or on old Court rules. Failure to comply, in particular, with r15(1)(c), (d), (e) is a serious matter, for the reasons explained above and in the B & M Quality Constructions and Portrait Express cases. The
Full Federal Court's judgment in Spencer Constructions provides no basis for curing or disregarding these matters. In fact, the reasoning in that case reinforces the conclusions to which the other two cases lead.

Orders 
I therefore propose to make the following orders:
Order that the statutory demand by the Defendant to the Plaintiff dated 3
June 1998 be set aside.
Order that the Defendant pay the Plaintiff's costs of these proceedings.
 * * * 
