

Callaghan versus Merivale Cbd Pty Limited [2005] NSWSC 985 (20 October 2005) 
Last Updated: 24 October 2005 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Callaghan versus Merivale CBD Pty Limited <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2767 of 2002  
HEARING DATE{S): 08/08/05-11/08/05  
JUDGMENT DATE: 20/10/2005  
PARTIES: 
Edward Callaghan (plaintiff) 
Merivale CBD Pty Limited (defendant) 
Merivale CBD Pty Limited (cross-claimant) 
Edward Callaghan (cross-defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Burchett AJ  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr P Bolster and Mr E Hyde for the plaintiff/cross-defendant 
Mr G Blake SC and Ms S Higgins for the defendant/cross-claimant  
SOLICITORS: 
Tiernan & Associates for the plaintiff/cross-defendant 
Antonys Lawyers for the defendant/cross-claimant  
CATCHWORDS: 
Lease - rent review clauses - whether time of essence in any respect - payment of rent demanded which substantially exceeded rent due - mistake as to legal obligation - mistake induced by lessor's representation about obligation - inference from intention to induce belief that belief was induced - meaning of "anniversary" - construction contrary to ordinary meaning of word to avoid absurdity - power of court to mould language - principles of interpretation - rule as to construction of rent review clauses - indications to contrary of prima facie rule - effect of lenity in one respect and strictness in an other as an indication the strict construction must be adhered to where it is applicable - effect of lessor itself failing to comply with a time requirement - consideration of waiver as estoppel or as election - implied agreement - equitable assignment where assignor ASIC on behalf of defunct company not joined - effect - nature of renewal of a lease - effect of covenant to repair in short form under Schedule 4 of the Conveyancing Act - effect of words "having regard to the condition of the demised premises at the commencement of the lease " - meaning of covenant to replace a worn out item with one "of a like nature and equal value"  
ACTS CITED:  [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth)  [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/)  
DECISION: 
Verdict for plaintiff in the action and for the cross-claimant on cross-claim.  
JUDGMENT:  - 77 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
BURCHETT AJ  October 2005  /02 EDWARD CALLAGHAN versus MERIVALE CBD PTY LIMITED  
JUDGMENT  On 17 May 2002, a Statement of Claim was filed on behalf of Pub Oz Pty
Limited, as plaintiff, in which Merivale CBD Pty Limited was named as defendant. By the Statement of Claim, there were pleaded a lease dated 11
November 1993 of the premises of a hotel, known as the Wynyard Hotel at -113 Clarence Street, Sydney, for a term of five years from 21 July 1993 with an option to renew for a further five years; successive transfers of the interest of the lessors and successive assignments of the interest of the lessee, culminating in a transfer of the interest of the lessors to the defendant and an assignment in 1998 of the interest of the lessee, with the consent of the defendant, to Pub Oz Pty Limited; and a subsequent exercise of the option of renewal by Pub Oz Pty Limited extending the term of the lease by a renewed lease to 20 July 2003. It was then pleaded that the lease contained provisions in relation to the amount of rent payable from time to time, and by letter dated 16 March 1999 the defendant purported to review the rent in accordance with clause 6 of the lease, failing to carry out the review in accordance with the clause in that the purported review was carried out earlier than 120 days prior to the relevant date specified in the lease and was invalid, but the defendant relied on clause 6 (c) of the lease as requiring the plaintiff to challenge the review of the rent within 14 days after being notified of that review, and the defendant demanded rent calculated in a manner that was in breach of the lease. It was finally pleaded that the plaintiff had paid the rent demanded while asserting the correct rent should be determined by two licensed hotel valuers, which the defendant refused to have done, and the plaintiffs sought relief accordingly.  On 19 August 2003, consent orders were made substituting the present plaintiff as plaintiff and granting leave for the filing of an Amended
Statement of Claim. By the Amended Statement of Claim, it was added to the pleading that on 16 April 2003 Pub Oz Pty Limited went into liquidation, and on 23 June 2003 the plaintiff, Edward Callaghan, purchased for valuable consideration from the liquidators all of the rights of the company associated with the matters pleaded in the Amended Statement of Claim. Subsequently, by a
Further Amended Statement of Claim, the plaintiff alleged an assignment of the same rights of Pub Oz Pty Limited to him by the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission following the deregistration of the company, reliance being placed on section 601AD of the [Corporations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) 2001 .  For the purposes of a consideration of the claim made by the plaintiff, it is necessary to reproduce some provisions of the lease which are not free from a measure of complexity. Clause 6 of a set of annexed clauses deals with the subject of reviews of the annual rent for which the lease provides during the period from the date of its commencement on 21 July 1993 to the date of termination on 20 July 1998 and then for the ensuing period of any renewal under the option to renew from 21 July 1998 to 20 July 2003. But clause 6 does not stand alone; it has to be read with clause 5 and items 6 and 7 of the third schedule, as well, in the case of a renewal, as with clause 4.
Accordingly, I must set out the relevant provisions of those clauses and items. Clause 4 contains an option of renewal in a fairly conventional form, to which has been added a proviso in the following terms:  "PROVIDED ALWAYS THAT the annual rent for such further term shall be those amounts stipulated in or calculated pursuant to Item 6 of the Third Schedule and the amounts so stipulated or calculated shall be the annual rent payable by the Lessee as from the date of commencement of the renewed lease."  
It is unnecessary to set out the whole of clause 5, of which that part relevant for present purposes provides:  "The Lessee hereby covenants with the Lessor as follows:-  
To pay the annual rent reserved at the times and in the manner set forth in item 6 of the Third Schedule and to pay all increases in rent determined under this Lease."  
Clause 6 introduces the complexities. Omitting a few provisions which do not bear on the present problem, it provides:  "It is hereby expressly covenanted and declared that the annual rental hereby reserved shall be revised annually on and from the annual anniversary of this
Lease until the end of the years as follows:-  (i) As on the dates of review of rent specified in Item 7(a) of the Third
Schedule hereto whenever occurring during the term hereof the review shall be calculated by multiplying the annual rent payable immediately prior to the review date by a fraction the numerator of which is the Index Number current as at the review date and the denominator of which is the Index Number current as at the review date immediately preceding the relevant review date (and in the case of the first review date the denominator shall be the Index Number current as at the date of commencement).  
Whenever herein used the words "Index Number" shall mean the All Groups
Consumer Price Index for Sydney published on the date to which it has last been calculated immediately prior to the relevant Rent review date (and in the case of the first review date the date of commencement) in the Australian
Statistician Consumer Price Index publication and such applicable Index Number shall be deemed to be the Index Number as at such review date.  ...  
At any time but not earlier than 120 days prior to each date specified in
Item 7(b) of the Third Schedule hereto whenever occurring during the term hereof (each of which dates is hereinafter referred to as a "review date") or at any time thereafter the Lessor may by notice in writing to the Lessee fix the annual rent (subject as herein provided) at an amount which in the opinion of the Lessor is the market rent of the Premises as at that review date and the amount so fixed shall be the annual rent payable by the Lessee as from that review date. Any receipt for the payment of rent due on or after a review date shall not prejudice the Lessor's right to demand payment thereafter of any additional rent payable by the Lessee pursuant to the provisions of this clause. Without prejudice to the generality of this clause the Lessor shall not by reason of its failure to give notice of the rental which it proposes from the review date within any period whether specified herein or not forfeit its right to have the annual rent reviewed from the review date and the rate at which the annual rent is payable from the review date shall date back to and be payable from the review date.  
If the Lessee considers the annual rent fixed by the Lessor pursuant to sub-clause (b) of this clause or clause 4 hereof not to be the current market rent of the Premises the Lessee may by notice in writing to the Lessor within days after being notified of such rent require the annual rent to be determined by two licenced hotel valuers of the Australian Institute of
Valuers one appointed by the Lessor and one appointed by the Lessee and the said valuers shall jointly determine the current market rent of the Premises upon the covenants and conditions of this Lease (or such of them as shall be applicable) and taking account of any goodwill attributable to any business carried on by the Lessee in the Premises. Before proceeding with their determination the said valuers shall agree upon and appoint an umpire (also being a member of the said Institute) and obtain in writing the acceptance of his appointment. If the said valuers are unable to agree upon a determination the current market rent shall be deemed to be one half of the aggregate of the two determinations and subject thereto if the said valuers are unable to agree upon a determination within 21 days of their appointment or within such extended time as the parties hereto may agree upon or if there shall be any dispute between the parties as to the qualifications of the valuers or either of them then the current market rent of the Premises shall be determined in manner aforesaid by the umpire who shall have due regard to any information or opinions furnished to him by the said valuers and who shall deliver his determination thereof within 28 days of the due date for determination by the valuers. The said valuers and the said umpire shall act as experts and not as arbitrators and their determination shall be final and binding on the parties hereto and the current market rent so determined in accordance with the provisions of this sub-clause shall be the annual rent payable by the Lessee in lieu of the rent fixed by the Lessor as aforesaid. The fees of the said valuers and the umpire and other costs of their determination shall unless the current market rent of the Premises as determined under this sub-clause shall be equal to or greater than the current market rent fixed by the Lessor as aforesaid (in which event all fees of the determination shall be borne by the
Lessee) be borne equally by the Lessor and the Lessee unless it shall be decided as part of the determination that because of some impropriety or lack of co-operation or unreasonableness on the part of one of the parties hereto that that party shall bear the whole or some fractions [sic] of the fees in excess of one half.  
The market rent determined as hereinbefore provided and payable by the
Lessee as the annual rent after a review date or from the date of commencement of the renewed lease shall not in any circumstances be less than the amount payable by the Lessee for rent on an annual basis immediately prior thereto.  
If the Lessee considers the annual rent fixed by the Lessor pursuant to sub-clause (b) of this clause or clause 4 hereof not to be the current market rent of the Premises and gives to the Lessor a notice to that effect pursuant to sub-clause (c) for the annual rent to be determined in accordance with that sub-clause or if the Lessee fails to accept in writing within fourteen (14) days after being notified thereof that that annual rent so fixed by the Lessor is the current market rent of the Premises the Lessee shall if requested in writing by the Lessor from the review date in addition to continuing t[o] pay the monthly rent instalments at the rate applying immediately prior to the review date pay by equal monthly instalments in advance eighty (80) per centum of the increase in annual rent sought by the Lessor and fixed in its notice to the Lessee pursuant to sub-clause (b) hereof. Immediately following determination of the rent in accordance with sub-clause (c) hereof or the increased annual rent otherwise being agreed an appropriate adjustment and payment or repayment as the case may be shall forthwith be made between the
Lessor and the Lessee to ensure that as from the review date the Lessee had paid and the lessor [sic] has received the appropriate amount in respect of the annual rent as agreed between the Lessor and the lessee [sic] or otherwise as determined in accordance with sub-clause (c) hereof."  These provisions, of course, can only be applied by reference to the Third
Schedule, items 6 and 7 of which provide:  "ITEM 6 (Clause 5) ANNUAL RENT  
The Lessee shall pay rent as follows:-  
ONE HUNDRED AND TEN THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED DOLLARS ($110,400.00) per annum payable at the rate of NINE THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED DOLLARDS ($9,200.00) per month the first of such instalments to be made on the 21st day of July 1993 and thereafter on the 21st day of each succeeding month during the first two years of the term hereof.  
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ($130,000.00) per annum payable at the rate of TEN THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND THIRTY THREE DOLLARS AND THIRTY
THREE CENTS ($10,833.33) per month during the third year of the term hereof
PROVIDED ALWAYS that the Lessor may at his option elect not to charge rent at the rate of ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THOUSAND ($130,000.00) per annum but instead to fix the annual rent for the said third year of the term hereof at an amount which, in the opinion of the Lessor, is the then current market rent of the premises and the amount so fixed shall subject to paragraph (b) of clause 6 be the annual rent payable by the Lessee for the third year of the term hereof.  
The annual rent for the fourth year of the term hereof shall be the same rental as the rental payable for the third year of the term hereof, the amount of which was established pursuant to clause (b) of Item 6 hereof.  
The annual rent for the fifth year of the term hereof shall be the annual rental calculated in accordance with sub-paragraph (a) of clause 6 hereof.  
If the Lessee takes a renewed lease of the Premises pursuant to the option of renewal granted herein then the annual rent payable by the Lessee for the further term shall be as follows:-  
The annual rent payable for the first year of the further term hereof shall be the same annual rental which was payable for the fifth year of the initial term hereof.  
The annual rent for the second year of the further term hereof shall be the annual rental calculated in accordance with paragraph (b) of clause 6 hereof.  
The annual rent for the third, fourth and fifth year of the further term hereof shall be the annual rental calculated in accordance with paragraph (a) of clause 6 hereof.  
ITEM 7 (Clause 6) DATES OF REVIEW OF RENT  
The fifth anniversary of the commencement date of this lease and during any renewal hereof on the third, fourth and fifth anniversary of the date of the renewed lease.  
On the third anniversary of the commencement date of this lease and during any renewal hereof on the second anniversary of the date of the renewed lease."  What set the scene for the arguments about this aspect of the case, or at least what raised the curtain upon that scene, was the receipt by Mr Callaghan on or about 16 March 1999 of a letter of that date addressed "Mr Edward
Callaghan, Wynyard Hotel, Pub Aus [sic] Pty Ltd" and headed "RE: ANNUAL
REVIEW OF RENT 107 CLARENCE STREET - SYDNEY". The letter was in the following terms:  "I refer to our previous telephone conversations when we discussed the annual review of rental on the above property, which is due on 21 July 1999.  
I note that I am yet to receive the trading figures of the Wynyard Hotel, as requested by me approximately a fortnight ago.  
As you are aware, Clause 6(b) of your lease states as follows '... the lessee fix the annual rent at an amount which in the opinion of the lessor is the market rent of the premises as at that review date and the amount so fixed shall be the annual rent payable by the lessee as from that review date.'  
Accordingly, from 21 July 1999 the rental of the above premises, as determined by us as the lessor, will increase to $260,000 pa. This calculates to $5,000 per week ($21,666.67 per month). This increase is in accordance with current market rentals of similar properties to that of the Wynyard Hotel.  
Should you have any queries please do not hesitate to contact me.  
Yours sincerely  
Jennifer Wilson 
FINANCIAL CONTROLLER"  
Two things should be noticed about this letter. First, its date, on or about which on the evidence it was received; and secondly, although it refers to the lessee's power to fix an amount which in the opinion of the lessor is the market rent, it does not actually state that the amount fixed is in the opinion of the lessor the market rent for the Wynyard Hotel, but that it is an amount "determined by us as the lessor" which "is in accordance with current market rentals of similar properties [unspecified] to that of the Wynyard
Hotel". Nor does it specify, in accordance with clause 6(b) of the lease, that the increased rent "in the opinion of the Lessor is the market rent of the
Premises as at [the relevant] review date", which was more than four months into the future. The question of the date of the notice raises a separate point, since the notice is clearly given on the basis that the review date in question is 21 July 1999 and, if so, a notice in accordance with clause 6(b) was required to be given " [a]t any time but not earlier than 120 days prior to" 21 July 1999, ie not earlier than 23 March 1999. The notice was thus issued a full week before the earliest date at which clause 6(b) could have permitted its issue.  There was some dispute at the hearing as to precisely what happened next, but there is no doubt that on 23 June 1999 a solicitor, Angela Frost, acting on behalf of the lessee, wrote to Jennifer Wilson, Financial Controller,
Merivale CBD Pty Limited a letter in the following terms:  "I act for Edward Callaghan of Pub Oz Pty Ltd at the Wynyard Hotel.  
Mr Callaghan has instructed me to advise you that the proposed rent increase is unacceptable and does not reflect the market value of the property.  
It may be necessary to appoint a valuer as anticipated by the lease but in the meantime Mr Callaghan has requested a meeting with you in an attempt to resolve this matter.  
Your reply as soon as possible would be appreciated."  
There was a prompt verbal response to this letter from Mr Hemmes, a director of the defendant who had oversight of the administration of its leases, to the effect that under the provisions of the lease it was "too late" for the lessee to challenge the lessor's determination of the increased rent. A letter followed dated 13 July 1999 from Jennifer Wilson to Angela Frost in the following terms:  "As per your discussions with Mr John Hemmes we advise that as per Clause 6 of the lease, written notification disputing the rental increase must be made within 14 days of notification of the new rent.  
Accordingly as from 21 July 1999 the new rental of the above property will increase to $21,666.67 per month.  ..."  
The evidence of Mr Hemmes is that, at about the time this letter was written, he had a telephone conversation with Angela Frost in which he said:  "Angela, it is too late for Pub Oz to object to the market rent review."  
According to his version, she begged him to permit the objection to be made out of time on the basis that it was "not that far out of time", but he responded: "No I won't", adding that the rent was "very reasonable". It was following his conversation with Angela Frost that he instructed Jennifer
Wilson to write the letter of 13 July 1999.  From the time of these communications insisting that rent was due and must be paid in accordance with the purported determination under clause 6(b), and rejecting the availability of any further review under clause 6(c), Pub Oz Pty
Limited paid the rent demanded, the subject of its review not being raised again until 27 February 2002 when Messrs Hunt & Hunt, who had by then been consulted by Pub Oz Pty Limited, wrote referring to the purported increase of rent on 21 July 1999 from $165,000 per annum to $260,000 per annum and the defendant's assertion of 13 July 1999 that notification disputing the rental increase was required to be given within 14 days of the notification of the new rent. Messrs Hunt & Hunt pointed out that the lessor's notice was clearly issued more than 120 days prior to the review date and stated "the notice was thus invalid", even if 21 July 1999 was the correct review date.
The letter also contended that the rent since 21 July 1999 had not reflected the true market value and had been paid "under the mistaken belief that the notice by Merivale was valid, and that the notice disputing the rental increase was technically given out of time". It was following the defendant's rejection of the propositions put by Messrs Hunt & Hunt that this proceeding was commenced. I should say at once that I accept the increased rent was indeed paid by reason of the mistake alleged and also a mistaken belief that it was too late under the lease to give a lessee's notification pursuant to clause 6(c) once 14 days had expired from the date of the lessor's notification. I reach this conclusion the more confidently since the verbal and written statements on behalf of the lessor were intended to induce just such beliefs in Mr Callaghan: cf Gould versus Vaggelas [(1985) 157 CLR ]
at 236; Como Investments Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) versus Yenald Nominees Pty Ltd
ATPR 43,617 at 43,619-43,620; and the authorities cited in the latter case. See also Kiriri Cotton Co Ltd versus Dewani [[1960] AC ] at -205; David Securities Pty Limited versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 353] at 384.  The first argument urged on this aspect of the case on behalf of the plaintiff is that, pursuant to item 7(b) of the third schedule to the lease, the relevant review date was not 21 July 1999 but one year later, ie. 21 July
This, the submission ran, was the date identified by the opening words of clause 6(b) of the lease permitting service of a notice fixing the rent at any time "but not earlier than 120 days prior to each date specified in Item (b) of the Third Schedule". The only date specified in item 7(b), during the currency of any renewal of the lease, is "the second anniversary of the date of the renewed lease". In the ordinary use of the English language, an "anniversary" of a date or event is "the date on which [the] event took place in a previous year": The New Oxford Dictionary of English (1998). Thus, the lease having been renewed on 21 July 1998, the first anniversary of its date was 21 July 1999 and the second anniversary of its date was 21 July 2000.
This is how Lambert JA (with whom Anderson JA agreed) understood the word "anniversary" in the context of the term of a lease, while pointing out that "[a]n anniversary is associated precisely with a period of one year, usually in the sense of a recurring one-year interval", in Peking Palace Ltd (Tang's Restaurant) versus Trizec Construction Limited <case>; <case>; [(2002) 55 NSWLR 642] at 656 where the "first anniversary" of the registration of a political party was accepted as being the date one year later than the date of its registration. But the trouble with counsel's argument, as applied to this lease, is that it would introduce both contradictions and absurdities into the construction of the document. Clause 6 of the lease commences by providing that "the annual rental hereby reserved shall be revised annually on and from the annual anniversary of this Lease until the end of the years", and then provides, in paragraphs (a) and (b), that the dates of review shall be those specified in item 7(a) and item 7(b) of the Third Schedule. But the covenant to pay rent in clause 5 requires it to be paid "at the times and in the manner set forth in item 6 of the Third Schedule", to which also the proviso in respect of a renewal makes special reference in clause 4. Item 6, in separate paragraphs, details the rent payable year by year, specifying each year during which a revised rental will apply and whether that revision will be a revision referred to in item 7(a) or item 7(b). It will be appreciated that the difference between item 7(a) and item 7(b) is the difference between a review in accordance with clause 6(a) of the lease and a review in accordance with clause 6(b) of the lease (it is necessary to note at this point that both clause 6 of the lease and item 6 of the Third Schedule, rather confusingly, have a number of paragraphs, lettered (a) to (e) in clause 6, and (a) to (g) in item 6 - the reader needs to take care to avoid mistaking a paragraph of item 6 for a paragraph of clause 6). When, then, attention is paid to the terms of item 6 of the third schedule, it becomes apparent that the first review under clause 6(a) of the lease will establish the rent for the fifth year of the original term of the lease (see item 6(d)), and the next review of this kind will establish the rent for the third year, followed by the fourth and fifth years, of a further term of five years in a case where the option of renewal has been exercised (see item 6(g)). Similarly, reviews under clause (b) of the lease will establish the rent payable "during the third year of the term" of the original lease (see item 6(b)) and "for the second year of [a] further term" (see item 6(f)). Plainly, when each of the years referred to in item 6 is matched with the provisions of item 7, in every case, the "anniversary", if the word is used in accordance with its ordinary meaning, referred to in item 7 must be one year later than the date of the commencement of the year during which the reviewed rent is to be payable! But there will be no difficulty if the writer thought of the date of the lease, and also of the date of the renewed lease, as being the first anniversary of each document, so that what in normal parlance would be the first anniversary would, in his use of language, be the second. On any other basis, item 6 and item 7 are in direct conflict, and item 7 would involve an absurdity insofar as a rent would be payable for a period of a year, during each year to which the item applies, but would not be fixed until the end of that year. A further absurdity would be involved in the fifth year insofar as the lease would provide for a procedure being undertaken to establish a rental at a time when the lease had expired.  It is an outdated approach to interpretation which, in such a case as this, would pedantically insist upon the dictionary meaning of the word "anniversary" in defiance of the context: see Short versus F W Hercus Pty
Limited <case>; [(1993) 40 FCR 511] at 517-520. The modern approach also enables the Court to go beyond moulding the choice of words or syntax involved in the drafting of the document (see Fitzgerald versus Masters <case>; [(1956) 95 CLR 420] at 426-427) so as to correct errors, even if their nature may not be precisely identifiable, which may have caused the document to be "lacking in commercial common sense": Dockside Holdings Pty Ltd v
Rakio Pty Ltd <case>; [(2001) 79 SASR 374] at 378, per Williams J, with whom Olsson and Duggan JJ agreed. Dockside Holdings is an interesting example of a case where the
Court felt able, not merely to read a word, in the light of its context, in a special sense, but actually to reformulate a provision in order to make it accord with the sense the Court inferred to have been intended. Williams J placed particular reliance on Westpac Banking Corporation versus Tanzone Pty
Ltd (2000) 9 BPR 17521; Mannai Investment Co Ltd versus Eagle Star Life
Assurance Co Ltd <case>; [[1997] AC ]; and
Investors Compensation Scheme Ltd versus West Bromwich Building Society <case>; [[1998] 1 WLR 896.] Although the nature of the error was more complicated in Dockside Holdings than the error which I infer occurred here, the summary statement of the problem by Williams J at 386 would be equally applicable to that with which I have to deal. His Honour said:  "The difficulty in the present case is that words have not been used in a natural and ordinary way."  
In Mannai Investment Co Ltd versus Eagle Star Life Assurance Co Ltd at 774,
Lord Hoffmann said:  "I propose to begin by examining the way we interpret utterances in everyday life. It is a matter of constant experience that people can convey their meaning unambiguously although they have used the wrong words. We start with an assumption that people will use words and grammar in a conventional way but quite often it becomes obvious that, for one reason or another, they are not doing so and we adjust our interpretation of what they are saying accordingly.
We do so in order to make sense of their utterance: so that the different parts of the sentence fit together in a coherent way and also to enable the sentence to fit the background of facts which plays an indispensable part in the way we interpret what anyone is saying. No one, for example, has any difficulty in understanding Mrs. Malaprop. When she says 'She is as obstinate as an allegory on banks of the Nile,' we reject the conventional or literal meaning of allegory as making nonsense of the sentence and substitute 'alligator' by using our background knowledge of the things likely to be found on the banks of the Nile and choosing one which sounds rather like 'allegory.'  
Mrs Malaprop's problem was an imperfect understanding of the conventional meanings of English words. But the reason for the mistake does not really matter. We use the same process of adjustment when people have made mistakes about names or descriptions or days or times because they have forgotten or become mixed up. If one meets an acquaintance and he says 'And how is Mary?' it may be obvious that he is referring to one's wife, even if she is in fact called Jane. One may even, to avoid embarrassment, answer 'Very well, thank you' without drawing attention to his mistake. The message has been unambiguously received and understood."  
In the same case, Lord Steyn referred with approval (at 770-771) to an earlier statement of Lord Diplock that "if detailed semantic and syntactical analysis of a word in a commercial contract is going to lead to a conclusion that flouts business common sense, it must be made to yield to business common sense". Lord Steyn added:  "In determining the meaning of the language of a commercial contract, and unilateral contractual notices, the law therefore generally favours a commercially sensible construction. The reason for this approach is that a commercial construction is more likely to give effect to the intention of the parties. Words are therefore interpreted in the way in which a reasonable commercial person would construe them. And the standard of the reasonable commercial person is hostile to technical interpretations and undue emphasis on niceties of language."  
The views Lord Steyn and Lord Hoffmann had expressed in that case were repeated by Lord Hoffmann (with the concurrence of Lord Hope of Craighead and
Lord Clyde) in Investors Compensation Scheme Ltd versus West Bromwich Building
Society at 912-913. The whole passage is too long for quotation, but the following part of it is peculiarly apposite to the present case:  "The meaning which a document (or any other utterance) would convey to a reasonable man is not the same thing as the meaning of its words. The meaning of words is a matter of dictionaries and grammars; the meaning of the document is what the parties using those words against the relevant background would reasonably have been understood to mean. The background may not merely enable the reasonable man to chose between the possible meanings of words which are ambiguous but even (as occasionally happens in ordinary life) to conclude that the parties must, for whatever reason, have used the wrong words or syntax: see Mannai Investments Co Ltd versus Eagle Star Life Assurance Co Ltd ...  
The 'rule ' that words should be given their 'natural and ordinary meaning' reflects the common sense proposition that we do not easily accept that people have made linguistic mistakes, particularly in formal documents. On the other hand, if one would nevertheless conclude from the background that something must have gone wrong with the language, the law does not require judges to attribute to the parties an intention which they plainly could not have had."  Applying these statements of the law to the interpretation of the lease in question, I reach the clear conclusion that the word "anniversary" has been used in this lease to refer to the day of the date of the lease, not only in each recurring year, but also in the very year in which it was executed, so that its first anniversary, understood in accordance with the way this document has been drafted, was the date of its execution and its second anniversary was the corresponding date in the next year. But so to decide is not to solve the problem set by the plaintiff's case. Even if the second anniversary of the renewed lease must be taken to have been 21 July 1999, the notice which lit the fuse to the present dispute was given one week before the earliest date that would accord with clause 6(b) of the lease. In Mannai
Investment Co Ltd versus Eagle Star Life Assurance Co Ltd at 773, Lord
Hoffmann said of a notice given pursuant to a clause in a lease permitting a significant change in the term of the lease to be effected by the service of a notice to a particular effect, that "such notices, operating, as they do, unilaterally to alter the rights of the parties, must comply strictly with the terms of the lease." Here, the notice that was relied on by the defendant to alter radically the rights of the parties (almost doubling the rent) did not so comply.  At this point, an unusual irony must envelop the discussion. For the defendant, which had insisted upon its right to a strict compliance by the company Pub Oz Pty Limited with a time requirement of clause 6(c), itself relied, in respect of the temporal provision of clause 6(b), on the proposition that time was not of the essence of the contract. This, of course, was in the teeth of Lord Hoffmann's dictum.  For a number of years, the Court's task in interpreting rent review clauses was somewhat like trying to navigate a boat through unfamiliar waters by the aid of several entirely inconsistent charts. But, more recently, appellate authority in Australia and in the English Privy Council has delineated the course. The starting point is the decision of the House of the Lords in
United Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley Borough Council [[1978] AC ] where it was held (to use the words of Lord Diplock at 930) that "in the absence of any contra-indications in the express words of the lease or in the interrelation of the rent review clause itself and other clauses or in the surrounding circumstances the presumption is that the time-table specified in a rent review clause for completion of the various steps for determining the rent payable in respect of the period following the review date is not of the essence of the contract". The terms of this statement obviously accord great weight to the individual provisions of a particular contract, as indeed, where the question is as to the meaning and effect of a contract, would be inevitable. In Gollin & Company Limited versus Karenlee Nominees Proprietary
Limited <case>; [(1983) 153 CLR 455] at 468 Mason, Murphy, Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ, in their joint judgment, expressed acceptance of the broad proposition stated in
United Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley Borough Council. It was not the broad proposition, but its application to particular circumstances, which created difficulties and led to quite inconsistent decisions. Many of these decisions came up for consideration in G R Mailman & Associates Pty Ltd v Wormald (Aust) Pty Ltd [(1991) 24 NSWLR 80], a decision of the Court of Appeal (Gleeson CJ, Samuels and Meagher JJA). The rent review provisions there in question are set out in the judgment of
Gleeson CJ at 83-85. For present purposes, it may be noted that they included a provision (paragraph 2.02 (a)) enabling the lessor "[w]ithin sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of each period ... [to] give notice in writing ... to the Lessee increasing the yearly rental to an amount which the Lessor considers will be the current market rent ... "; a provision (paragraph 2.02 ) that "[p]rior to the expiration of fourteen (14) days from the service of any such notice from the Lessor, the Lessee may, by notice in writing to the
Lessor, dispute that the amount set out in the notice ... is the current market rent and ... shall nominate [a valuer]"; a provision (paragraph 2.02 ) that "[i]n the event that the Lessee does not serve notice of dispute on the Lessor within the time prescribed ... the Lessee shall be deemed to have agreed that the amount set out in the notice [of the Lessor] ... is the current market rent"; and a provision that if the lessor "shall fail to give notice within the period of sixty (60) days referred to [in the first provision], the Lessor may nevertheless give such notice at any time during the ensuing Review Period" whereupon the review date shall be the day following the giving of the notice. A lessor's notice was duly given, but the lessee failed to serve a lessee's notice until after the expiry of the period of 14 days. In separate judgments, in which the cases are examined in some detail, all members of the Court came to the conclusion that United
Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley Borough Council did not enable the express provision of paragraph (d) to be overridden. As Gleeson CJ put it (at ):  "Although I do not find this an easy matter, because I regard the commercial considerations invoked by the House of Lords to be weighty, I am unable to accept that they can be taken to the length of entitling a Court to disregard, or fail to give effect to, the language of an express stipulation such as that contained in art 2.02 (d). It is one thing to treat a stipulation as to time as directory rather than mandatory. It is, however, another thing to treat a contractual provision which spells out the agreed consequence of failing to do something within a particular time as not meaning what it says."  
Samuels JA cited with approval (at 95-96) the dissenting judgment of Browne-
Wilkinson LJ (as Lord Browne-Wilkinson then was) in Mecca Leisure Ltd v
Renown Investments (Holdings) Ltd [(1984) 49 P&CR 12] at -24 where the following statement was made:  "Hitherto, the doctrine (of time not being of the essence) has only operated so as to allow one party to perform obligations laid down in the contract at a later date; it has never operated so as to alter the substantive terms of the contract entered into between the parties, other than the terms as to time."  
Samuels JA commented (at 97):  "If in this case the Court were to hold that time was not of the essence in par (b) and par (d), this would in effect require the Court to rewrite the express terms of par (d). This is not a case where the parties have failed to set out the consequences of a 'breach'. Thus, there is no room for the Court to apply the presumption considered in United Scientific."  
Meagher JA said (at 100):  "Once a contract expressly spells out the consequences of non-compliance with a time-limit I cannot see how it can be argued that the time-limit is non essential."  
Meagher JA went on (at 101) to say that he had "considered the consequences which would ensue from a finding that the time-limit was non-essential". His
Honour said:  "It would not entail the consequence that the tenant's notice of 6 February was valid, nor would it entail the consequence that the tenant could rely on cl 2.02(b). That is because cl 2.02(b) says that such a right can only be exercised within 14 days of service of a cl 2.02(a) notice. ... In my view, no decision can legitimately be made that a time provision in a rent review clause is not of the essence if such a decision would involve an alteration in the contract entered into between the parties."  
It is difficult to see how his Honour's comment could be reconciled with giving effect under clause 6(b) of the lease in the present case to the notice served by the defendant prior to a date the contract specifically excluded by the words "but not earlier than 120 days prior to each date specified in Item (b)".  Whatever else may be said about Mailman, it is clear that the Court of Appeal insisted upon the primacy of the contract itself - a point the House of Lords in terms acknowledged. If the provisions of the contract necessarily imply the essentiality of time in some respect, then that essentiality has to be acknowledged. This point was taken up by Barker J in Mobil Oil New
Zealand Ltd versus Mandeno [[1995] 3 NZLR 114] at 117, when he said:  "The cases show the essential point is whether time of the essence was intended as a matter of construction."  
His Honour concluded a lengthy passage at (118-120), in which he referred to
Mailman as a case that was "clearly decisive", by pointing out that the
Court of Appeal had there approved the dissenting judgment of Browne-Wilkinson
LJ in the Mecca case. Barker J referred to a passage in the judgment of
Samuels JA in Mailman (at 97) in which it had been emphasised that the lessor there was given a second chance to initiate the procedure of review but, as Barker J put it (at 120), "the same leniency was not intended by the parties to be extended to the lessee". Barker J regarded this as "a significant matter" which applied also to the case before him. He concluded (at 120):  "For the reasons stated in their judgments, I prefer the unanimous decision of the Court of Appeal of New South Wales in Mailman and the dissenting judgment of Browne-Wilkinson LJ in Mecca. I am driven to the same conclusion as the Judges in those cases by holding that the parties intended that time should be of the essence, particularly when dealing with the response of a lessee to whom the contract did not give the same leniency in the matter of notice as to the lessor."  The decision in Mobil Oil New Zealand Ltd versus Mandeno was cited to the
Privy Council (Lord Browne-Wilkinson, Lord Cooke of Thorndon, Lord Clyde, Lord
Hobhouse of Woodborough and Henry J) in W & R Jack Ltd versus Fifield [2000] 3 NZLR 129 where, in reasons delivered by Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough, their Lordships considered a set of clauses providing for service of a landlord's notice specifying a new annual rent proposed by the landlord; for a notice by the tenant within 28 days of receipt of the landlord's notice disputing that the proposed new rent was the current market rent and requiring arbitration; and that upon the tenant's failure to give notice he should be deemed to have accepted a new annual rent specified in the landlord's notice.
Lord Hobhouse said (at 133):  "Two important features of this scheme must be stressed. First, the time provision governing the time within which the lessee may serve a counternotice is of the essence. (Mobil Oil New Zealand Ltd versus Mandeno [[1995] 3 NZLR .)]
A late notice is non-contractual and ineffective. But, like any other time provision, the requirement may be waived by the party for whose benefit it has been inserted, here the lessor. (Charles Rickards Ld versus Oppenheim [[1950] 1
KB 616.)](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1950%5d%201%20KB%20616 "View LawCiteRecord" ) Secondly, once the time has expired, the proposed rent becomes the contractual rent."  
Since the decision of Barker J in Mobil Oil New Zealand Ltd versus Mandeno was so largely based on his Honour's acceptance of the decision of the
Court of Appeal in Mailman as "decisive", it seems to me that the implicit approval given by the Privy Council to Mobil Oil New Zealand Ltd v
Mandeno carries with it their Lordships' approval of Mailman.  What these authorities establish is that rent review clauses are dichotomous in nature. On the one hand, some rent review clauses may be seen as simply establishing a machinery of review, or a series of steps to be taken to enable a review to be carried out. On the other hand, other rent review provisions may declare the consequences of default in the taking of some step, or may express the necessity to take the step, in terms which make it clear that more than machinery is involved and contractual rights and obligations may depend upon strict and timely compliance with the procedure laid down. In the former case, the whole procedure may be merely directory and a particular non-compliance may have no serious effect upon rights or obligations; in the latter case, the procedure is mandatory and time is essential, whether or not it is expressly stated to be so. Although the House of Lords gave voice in
United Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley Borough Council to an inclination to construe rent review clauses in the former sense, they also made it clear that the language of the lease, the way its provisions operate in connection with each other and other aspects of context may well lead to a different conclusion. In subsequent cases, it has been pointed out that the contrast between lenity in one respect and strictness in another of the provisions of the lease may emphasise that the strict provisions are intended to mean what they say.  As I have remarked, the present case presents the unusual feature that, although the lessor has insisted upon strict compliance by the lessee, it has never itself complied with the first requirement laid down in the lease as the ground of the lessee's obligation. To adapt the metaphor of Meagher JA in
Mailman, (at 99), the lessor took the first step in the "stately saraband" for which the lease provided out of time with the music, and the question is did the contractual dance ever begin?  The answer to this question is not to be obtained by a solemn intoning of the words of Lord Diplock in United Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley
Borough Council. It is necessary to refer to the terms of the lease. The language of clause 6(b) does not suggest that the time limitation contained in it is unimportant machinery. It begins with the words:  "At any time but not earlier than 120 days prior to each date specified ... or at any time thereafter the Lessor may by notice in writing to the Lessee fix the annual rent (subject as herein provided) ... and the amount so fixed shall be the annual rent payable by the Lessee ..."  
It is difficult to imagine any words (except perhaps the hoary words "as to which time shall be of the essence", which all the authorities say are not required) that could more clearly express the exclusion of a notice given at some earlier time. And if one leaves the clarity of the language used, in order to turn to the context for guidance, it is noteworthy that the argument which appealed to Samuels JA in Mailman (at 97) and to Barker J in
Mobil Oil New Zealand Ltd versus Mandeno (at 120), that the lease made an inflexibly stated time provision in the relevant respect while making a more lenient provision in another respect, is applicable to the construction of the present lease. The provisions are not the same, but the logic is the same. In the cases cited, the time provision with respect to action by the lessee was strict, but the time provision affecting the lessor was expressed in more generous terms. In the present case, the same contrast may be made with respect to the two time provisions affecting the lessor. While its notice must be given "not earlier than 120 days prior to each date specified", so long as it is not too early it may be given "at any time thereafter". The lenity of the latter provision is emphasised by the second and third sentences of clause (b). The second sentence ensures that any receipt of rent on or after a review date shall not prejudice the lessor's right to review the rent pursuant to the clause, and the third sentence expressly provides that the lessor "shall not by reason of its failure to give notice of the rental which it proposes from the review date within any period whether specified herein or not forfeit its right to have the annual rent reviewed from the review date and the rate at which the annual rent is payable from the review date shall date back to and be payable from the review date". So wide is the language in which the lessor's right to give a delayed notice is thus protected, indeed, that its counsel was emboldened to submit that the latter part of the clause also overrode the limitation expressed by the words "not earlier than 120 days prior". While I think this is a quite impossible construction of the paragraph (the final sentence of it that is in question is concerned with the possible forfeiture of a right to a review by failure to do anything about it, not with a premature notice which could not possibly work a forfeiture), the significant point is the contrast between the strict limit upon the period in advance of a review date at which a notice may be given fixing the market rent at that review date and the complete freedom allowed to the lessor in respect of the giving of a notice at any subsequent time. There is, of course, sound reason for limiting the period in advance of a review date as at which a notice having actual operative effect (subject only to paragraph (c)) may be given, when it is borne in mind that the lease contemplates a genuine assessment of the market rent at a future date; if that date be too far removed, the assessment could only be unreliable.  In my opinion, the provisions of clause 6 of the lease do not give any contractual effect to a purported notice by the lessor pursuant to clause 6(b) which is served earlier than the time specified by the lease. The same conclusion would, of course, follow if the question were considered as one of the operation of a condition precedent, but as Samuels JA made clear in
Mailman (at 94-95), it is difficult to reconcile the principles applicable to a condition precedent with the law as it has been laid down in
United Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley Borough Council. To adapt the language of Brennan J (with whom Stephen J agreed) in Perri v
Coolangatta Investments Proprietary Limited <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 537] at 570 (and see also per Gibbs CJ at 545), if clause 6(b) is seen as establishing a condition, the failure of the lessor to comply with that condition affected the formation of the relevant obligation asserted against the lessee. However, to the extent that United Scientific Holdings
Ltd versus Burnley Borough Council holds sway, a rent review clause cannot simply be analysed by a Judge at first instance in terms of the law of contractual conditions. Nevertheless, where the lease exhibits a contrast between strict and lenient provisions, and the strict provision (as here) is expressed as a condition precedent to the imposition unilaterally of an obligation upon the other party, the principle enunciated by Lord Hoffmann, which I have cited earlier, requiring strict compliance by the lessor with the terms of the lease, cannot be left out of account in relation to the question whether the time limitation must be observed.  There remains, in respect of this aspect of the case, the question whether, although clause 6 of the lease requires strict compliance in the case of a lessor's notice with the limitation upon the time before which it may not be served, time should be treated in other respects as not essential. Had the lessor, by notice in writing given not earlier than the requisite time, validly fixed the annual rent under clause 6 (b), "subject as herein provided", i.e. subject to paragraphs (c), (d) and (e), would the lessee have been strictly bound by the time limit of fourteen days expressed in paragraph ? When this question is asked, it is important to notice that the lease in the present case contains no such provision as article 2.02 (d) of the lease in Mailman, by which a consequence of a failure by the lessee to "serve notice of dispute on the Lessor within the time prescribed in paragraph (b)" was specified as being that "the Lessee [was] deemed to have agreed that the amount set out in the [lessor's] notice... is the current market rent of the
Demised Premises at the Review Date and for the following Review Period". That provision was mirrored in closely similar terms in Mobil Oil New Zealand
Ltd versus Mandeno and in W & R Jack Ltd versus Fifield, and in all of these cases provided a strong ground for distinguishing each of them from
United Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley Borough Council. In the absence of such a term of the contract, a provision enabling the lessee, by the service of a counter-notice within a stated period, to set in train an arbitration or expert determination of the issue of the market rent looks very much like a provision that "lays down the administrative procedure or machinery by which the fair market rent shall be ascertained", to use the language of Lord Salmon in United Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley Borough
Council at 948. In my opinion, what Lord Diplock called (in the same case at 930) "the presumption...that the time-table specified in a rent review clause for completion of the various steps for determining the rent payable in respect of the period following the review date is not of the essence of the contract" should prevail so far as the construction of clause 6 (c) is concerned. Indeed, the language of paragraph (e), which allows in broad terms for the settlement of the question raised by a landlord's notice under clause (b) by "the increased annual rent otherwise being agreed" and for the payment of 80 per cent of the increase in the rent fixed by the landlord's notice, not only where the lessee has given a counter-notice pursuant to clause 6 (c), but also "if the Lessee fails to accept in writing within fourteen (14) days after being notified thereof that that annual rent so fixed by the Lessor is the current market rent of the Premises", is consistent with the view that the strict essentiality of time is not insisted upon in this respect by the terms of this lease.  It follows that the defendant was in error, not only in asserting the effectiveness of a notice under clause 6 (b) that did not comply with the time limitation expressed in that provision, but also in denying the right of the lessee, under the terms of this lease, to activate the machinery of clause 6 after the expiry of fourteen days from notification of an annual rent fixed by the lessor under clause 6 (b).  In the circumstances, I need not examine in detail the plaintiff's alternative argument that the defendant did not comply with clause 6 (b) because it did not by its notice "fix the annual rent...at an amount which in the opinion of the lessor [was] the market rent of the Premises as at [the] review date". No doubt a clause committing such a power to one party to a contract requires that power to be exercised genuinely and in good faith. In the present case, the amount inserted in the lessor's notice was decided by Mr
Hemmes. He gave evidence and was cross-examined. I am satisfied, upon a consideration of the whole of his evidence and having regard to other evidence (such as that of the licensee and manager of the CBD Hotel about other hotels allegedly considered for purposes of comparison), that Mr Hemmes made no serious attempt to assess the market rent of the leased premises as at the review date, but chose a figure upon which he had determined long before as being the amount he wanted. In evidence, he relied upon comparisons with various other premises, but these comparisons were quite unconvincing and wore the strong appearance of being afterthoughts. However, it is unnecessary to pursue the point.  The defendant, in answer to the plaintiff's case, says that Pub Oz Pty
Limited, by virtue of the terms of the letter of 23 June 1999 set out earlier in these reasons, waived compliance by the defendant with the time stipulation in clause 6 (b) of the lease. This argument seems to me to be difficult to reconcile with the language of the letter. Having bluntly declared that "the proposed rent increase is unacceptable and does not reflect the market value of the property", the writer goes on to state:  "It may be necessary to appoint a valuer as anticipated by the lease but in the meantime Mr Callaghan has requested a meeting with you in an attempt to resolve this matter."  
This does not seem to me to be the language of waiver, although certainly it evinces a willingness to consider either negotiating in an attempt to reach a solution or entering upon a process of valuation which might have led to a waiver if undertaken. The holding out of an olive branch need not be seen as a waiver. In fact, of course, the lessor rebuffed the lessee before the matter had got any further. It had certainly not got to the stage contemplated by
Denning LJ in Charles Rickards Ld versus Oppenheim [[1950] 1 KB 616] at 623, the case cited by Lord Hobhouse in W & R Jack Ltd versus Fifield, where his
Lordship (with whom Bucknill and Singleton LJJ agreed) said:  "If the defendant, as he did, led the plaintiffs to believe that he would not insist on the stipulation as to time, and that, if they carried out the work, he would accept it, and they did it, he could not afterwards set up the stipulation as to the time against them. Whether it be called waiver or forbearance on his part, or an agreed variation or substituted performance, does not matter. It is a kind of a estoppel. By his conduct he evinced an intention to affect their legal relations. He made, in effect, a promise not to insist on his strict legal rights. That promise was intended to be acted on, and was in fact acted on. He cannot afterwards go back on it."  As these remarks of Denning LJ illustrate, a waiver is not always easy to grasp. It may take different forms. But, for present purposes, a waiver may be founded either upon estoppel or upon election. When the chameleon wears the colours of estoppel, it requires reliance by the other party (here, the defendant) so as to make it unconscientious of the party waiving to insist further upon the right in question. When waiver appears in the guise of election, a conscious choice between known rights is required, or at least conduct definitely inconsistent with the continued assertion of the right waived. The nature of a waiver of a contractual right founded upon estoppel is explained in the passage I have cited from Charles Richards Ld v
Oppenheim. What waiver as a species of election involves is stated in
Craine versus The Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Company Limited <case>; [(1926) 28 CLR 305] at 326 where Isaacs J, delivering the judgment of the Court (Knox CJ, Isaacs and Starke JJ), said that "waiver must be an intentional act with knowledge", the question being whether the party has approbated so as not to be able to reprobate - "whether he has elected to get some advantage to which he would not otherwise have been entitled, so as to deny to him a later election to the contrary .... His knowledge is necessary, or he cannot be said to have approbated or elected." This view of the law was accepted in George v Roach <case>; [(1942) 67 CLR 253] at 262 by Rich J who insisted upon "intention and knowledge of all the relevant circumstances", and in Deaves versus CML Fire and General
Insurance Company Limited <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 24] at 42 by Gibbs CJ (with whom Stephen J relevantly agreed).  In neither the sense of estoppel, nor in that of election, can waiver assist the defendant. Far from changing its position in reliance on the letter of 23 June 1999, the defendant rejected any course suggested by that letter out of hand, so there is no estoppel. As for election, not only is it clear
Pub Oz Pty Limited did not have the necessary intention and knowledge, but the remarks of Lord Wilberforce in Johnson versus Agnew [[1980] AC 367] at 398 are very much in point. His Lordship said:  "Election, though the subject of much learning and refinement, is in the end a doctrine based on simple considerations of common sense and equity. It is easy to see that a party who has chosen to put an end to a contract by accepting the other party's repudiation cannot afterwards seek specific performance.
This is simply because the contract has gone - what is dead is dead. But it is no more difficult to agree that a party, who has chosen to seek specific performance, may quite well thereafter, if specific performance fails to be realised, say, 'Very well, then, the contract should be regarded as terminated.' It is quite consistent with a decision provisionally to keep alive, to say, 'Well, this is no use - let us now end the contract's life.' A vendor who seeks (and gets) specific performance is merely electing for a course which may or may not lead to implementation of the contract - what he elects for is not eternal and unconditional affirmation, but a continuance of the contract under control of the court which control involves the power, in certain events, to terminate it."  
A doctrine based on common sense and equity could no more regard an attempt to find an agreed solution, in the circumstances of this case, as a waiver of rights than it could find, as Lord Wilberforce pointed out, in an attempt to achieve the implementation of a broken contract, a waiver of the right to terminate it for a persistence in the conduct that broke it. Accordingly, I reject this defence.  Next, the defendant pleaded that an agreement to pay the increased rent should be inferred from the conduct of Pub Oz Pty Limited in paying the rent demanded by the defendant, so that the defendant had no liability in respect of overpaid rent. Reliance was placed on the principle laid down by McHugh JA (with whom Samuels JA agreed) in Empirnall Holdings Pty Ltd versus Machon Paull
Partners Pty Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR 523] at 535:  "'[W]here an offeree with a reasonable opportunity to reject an offer of goods or services takes the benefit of them under circumstances which indicate that they were to be paid for in accordance with the offer, it is open to the tribunal of fact to hold that the offer was accepted according to its terms.
...  
The ultimate issue is whether a reasonable bystander would regard the conduct of the offeree, including his silence, as signalling to the offeror that his offer has been accepted."  
This formulation states a test for a conclusion of fact. But that test is not met in the present case. Pub Oz Pty Limited was not silent; orally and in writing, it rejected the revised rent. It met an adamant refusal of any reconsideration under the lease and an insistence that it was obliged by the terms of the existing contract to pay. That it paid in these circumstances could signal to the lessor no more than that it had failed to detect the error infecting the lessor's position. On the evidence of Mr Callaghan which I accept, this was in fact the case; he mistakenly believed Pub Oz Pty Limited was under a legal obligation to pay.  The defendant urged in support of its contention the later decisions in
Brambles Holdings Ltd versus Bathurst City Council <case>; [(2001) 53 NSWLR 153] and 33 Bank Street Nominees Pty Ltd versus Citipower Pty [(1997) BC 9702794], a judgment of Beach J. In the former case, Ipp AJA (at 197) referred to the passage in the judgment of McHugh JA in Empirnall Holdings
Pty Ltd versus Machon Paull Partners Pty Ltd, to which I have referred, in holding that an offer in respect of the fees for certain waste disposal operations had been accepted by conduct when those fees had been charged. In the latter case, Beach J inferred, "[i]n the absence of any other evidentiary material shedding light upon the matter", from the payment of rental over a period of three years, an agreement by a lessor not to apply a rent review clause. But, as I have made clear, there is not such an absence of evidence here. Here, as in Gollin & Company Limited versus Karenlee Nominees
Proprietary Limited (at 465-469), there is evidence to elucidate the circumstances in which the payments were made, and I find it does not indicate the alleged agreement, or any waiver of the lessee's rights.  What the circumstances do indicate, rather than an agreement to accept the rent fixed by the lessor, is a misrepresentation (doubtless innocent), made on its behalf, that in the events that had happened the rent had been effectively fixed at the revised figure which could not be reconsidered under clause 6(c).
The payments of the increased amounts made in consequence by the lessee were made under a mistake induced by that misrepresentation, and are recoverable.
Shorn of the complications of the restrictive legislation there in question, the case is analogous to Solle versus Butcher [[1950] 1 KB 671], where
Denning LJ said (at 695):  "It seems to me that the plaintiff was not merely expressing an opinion on the law: he was making an unambiguous statement as to private rights, and a misrepresentation as to private rights is equivalent to a misrepresentation of fact for this purpose ... But it is unnecessary to come to a firm conclusion on this point, because, as Bucknill LJ has said [at 684 et seq], there was clearly a common mistake, or, as I would prefer to describe it, a common misapprehension, which was fundamental and in no way due to any fault of the defendant ..."  
Of course, the distinction between a mistake of law and a mistake of fact involved in this passage is no longer the test for recovery under our law:
David Securities Pty Limited versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 353] where the Court also referred with approval (at 384) to what
Lord Denning said in Kiriri Cotton Co Ltd versus Dewani at 204, a passage extending somewhat further the view his Lordship had expressed in Solle v
Butcher in the passage I have cited.  The principle with respect to the recovery of money paid under a mistake of law was stated in the joint judgment of Mason CJ, Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ in David Securities Pty Limited versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia at 378 in the following terms:  "[T]he payer will be entitled prima facie to recover moneys paid under a mistake if it appears that the moneys were paid by the payer in the mistaken belief that he or she was under a legal obligation to pay the moneys or that the payee was legally entitled to payment of the moneys. Such a mistake would be causative of the payment."  
In using the word "mistaken" their Honours made it clear (at 369) that what they were referring to was not only "a positive belief in the existence of something which does not exist but also ... 'sheer ignorance of something relevant to the transaction in hand'". The principle has been affirmed in subsequent decisions of the High Court. In Commissioner of State Revenue v Royal Insurance Australia Limited <case>; [(1994) 182 CLR 51] at 67, Mason CJ cited the passage from David Securities at 378 which I have quoted, adding:  "And, prima facie, that is all that is required where, as here, the recipient has no legal entitlement to receive or retain the moneys. The recipient has been unjustly enriched. Indeed, it is perhaps possible that the absence of any legitimate basis for retention of the money by the Commissioner might itself ground a claim for unjust enrichment without the need to show any causative mistake on the part of Royal. But there is no occasion to pursue this aspect of the case further."  
See also Roxborough versus Rothmans of Pall Mall Australia Limited <case>; [(2003) 217 CLR 30] at 53.  It cannot be said that any of the payments of amounts exceeding the rent that was due caused the defendant to refrain from taking the appropriate steps to increase the rent, so as to raise some equity in its favour. That would be to reverse the current of causation that actually flowed, for the payments were made because of the defendant's own insistence that everything necessary to impose an obligation to make them had already occurred. In any case, the claim of Pub Oz Pty Limited that the whole procedure was not in accordance with the legal rights of the parties was made before the end of the lease, and so before it could be said to be too late for the defendant to invoke the proper procedure (it will be recalled that clause 6(b) remained available, while the lease was in force, "at any time thereafter"). That the defendant did not respond to the claim by taking any step under clause 6(b) is powerful evidence in favour of the view that it knew an expert determination under clause 6(c) would not justify its retention of at least a large part of the payments, and I do not find that any part has been shown to be an amount it would, had the proper steps been taken, have been entitled to retain. On that issue, the onus is on the defendant: David Securities Pty Limited v
Commonwealth Bank of Australia at 384.  Counsel for the defendant raised the contention that clause 6(e) of the lease provided a defence to the extent of 80 per centum of the overpayments made. But it seems to me there are several answers to this proposition. In the first place, clause 6 (e) is an interim provision to operate pending resolution of the question whether the amount "fixed by the Lessor pursuant to sub-clause (b) ... or clause 4" is to be varied. I have already held that the purported notice under clause 6(b) was not valid, so it must follow that clause 6(e) never became available. Secondly, assuming a valid notice under clause 6(b), clause 6(e) looks to the giving by the lessee of a notice under clause 6 (c) or the lessee's failure to accept in writing within 14 days after being notified thereof that the "annual rent so fixed by the Lessor [ie in a valid notice under clause 6(b)] is the current market rent". In either case, clause 6(e) then requires the further step expressed by the words "the Lessee shall if requested in writing by the Lessor from the review date in addition to continuing to pay the monthly rent instalments at the rate applying immediately prior to the review date pay by equal monthly instalments in advance eighty (80) per centum of the increase in annual rent sought by the
Lessor and fixed in its notice to the Lessee pursuant to sub-clause (b)". The lessor, which absolutely refused to recognise that the lessee had given or could give a notice under clause 6(c) has never been in a position to avail itself of this provision, and in fact no request in writing to make the payments specified in clause 6(e) has ever been made. Finally, clause 6(e) contemplates either a "determination of the rent in accordance with sub-clause " or alternatively "the increased annual rent otherwise being agreed", whereupon the interim measure provided for by clause 6(e) would resolve into an "appropriate adjustment and payment or repayment as the case may be" which "shall forthwith be made between the Lessor and the Lessee to ensure that as from the review date the Lessee had paid and the lessor has received the appropriate amount in respect of the annual rent as agreed between the Lessor and the lessee or otherwise as determined in accordance with sub-clause (c)".
Plainly, this part of the clause has also never been applicable, as there has never been any contemplation by the lessor of either a determination under clause 6(c) or any such agreement as clause 6(e) envisages. I reject the contention that now, long after the lease has been terminated, the defendant can avail itself in any way of clause 6(e).  For these reasons, at the time Pub Oz Pty Limited went into liquidation it was entitled to recover the overpayments of rent together with interest thereon but the plaintiff, in consideration of a payment of $10,000 plus $1,000 goods and services tax totalling $11,000, took an assignment from the liquidators and was substituted for the company as plaintiff. The liquidators duly gave notice in writing to the defendant of the assignment on 23 June
There was some dispute about the effectiveness of this assignment, but I do not see any reason to doubt that it was, at least, a good assignment in equity. If so, the company as legal owner having gone out of existence, there is no reason why the equitable assignee should not "prosecute the action to finality and obtain a judgment without joining the assignor as a party":
Weddell versus Pearce [[1988] 1 Ch 26] at 43;
Jennings versus Credit Corp Australia Pty Ltd <case>; [(2000) 48 NSWLR 709] at 719-722. In any event, in order to make doubly sure, the plaintiff has since taken a further assignment, in reliance on [s
AD](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ad.html) of the [Corporations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/), from the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. In my opinion, the plaintiff is entitled to succeed in his action. The parties have calculated the overpaid rent, with adjustments for indexation, at $383,967.36 on which interest is to be allowed at the appropriate rates, the amount of interest being $145,655.09 as at 11 August 2005.  That leaves the cross claim to be considered.  The cross claim is pleaded in reliance on three particular clauses of the lease which are set out below:  "7. The Lessee takes subject to the full effect of the covenants next hereinafter shortly noted as the same are set forth in words at length in the second column of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p2) of the Fourth Schedule to the [Conveyancing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/):-  ...  
And to maintain and leave the premises in good repair (having regard to their condition at the commencement of the lease), reasonable wear and tear, war damage, and damage by fire, lightning, flood and tempest excepted;"  (The "words at length in the ... Fourth Schedule to the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/)" referred to in this clause are:  "And also that the lessee will during the term, when, where, and so often as the need shall be, but having regard to the condition of the demised premises at the commencement of the lease and excepting reasonable wear and tear, war damage, and damage by fire, lightning, flood and tempest, occurring within the term -  well and sufficiently maintain, amend, and keep, and  at the expiration or sooner determination of the term peaceably surrender and yield up unto the lessor,  in good and substantial repair the demised premises, including all appurtenances, buildings, erections and fixtures belonging to the demised premises, or at any time within the term lawfully made or erected by the lessor upon or within the demised premises.")  "24. (c) The lessee does hereby covenant with the lessor:-  
At all times during the continuance of this lease to keep the fittings plant and chattels now and from time to time on the said premises in a proper state of repair working order and condition and will replace the same or such part or parts or items thereof as shall become broken worn out destroyed damaged or obsolete with fittings plant and chattels of a like nature and equal value so that the same are in a proper state of repair working order and condition at the expiration or sooner determination of this lease or any extension or renewal of it."  "25. (a) The lessee hereby acknowledges that the fixtures, fittings and equipment as listed in Annexure 'A' hereto belong to and are the property of the Lessor.  
The lessee accepts these fixtures, fittings and equipment in their present condition and state of repair and shall return the same to the lessor upon the termination of this lease in a condition as near to their existing condition at the commencement of this lease (reasonable wear and tear excepted). [Sic]
The lessee shall maintain the same and be responsible for their repair during the continuance of this lease and any option period granted pursuant to this lease."  Perusal of these clauses reveals that clause 7 is concerned with the repair of the premises, including the appurtenances and fixtures belonging to them, "having regard to the condition of the demised premises at the commencement of the lease and excepting reasonable wear and tear." Because the measure of the obligation imposed by this covenant is the condition of the demised premises at the commencement of the lease, it may be important to know when that time was. In the present case, it will be recalled, Pub Oz Pty Limited only purchased the business of the hotel as the original term of the lease was drawing to a close; indeed, it was on the very same day that the option of renewal was exercised, an option only exercisable pursuant to clause 4 of the lease "if the Lessee shall not then be in breach of any of the covenants and agreements by and on the part of the Lessee contained in this lease". It was not suggested the lessee was so in breach and a renewed lease was entered into. It was the renewed lease which then governed the relationship between the lessor and the lessee and clause 7 of that lease, when it referred to "the commencement of the lease", could hardly mean anything but the date 21 July when the lease commenced: Halsbury's Laws of Australia vol 16 -3610; Gerraty versus McGavin <case>; [(1914) 18 CLR 152] at 163, where Isaacs J said:  "Now, what is the position of a lease obtained by the exercise of an option to renew? Clearly it is a new lease, a new demise."  A further matter should be noted about clause 7. Counsel for the cross- claimant referred me to Lurcott versus Wakely & Wheeler [[1911] 1 KB ], an authoritative decision as to the effect of covenants to repair. In that case,
Fletcher Moulton LJ said (at 919):  "[I]t is settled law that when a man undertakes to keep a thing in good condition or in thorough repair, and it is not in that condition when the demise commences, the covenant implies that he is to put it in that state as well as to keep it in that state."  
To my mind, the form of covenant which clause 7 adopts from Schedule 4 to the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) is specifically designed to overcome this very conclusion. For it contains the important qualification expressed by the words "but having regard to the condition of the demised premises at the commencement of the lease". If the premises were not then, to use his Lordship's expression, "in good condition or in thorough repair", the covenant has regard to that fact, so as not to impose a requirement to put the premises in a better state than that in which they were leased.  There is a somewhat similar aspect of clause 24(c)(i) which the cross claimant's case seemed to me to overlook. That provision relates to the keeping in a proper state of repair working order and condition, and replacement where necessary, of fittings plant and chattels. But it does not require the lessee, as Suetonius might have said, to replace brick with marble by installing brand new modern equipment where he had found much worn (though not worn out) and inferior items. In Lurcott versus Wakely & Wheeler,
Fletcher Moulton LJ explained (at 916), of a covenant to keep old premises in good condition, that it meant "considering that they are old premises, they must be in good condition as such premises"; and he said:  "We have to consider what it obliges the lessee to do in the case of an old building."  
In the same way, when clause 24(c)(i) is applied to television sets, refrigerators and air conditioning units that are outdated or aging models, of low value, and the clause itself limits the obligation to replacing them with items "of a like nature and equal value", it is necessary to consider what it is that the lessee is obliged to do. Likeness in nature and equality in value require an appraisal of a replacement by comparison with what the item replaced would be if it were still functioning in a reasonable fashion.  Clause 25 raises a different problem. It applies to the particular fixtures, fittings and equipment that are stated to be listed "in Annexure 'A' hereto". The difficulty is that the registered lease has no annexure "A", and it is not shown Pub Oz Pty Limited or the cross-defendant was ever supplied with such a document. In response to this difficulty, the cross-claimant submits, first, that the conveyancing file of a solicitor who acted upon the sale of the business by the original lessee, some two years after the date of the lease, by an agreement dated 19 May 1995, to a company Dukest Trading & Investments Pty Limited did contain, as well as the contract and a copy of the lease, an inventory headed Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd, consisting of 23 pages, undated but bearing a facsimile stamp with the date 2 February 1993.
This document bore nothing in the way of an annexure note but a capital "A" has been handwritten at the top of the first page (whether for the purpose of annexation to another document or because it was believed by someone to be a copy of the missing annexure is not known), and the bottom right hand corner of each page bears two sets of initials which appear to correspond with initials also inscribed at the bottom right hand corner of the agreement of 19
May 1995 and each page of a copy of the lease in the same file. They have not been identified with any two signatories of the lease. The copy of the lease is a photocopy bearing also a number of other initials which do not appear on either the agreement or the inventory. The copy of the agreement is also endorsed "A" in ink, but in what appears to be a different hand, and a section of the lease itself bears the endorsement "THIS IS THE ANNEXURE 'A' REFERRED
TO IN THE LEASE ... ". A further copy of the same inventory was contained in the 1997 purchase file of the solicitor for the cross-claimant, who obtained it from the vendor to the cross-claimant. On this basis, counsel for the cross-claimant argues that I should conclude the Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd inventory became the annexure A referred to in clause 25(a) of the lease. But
I do not see how this answers the difficulty. Counsel's written submission concedes that "there is no evidence that Pub Oz Pty Ltd received Annexure 'A'", and it is clear on the evidence that there was no such annexure to the lease as registered.  The obligation binding the cross-defendant is to be found in a deed delivered on 19 May 1998 which refers to the registered lease. The parties were the cross-claimant, the company Dukest Trading & Investments Pty
Limited, Pub Oz Pty Limited, Matthew John Duffy and another person who had guaranteed the obligations of Dukest Trading & Investments Pty Limited (they are referred to as "the Continuing Guarantor"), and the cross-defendant.
There is a recital that the other parties had requested the cross-claimant "to consent to an assignment of the Lease" and there is a definition of "Lease" as meaning "the lease of the premises, the date and registration number of which are set out in Item 6 of the Reference Schedule". That item simply provides:  "Dated: 11 November 1993 Registered: U638093".  
There is no reference to any other version of the lease. Clause 9(a) requires the Transferee to "register or procure registration of a transfer of the Lease in its name at the Land Titles Office". That transfer would have to be effected by reference to the registered lease containing no annexure in terms of the Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd inventory.  Clause 2 of the deed provides:  "The Transferee [ie. Pub Oz Pty Limited] hereby covenants with the Lessor [ie.
the Cross-Claimant] that the Transferee will on and from the date referred to in Item 8 of the Reference Schedule [that date is '20 April 1998'] pay the rent reserved by the Lease and all other moneys payable thereunder on the days and in the manner therein provided AND will be bound by and will do, perform, observe and carry out each and every of the covenants, obligations and provisions of the part of the Transferor [ie. Dukest Trading & Investments Pty Limited] as Lessee in the Lease as if the Transferee had originally been the party thereto and was named in the Lease as Lessee."  
Clause 5 provides:  "The Incoming Guarantor [ie. the cross-respondent] hereby acknowledges by his execution hereof that the Lessor has agreed to consent to the assignment of the Lease from the Transferor to the Transferee at the request of the Incoming
Guarantor and in consideration of such agreement and these presents the
Incoming Guarantor hereby covenants with the Lessor as follows:  the Incoming Guarantor unconditionally guarantees to the Lessor the payment of every sum of money whatsoever that may be or become payable by the
Transferee to the Lessor under or in accordance with or by virtue of or in consequence of the Lease or this Deed notwithstanding that such money is for rent, interest payable on moneys overdue or for any other moneys payable thereunder or for damages or costs which the Lessor may pay, incur, sustain or be put to in connection with the exercise or attempted exercise of any remedy or right conferred upon the Lessor under or in accordance with or by virtue of or in consequence of the Lease and this Deed or otherwise;  the Incoming Guarantor hereby covenants with the Lessor that in the event that the Transferee in any respect fails to observe or perform any of the terms, covenants, conditions and restrictions contained in the Lease or this
Deed on the part of the Transferee to be observed or performed the Incoming
Guarantor shall indemnify and keep indemnified the Lessor from and against all actions, claims, costs, damages, decrees, demands, expenses, judgments, losses, orders, proceedings, summons, [sic] suits and writs of any nature whatsoever arising out of or in consequence of any such failure;  ... "  In my opinion, the evidence simply does not sustain the conclusion that the
Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd inventory was ever actually adopted as the annexure
A referred to in clause 25(a) of the lease, and the evidence certainly does not show that the obligations undertaken under seal by Pub Oz Pty Limited and the cross-defendant were so undertaken by reference to that inventory.  It is convenient at this point, having just set out clause 2 of the Deed, to examine its effect. The covenant in that clause is limited by its opening words to the period "on and from the date [being 20 April 1998]". Counsel for the cross claimant argued that this limitation upon the covenant applied only to the rent and that the other obligations undertaken could relate back to the first day of the lease. There is a number of reasons why I do not accept this construction. In the first place, the covenant to pay the rent is certainly limited in the way I have stated, and that covenant is, by the structure of the language of the clause, indivisibly linked to the further obligations expressed by the words "and all other moneys payable thereunder". Furthermore, the balance of the clause does not refer to a backdating to the commencement of the lease but continues by imposing further obligations in the one sentence which had commenced with the indication that it was to operate on and from the date specified. Then, when one looks at the context of the rest of the deed, one finds that the Transferor and Continuing Guarantor by its express terms remain liable notwithstanding the assignment and notwithstanding any possible future assignment (clause 4). While this care is taken to ensure that these assignments should not affect the liability of the Transferor and the
Continuing Guarantor, there is no corresponding express provision that a liability imposed on the Transferee and the Incoming Guarantor should not affect the continuing liability of the Transferor and the Continuing Guarantor for past breaches.  If clause 25(b) has application to any of the items claimed in the cross- claim, its application will be subject to the effect of its reference to the "existing condition [of such an item] at the commencement of this lease (reasonable wear and tear excepted)". It does not refer to replacement, although, of course, repair may involve the replacement of parts (but not normally the replacement of the whole, particularly in a context, such as the context of this clause, where the immediately proximate clause 24(c)(i) expressly includes replacement in certain circumstances).  Both counsel made submissions concerning the cross-claim item by item and I shall deal with these items by the same designations, as follows:  
Damaged and non-functioning Ice Machine  
The cross-claimant alleged that the ice machine was listed in the inventory which has been referred to as annexure "A". Although I was unable to identify this particular machine in that inventory, if it was indeed a machine of an age to be there it might well be liable to breakdown. I note that an invoice obtained by the cross-claimant itself explicitly limits the warranty on the part supplied to 12 months only. There are in fact two invoices upon which the cross-claimant relies. The first is dated 19 March 2003, that is to say, immediately after Pub Oz Pty Limited was evicted. The invoice is for $107.50 for service to an icemaker and the "Fault" to which it relates is described as "general service". Although in this case, as in the case of many of the claims, the evidence is sparse, I conclude that the machine did require service as at the date of the eviction and I allow the sum of $107.50. Mr
Mason, who is appropriately qualified, gave evidence that, although he found it to be working, it was not working at its full capacity. However, the cross- claimant then relies on a further invoice in respect of the same machine dated approximately one month later, on 18 April 2003. This invoice is for the sum of $494 in respect of the replacement of a burnt out water pump. Bearing in mind the alleged age of the machine, and in any case having regard to the fact that the commercial refrigeration specialists employed by the cross-claimant were only prepared to warrant the new pump for 12 months, it seems to me quite impossible to infer that this charge relates to any breach of covenant under the lease.  
Damage to bathroom fittings  
The cross-claimant claims the amounts specified in six invoices. The first invoice is dated 21 March 2003 in the sum of $678.15 for 12 cistern valves and a number of other items including a "Posh Solus Basin Mixer Chrome" and a "Posh Solus Sink Mixer Chrome", neither of which is identified in the evidence or otherwise explained. Whether these items were replacements or improvements is not known. When this was pointed out in submissions for the cross- defendant, counsel for the cross-claimant was content to respond that certain evidence about the condition of bathrooms and toilets had not been challenged and the cross-defendant had adduced no evidence about the extent of reasonable wear and tear. As to the former point, both the witnesses were cross-examined but not as to every detail, and not as to the detail of their evidence about the bathrooms and toilets, but that evidence was itself somewhat contradictory. The witness Mason said "[T]he toilets either did not have a toilet seat or had a seat which was broken. The cisterns on the toilets were either damaged or not working at all. The tap fittings in the bathrooms leaked or did not function." He also expressed the opinion that "the toilets seats, toilet cisterns and taps all needed to be replaced as they could not be repaired". As against these statements, the invoices relied on refer to large numbers of parts, which fact, at any rate when there is no explanation of it, suggests that the items were repaired, as one does not normally buy large numbers of parts in order to instal new items of this nature. In any case, the other witness relied upon presents a different picture. He was Mr Gencher, the manager of another hotel in the cross-claimant's group, who prepared a report on the condition of the hotel after spending about 20 hours inspecting it. His report refers to many matters of which the cross-claimant complains, but relevantly to the present point, it refers to one broken toilet seat "in far left cubicle" of the ladies' toilets and otherwise makes no reference to any problem with taps, cisterns or toilet seats in the ladies' and men's toilets, no reference to any problem of that kind in the first floor toilets and one problem of "Toilet cistern running" in the second floor toilets. (Another witness for the cross-claimant, a Mr Jaja, said of the toilets that "water was continually flowing in some of them" - should the Court accept that, or rely on Mr Gencher's report after 20 hours of inspection for the purpose of reporting on the state of the hotel?) The hotel stayed open, Mr Gencher said in cross-examination, both as to the bar and as to accommodation, which could surely not have happened unless the toilets had been reasonably usable. It is true that Mr Gencher, in his affidavit although not in the report he made at the time, referred to the "toilets", immediately after referring to the men's and ladies' toilets and without specifying whether the first and second floor toilets were included, as "filthy and most had leaking taps". The difficulty remains that the invoice is unexplained and it, as well as other invoices, does not seem to sit well with the statement of Mr Mason that "the toilets seats, toilet cisterns and taps all needed to be replaced as they could not be repaired". The second invoice is for an amount of $433.14. It is dated 31
March 2003. It relates to a large number of small items apparently forming parts of toilet cisterns and basins, which again seems consistent only with the overhaul of cisterns rather than their replacement, or, possibly, consistent with the laying in of a stock of parts for the future. The third invoice is for $295.40 dated 2 April 2003 which again includes a number of small parts. But on this occasion there are two "Caroma" items at $90 each.
The fourth invoice is for $55.55 dated 2 April 2003 in respect of 1 pull chain outlet valve. The fifth invoice is for $1,034.66 dated 10 April 2003. It relates to another pull chain outlet valve and to 24 inlet valves. There is simply no evidence to explain or justify this quantity of inlet valves, particularly as there were also other valves, including inlet valves, included in the previous invoices. The sixth invoice is actually a part of a larger invoice dated 30 April 2003 from a Mitre 10 store. The amount claimed here is $92.47 including 3 tap handles (why a separate order of parts, such as 3 handles, if, as Mr Mason said, all taps were beyond repair and needed replacing?) and 1 "longnose plier". It is impossible to imagine how a tool such as a "longnose plier" could properly be charged as part of the cross- claimant's claim. The very fact of its inclusion, and the cross-claimaint's persistence in claiming it after counsel for the cross-defendant pointed out the incongruity of this claim, is a matter of grave concern when the Court is asked, without explanation, to accept the large number of items which have not been identified with a particular repair or replacement falling within a relevant covenant. I should add that counsel for the cross-claimant points out there was no evidence adduced on behalf of the cross-defendant identifying specific elements of reasonable wear and tear. I do not think this prevents the Court drawing inferences, just as the cross-claimant asks the Court to draw inferences, to the extent it can, in dealing with the cross-claimant's claims. It would certainly be difficult for the cross-defendant to give precise evidence of the extent to which any of the claims relating to bathroom fittings might have been contributed to by reasonable wear and tear in the absence of any sort of identification of the particular matter under repair or replacement when the purchases were made that led to these invoices.  
Damage to plumbing on roof of laundry  
This claim is made by reference to a quotation, not an invoice, in which the sum of $1,345 was quoted on 26 March 2003 for "plumbing maintenance" described only by the following words:  "To supply labour & materials to remove & replace rusted flashing on roof of laundry where roof sheets meet wall for adjoining building."  
Other evidence indicates that the laundry of the hotel was erected on its roof, apparently (having regard to the wording of the quotation) at the edge of the roof where the roof of the laundry meets the wall of a higher adjacent building. On this basis, assuming the roof of the laundry was of corrugated iron or similar material, a tendency to collect water at the junction of roof and wall might well lead over time to rusting, not, one would have thought, of the flashing (which, at least in an old building, would be lead) but of the ends of the iron sheets, and, of course, the flashing itself might also deteriorate. Having regard to the evidence generally about the condition and age of the hotel, which appears to be more than 100 years old, and the probabilities of the situation which I have attempted to sketch, this claim may well fall within the covenant to repair. However, it is noteworthy that the claim is made only on the basis of a quotation which formed part of a series of quotations grouped in quotation number 0004 issued by Watermark
Plumbing & Draining Pty Ltd on 26 March 2003. It is not clear whether all of the matters included in quotation 0004 were ever actually found to be necessary and carried out. Counsel for the cross-claimant did not direct me to any evidence of the nature and extent of the problem here in question.
Nevertheless, this quotation does accord with the reasonable probabilities, and I propose to allow it.  
Damaged and blocked guttering and downpipes  
This item was one of those included in quotation 0004 and in this case the carrying out of the work is evidenced by two invoices for amounts that were quoted. One invoice is dated 3 April 2003 in the sum of $1,050 and the other invoice dated 10 April 2003 is for $445. The former relates to the removal and replacement of an existing rusted box gutter (required to eliminate leaks into a bathroom below) and the latter involves investigation and clearing of "blocked downpipes and gutters". Having regard to the amounts, and the nature of this work performed by an outside plumber, I think I should conclude it was of a kind that fell within the covenant to repair.  
Damage to the timber on the staircase from the ground floor to level one of the accommodation area  
Under this heading, the cross-claimant claims a sum of $29,342.50, the total of a quotation dated 28 July 2003 by Dakota Enterprises Pty Ltd, the letterhead of which describes the company as a building services company. The amount of the quotation includes goods and services tax which is not alleged to be chargeable as part of the claim, so the amount should be reduced to $26,675. There is no detail of how the amount is made up, simply a compendious statement as follows:  "Proposal as discussed.  
To replace bottom section of stairway as it is uneconomical to repair.  
All works to be done in a way as to cause a minimum disruption to hotel guests for a minimum of time. That is to start and work through in shifts until completed.  
Firstly barricade and put up safety signage. 
Demolition and removal of stairway and all handrails and skirtings make clean for installing of new. 
Install new stairs and landings.  patch [sic] existing render from damage caused by removal. 
Reinstall handrails.  reinstall [sic] special order copied skirtings and floor trims.  clean [sic] up then restain and blend in to existing timberwork."  
The evidence includes a photograph of the stairway which does not suggest any old-world attractiveness to justify "special order" copying of skirtings and floor trims and there was no architectural evidence called, nor did anyone from Dakota Enterprises Pty Ltd give evidence to explain or justify the quotation. Although the hotel has been continuously occupied and used by the cross-claimant since its repossession, there was no evidence to suggest that any of the work in the quotation has been carried out. There was evidence that some work (not referred to in this quotation) was done to strengthen the existing stairs and replace some steps.  
Given that the work the subject of this claim has not been done, although a period of two and a half years has elapsed since the cross-defendant was evicted, it is important to note Mr Gencher gave evidence that he had not seen any live termites (termite damage was suggested to be the problem with the stairs) and, asked about the performance of the work of repairing the stairs, he said:  "I have been in the building numerous times since [ie. since reporting on the condition of the hotel at the time of its repossession by the cross-claimant] and I would say yes, the repair work has been completed."  
Pressed as to whether he actually knew, he replied:  "I don't know what extent of work was completed, but I would say the condition of the stairs is now suitable."  
The problem which there had been was put to him in the following terms:  "[W]hen you put your foot down on the stair there would be some slight give?"  
He replied:  "There was movement, yes."  
In the light of this evidence from a man of great experience in the management of hotels, who was the cross-claimant's own witness, it is difficult to see how the quotation of Dakota Enterprises Pty Ltd, which was never acted upon, could be regarded as justifying the allowance of the sum of $26,675.00 or any other amount. Another witness relied upon by the cross-claimant, Mr Peter
Mason, who claimed to have experience in building maintenance in the hotel industry, was asked in cross-examination:  "The repairs to the staircase, they have been repaired?"  to which he replied:  "Yes, they have."  
He said the repairs involved the removal and replacement of three steps "and there was sections of timber on each side of the staircase". The Court was told that a piece of aluminium plating had been inserted to strengthen the stairs. Mr Mason also gave evidence that what he had noticed about the staircase which led to these repairs was "some sponginess associated with white ants". The term "white ants" is, of course, an inaccurate reference to termites, and there is no evidence on which I would conclude that termites were ever active in the staircase in the period when Pub Oz Pty Limited was the lessee. The witness Ben Hegerty, a bar attendant and trainee manager, gave evidence which I accept that the stairs were "feeling spongy" at the time Pub
Oz Pty Limited went into occupation. At that time, Mr Callaghan arranged for an inspection by pest specialists who did not find any live termite activity.  
The cross-claimant relied on evidence from Theresa Cassimatis, who was licensee of the hotel until July 1995, and Matthew John Duffy, who was licensee from August 1995 until April 1998. These persons swore affidavits indicating that there was no termite activity in the building and no sign of previous termite activity, over the period from 1993 to 1998 covered by their evidence. I do not accept this evidence, and I regard it as casting doubt on the accuracy of other evidence given by these witnesses about other aspects of the condition of the premises. The House Report prepared by Mr Callaghan, originally in April 1998 in note form, and produced as a report on 11 November , while stating that the bar area was "in above average condition", states that the cellar "shows signs of the presents [sic] of white ants/termites.
Some of the floorboards and bearers have been taken out by the white ants, being replaced with fresh timber. This is evident in the cold room, ceiling and walls. Also in the stairs leading to the first floor, studs in storeroom, ladies' toilet and some timber in gents' toilet also. These area's [sic] have been a feeding ground of the white ants/termites." Mr Callaghan's evidence as to those matters is confirmed by Mr Hegerty. Also, the cross- claimant's witness Mr Mason indicated there were visible signs on the stairs to indicate the replacement of damaged timber by new timber. There is no evidence that this was done in Mr Callaghan's time and it is unlikely that, faced with a complaint of failure to repair under the covenant, Mr Callaghan would have refrained from providing evidence that he had in fact carried out repairs if he had done so. It follows that these repairs, which seem clearly to have indicated previous termite damage to Mr Mason, were there and conveying the same information at least during Mr Duffy's time.  
The clause applicable to the cross-claimant's claim in respect of the staircase is clause 7, the obligation of which is qualified by the words "having regard to their condition at the commencement of the lease". I am unable to conclude that the condition of the stairs was materially different at the commencement of the lease from their condition at its termination. I am also unable to conclude, even if the condition of the stairs at the termination of the lease did constitute or evidence a breach of clause 7, that any part of the quotation presently under consideration is an amount for which the cross-defendant is liable.  
Termite protection  Under this heading, the cross-claimant claims the sum of $2,727.27 pursuant to a quotation from Rio Pest Management Pty Ltd dated 31 March 2003. This quotation is for the supply and fitting of baiting stations to be "regularly monitored and scanned for checking of termite activity and also for technical information". No invoice was tendered and no evidence that this particular quotation has ever been accepted. In the absence of explanatory evidence, I can only regard the quotation as relating to what might be a wise preventive measure, but not one that has been shown to relate to work reasonably required as a result of a breach of one of the covenants relied upon.  and (f) Damaged and non-functioning lights, including the emergency and exit lights; and unsafe electrical wiring and disconnection of the external lights of the property  
Under these headings, the cross-claimant claims a sum of $2,293.18 and a further sum of $142.14. The larger amount is part only of a total amount of $5,045 relating to what was described as "various works for repairs, maintenance, and improvements at the Wynyard Hotel" charged by an electrical contractor. The work involved many individual items of installation of electrical wiring and fittings, etc, which were completed by 30 June 2003.
Almost a year later, it being appreciated that this work had, on the face of the invoice relating to it, involved improvements, and not just repairs, a request appears to have been made on behalf of the cross-claimant to the electrical contractor to apportion its invoice so as to show that part which related to repair work. The service manager of the contractor provided a letter estimating the percentages of particular parts of the work that involved repairs, and it seems, although it is difficult to reconcile the arithmetic exactly, that the claim actually made is simply based on the apportionment indicated by the service manager. Whether he was the service manager at the time the work was done, much of it more than a year earlier, or whether he was in any way associated with the work, the evidence does not reveal. Nor, of course, does the evidence in any way indicate how he distinguished between what he called "repair work" and what his company had called "improvements". There are no working sheets or calculations relating to this task.  
The smaller amount relates to 68 light bulbs purchased from an electrical goods supplier on 16 April 2003. By that date, since the hotel had remained open and operating, both the bar and the accommodation, it is hard to imagine that these light bulbs would be for any purpose other than to have on hand a stock of bulbs so that, as it became necessary to change a light bulb, this could be done efficiently.  
In my opinion, the evidence indicates in general terms that some electrical repairs were probably required and some bulbs needed replacing at the termination of the lease, but the evidence simply does not establish that what the contractor's service manager a year later thought was the proper proportion of a much larger invoice to allow in respect of the cross- defendant's legal obligation was an accurate assessment of the extent of that obligation and, although the amount is relatively small, there is certainly no basis for guessing at a proportion of the light bulbs that may have been required as there was no evidence either of the quantity of bulbs needed or that the hotel's store at the time the lease terminated contained no light bulbs; the subsequent supply may have been a replenishment following the use of those that were there.  
This item has been deleted  
Damage to the rooftop floor above the toilets on level 2  
An amount of $444 is claimed under this heading in relation to an invoice dated 3 July 2003 from Watermark Plumbing. That invoice indicates that work was done on 22 May, 26 May, 24 June and 30 June in relation to a roof leak diagnosed as "possibly due to an amount of water on rubber matting in extremely heavy rain", requiring "[i]f leaks again further investigation". On the final call on 30 June 2003 the plumber's invoice notes "if leak continues or new leaks appear in area below rubber matting, rubber may require replacement as this over time will be more cost efficient than repairing existing whenever a new leak appears". This language suggests the problem was quite possibly one of new leaks developing because of some structural defect as a result of "extremely heavy rain". Nothing in the invoice suggests the plumber found anything in the way of poor maintenance in the past as a cause of the problem. The amount is not large, merely $444, but in principle it does not seem to me that the cross-claimant has proved its case.  
Two missing and 11 damaged and non-functioning bar fridges  
Under this item, a claim is made for $3,072.73 for the replacement of 13 bar refrigerators at $260 per refrigerator supplied by Bing Lee Electrics Pty
Limited as invoiced on 25 September 2003 for delivery on 30 September 2003.
The model number is specified and, if I read the abbreviation correctly, the size is specified as 95 litres. But there is no other information to enable a comparison to be made with the refrigerators which they replaced, except that the new refrigerators were LGs. Although, as I have already made clear, the evidence is unsatisfactory by which the cross-claimant seeks to show that the
Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd inventory was actually annexure "A" to any relevant copy of the lease, it does suggest that the refrigerators listed in that inventory were probably the refrigerators that were in the hotel. If so, those refrigerators consisted of twelve Sanyo bar refrigerators four of which were valued in 1993 for the purpose of the inventory at between $120 and $175 each, no value being assigned to the others. There is no evidence to indicate a particular value which such a refrigerator would have had 10 years later. I see no reason to doubt the cross-claimant's contention that these refrigerators were in working order at the time Pub Oz Pty Limited took an assignment of the lease. However, the date of its eviction was almost exactly years later. Unless the cross-claimant can bring itself within clause 25, despite the difficulties that have been discussed, the clause of the lease which would appear to be applicable to the refrigerators would be clause 24 (i) under which, to the extent that replacement was required, the lessee's liability was limited to replacement by items "of a like nature and equal value" and, as I have already concluded, having regard to what it is that must be replaced in the way that Fletcher Moulton LJ indicated in Lurcott v
Wakely & Wheeler. Plainly, it would not accord with the measure of the obligation imposed by that clause to replace an old refrigerator with a brand new one. The cross-defendant's liability cannot exceed the cost of an appropriate reconditioned refrigerator, and there is simply no evidence about that. It is the cross-claimant that is making the claim, and I do not think it can make out its case simply by relying on an invoice relating to brand new refrigerators which may or may not be of a reasonably similar type (so far as a similar type remains available). I do not think the Court should be asked to guess about these matters in the absence of evidence.  
Although all the refrigerators were replaced, the evidence did not sustain the view that none of them worked. What Mr Jaja said in cross-examination was that "a number of them didn't work". He referred to damaged power points exposing wires, but that of course would not make the refrigerator itself unusable; it would simply require the power point to be attended to. He referred to doors that did not seal, but again that might well be capable of a simple repair, just as the problem of a refrigerator not cooling might be no more than a matter of appropriate service. The fact is these refrigerators were not replaced for nearly seven months during which the cross-claimant was conducting the business of the hotel. Having regard to Mr Jaja's evidence, it is easy to accept that some maintenance work may have been required on the bar refrigerators and perhaps some of them required to be replaced; but it is not possible to put a number on those that may actually have required to be replaced and there is very little indication in the evidence to guide the
Court in assessing an appropriate figure to allow in respect of the cross- defendant's obligation.  , (l) and (m) Deleted  damaged, dirty and stained double bed ensembles  
Under this heading a claim is made for $6,608 in respect of 14 double bed ensembles. The claim is supported by two invoices from Sealy of Australia, one dated 29 September 2003 and the other dated 9 October 2003. I found the figures impossible to reconcile precisely, but as counsel for the cross- defendant was prepared to accept that these were the relevant invoices and counsel for the cross-claimant in final submissions suggested no other basis of support for the amount of the claim, I am prepared to accept that the claim is supported by appropriate evidence of the purchase of new beds from Sealy of
Australia. The difficulty is again that, like the refrigerators, for the new beds to fall within clause 24(c)(i) of the lease they would have to be "of a like nature and equal value" within the meaning of that clause when compared with what was there before. The evidence is sparse indeed to enable me to form any conclusion on that subject. In very general terms, guidance may be obtained from the description by the valuer who assessed the hotel for rental purposes on 7 February 2002. He describes it as providing a "modest standard of shared accommodation". Also, the witness, the plaintiff's daughter, Mrs
Tumbridge, herself a hotel licensee, who inspected the hotel with her father in or about April 1998, described it as "run down" and said that she recalled the accommodation rooms "were very basic and in need of cleaning, new furnishings and maintenance". Although the evidence of the licensee at that time is to the contrary and was not tested by cross-examination, neither was there any reason to disbelieve Mrs Tumbridge, whereas I have already pointed out that the evidence about the question of termites and the stairs suggests that what the previous licensee deposed to cannot receive unqualified acceptance. Again, assuming the Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd inventory was at least an inventory professionally prepared which did relate to the contents of the hotel in February 1993, it may be inferred from the values suggested by that inventory in respect of eight of the double beds (the balance with no values attributed may or may not have had no significant value) that the beds ten years later were of a very small value indeed. The 1993 value of the eight beds appears to have been between $150 and $250 each.  
In assessing the condition of the beds that were replaced, one should not lose sight of the fact that the evidence shows, as I have already remarked, that the hotel remained open, including the accommodation part of it, throughout the period following the eviction of Pub Oz Pty Limited. The replacement of the beds did not involve even one bed replaced immediately because unusable, but was carried out, as the dates of the invoices show, after the hotel had been in operation under the management of the cross-claimant, a very experienced hotel operator whose standards, on the evidence, are not low, for a period of over six months.  
Missing and dirty and stained linen for bedding in the accommodation area  
Under this heading, claims are made in the sums of $851.20 and $238, the former amount being for 38 double sheets at $24.80 per sheet and the latter for 28 pillow cases at $9.35 each. There is no doubt that in a hotel, items of this nature would require replacement from time to time, but again it is noteworthy that the hotel operated for over six months before the purchases relied on were found to be necessary, so far as the dates of the invoices give an indication; for the earlier of them is dated 29 September 2003. Although the cross-claimant's evidence was to the effect that the bedding was in very poor condition, there was no evidence to explain such a lengthy delay in replacing it.  
Damaged, torn and stained carpet on level one and two  
Under this heading, the claim is for $12,270 for the replacement of carpet on the staircase and in the accommodation areas. The invoices are dated 9
September 2003 and 14 October 2003. The laying of new carpet on the stairs is yet another indication that the stairs were found to have been adequately repaired by the replacement of three steps without the performance of the work of rebuilding the entire stair and landings for which the sum of $29,342.50 was claimed. The cross-defendant said that the obligation imposed by clause 7 of the lease, which would extend to the carpet, is an obligation to maintain but not to replace. But in Lurcott versus Wakely & Wheeler at 919
Fletcher Moulton LJ said:  "For my own part, when the word 'repair' is applied to a complex matter like a house, I have no doubt that the repair includes the replacement of parts. Of course, if a house had tumbled down, or was down, the word 'repair' could not be used to cover rebuilding. It would not be apt to describe such an operation."  
His Lordship added:  "Therefore you have from time to time as things need repair to put new for old."  
However, clause 7 does require regard to be had, as I have already pointed out "to the condition of the demised premises at the commencement of the lease", and there is simply no evidence comparing the quality of carpet which was in the premises at the commencement of the lease with the quality of the carpet that was laid by the cross-claimant. The one obvious indication of that quality is the statement contained in the invoice of 9 September 2003 that the carpet is "100% wool". It is described as "Condo plush".  non-functioning television sets  
Under this heading, a claim is made for $3,294.55 in respect of 11 x 51cm television sets and 2 x 68cm television sets, the claim, however, being limited to the cost of 12 x 51cm television sets at $302 per set, with some slight further adjustment. The television sets were bought new from Bing Lee
Electrics, the invoice of which is dated 25 September 2003, ie. after the cross-claimant had been operating the hotel for some six months. Mr Jaja swore that the "newly purchased television and bar fridges were the same size as those that were on the premises". Because this particular statement was not taken up in cross-examination, counsel for the cross claimant argued the Court should accept it. However, in the case of the television sets, there is evidence to the contrary in the inventory prepared by Gray Eisdell Timms Pty
Ltd which the cross-claimant contended was annexed to the lease. There it was specified that four of the television sets were 30cm sets and no larger size was given for any set, almost all of the other sets being described as "portable". Having regard to the documentary evidence, I am satisfied that the replacement television sets were much larger than those they replaced. It was conceded they were also "brand new" and "current models". I do not accept Mr
Jaja's evidence about the size of the television sets that were in the hotel, and as his statement about the size of the refrigerators that were replaced was in identical terms I think the demonstrable incorrectness of what he said, so far as it related to the television sets, throws doubt on the other aspect of what he said also. Another aspect of Mr Jaja's evidence was his claim that the television sets were replaced because they were not functioning and it was impossible or uneconomic to repair them. He said he was instructed by Mr Mason to replace them. However, Mr Mason did not suggest in his oral evidence that none of the television sets worked. This may be contrasted with his affidavit where he asserted: "In some rooms there were no televisions and in the remainder of the rooms there were older model colour televisions, which did not function." In his oral evidence Mr Mason said there was a reception problem, with some of the sets, which required something to be done about the antenna, after a change to which "reception problems went away". Asked whether that related to "half of the televisions", he answered:  "Probably, yes."  
All of the sets were later replaced, he said, on the instructions of Mr
Hemmes. Mr Gencher also, upon being asked whether the television sets "required replacement", said:  "I would say the televisions, some [emphasis added], yes."  
He, too, explained that some of them worked but had problems with reception, in relation to which he did not know whether the central aerial was adequate or operable.  
When it is suggested, in the face of this evidence, that the change to larger and new television sets was dictated by poor maintenance of the small old sets previously in the rooms, the obvious alternative explanation is that Mr
Hemmes, long before he effected the eviction of Pub Oz Pty Limited, intended to "change everything when we take it over" as he put it in cross-examination in his own words. No evidence was presented as to the cost of reconditioned television sets of the size of those previously in the premises. In my opinion, the most likely explanation of that is that it would not have suited
Mr Hemmes's plan for change to have had sets of that kind in the hotel, although they could have been obtained for a very small expenditure, especially as about half of the sets would not have actually required replacement.  
Damaged and non-functioning air-conditioners  
Under this heading, the cross-claimant claims a total of $6,473 made up of four amounts, as follows: 
A quotation for $4,455 (including GST) given on 23 July 2003 by Biggs Air
Conditioning of Belrose in the following terms:  "Supplied & re-fitted 3 x 2hz power room aircondtioners [sic] to make good & the removable of tenants fit out installation of base building services [sic]. Due to lack of maintenance causing major components to break down."  
This quotation appears to be linked with a payment advice bearing the date 7
October 2003 forwarding a cheque dated 28 October 2003 for $5,230.50 to Biggs
Air Conditioning. Deducting goods and services tax from $5,230.50, one arrives at the figure claimed of $4,755, but this of course is substantially more than the quotation which, deducting goods and services tax, was for $4,050. The bareness of the quotation and the absence of any detailed invoice are also peculiar features, especially in the presence of the statement about lack of maintenance which is not linked to any discussion of the economics of repair, or the nature of the problem, or whether that problem had developed during the four months since the eviction of Pub Oz Pty Limited. If it was intended as an expression of expert opinion, it was of course far from compliance with the rules governing that means of proof. 
Biggs Air Conditioning sent a tax invoice for $116 plus GST on 21 March for work described as follows:  "A/C not working due to blown fuses in condensor. Replaced fuses and tested operation to find all OK."  
It does not seem to me that this invoice proves anything against the cross- defendant. 
Biggs Air Conditioning sent an invoice dated 23 May 2003 for $174 plus GST in respect of a job described as follows:  "Checked a/c unit to find system complete block of ice. Switched system onto defrost cycle to melt the ice cleaned filters tested operation to find all ok."  
After two months of operation by the cross-claimant, this does not seem to me to indicate some fault on the part of the cross-defendant. 
Biggs Air Conditioning sent an invoice dated 27 June 2003 for $1,428 plus
GST for a job described as follows:  "Checked A/C unit to find No power Due to Faulty evap fan motor & P C board. Replaced & tested operation to find all ok. Also fixed both systems to work on heating."  
Bearing in mind the age of the equipment and the date of this invoice, some three and half months after the eviction of Pub Oz Pty Limited on 10 March , it is hard to find in it evidence upon which a finding of faulty maintenance should be made against the cross-defendant.  
There was, of course general evidence about the state of the air conditioners.
I conclude from this evidence that they were all old. Mr Mason, in his affidavit, said that four of the five air conditioning units in the ground floor area "needed repair or replacement". But he did not specify any reason why it would be necessary to replace them. Nor, if the need of repair was apparent at the time of the eviction of Pub Oz Pty Limited, is it easy to understand the series of separate calls apparently made to Briggs Air
Conditioning to deal with particular problems which, so far as their invoices indicate, had just arisen from time to time over a period of three and half months.  
Counsel for the cross-defendant drew attention, with respect to this matter, and also with respect to the question of painting, to clause 8 of the lease which provides:  "The Lessee covenants with the Lessor as follows:-  ...  
The Lessee will, so often as may be reasonably required by the Lessor having regard to the condition of the Premises at the commencement of the
Lease, paint all outside and inside wood, iron and other works now or usually painted and also shall repaper such parts of the premises as are now plastered, in each event in a good and workmanlike manner and use good quality materials.  ...  
To replace renew maintain and repair the air-conditioning and ventilation plant in the premises (if any) as and when reasonably required by the Lessor so to do during the term of this lease PROVIDED THAT before effecting any such replacement or renewal the Lessee shall consult with the Lessor as to the selection of the equipment, the contract price and the contractor to be engaged for the installation PROVIDED FURTHER that the Lessee shall not be required to replace or renew the said air-conditioning and ventilation plant unless the necessity for replacing or renewing the same has arisen as a result of the Lessee's failure to maintain and repair the same as hereinbefore provided."  
For the cross-defendant it was argued that no relevant requirement had been made during the currency of the lease. It was also argued that the replacement of air conditioning equipment was not shown to be a necessity that had arisen as a result of the lessee's failure to carry out maintenance as and when reasonably required so to do during the term of the lease. It seems clear, as a matter of English, that the final words of paragraph (cc) "as a result of the Lessee's failure to maintain and repair the same as hereinbefore provided" must refer back to the provision, at the beginning of the paragraph, requiring the lessee to maintain and repair the air conditioning and ventilation plant "as and when reasonably required by the lessor so to do during the term of this lease". Accordingly, there being no such requirement, the second proviso in the paragraph seems clearly to negative an obligation to replace or renew air conditioning as distinct from any obligation to repair it. This conclusion alone would be sufficient to require the rejection of the item of $4,755 included in the claim. But, in any case, that item could only be made good upon proof that it was reasonable to require replacement as distinct from repair of the equipment in question; and the evidence is far from establishing this.  
For the cross-claimant, it was attempted to answer these propositions by claiming that the obligation of replacement could also be enforced under clause 7 of the lease. I think this too would encounter the same difficulty of proof having regard to the virtual absence of evidence to justify replacement rather than repair of the unit in question; however, the rule of interpretation generalia specialibus non derogant makes it impossible to treat the broad obligation to repair in clause 7 as overriding the specific terms of the second proviso in para (cc).  
Five broken windows  
Under this heading, a claim is made for $370.91 in respect of an invoice received from O'Brien Glass dated 17 July 2003 referring to work completed 15
July 2003. Although Mr Mason has again made a broad statement, which does not appear to be correct, that there were five broken windows replaced by O'Brien
Glass, the invoice in fact does not refer to more than three, and indicates only two locations, the men's room and the cellar. Mr Mason also gave evidence that "[i]n some cases windows of the bedroom were cracked or broken", but there is no invoice for repair or re-glazing of a bedroom window. The invoice from O'Brien Glass should be allowed as a normal repair.  
Missing or damaged and unusable bar stools  
Under this heading, a claim is made for $2,748 for the replacement of 12 stools. The invoice is dated 2 July 2003 and it charges $229 per stool for what are described as "Colonial stools to match existing upholstery: Nylex
Cordova 'Smoke'". These stools appear to be for the purpose of replacing 12 out of 23 timber colonial style bar stools which were valued in the Gray
Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd inventory at between $40 and $70 each in 1993. With the most meticulous maintenance, it is hard to believe that in ten years the stools would have remained in perfect condition and, although money values have certainly changed, their replacement in the manner for which the claim is made does seem, as the cross-defendant submits, to require some explanation.
Counsel for the cross-claimant offered none in the written submissions in reply except to contend that "the values are not relevant to control the amount which is claimable."  
Missing or damaged curtains  
Under this heading, a claim is made for $4,090.91. It is alleged the blinds and curtains in the hotel were in a state of disrepair, and a quotation was obtained to supply and install fire retardant blockout curtains at a cost of $12,000. However, this work was not carried out. Instead Woodlock PVC Venetian blinds were installed at the cost claimed as set out in an invoice dated 3
October 2003. The evidence of Mr Mason is that the curtains in each of the bedrooms were badly worn and torn. Notwithstanding indications to which I have already referred that Mr Mason's evidence, as well as other evidence called on behalf of the cross-claimant, was exaggerated, I accept that the replacement of the curtains was probably required under clause 24(c)(i) of the lease.
However, the obligation under that clause, as I have previously pointed out, is limited to items "of a like nature and equal value". It is plain that, when the quotation for fire retardant curtains was obtained, this limitation was overlooked or ignored, and it is not clear to me that any basis has been shown on which I could find that the full cost of new Venetian blinds was reasonably justified; certainly some part of that amount was.  
Damaged and marked walls, ceilings and woodwork  
Under this heading, a claim is made for $12,278.20 pursuant to a document dated 23 July 2003 issued by Dakota Enterprises Pty Ltd which refers to a site inspection on that day and makes a quotation for a proposal "as discussed" in the following terms:  "The Timber panelling through out [sic] the bar, dining, and gaming areas are repairable [sic] But are in different levels of condition and would be very difficult to maintain a constant look through out if all panels were not re coated at the one time. The gaming area has been cleaned and seems to be in reasonable condition with the exception of damage to some parts by screw on signage and small chips in various spots. This area would need to be lightly sanded and the screw holes puttied and then re stained and re lacquered.  
The dining area has not been regularly cleaned polished or waxed and has dust and food stains which I was unable to remove without damaging the stain and lacquer coatings. This area would need the same treatment as the gaming area and would also need to be professionally chemically cleaned prior to works being done. The bar area has extensive damage to all panels, and many screw holes in need of repair which normally would not be economical to repair. But to maintain the integrity of the existing panels throughout the rest of the hotel, these repairs will be quoted but no guarantees or responsibilities will be given to the exact match of these. If however you would need the bar area brought back to the original state these panels would need to be replaced or completed on site with a[n] added cost of $2,580.00 plus GST.  
Note We feel this is the way to approach this problem, if a cheaper method is adopted it will not match to the original design. This job will be the coordination of four trades and we will need at least 10 working days notice prior to starting. Approximate m2 to be recoated = 83.5m2 ... "  
There followed the following figures: for pre-cleaning $950; for recoating $5,427; for repairs $4,785 totalled to $11,162 plus GST $1,116.20 yielding a total payable of $12,278.20. From this breakdown, it will be apparent that the figure of $12,278.20 claimed by the cross-claimant has been inflated by the inclusion of a sum of $1,116.20 GST. The correct claim is $11,162.  
For the cross-defendant, it was submitted that the quotation was made on the basis of taking the panels back to their original condition some 30 years earlier; and it was put that this could not have been the cross-defendant's responsibility. The quotation itself is somewhat ambiguous on the subject, but
Mr Mason was cross-examined about this panelling work. Although I thought he was somewhat evasive on the matter, he did at one stage of his cross- examination concede that the panelling was old, possibly 30 years old, and that the instruction to the repairer "was to reinstate the woodwork to its original condition", that is, "when it was new". He agreed that meant "a fairly careful process of sanding it all back ... [a]nd then reapplying fresh lacquer to the original woodwork". He also agreed that that was "a big job".
He said the alternative would be to replace all existing timberwork with new timberwork, but he did not say what difference that would make to the cost.
However, on the face of it, the difference would seem likely to be considerable.  
The assumption in the cross-claimant's claim appears to be, as its written submissions accepted, that it was necessary to do this work to bring the wood panelling back into a condition similar to that which it was in at the commencement of the lease. But as I understood the submission, counsel meant the commencement of the original lease in 1993. For reasons I have already explained, I think that exceeds the obligation of the cross-defendant, and there was really no satisfactory evidence to indicate how far this now 30 year old panelling had deteriorated by 1998. This also is an item which, on the evidence, is allowable to some degree, but not in the full amount claimed.  
Damaged seals on the refrigerators in the bar area  
Under this heading, a claim is made for $519.91 based on an invoice from
Egginton's Refrigeration Seals dated 4 April 2003. No argument was raised against the allowance of this amount, and I allow it as a repair.  
Labour costs claimed  
Under this heading a claim is made for $7,532.17 in respect of labour costs involved in work alleged to have been done by workmen associated with the cross-claimant. The cross-defendant submits that details have not been furnished showing how much work, and at what cost, was done to rectify particular breaches that might be attributable to Pub Oz Pty Limited. The cross-claimant responds that the amount claimed is based on time sheets Mr
Mason had been requested to prepare on the hours spent arranging for repairs to the premises. It seems to me a major problem exposed by the cross- defendant's submission is that the work to which the timesheets relate, although in part directed to matters that could properly be regarded as repairs, was, in the light of my earlier findings, partly directed, not to repairs, but to improvements and to the effecting of the changes that Mr
Hemmes desired to make. Some apportionment is required which, of necessity, will involve a difficult exercise in estimation, especially as much of the work was not even sketchily covered by the evidence.  
Paint and nails  
There is an invoice for $47.99 dated 2 April 2003 which I infer relates to the repair job done on three steps of the stairs. I shall allow this item.  
Painting  
Under this heading, the cross-claimant claims the sum of $19,150 based on an invoice dated 24 September 2003 from Painters & Decorators Pty Ltd. For the cross-defendant, it is submitted that the lessee's obligation was to paint "so often as reasonably required by the lessor having regard to the condition of the premises at the commencement of the lease", this qualification being stated in clause 8(v) of the lease. But I think there is a clear distinction between the drafting of clause 8(v) as a positive obligation placed upon the lessee in certain circumstances and the drafting of clause 8(cc) with its express proviso limiting the liability of the lessee except in certain circumstances. In my opinion the state of the premises, when the point is reached at which they need repainting, is a matter falling within the covenant to repair as well as within any obligation imposed pursuant to clause 8(v). In this case, the evidence of the cross-claimant's witnesses as to the need for painting is supported by evidence that the last time the premises had been painted (except, perhaps, for some particular parts) was in 1996. I conclude there was a need for repainting and accordingly this claim should be allowed, subject to one matter. The invoice indicates that a sum of $1,340 inclusive of goods and services tax was incurred because of the cross-claimant's choice to repaint, not so as to restore the previous condition of certain rooms, but so as to change the colour in a way that required extra coats of paint. I do not think this amount could be allowable against the cross defendant and I deduct the sum of $1,218.18 being the amount involved less goods and services tax.  
Repair to water damaged ceiling of bathroom on level 1  
Under this heading, an amount of $535 is claimed, the amount of an invoice dated 9 September 2003 for work described as follows:  "Works completed on level one bathroom. Remove water damaged ceiling and cornice clean up. Install new gyprock ceiling and cornice. Patch ceiling hole and make both ready for painter."  
Having regard to the date of this invoice, I accept the cross-defendant's submission that the mere inclusion of it in the claim supported by Mr Mason is not a sufficient basis for allowing it against the cross-defendant. I have simply not been satisfied as to when the particular water damage to which this invoice relates occurred.  
Repairs to dimmers  
Under this heading, a claim is made for $596. The cross-defendant submits the claim is not shown to be related to anything attributable to the lessee, and reliance is placed on the terms of the job sheet of the electrical contractor
Grose & Co dated 8 August 2003. The cross-claimant contents itself with responding that Mr Mason was not cross-examined on the matter. It seems to be that response is inadequate, since the description of the work clearly indicates that it related to the investigation of possible faults or problems in relation to the dimmers, which appear to have been dealt with partly by improving the way they were mounted, so as to gain more ventilation, and partly by reducing the load by changes to the dimmers and reducing the wattage of all bar lights. There is no suggestion in the description of the work that it had been necessitated by poor maintenance either before the eviction of the lessee or at any time.  
Light dimmer  
A claim is made for $83.15, the amount charged by an electrical supplier for one light dimmer by invoice dated 23 April 2003. The fact of such a purchase at that time does not seem to me to provide a sufficient basis for attributing liability to the cross-defendant.  Having examined the detail of the cross-claim, it is appropriate to make a general comment. Many of the allegations on which it is based involve value judgments. In a number of respects, the cross-claimant alleges serious failures reflecting on the conduct of the hotel by the cross-defendant. Yet the evidence is that Jennifer Waldron, an executive of the cross-claimant who did not impress as likely to look for less than satisfactory standards for herself, lunched regularly at the hotel from April 1998 to November 2000, while she was in Sydney, enjoying, as she said, "good food" there with "nothing unpleasant about it". Indeed, the popularity of the hotel was given by Mr Hemmes as a justification for his increasing its rent so greatly! And despite the strong criticism by the cross-claimant's witnesses of the accommodation provided at the hotel, the cross-claimant did not immediately change very much, as will have been gathered from the dates of the invoices that are relied upon. Notwithstanding the large amount ultimately spent on the panelling in the public areas, which Ms Waldron must have seen, there was no demand made during the currency of the lease to repaint or take any other step on the footing the lessee was not showing proper care of the premises. The evidence given by the cross-claimant's witnesses seemed to me to be exaggerated, and I conclude that much of the work and replacements owed a great deal to Mr Hemmes's desire to change the hotel to fit the standard he required for a hotel belonging to the group of hotels conducted by his companies. It was admitted that one of the electrical invoices (for $5,045) was more than half related to improvements, so that the amount claimed was reduced to $2,293.18, and even then not justified in any satisfactory manner.
On the whole of the evidence, I conclude that this was not an isolated case - it was a case where the terms of the invoice revealed the fact, while in other cases invoices were too broadly expressed to do so.  That conclusion, of course, leaves the Court with an extremely difficult task of estimation of the various amounts that should be allowed in respect of items not wholly justifiable. But it is clear the task must be carried out. In the Commonwealth of Australia versus Amann Aviation Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64] at 83, Mason CJ and Dawson J (who with Brennan and Gaudron JJ formed the majority) said:  "The settled rule, both here and in England, is that mere difficulty in estimating damages does not relieve a court from the responsibility of estimating them as best it can. Indeed, in Jones versus Schiffmann <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 303] at p.308 Menzies J went so far as to say that the 'assessment of damages ... does sometimes, of necessity involve what is guess work rather than estimation'. Where precise evidence is not available the court must do the best it can."  
See also the comments of Deane J at 125 and Gaudron J at 153. To the authorities collected by Mason CJ and Dawson J in a footnote at 83 may be added the further authorities and textbook references collected in Amann
Aviation Pty Limited versus Commonwealth of Australia <case>; [(1990) 22 FCR 527] at 574.  Accordingly, and having regard to my general conclusions and the specific matters set out earlier in respect of each item in the itemised claim, I have estimated the amounts in those cases where I have concluded some amount less than the full amount claimed should be allowed. I set out below details of the award that should be made under the cross-claim:  
Damaged and non-functioning ice machine $107.50  ---  
Damage to bathroom fittings $2,000.00  
Damage to plumbing on roof of laundry $1,345.00  
Damaged and blocked guttering and downpipes $1,495.00  
Staircase $NIL  
Termite protection $NIL  &(f) 
Damaged and non-functioning lights, including the emergency and exit lights; and unsafe electrical wiring and disconnection of the external lights of the property $1,500.00  
Damage to the rooftop floor above the toilets on level two $NIL  
Two missing and 11 damaged and non-functioning bar fridges $1,000.00  damaged, dirty and stained double bed ensembles $2,000.00  
Missing, dirty and stained linen for bedding in the accommodation area $750.00  
Damaged, torn and stained carpet on level one and two $10,000.00  non-functioning television sets $750.00  
Damaged and non-functioning air conditioners $NIL  
Broken windows $370.91  
Missing or damaged and unusable bar stools $600.00  
Missing or damaged curtains $3,000.00  
Damaged and marked walls, ceilings and woodwork $6,000.00  
Damaged seals on refrigerators in bar area $519.91  
Labour costs $2,500.00  
Paint and nails $47.99  
Painting $17,931.82  
Repair to water damaged ceiling of bathroom on level one and repairs and purchase relating to dimmers $Nil  
TOTAL $51,918.13  I shall leave questions of interest until the bringing in of short minutes.
It is not clear to me what claims for reimbursement have been made or when they have been made. It may be that counsel can reach some agreement on this issue.  The only order that I make at this stage is that the parties bring in, on a date to be fixed, short minutes of orders appropriate to be made in the light of these reasons, when any application for costs can also be heard.  
LAST UPDATED: 20/10/2005 * * * 
