

Steven Faraday versus Thomas Gabor Rappaport and 2 Ors;Steven Faraday versus Thomas
Gabor Rappaport ;Rosalia Rappaport by her tutor Thomas Gabor Rappaport v
Steven Faraday [2007] NSWSC 34 (7 March 2007) 
Last Updated: 8 March 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Steven Faraday versus Thomas Gabor Rappaport & 2 Ors;Steven Faraday v
Thomas Gabor Rappaport ;Rosalia Rappaport by her tutor Thomas Gabor Rappaport v Steven Faraday <case>  
JURISDICTION: Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2649/02  /03  /03  
HEARING DATE{S): 7-11/08/06, 14-17/08/06, 21/02/07 and written submissions.  
JUDGMENT DATE: 7 March 2007  
PARTIES: 
Steven Faraday  v 
Thomas Gabor Rappaport & 2 Ors; 
Steven Faraday  v 
Thomas Gabor Rappaport; 
Rosalia Rappaport by her tutor Thomas Gabor Rappaport  v 
Steven Faraday  
JUDGMENT OF: White J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff: In Person 
Defendant: M A Bradford  
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff: N/A 
Defendants: Slater & Gordon  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACTS - Plaintiff in proceedings no. 2649/02 claimed beneficial interest in properties in New South Wales and Queensland held by third defendant on trust for first and second defendants - Where plaintiff paid moneys to first defendant for purposes of property investment but did not reach agreement with defendant that plaintiff should have any defined beneficial interest in properties - Where no compliance with ss 23C or 54A Conveyancing Act 1991 or ss 11 or 59 [Property Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/) (Qld) -
Where no evidence of acts of part performance - Khoury versus Khouri <case> applied - Held that plaintiff not entitled to beneficial interest in properties; 
CONTRACTS - Agreements not intended to create legal relations - Domestic, social and other agreements - Plaintiff in proceedings no. 3668/03 claimed that defendant agreed to leave property to plaintiff upon defendant's death in exchange for moneys contributing towards purchase price of property - Whether plaintiff and defendant intended to create legal relations - Held that plaintiff contributed moneys to defendant as gift; 
LIMITATION OF ACTIONS - Plaintiff in proceedings no. 3668/03 claimed that defendant failed upon demand to return moneys and goods given to defendant for safekeeping - Plaintiff's claim in detinue - Plaintiff's claim statute-barred by virtue of [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/s14.html) and [21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/s21.html) [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) - No questions of principle.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/)  [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/)  [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/)  [Property Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/) (Qld)  [Civil Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/)  
CASES CITED: 
Khoury & Anor versus Khouri <case> 
Young versus Queensland Trustees Ltd <case>; <case>; <case>; [[2005] 2 Qd R 410] 
Hamilton versus Kaljo [(1989) 17 NSWLR 381] 
Bannister versus Bannister [[1948] 2 All ER 133]  
DECISION: 
See paragraphs 291-294 of judgment.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
WHITE J  
Wednesday, 7 March 2007  /02 Steven Faraday versus Thomas Gabor Rappaport & 2 Ors  /03 Steven Faraday versus Thomas Gabor Rappaport  /03 Rosalia Rappaport by her tutor Thomas Gabor Rappaport versus Steven Faraday  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: These three proceedings were heard together. Mr Steven
Faraday (known as Steve Faraday) was the brother of Mrs Rosalia Rappaport. She died on 26 May 2006. Her only child was her son, Mr Thomas Rappaport. Because these proceedings concern five members of the Rappaport family, I shall not refer to each of them using their titles Mr, Mrs and Ms, but shall use their first names. I do so for ease of reading and without meaning disrespect.  
Mr Faraday's Claims in Proceedings No 2649/02  In proceedings No. 2649/02, Mr Faraday claims a beneficial interest in three properties acquired by Thomas Rappaport and his wife, Vivian Rappaport, between 1987 and 1990. Those properties are now held by the trustee of the
Rappaport family trust, Tovir Investments Pty Ltd. The defendants disclaimed any reliance on [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s42.html) and [43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s43.html) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) or the equivalent Queensland legislation [(s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/lta1994109/s184.html) of the [Land Title Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/lta1994109/) (Qld)).
Mr Faraday also claims that Thomas Rappaport should account for moneys allegedly owed by Thomas Rappaport to him. As at 3 February 2000, the sum allegedly owed was $84,159.53.  Mr Faraday claims that in late 1986, Thomas Rappaport told him that there was a shop for sale in Surfers Paradise which had the TAB as a tenant (the "Chevron Island property" or "TAB premises"). Mr Faraday claims that he and
Thomas Rappaport agreed that Mr Faraday would contribute half of the purchase price to the Chevron Island property, and Thomas Rappaport would hold a half interest in the property on trust for him. Mr Faraday contends that it was agreed that he would be entitled to half the rental income from the property after the payment of rates and levies. He claims that his money was used by
Thomas and Vivian Rappaport to acquire the Chevron Island property, although he is unable to identify how much of his money was applied in that way.  On 9 February 1987, Thomas and Vivian Rappaport purchased the Chevron Island property. They purchased as joint tenants. Mr Faraday was not included on the title. The cost of purchase was $175,000. Thomas and Vivian Rappaport claim that all of the purchase moneys were provided by them from their savings and moneys borrowed by them. Thomas Rappaport denies receiving any moneys from Mr
Faraday for investment.  The second property in which Mr Faraday claims a beneficial interest is in
Belmore Road, Randwick, New South Wales (the "Belmore Road property" or "the butcher's shop"). It was purchased by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport on 30
November 1988 for $244,000. Mr Faraday claims that in or about October 1988, he and Thomas Rappaport agreed to the purchase of the property. According to
Mr Faraday, Thomas Rappaport told him that it would cost about $150,000.  Mr Faraday claims that at this time, he had an account with Thomas Rappaport consisting of his share of the rental income from the Chevron Island property, less his share of expenses, plus moneys paid by him to Thomas Rappaport. Mr
Faraday contends that Thomas Rappaport told him that he had about $60,000 in the account which would be enough to give Mr Faraday a 40% interest in the
Belmore Road property. Mr Faraday says they agreed to go ahead on the basis that he would have a 40% share of the Belmore Road property.  Thomas Rappaport denies making any such agreement. He denies that any such account with Mr Faraday existed. He and Vivian Rappaport deny that Mr Faraday made any contribution to the purchase of the Belmore Road property.  On 10 January 1989, Thomas and Vivian Rappaport entered into contracts to purchase two factory units in Brisbane Road, Labrador, Queensland, for a total price of $190,000 (the "Brisbane Road properties"). The contract was completed on 16 March 1990 when the construction of the factory units was finished. Mr
Faraday claims that he and Thomas Rappaport agreed that one of the factory units would belong to Mr Faraday, and the other would be Thomas Rappaport's.
He claims that Thomas Rappaport used an amount of $100,000 then standing to the credit of Mr Faraday's account with Thomas Rappaport in purchasing the property. According to Mr Faraday, it was initially proposed that they would buy one unit together and hold it in equal shares, but when the second factory unit became available, they agreed to buy two units, to be divided between them. Mr Faraday claims to be entitled either to a half-share of both factory units, or to the whole of one or other of them.  Again, Thomas Rappaport denies that the alleged agreement was made. He and
Vivan Rappaport deny that Mr Faraday made any contribution to the purchase of the Brisbane Road properties. Thomas Rappaport denies having held moneys for
Mr Faraday.  There is no note or memorandum signed by or on behalf of Thomas and Vivian
Rappaport evidencing the terms of the agreements for which Mr Faraday contends.  Mr Faraday claims that from about 1987 Thomas Rappaport regularly provided to him statements of account. Mr Faraday produced such statements, which he called "running sheets", for the period from 25 May 1995 to 3 February 2000.
These documents record a credit balance in favour of Mr Faraday made up of various credit items which Mr Faraday says were amounts of cash which he provided to Thomas Rappaport, together with a credit for rental income derived from the three properties, less expenses referable to those properties and payments said to have been made to or on behalf of Mr Faraday. The running sheets show a crediting of interest to the account balance from time to time.
The last of the sheets shows a credit balance in Mr Faraday's favour of $84,159.53 as at 3 February 2000. Mr Faraday says that those are moneys which
Thomas Rappaport owed him as at 3 February 2000 in addition to his beneficial interest in the properties.  Thomas Rappaport denies producing any of the running sheets. He says they are fabrications of Mr Faraday's.  Mr Faraday also relies on a number of documents which he claims are in
Thomas Rappaport's writing which record the deposit of moneys to the credit of
Mr Faraday derived from the "TAB" (that is the Chevron Island property), and the "butcher" (that is the Belmore Road property), or which otherwise corroborate his claim. Thomas Rappaport denies authorship of most of the documents.  
Mr Faraday's Claim in Proceedings No 1648/03  Mr Faraday owns a house in Moffatts Drive, Dundas, New South Wales (the "Dundas property"). He purchased the house in 1979 for $43,500. Thomas
Rappaport presently holds the certificate of title to that property. In proceedings No. 1684/03, Mr Faraday claims the return of the certificate of title. He claims that he provided the certificate of title to Thomas Rappaport for safe keeping in 1995 shortly before he left for an extended overseas trip.  Thomas Rappaport says that the certificate of title was provided by Mr
Faraday to Thomas Rappaport's parents (Alexander Rappaport and Rosalia
Rappaport) as security for a promise allegedly made by Mr Faraday in 1979 to leave the Dundas property in his will to Thomas Rappaport's parents, or as security for a loan allegedly made to assist Mr Faraday with the purchase of that property.  
Claims made by Thomas Rappaport on Behalf of Rosalia Rappaport in Proceedings No 3668/03  Proceedings No. 3668/03 were instituted by Thomas Rappaport, acting as tutor for his mother, Rosalia Rappaport. Mr Faraday is the defendant in those proceedings. There are five claims. The first relates to the purchase and sale by Mr Faraday of a unit at 8/9 Dalley Street, Bondi Junction, New South Wales (the "Dalley Street property"). The unit was purchased by Mr Faraday in 1971 for $14,000. Thomas Rappaport claims that Rosalia Rappaport provided $3,500 to
Mr Faraday to assist in the purchase of the unit pursuant to an agreement that
Mr Faraday would leave that property to Rosalia Rappaport or her estate on his death. The property was sold in 1987. (Mr Faraday claims he sold it in 1979.)
Thomas Rappaport claimed that the sale of the unit was a breach of that agreement. He claimed damages or equitable compensation. Alternatively, he claimed repayment of the alleged loan of $3,500. Mr Faraday denies receiving any money from Rosalia Rappaport. He denies the alleged agreement. This claim was ultimately not pressed.  The second claim is that Rosalia Rappaport paid $12,500 as a contribution towards Mr Faraday's purchase in 1979 of the Dundas property. It is alleged that Mr Faraday agreed to leave the Dundas property to Rosalia Rappaport or her estate on his death. Thomas Rappaport claims that Mr Faraday is obliged to leave the Dundas property to the estate of Rosalia Rappaport on his death. He claims that the Dundas property is held on trust for Rosalia Rappaport's estate, subject to a life interest in favour of Mr Faraday. Alternatively, he claims that Mr Faraday owes Rosalia Rappaport's estate $12,500 together with interest, and claims that that debt is charged on the Dundas property.  The third claim is that on or about 24 January 1989, Rosalia Rappaport gave
Mr Faraday money and goods for safekeeping. The money consisted of US$2,300 and AS$700 in cash. The goods were a ring and a gold bullion piece weighing .5 ounces. It is claimed that Mr Faraday has failed to return the money and goods after demand. Mr Faraday denies receiving the money or the goods. He also relies on the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) as a defence to the claim.  The fourth claim is that on or about 16 August 1999, Rosalia Rappaport gave
Mr Faraday $11,000 cash to deposit into her account. It is claimed that he failed to do so and failed to account for the moneys. Mr Faraday denies receiving these moneys.  The fifth claim is that in August 1999, Mr Faraday obtained $28,000 from various accounts belonging to Rosalia Rappaport and has appropriated those sums to his own benefit without her consent. Mr Faraday denies the allegations. He admits receiving $3,700 on behalf of Rosalia Rappaport, and to receiving $4,074.18 being the balance of her account with the St. George bank.
He is obliged to account for these sums.  
Outline of Principal Events  Mr Faraday's older sister, Rosalia Rappaport, and her husband Alexander
Rappaport, emigrated to Australia from Romania in 1961. Alexander Rappaport was a plumber. Their son, Thomas Rappaport, was 14 when the family arrived in
Sydney. In due course, Thomas Rappaport qualified as an electrician.  Mr Faraday emigrated to Australia from Romania in January 1969. At that time, Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport owned a property consisting of two flats in Blair Street, Bondi, New South Wales ("the "Blair Street property"). Thomas
Rappaport was the registered proprietor of a duplex at 6 Kent Street,
Waverley, New South Wales. He and his parents lived in one flat and the other was let. Thomas Rappaport purchased the property with the assistance of a gift of almost half the purchase price from his parents.  Mr Faraday lived with the Rappaports for about a month before moving to a room in Bondi Junction, and later in Kingsford, which he rented. He obtained work as a printer with the Government Printers Office. After about three years he became a proofreader. He received award wages but supplemented his income by giving music lessons.  Mr Faraday has another sister, Ms Malvina Hollander, who also emigrated to
Australia with her husband.  In 1971, Mr Faraday purchased the Dalley Street property for $14,500. He borrowed $8,000 from the Commonwealth Bank. Thomas Rappaport says, and Mr
Faraday denies, that Rosalia and Alexander Rappaport gave or lent him $3,500 to assist with the purchase. Mr Faraday moved to the Dalley Street property and let out one room.  Thomas and Vivian Rappaport married in 1974.  In 1976, Mr Faraday left the Government Printers Office and took up employment with a private printing company paying higher wages. In about 1978, he and a partner established a printing business. It was not profitable and was closed after a year. Mr Faraday continued to teach music privately. From about 1979, after his own printing business was closed, he worked full-time as a piano teacher.  The mortgage over the Dalley Street property was discharged in September In about mid 1979, Mr Faraday purchased the Dundas property for $43,500.
Thomas Rappaport says, and Mr Faraday denies, that Rosalia and Alexander
Rappaport gave or lent him $12,500 to assist with the purchase, on terms that
Mr Faraday would leave the Dundas property to Rosalia and Alexander Rappaport by his will, or if they predeceased him, to Thomas Rappaport. Thomas Rappaport says, and Mr Faraday denies, that the certificate of title to the Dundas property was provided at this time by Mr Faraday to his parents as security for the arrangement. Mr Faraday moved to the Dundas property and rented the
Dalley Street property.  Mr Faraday claims that in about 1980 or 1981, Thomas Rappaport proposed that he and Mr Faraday invest in property together. He says that he began giving money to Thomas Rappaport from time to time. Whenever he had a few thousand dollars he would give it to Thomas Rappaport in cash.  In 1982, Rosalia and Alexander Rappaport separated. Thomas Rappaport deposed that between 1982 and 1996, Rosalia Rappaport gave money to Mr Faraday to bank into Thomas Rappaport's bank account to be used to buy investment properties.  In 1983, Mr Faraday married Ms Puiu Valeria (hereinafter "Valeria Faraday" or "Mrs Faraday"). Mr Faraday was interviewed by officers of the Department of
Immigration in connection with Valeria Faraday's application for permanent residency status. The notes of the interview record Mr Faraday as saying that his income was $200 per week, that he fully supported his wife, and that he had no debts as such.  On 30 April 1984, Mr and Mrs Faraday purchased a unit in Warners Avenue,
Bondi Beach, New South Wales for $40,000 as tenants in common in equal shares (the "Warners Avenue property"). Thomas Rappaport claims that Mr Faraday admitted that Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport provided all the funds for the purchase.  On 23 November 1985, Mr Faraday and Thomas and Vivian Rappaport exchanged contracts to purchase a unit at 4/23 Armrick Avenue, Broadbeach, Queensland for $77,500 as tenants in common (the "Broadbeach property"). Mr Faraday had a % share of that property. Thomas and Vivian Rappaport had the other 50% share.  On 16 January 1987, Mr Faraday entered into a contract to sell his half interest in the Broadbeach property to Thomas and Vivian Rappaport for $38,000. The transfer was signed by Mr Faraday on 21 January 1987. Mr Faraday claims that he believed at the time that the property was sold to a third party. He says that he did not appreciate that Thomas and Vivian Rappaport had bought his half interest in the property. He denies having received the purchase price for his half-share. He says that those moneys were left with
Thomas Rappaport for investment in other properties. Thomas Rappaport says that the proceeds were used by Mr Faraday to repay loans from Alexander and
Rosalia Rappaport.  One of the reasons for Mr Faraday selling his interest in the property was that some conflict had arisen between him and Vivian Rappaport. He was also dissatisfied with the property as an investment property.  On 6 February 1987, Mr Faraday signed a memorandum of transfer of the
Dalley Street property. The transfer was registered on 16 February 1987. The sale price was $62,000.  On 9 February 1987, Thomas and Vivian Rappaport purchased the Chevron
Island property. The purchase price was $169,000. The total cost of the purchase was $175,000. Thomas Rappaport gave evidence that about $46,000 was provided by he and his wife from cash savings and two term deposits in their joint names and the balance was borrowed by them from the National Australia
Bank or the Select Credit Union.  Mr Faraday says that it was from 1987 that he started to receive running sheets from Thomas Rappaport showing the state of his "account".  On 24 September 1987, Thomas Rappaport made a will by which he left to Mr
Faraday a legacy of $135,000 indexed according to movements in the Consumer
Price Index. At this time, Thomas Rappaport had a wife and two children aged and 7. Mr Faraday said that the reason for the will was that he was concerned that he had property partly belonging to him but standing in Thomas
Rappaport's name, and that Thomas Rappaport told him that the legacy represented Mr Faraday's share of what had been invested. This is denied by
Thomas Rappaport.  In late 1988, Rosalia Rappaport advised Mr Faraday that she had found tins of paint in her cupboard. Thomas Rappaport had been prosecuted but acquitted on a charge of theft of paint tins in 1986. Mr Faraday formed the view that
Thomas Rappaport had concealed stolen paint in his mother's house. Mr Faraday admitted this caused him not to trust Thomas Rappaport as he had done before.  On 10 January 1989, Thomas and Vivian Rappaport exchanged contracts to buy the Brisbane Road properties off the plan. The purchase was completed on 16
March 1990.  For reasons given below, I accept that on 24 January 1989, Rosalia
Rappaport delivered cash of US$2,300 and A$700 to Mr Faraday, together with a ring and a gold bullion piece for safekeeping.  Mr Faraday turned 65 on 25 December 1989. On 18 October 1989, he applied for the aged pension. He received the pension from January 1990. On applying for the pension he declared that he owned real estate apart from the house he lived in. He agreed that this was a reference to the Warners Avenue property which he owned with his wife.  Mr Faraday did not include any income or expenses in relation to the properties in Thomas and Vivian Rappaport's name in his own tax returns.  Between February and October 1990, Mr and Mrs Faraday travelled overseas.
Between March and September 1990, Thomas Rappaport transferred moneys to Mr
Faraday's account. Mr Faraday produced handwritten notes allegedly written by
Thomas Rappaport suggesting a crediting of funds from rent from the TAB premises and the butcher's shop. For example, on 1 May 1990, $1,900 was transferred to an NAB account for Mr Faraday made up of $100 in notes and two cheques of $800 and $1,000. Mr Faraday produced a note which read:  "For Month of April 1990  
Butcher $ 380.00 
TAB $ 720.00  $1,100.00  plus $800 from your S/Acc 
Total $1,900.00 
Deposited to NAB Master"  
There were similar notes in relation to deposits made on 1 March 2000, 3 April , 1 June 2000 and 4 September 2000. Thomas Rappaport says that the notes are forgeries concocted by Mr Faraday.  Mr Faraday says that at some time after 1987, Thomas Rappaport told him he would mark the changes to the market value of the investment properties on Mr
Faraday's copy of Thomas Rappaport's will and initial it to show what Mr
Faraday's investments were then worth. Mr Faraday says that Thomas Rappaport amended the figure of $135,000 on Mr Faraday's copy of Thomas Rappaport's will to $320,00 and initialled the change. Thomas Rappaport denies that such a conversation occurred and denies the writing is his.  On 19 March 1992, Mr Faraday made a will. He dealt specifically with the
Dundas and Warners Avenue properties. He made no reference to having any interest in any of the three investment properties in the name of Thomas and
Vivian Rappaport.  In 1992, Rosalia Rappaport asked Mr Faraday to return the cash, ring and gold bullion piece handed to him in January 1989. He denied having received the goods. He denied having given a receipt for the goods. Rosalia Rappaport, influenced by Mr Faraday, formed the view that Thomas Rappaport had taken the property. Thomas Rappaport denied having received the goods, but relations between his mother and him were soured.  In May 1995, Mr and Mrs Faraday sold the Warners Avenue property. Mr
Faraday received $75,000 from the sale. Mr Faraday produced "running sheets" of his alleged account with Thomas Rappaport covering the period from 25 May to 3 February 2000. The running sheets record 16 deposits made with
Thomas Rappaport between 30 May 1995 and 21 August 1995 of $69,450. Thomas
Rappaport admitted to receiving $65,000 in instalments of approximately $10,000 on six or seven occasions during this period. He says, and Mr Faraday denies, that he converted these moneys into foreign currency and delivered the foreign currency to Mr Faraday. This was in anticipation of Mr Faraday's leaving for an overseas trip.  Mr Faraday says that in 1995 he had another discussion with Thomas
Rappaport about the value of his investments. He says that Thomas Rappaport again altered Mr Faraday's copy of Thomas Rappaport's will, by crossing out the figure of $320,000 and substituting $410,000. The alteration is purportedly initialled by Thomas Rappaport and dated 29 October 1995. Again,
Thomas Rappaport says that the handwriting is a forgery.  Mr Faraday left for an overseas trip on 11 November 1995. He was absent from Australia until September 1996. Mr Faraday says, and Thomas Rappaport denies, that he left his certificate of title to the Dundas property with
Thomas Rappaport for safekeeping before he left.  Before he left for overseas, Mr Faraday made a new will. Again, it made no mention of his having any interest in properties registered in the names of
Thomas and Vivian Rappaport.  Alexander Rappaport died in September 1997.  On 4 September 1998, Rosalia Rappaport and Thomas Rappaport entered into an agreement to make mutual wills. The agreement was made because Thomas
Rappaport had secured a bank loan to carry out renovations to the Blair Street property. That property was jointly owned by Rosalia Rappaport and Thomas
Rappaport. The loan was secured over the property. The agreement set out terms on which Rosalia Rappaport was to take up residence in the bottom flat. The agreement for mutual wills recited that both parties wished to ensure that
Thomas Rappaport's children would ultimately receive the Blair Street property. Thomas Rappaport made a will giving his interest in the Blair Street property to his wife for life and then to his children. He left the balance of his estate to his wife, or if she did not survive him, to his children.
Rosalia Rappaport left her property, including her interest in the Blair
Street property, to her grandchildren.  Mr Faraday was involved in the negotiations relating to these agreements.
He was present when the agreements were signed. He witnessed Rosalia
Rappaport's will. He raised no objections to Thomas Rappaport's will. He did not assert to the solicitor who documented the transactions, Mr Gellert, that he had any interest in property in Thomas Rappaport's name. Although his legacy was revoked, he did not ask Thomas Rappaport for any other form of "security" for his investment. Thomas Rappaport says that this was because he had no such investment.  On 18 August 1999, Rosalia Rappaport moved into a nursing home. She was then 86. In May 2000, Thomas Rappaport discovered two documents in Mr
Faraday's hand. One relates to his funding of the purchase of the Dundas property. The other was the receipt for the property given to Mr Faraday in
January 1989, that is, the cash, ring and gold bullion piece.  Disputes arose in October 2000. According to Mr Faraday, he told Thomas
Rappaport that he was thinking of moving from Dundas to closer to Bondi and would need to draw down a substantial amount to buy a house or unit. He asked to draw down $50,000 to buy some term deposits. He said that Thomas Rappaport refused that request, and offered instead that Mr Faraday could move into one of Thomas Rappaport's units in Bondi rent-free, or he could choose a place to live which Thomas Rappaport could buy in Thomas Rappaport's name in which Mr
Faraday could live for the rest of his life without paying rent.  Thomas Rappaport denied this conversation. He said that he told Mr Faraday that Mr Faraday could not afford to borrow the balance of the money which he would need to buy a house or unit in the eastern suburbs, and that it was unlikely that Mr Faraday would be able to raise a loan to buy such a property.
He proposed that Mr Faraday move into one of his existing units, and that Mr
Faraday could rent out the Dundas property and Thomas Rappaport would receive the rent.  On 8 October 2000, Mr Faraday wrote a long, rambling and emotional letter to Thomas Rappaport, which does Mr Faraday no credit. In his affidavit of 7
July 2004, Thomas Rappaport said that:  "At no point throughout this letter does the plaintiff make a clear reference to the accumulation of moneys which I had allegedly received from him over many years for the purpose of purchasing investment property upon his behalf."  However, Mr Faraday said in the letter:  "If I move into a flat at $300 the annual rent is $15,600. If divided by $400,000 that means that I need 25.6 years to use up the money."  Thomas Rappaport did not reply to the letter. In some circumstances, failure to reply to such a letter, which impliedly asserted that Thomas
Rappaport was holding moneys or property to the value of $400,000 belonging to
Mr Faraday, might be an admission. However, the rest of the contents of the letter is such that it is perfectly understandable that Thomas Rappaport would not reply to it. I do not treat his failure to reply as an implied admission by him of Mr Faraday's assertions.  Nonetheless, Thomas Rappaport understood the words "If I move into a flat at $300 the annual rent is $15,600" to be referring to Mr Faraday's moving into one of Thomas Rappaport's investment properties rent-free. That is consistent with Mr Faraday's version of the conversation with Thomas
Rappaport, but not inconsistent with Thomas Rappaport's version of the conversation. Thomas Rappaport said that he had no idea what Mr Faraday was talking about when Mr Faraday said "if divided by $400,000 that means that I need 25.6 years to use up the money". He said that he rang Mr Faraday about it, but he was not making any sense. However, this sentence is consistent with
Mr Faraday's believing that Thomas Rappaport was holding $400,000, or property of that value, for Mr Faraday, so that it would take 25.6 years of rent-free accommodation in one of Thomas Rappaport's units for Mr Faraday to get an equivalent benefit which Thomas Rappaport had of holding Mr Faraday's money or property. The fact that Mr Faraday should impliedly assert such a matter does not establish his assertion as valid. Nonetheless, whilst the letter is emotional, bitter and accusatory, and shows the depth of ill-feeling Mr
Faraday has to Thomas Rappaport, the assertions in it in relation to Thomas
Rappaport's holding Mr Faraday's money or property, seem to reflect a genuinely held view that that was the case.  Mr Faraday's first proceeding was commenced on 13 May 2002.  It is convenient to deal with the claims brought on behalf of Rosalia
Rappaport first.  
Credibility of Mr Faraday and Thomas Rappaport  Mr Faraday was extensively cross-examined. He was 81 at the time of the hearing. He had an impressive command of the dates and details of his own case. Nonetheless, I concluded that his recollection of events was unreliable, and his evidence was tailored to what he perceived to be the best advantage for his case. That is not to say that there is no underlying merit to his case.  For reasons which I give later, I have concluded that Mr Faraday did provide money to Thomas Rappaport for investment. At least some of that money was sourced from money given to Mr Faraday by Rosalia Rappaport. Nonetheless,
I do not accept Mr Faraday as a credible witness either on matters of detail or substance. I have also concluded that he was prepared to manufacture evidence to support his case.  Five matters in particular reflect adversely on his credit. The first was his denial that Rosalia Rappaport provided him with financial assistance when it is clear both from his own lack of income and his own note (referred to at para [82]) that she did so. The second is his assertion that he sold the
Dalley Street property in 1979 when the documents establish unequivocally that the unit was sold in 1987. He asserted that the Dalley Street property was sold in 1979 to provide an explanation as to how he had funds to buy the
Dundas property in 1979. It appeared to me that he genuinely believes that he had sold the Dalley Street property in 1979. However, that showed how his perception of the facts has become distorted by what he perceives to be his interest in the litigation. The third was his false denial both in court and earlier to his relatives that he had received money and property from Rosalia
Rappaport for safekeeping. The fourth was his denial of being aware that he had sold his half interest in the Broadbeach property to Thomas and Vivian
Rappaport, when the documents he prepared and signed show that he must have known that was what he was doing. The fifth was the production of three versions of amendments to Thomas Rappaport's 1987 will showing increased legacies, at least two of which I am forced to conclude, on the balance of probabilities, were prepared by Mr Faraday himself, and not by Thomas
Rappaport as Mr Faraday asserted.  Except where otherwise indicated, I do not accept Mr Faraday's evidence unless it is corroborated by other acceptable testimony, or documents whose authenticity is otherwise established, or is consistent with the objective probabilities.  It is difficult to assess Thomas Rappaport's credibility because he was not effectively cross-examined. Mr Faraday represented himself. He was incapable of conducting an orderly or effective cross-examination. It was noteworthy that during the hearing Mr Faraday at no stage had before him any of Thomas
Rappaport's affidavits, although he had clearly read them and remembered parts of them. The cross-examination consisted of Mr Faraday's putting propositions about his case that Thomas Rappaport easily rebutted. I accept the submission of Mr Bradford of counsel, who appeared for the Rappaports, that Thomas
Rappaport should not be prejudiced by Mr Faraday's inability to cross-examine him properly.  My assessment of Thomas Rappaport's credibility does not depend on his demeanour in the witness box.  Nonetheless, I do not accept Thomas Rappaport as a reliable witness. It is not just that he is an interested party, although that is a relevant consideration indicating that his evidence should be considered with caution.
In reaching my conclusion as to his credit, I have had regard to his evidence in his first affidavit as to the arrangements for the investment of moneys provided to him by Mr Faraday, (which he asserted belonged to Rosalia
Rappaport), and his later inconsistent evidence as to the source of funds for investment. I have also had regard to documents which are admittedly in his own hand, and to documents which I have found on the evidence of a document examiner, Mr Dubedat, are in his hand. Those documents are inconsistent with
Thomas Rappaport's testimony. I have also concluded, contrary to his evidence, but consistently with the evidence of Mr Gellert (a solicitor who acted for
Rosalia Rappaport), that Thomas Rappaport prepared a draft of a statutory declaration for his mother in 2000 which he provided to Mr Gellert. This last matter, if standing on its own, would not be of much significance, but it has had some slight bearing on my assessment of Thomas Rappaport's credibility.  Except where otherwise indicated, I do not accept Thomas Rappaport's evidence unless it is corroborated by other acceptable testimony, or by documents whose authenticity is otherwise established or not in dispute, or is consistent with the objective probabilities.  
Rosalia Rappaport's First Claim: Purchase of the Dalley Street Property  The first claim related to an amount of $3,500 it was claimed Rosalia
Rappaport had sent or given to Mr Faraday to assist with the purchase of the
Dalley Street property. I think it likely that some assistance was given to Mr
Faraday by Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport. However, such assistance was by way of gift. There was no contract that Mr Faraday should leave the property to Rosalia Rappaport in his will. He sold the property in 1987 without any complaint from Alexander or Rosalia Rappaport. No demand was made for repayment of moneys advanced to assist with the purchase. Not surprisingly, in final submissions this claim was abandoned.  
Rosalia Rappaport's Second Claim: Financial Assistance for the Purchase of the Dundas Property  In her affidavit, Rosalia Rappaport said:  "9 Steven always said to me, 'If I die I will leave everything to my family.
I will give half of my property to you as my sister and the other half to my sister Malvina. In the end, it will all go to your son Gabor (Thomas).' We never discussed any of these matters in detail because there was no need to.
Neither Steven nor Malvina had any children, so we all understood that all the property they owned would go to my son Gabor (Thomas).   I gave my money to Steven because he wanted it. But not all at once. I do remember helping Steven with a second house. I do not remember how much I gave him. But he could not buy this house without my help. I cannot remember this house now. If I didn't help him, he could never buy this house."  The evidence from Rosalia Rappaport was, in substance, that she made a gift of money to Mr Faraday to assist him with buying the Dundas property. She did so because he was her brother. There is no indication in her affidavit that she and her brother entered into a contract intended to have legal effect or otherwise entered into any legal relationship in relation to that gift. She expected that Mr Faraday would leave all his property to her and her sister, and thence to her son. That is very different from there being a contract that
Mr Faraday would leave the Dundas property to her in return for her advance.  The second house to which Rosalia Rappaport referred was the Dundas property. Her affidavit was prepared in 2001 when she was in a nursing home.
The solicitor who prepared it deposed that she was able to converse with him in English and he observed that she had a sufficient knowledge of conversational English in order to understand his questions and to make herself properly understood.  Her solicitor also deposed to having later been told by Rosalia Rappaport, when accompanied by a Hungarian interpreter, that:  "I helped my brother many times with money. ... I gave money many times to my brother but he never gave me any money back. I remember giving the money to my brother to help him buy a house. I did this because he asked me for the money.
But he never gave the money back to me. The money I gave to my brother was to be returned to me if ever I needed it. My brother had always agreed that on his death he would leave his house to me and my sister Malvina in equal shares. Eventually it will go to my son Gabor as Malvina had no children."  This conversation took place when Rosalia Rappaport was 93 and shortly before her death. It is consistent with her affidavit and reinforces the view that she did not intend to enter into legal relations with her brother.
Rather, the provision of funds was a family arrangement. The money was provided as a gift, but she expected the money to be given back if she needed it. She told her solicitor that Mr Faraday had agreed to leave his house to her and to his sister Ms Hollander in equal shares. Her evidence does not suggest that this "agreement" was the quid pro quo for an advance to Mr
Faraday for him to buy the house, or that the parties would enter into any legal relationship.  There is no evidence that Rosalia Rappaport ever asked to be repaid money provided to Mr Faraday to assist with the purchase of the Dundas property.  Mr Faraday denied receiving any money on any occasion from Rosalia
Rappaport or her husband. I do not accept that denial.  Mr Faraday purchased the Dundas property in about mid 1979 for $43,500. He prepared a document which he left with Rosalia Rappaport which recorded his holding a bank balance and other moneys totalling $30,000. It recorded that he "owed" $44,500, which is clearly a reference to the moneys which he needed to complete the purchase of the Dundas property, including stamp duty. He recorded that he needed a loan of $15,000 of which $2,500 might be obtained from "Laci" (a reference to Ms Hollander's husband) and $12,500 from "Shoni" and "Babus", a reference to Alexander Rappaport and Rosalia Rappaport. He also noted his weekly income included $50 per week rent. This was a reference to rent to be obtained from letting out the Dalley Street property.  Mr Faraday did not borrow money from a bank or a commercial lender to acquire the Dundas property. It is unlikely that his income would have been sufficient at that time to have enabled him to save the whole of the purchase price of the Dundas property. His note recording his bank balance as at 30
April 1979, showed a shortfall of $15,000 in the moneys needed for the purchase of the Dundas property.  Mr Faraday stated that he obtained the funds to purchase the Dundas property by having sold in 1979 the Dalley Street property. However, he was wrong about that. The Dalley Street property was not sold until 1987. Mr
Faraday signed and dated the transfer. The transfer was dated 6 February 1987.
It was registered on 16 February 1987. There could be no reason that Mr
Faraday would have signed and dated a transfer as at 6 February 1987 if the property had in fact been sold in 1979. Nor is it conceivable that had Mr
Faraday sold the property in 1979, the purchaser would have waited until 1987 to register the transfer. In cross-examination, Mr Faraday suggested that he might have made a mistake when he wrote the date on the transfer by transposing the last two numbers in the date, that is, that he had intended to date the transfer as 6 February 1978. However, that explanation is fanciful.
There would be no reason why, if the property were sold in 1979, the transfer would be dated 6 February 1978 and not registered until 16 February 1987.  In his prenuptial agreement of 5 August 1983 with Valeria Faraday, she agreed not to make any claim to either the Dundas property or the Dalley
Street property. That is obviously inconsistent with his having sold the
Dalley Street property in 1979.  Mr Faraday's evidence in relation to this transaction showed his unreliability as a witness.  Thomas Rappaport deposed to recollecting two conversations with Mr Faraday in February 1979. The first was said to have taken place in the presence of
Thomas Rappaport's parents and his wife Vivian. Thomas Rappaport deposed that
Mr Faraday said:  "I am considering purchasing a house in Dundas for $43,500. I don't have enough money myself to complete the purchase. Your parents have already offered to lend me $12,500 on the same arrangements as with the Bondi Junction property. There will be no repayments and my existing will already provides that all of my assets will go to your parents and then to you and your children. You are the executor in my will. As the security for this loan, I will give the title deed to your parents and on my death the title deed will then be available to enable a solicitor to do the paperwork to transfer the house to your parents or if necessary, to you and your children."  According to Thomas Rappaport, his mother said that they would think about the matter and discuss it the next time Mr Faraday came for dinner. According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday came to the house the following Friday night, and during dinner his mother said to Mr Faraday:  "We agree to your proposal. We will lend you $12,500 in cash in order to purchase the house and we will hold the title deed as security."  According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday agreed and said:  "On my death, my house will go to Babusa (referring to Rosalia Rappaport) and to Shoni (referring to Alexander Rappaport) and then to Tom and his children."  Vivian Rappaport did not deal with this conversation specifically in her affidavit. She said that she was present "during the exchange of conversation as between [Mr Faraday] and Tom as outlined in [paragraph 14 of Thomas
Rappaport's affidavit]. I was also present during the exchange of conversation between Tom's mother and [Mr Faraday] as outlined in paragraph 15 of Tom's said affidavit. This conversation took place at the home of Tom's parents and not at our house as set out in the first sentence of this paragraph."  Neither Thomas nor Vivian Rappaport was cross-examined on this evidence. Mr
Faraday represented himself and was incapable of framing proper questions or conducting an orderly cross-examination. Nonetheless, these matters were clearly put in issue. I accept the force of the submission of Mr Bradford that the assessment of their credibility should not be prejudiced by the fact that
Mr Faraday was unable properly to cross-examine them. Nonetheless, I do not accept that after the passage of more than twenty-four years, Thomas Rappaport or Vivian Rappaport, could have such a precise recollection of a conversation over the dinner table as Thomas Rappaport deposed to. It is much more probable that there was a degree of reconstruction from the note found in Rosalia
Rappaport's possession, to which I have previously referred, and from the fact that Thomas Rappaport is holding the certificate of title to the Dundas property.  There was a dispute as to how Thomas Rappaport came to have possession of
Mr Faraday's certificate of title. According to Mr Faraday, he left the certificate of title in Thomas Rappaport's custody in 1995 shortly before he (Mr Faraday) left for an extended overseas trip. According to Mr Faraday, he left a dossier of documents with Thomas Rappaport comprising the certificate of title to the Dundas property, his citizenship certificate, his itinerary, and papers related to his travel insurance. He says that it did not occur to him to ask Thomas Rappaport to return the documents until many years later after the present dispute arose. This is an unlikely version of events.
Relations between Mr Faraday and Thomas Rappaport had deteriorated by the s owing to Mr Faraday's discovery of the paint and accusations as to who had taken delivery of Rosalia Rappaport's property. Mr Faraday had made two previous extended overseas trips in 1990 (8 months) and 1992 (8 months) without feeling the need to deliver his certificate of title to a family member.  Thomas Rappaport denies Mr Faraday's version of events. According to him, about two months after the conversations to which he deposed, Mr Faraday visited his parents' house, at which time Rosalia Rappaport handed over $12,500 in cash to Mr Faraday. Thomas Rappaport says that a short time later,
Mr Faraday came to his parents' house and brought with him the certificate of title to the Dundas property telling his mother that "here is the deed to the house which you can hold as security". Thomas Rappaport also deposed that Mr
Faraday told him that "your mother can hold the title deed as security because there won't be any need for me to make any repayments of the loan.
There won't be any interest payments either. When I die, she will be holding the certificate of title and together with my will the whole of the property will pass to her." According to Thomas Rappaport, about two weeks later,
Rosalia Rappaport gave him the certificate of title asking him to keep it in his safe. At this time, Thomas Rappaport was living at 34 Imperial Avenue,
Bondi, New South Wales.  I think Thomas Rappaport's explanation is the more likely, given my conclusion that Mr Faraday did receive $12,500 from Rosalia Rappaport. That does not mean it is true. The payment of $12,500 and the taking of the certificate of title would suggest that the moneys were advanced as a loan.  According to Thomas Rappaport, the parties sometimes described the advance as a loan. However, on his evidence, it was not expected that the advance or any part of it would be repaid. Nor would the advance attract interest.
Rather, Thomas Rappaport says that the certificate of title was left as security for Mr Faraday's promise to leave the Dundas property to his sisters in his will. However, the provision of the certificate of title would not be security for the performance of the alleged promise. Handing over the certificate of title would not prevent Mr Faraday from making a different will. All it would do would be to inhibit, and perhaps prevent, any attempt by
Mr Faraday to sell the Dundas property.  Even allowing for the close family relationship, I find it very surprising that if the arrangement were as deposed to by Thomas Rappaport, nothing was put in writing to record that arrangement. As Bryson JA said in Khoury &
Anor versus Khouri <case> at <case>:  "It must be obvious to anyone with any business experience and to any adult who gave any thought to his or her own interests that an arrangement involving significant sums of money about something so important as ownership of a family home should be written down. There has been a law requiring dealings with land to be in writing if they are to be effective in England for well over three centuries, and in Australia for as long as there has been a legal system here, and what that law requires is no more than reasonable people would do if they considered their own interests."  I am not dealing at the moment with the question of whether the agreement, if one were made, would be unenforceable by reason of [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) . I am rather dealing with the question whether it is likely that if an agreement were made between Mr Faraday and his sister that he would leave the Dundas property in his will to his two sisters in return for an advance of $12,500, there would be no writing to evidence such an agreement. In my view, it is improbable that if such an agreement were made there would be no written record of it.  In my view, Rosalia Rappaport expected that Mr Faraday would leave the
Dundas property to her and Ms Hollander, but there was no promise intended to have legal effect that he should do so.  The question then is whether, having regard to the fact that I have not accepted Thomas Rappaport's evidence in this respect, I should nonetheless find that the money was provided by Rosalia Rappaport as a loan, rather than a gift. The indicia that it was a loan are the note referred to in paragraph [82] above, the fact that the note must have been handed to Rosalia Rappaport, and the delivery of the certificate of title to Rosalia Rappaport. The claim that Rosalia Rappaport made the advance of $12,500 as a loan repayable on demand was advanced for the first time in an amended statement of claim which
I gave leave to file shortly before the hearing. Until that time, the only pleaded claim in respect of this transaction was that Mr Faraday would have only a life interest in the Dundas property and that Rosalia Rappaport and her heirs would have the remainder interest. (It may be noted that this agreement as pleaded does not accurately reflect the agreement which Thomas Rappaport deposed had been made.)  As I have said, Rosalia Rappaport's evidence suggests that the money was paid as a gift, not as a loan. There is corroboration of that in that at no time has there been any payment of interest or repayment of principal, or any request made for the payment of interest or the repayment of any principal. I conclude that the payment was not made as a loan, but as a gift.  That still leaves the question as to why the certificate of title to the property was delivered to Rosalia Rappaport. She makes no reference to receiving the certificate of title. Having rejected Mr Faraday's evidence that he delivered it to Thomas Rappaport in 1995, and having rejected Thomas
Rappaport's version of the events which Thomas Rappaport said led to the certificate of title being given to his mother and then to him, it can only be a matter of speculation as to how Thomas Rappaport comes to be in possession of the certificate of title. I do not conclude from the fact that Thomas
Rappaport has possession of the certificate of title that it was provided as security for a loan. This is a loose thread. However, that such a loose thread should exist is hardly surprising when one of the principal protagonists is dead, when I have rejected the evidence of all of the living witnesses who have given evidence on the topic, and where there may well be alternative explanations in a close family relationship which no party has chosen to put forward.  Had I been of the view that the moneys were advanced as a loan, the loan would have been repayable on demand. A cause of action for its repayment would have arisen immediately the advance was made, not when demand was made for it on the service of the amended statement of claim (Young versus Queensland Trustees
Ltd <case>; [(1956) 99 CLR 560]; Ogilvie v
Adams <case>; [[1981] VR 1041]; Haller versus Ayre <case>; [[2005] 2 Qd R 410).] Mr Faraday would have been entitled to plead [s (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) as a defence to the claim. He did not do so. However, he was incapable of recognising that such a defence would be available. Having regard to the lateness with which the claim was made, it would be essential in the interests of a fair hearing to consider a defence under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) to a claim for the recovery of the alleged loan, notwithstanding that such a defence was not pleaded. Such a defence would defeat the claim for recovery of moneys lent.  It is unnecessary for me to consider whether, had I found an agreement had been made as alleged by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport, such an agreement would have been unenforceable pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) in the absence of a note or memorandum of the agreement signed by Mr Faraday. No such defence was pleaded by Mr Faraday, although he had legal representation at the time he filed a defence. The view might then have been formed that in the interests of promoting Mr Faraday's credibility generally it was better to rest with the denial that any moneys had been advanced to Mr Faraday. Mr
Bradford acknowledged that there would be no prejudice to his client if the defence were amended. Mr Faraday did not seek leave to amend his defence to raise the issue. When the question was raised, he handed up drafts of a statement of claim in the 2002 proceedings which had been prepared by his solicitor. This confirmed my belief that Mr Faraday was unable to appreciate the point for himself. He contented himself with repeating his denial that he had received any money from Rosalia Rappaport.  It is unnecessary for me to express a view on whether I should myself consider the application of [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) when it has not been pleaded. There is no explanation as to why it was not originally pleaded in the defence. It is possible that this was a deliberate decision made by Mr Faraday's solicitor.  It follows that the second claim of Rosalia Rappaport fails. It also follows that there is no basis for Thomas Rappaport to continue to hold the certificate of title. A caveat has been lodged over the title to the Dundas property asserting an interest in that land pursuant to the alleged agreement.
Mr Bradford accepted that if the second claim failed, consequential orders should be made for the removal of the caveat.  
Rosalia Rappaport's Third Claim  The claim that Mr Faraday received money, a gold ring, and a gold bullion piece from Rosalia Rappaport in January 1989 was supported by a document in Mr
Faraday's writing which was located by Thomas Rappaport in May 2000. He and his mother had previously searched for the receipt without success. He found the document under the lining in one of the drawers of Rosalia Rappaport's wardrobe which had been moved into his premises following her admission to a nursing home in August 1999. Part of the document was in Rosalia Rappaport's hand. Part of it was in Mr Faraday's hand. The document was partly written in
Hungarian. When translated into English, Mr Faraday wrote:  "USA dollars 23 x 100 = 2.300  
A dollars separately = 700  "  Underneath that, Rosalia Rappaport had written:  "2 3AA USA 
Gold 
Signet Ring"  Underneath that, Mr Faraday had written:  "Gold  
R/R Signet ring 
All belong to Babus  .1.89"  Mr Faraday agreed that he had traced the box around the gold bullion piece. "Babus" was a familiar name by which Rosalia Rappaport was known.  Thomas Rappaport gave evidence that "in about 1992 the plaintiff began asking the defendant for the return of [these] items". He said that Rosalia
Rappaport said to Mr Faraday, "I gave you my gold signet ring with my initials on it, a gold bullion piece, US$2300 and AUD$700. I want all of these items back. They were not a gift. You were to give them back to me. You were only to hold them for me for safekeeping because I did not want to leave them in my flat."  According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday denied having received any of the items and told Rosalia Rappaport to ask Thomas and Vivian Rappaport.
Thomas Rappaport says that on the same occasion he asked Mr Faraday if he could remember giving his mother a receipt if he took the items. Mr Faraday replied, "No, I never took them, I never gave any receipt". Thomas Rappaport says that as a result of this incident the relationship between Rosalia
Rappaport, himself and his family became strained until 2000. She accused him of stealing the missing items. I accept this evidence.  Rosalia Rappaport signed a statutory declaration on 22 November 2000 confirming that she had entrusted the cash and jewellery referred to in the handwritten document to Mr Faraday. There was also unchallenged evidence from
Rosalia Rappaport's granddaughter, Michelle Rappaport, that during the school holidays in 1989, she was present when her grandmother brought out the gold bullion piece, signet ring, and the bundles of American and Australian dollars and gave them to Mr Faraday for safekeeping. She also deposed that in about , her grandmother told her that she had been asking Mr Faraday for the last two or three years (that is from 1992 or 1993) if he had the items which she gave him for safekeeping. She deposed to having been told by Rosalia
Rappaport that Mr Faraday said that he hadn't received the items and that she must have given them to Thomas Rappaport or Thomas Rappaport had taken them without asking. She corroborated the evidence of Thomas Rappaport and the statutory declaration of Rosalia Rappaport that this incident created a great deal of tension in the family.  Mr Faraday denied receiving the items referred to in the note. He said that Rosalia Rappaport asked him to prepare an inventory of items which she had and that the note is a copy of the inventory which he prepared.  At one point in his cross-examination, Mr Faraday agreed that in 1992,
Rosalia Rappaport asked him to return the items and that he told her that he did not have them. Later, he denied that she asked for the return of the items in 1992.  Mr Faraday said that the reason he outlined the perimeter of the piece of gold bullion was because he also had a gold bullion piece which was a little bit bigger and he did it so the two would not be mixed up.  According to Mr Faraday, the reason he was asked to prepare the inventory was because Rosalia Rappaport did not trust her family, except for her granddaughter, Michelle Rappaport.  However, if that were Rosalia Rappaport's concern, she might be expected to leave the property with Mr Faraday for safekeeping, rather than obtain an inventory of it. I do not understand how the preparation of an inventory with a note that the property on it belonged to Rosalia Rappaport would have been of any assistance to her. There could be no dispute about who owned the property if it were left in her possession.  The reason which Mr Faraday gave as to why it was necessary to draw an outline of the perimeter of the piece of gold bullion to differentiate Rosalia
Rappaport's piece from his piece was:  "If ever comes up some discussion about this, to be able to know which piece belongs ... you never know when will come up such a case, as I didn't know that this will come ever in front of the court. Automatically I made circumference of other but I didn't make on the paper for myself, I made on the paper only for her to see that if ever we have some doubt, we can identify that that is mine."  However, there would only be a need for Mr Faraday to differentiate his piece of gold bullion from Rosalia Rappaport's piece if both pieces came into the possession of the same person. He did not intend to leave his gold bullion piece with Rosalia Rappaport.  I am satisfied that Rosalia Rappaport provided the items to Mr Faraday in
January 1989 for safekeeping. I am also satisfied that she requested the return of the goods in 1992, but was told by Mr Faraday that he did not have them. I also accept that at this time there was discussion about the preparation of a receipt, that Rosalia Rappaport could not find the receipt, and that Mr Faraday denied having given a receipt.  In his defence to this claim (prepared when he had legal representation)
Mr Faraday pleaded the provisions of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) as a defence to this claim.  [Section (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) prescribes a six-year limitation period for actions in tort. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s21.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) provides:  "21 Successive wrongs to goods  
Where:  a cause of action for the conversion or detention of goods accrues to a person, and  afterwards, possession of the goods not having been recovered by the person or by a person claiming through the person, a further cause of action for the conversion or detention of the goods or a cause of action to recover the proceeds of sale of the goods accrues to the person or to a person claiming through the person,  an action on the further cause of action for conversion or detention or on the cause of action to recover the proceeds of sale is not maintainable if brought after the expiration of a limitation period of six years running from the date when the first cause of action first accrues to the plaintiff or to a person through whom the plaintiff claims."  Rosalia Rappaport's proceedings were commenced on 8 July 2003. Rosalia
Rappaport's claim is in detinue. The cause of action arose from the time Mr
Faraday's detention of the goods became wrongful, namely, after demand was made by Rosalia Rappaport for their return and that demand was refused. There may have been further periods of wrongful detention of the goods, but at no time did Rosalia Rappaport recover possession of them. Accordingly, by reason of [ss (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) and [21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s21.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), the cause of action is not maintainable if brought after six years running from the date when it first accrued to Rosalia Rappaport.  Rosalia Rappaport made demand for the return of the goods in 1992. The proceedings were therefore statute barred after 1998. Mr Bradford argued that time did not run because when demand for the return of the goods was made on
Mr Faraday, he falsely denied having received the goods and falsely denied having given a receipt for them. The submission seemed to invoke subs 55(1) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), which relevantly provides:  "(1) Subject to subsection (3) where:  ...  a cause of action ... is fraudulently concealed,  the time which elapses after a limitation period fixed by or under this Act for the cause of action commences to run and before the date on which a person having ... the cause of action first discovers, or may with reasonable diligence discover, the ... concealment, ... does not count in the reckoning of the limitation period for an action on the cause of action by the person or by a person claiming through the person against a person answerable for the ... concealment."  One problem with this submission is that Rosalia Rappaport has not pleaded a case of fraudulent concealment as a postponement to the bar. Another difficulty is that the postponement only operates for such period until
Rosalia Rappaport could with reasonable diligence discover the concealment. As she always had in her possession the document which, when shown to her in , led to her appreciating that the goods had in fact been entrusted to Mr
Faraday in 1989, it was always open to her to make that discovery by searching her own possessions.  Rosalia Rappaport was 79 in 1992. There is evidence that she became confused on being told by Mr Faraday that he did not have the goods and had not given a receipt for them. However, it is also part of the Rappaports' case that, nine and ten years later, Rosalia Rappaport was able to understand the contents of her statutory declaration and affidavit. In 2002, she deposed to having given Mr Faraday her ring, money and gold bullion piece for safekeeping. In her statutory declaration of 22 November 2000, she deposed to understanding from the receipt of 24 January 1989 that she had entrusted the property to Mr Faraday.  Mr Faraday's denial of having received his sister's goods and providing a receipt does not amount to a concealment of the plaintiff's cause of action.
He denied the facts which give rise to the cause of action. He did not conceal it. Moreover, before <case> can be satisfied, the defendant must be guilty of moral turpitude or dishonesty (Hamilton versus Kaljo [(1989) 17 NSWLR 381] at 386).
An allegation of fraud must be pleaded. It was not suggested to Mr Faraday in cross-examination that when he told Rosalia Rappaport in 1992 that he told a deliberate lie, or that he intended to conceal from his sister that he was holding her property. Even if it were open to the Rappaports to rely upon [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s55.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) to extend the limitation period, I would not be satisfied that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s55.html) was satisfied.  It follows that the third claim of Rosalia Rappaport's is barred by [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) and [21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s21.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/).  
Rosalia Rappaport's Fourth and Fifth Claims  Rosalia Rappaport's fourth claim that Mr Faraday received $11,000 in cash from Rosalia Rappaport in 1999 was based partly on hearsay and partly on admissions allegedly made by Mr Faraday to Thomas Rappaport. Thomas Rappaport deposed that Rosalia Rappaport had told him that she had given to Mr Faraday just over $11,000 in cash which she kept in her drawers (which I take to be the drawers of her cupboard).  Thomas Rappaport also deposed that after speaking to Ms Hollander, he had a conversation with Mr Faraday in which he told Mr Faraday that he had been informed by Ms Hollander that Mr Faraday had deposited the savings of $11,000 into his name with the NRMA, instead of placing the moneys in Rosalia
Rappaport's account with St George. According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday admitted having taken that step, and told him that he did so in order to earn higher interest, and because he did not have the documents to make up 100 points of identification as required to open an account in Rosalia Rappaport's name. Thomas Rappaport said that Rosalia Rappaport had told him that she had given Mr Faraday the cash in order for him to deposit it into her St George account.  The fifth claim is that before Rosalia Rappaport went into the nursing home in August 1999, Mr Faraday obtained $28,000 from various accounts and cash held by her and took the money without her knowledge or consent. The
Rappaports did not tender Rosalia Rappaport's bank statements to seek to identify what moneys were wrongfully withdrawn by Mr Faraday.  Mr Faraday denied receiving $11,000 in cash. He denied the conversations deposed to by Thomas Rappaport. He denied taking $28,000 of Rosalia
Rappaport's money. There was no issue that for a period of time he was an authorised signatory on his sister's bank account with St George. He admitted that he closed the St George account, apparently in 2002, which at the time had a balance of $4,074.18. He said that he added the sum of $925.82 to make an investment of $5,000 which was deposited with Suncorp. He still holds those moneys in a term deposit in his name.  Vivian Rappaport annexed to her affidavit a copy of a certificate of reinvestment of a term deposit of Mr Faraday with the Commonwealth Bank for the reinvestment of an amount of $10,575.45. Mr Faraday deposed that that investment was his money. The Rappaports relied upon his handwriting on the document which read:  "10,500 Com  ,000 St George - Com Rap (I topped up with $925-82)  ,800 Com Diff $4,074-18  ,200 HRM 925-82  ,700 Rap R $5,000-00  ,200 Valid"  He acknowledged that the sum of $3,700 belonged to Rosalia Rappaport.
Apart from this sum, and apart from the sum of $4,074.18 which he admitted having taken from Rosalia Rappaport's account with St George when that account was closed, Mr Faraday contended that each of the other investments was his money.  It was common ground that Mr Faraday had been able to draw moneys from
Rosalia Rappaport's account. He said that prior to his withdrawing the balance of the account of $4,074.18, the moneys he withdrew from the account were used to pay expenses of Rosalia Rappaport.  I do not consider that Mr Faraday's handwritten notes quoted in paragraph [133] above indicate that any of the investments listed were made with money belonging to Rosalia Rappaport, other than the two amounts of $4,074.18 and $3,700. No other moneys of Rosalia Rappaport were traced into Mr Faraday's possession. The claim that he received $11,000 in cash from Rosalia Rappaport depends upon the admission which it is said he made to Thomas Rappaport and hearsay evidence from Thomas Rappaport of what he had been told by his mother.
However, I am not satisfied that the evidence of Thomas Rappaport is reliable.
I take into account not only my general assessment of his credit referred to above, but also the delay in the making of the allegations. I also take into account the degree of hostility in the family.  Mr Faraday's note which identifies some of the moneys forming $28,200 as belonging to Rosalia Rappaport tends to corroborate his denial of having received $11,000 from her. If he had received funds from Rosalia Rappaport other than the moneys in her St George account, but was falsely denying such receipts, it is unlikely that he would acknowledge holding $3,700 of her money.  Mr Faraday's explanation of the source of the $3,700 was that this was money which was given by Rosalia Rappaport to her sister Ms Hollander, and given by Ms Hollander to him because Ms Hollander did not want to keep it. He said the amount he received was $3,600 which with interest had grown to $3,700 by the time he wrote the note, which was apparently some time in 2002.  Mr Faraday said that "altogether I am holding $8,700 for her, originating from $3,600 and from $4,000 when I closed her St George book." Mr Faraday said that he would make this money available to Thomas Rappaport on the same day that Thomas Rappaport settled his debt with Mr Faraday.  However, the money he is holding does not belong to Thomas Rappaport.
Thomas Rappaport is not even a beneficiary under his mother's will. There is no justification for Mr Faraday's continuing to withhold from the executrix of
Rosalia Rappaport's estate the moneys he acknowledges he received from Rosalia
Rappaport.  Thomas Rappaport has not established that Mr Faraday received more than the $3,700 and $4,074.18 which he acknowledged receiving. Mr Faraday is liable to repay those moneys together with interest.  No claim was made that Mr Faraday should pay compound interest on the moneys of Rosalia Rappaport which he is holding. He should pay interest at
Supreme Court rates on the sum of $4,074.18 from the time those moneys were withdrawn from Rosalia Rappaport's St George account. That date was not specifically identified. It must have been withdrawn by the time Mr Faraday wrote the note, which I will presume against him was on or about 6 May 2002.  It is not clear when he received the sum of $3,600, but his own evidence is that that sum, with interest, was $3,700 by the time he wrote the note on the term deposit certificate of reinvestment. That note was written some time after 6 May 2002. Only Mr Faraday could say when he received the moneys. He did not identify with any particularity how the moneys were invested. I should presume against him that as at 6 May 2002, he was holding $3,700 of Rosalia
Rappaport's money. Interest at the prescribed rates on the sum of $7,774.18 from 6 May 2002 to 7 March 2007 is $3,399.34.  He should account for both sums with interest at Supreme Court rates from May 2002.  Otherwise proceedings No. 3668/03 should be dismissed.  
Mr Faraday's Claims in Proceedings No. 2649/02  Mr Faraday gave evidence that in 1980 or 1981, Thomas Rappaport suggested to him that they buy property together. According to Mr Faraday, Thomas
Rappaport said:  "I can manage the investment and solve any problems that arise. I know you much better than anyone else and I know that I can trust you. You can give me the money and I will buy it and we can become equal owners. I can account for any income tax and then just give you a half share or less so that it does not affect your pension."  I do not accept that evidence. In 1980 or 1981, Mr Faraday was still working. He was 56 or 57 years old. He did not start receiving a pension until the beginning of 1990. Mr Faraday has later said that he has an interest in property registered in the name of Thomas and Vivian Rappaport, and asserted that this was done in order to protect his pension (although he later resiled from that assertion). In my view, Mr Faraday made up the conversation referred to in para [146] above to attempt to provide a context for the later agreements which he says were made.  Mr Faraday also said that sometime after 1981, he began giving cash to
Thomas Rappaport from time to time, whenever he had accumulated a few thousand dollars. This is denied by Thomas Rappaport.  Mr Faraday deposes that in about 1982, he and Thomas Rappaport, together with Vivian and Rosalia Rappaport, inspected a two-bedroom unit at Broadbeach in Queensland and that Thomas Rappaport proposed that they buy the property.
Thomas Rappaport denies that that conversation occurred in 1982. He said that there was a conversation to the same effect in 1985. The Broadbeach property was purchased in November 1985. I do not accept that such a conversation occurred in 1982.  
Purchase of the Warners Avenue Property  On 30 May 1984, Mr Faraday and Valeria Faraday purchased the Warners
Avenue property as tenants in common in equal shares. The purchase price was $40,000. According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday told him at the time that:  "I have bought this unit in cash. All of the money for this unit I obtained from your parents on loan. It is in both our names, half each and it will be rented out. Valerie will pay to me her half from her wages because she will be working."  
Mr Faraday denied the conversation. He denied that Thomas Rappaport's parents lent him any money to purchase the Warners Avenue property.  In paragraph 37 of Thomas Rappaport's first affidavit sworn 7 July 2003, he deposed that, to the best of his recollection, Alexander and Rosalia
Rappaport lent Mr Faraday most, if not all, of the purchase price for the
Warners Avenue property and that after the defendant sold his unit in Bondi
Junction in 1987, he repaid Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport in full for the moneys he had borrowed. He said that upon receiving those moneys, Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport then gave Thomas Rappaport a lump sum of $25,000 as a gift which he used to purchase other real estate.  In submissions, it was put for Thomas and Vivian Rappaport that the purchase price for the Warners Avenue property was provided by loans of $17,000 from Rosalia Rappaport and $20,000 from Alexander Rappaport, with
Valeria Faraday contributing $3,000. There is no corroboration of those figures. Thomas and Vivian Rappaport did point to a record prepared by an officer of the Department of Immigration of an interview with Mr Faraday in connection with Valeria Faraday's application for permanent resident status.
It appears that the interview took place in late 1983. The record of the interview noted that Valeria Faraday had assets in Australia of $2,750. It recorded that Mr Faraday's income was approximately $200 per week and that he fully supported his wife. He had "no debts as such". However, this document says nothing as to whether Alexander or Rosalia Rappaport lent all or part of the purchase price of the Warners Avenue property.  The question of whether Mr Faraday borrowed $37,000 or thereabouts from
Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport to purchase the Warners Avenue property has indirect relevance. Thomas and Vivian Rappaport say that it explains how Mr
Faraday dealt with moneys which they say they paid him in 1987 on the purchase of his half-interest in the Broadbeach property.  Thomas and Vivian Rappaport say that Mr Faraday would have been unable, on the income he was earning, to have saved enough money to have purchased the
Warners Avenue property from his own resources.  On the basis of Mr Faraday's estimates of his earnings, it appears that he would have needed to have saved approximately half of his net income after tax to have saved enough money to have purchased the Warners Avenue property without borrowing. Mr Faraday deposed to having lived a very frugal existence.
That evidence was not seriously challenged. I do not think it is out of the question that Mr Faraday could have saved enough of his own money to have purchased the Warners Avenue property without borrowing. That is particularly so if one accepts, as I do, that from time to time he received gifts of cash from Rosalia Rappaport. I am not satisfied that Mr Faraday borrowed $37,000 from Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport to acquire the Warners Avenue property.  
Purchase of the Broadbeach Property  Thomas Rappaport says that Mr Faraday used moneys borrowed from Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport to buy his half interest in the Broadbeach property purchased in December 1985. According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday told him:  "I have some savings and the balance I can borrow from the family. I can approach Laci and Malvina as well as your parents."  Thomas Rappaport said that he and Vivian Rappaport raised the moneys to buy their share of the Broadbeach property using their term deposit moneys of $35,349 and also part of a gift of $16,000 received from his mother. According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday later told him that he, Mr Faraday, had obtained his half of the share partly using his savings and borrowing the balance from Thomas Rappaport's parents. Thomas Rappaport deposed that Mr
Faraday told him:  "The loan to your parents can be repaid if the property is ever sold. In the meantime, your parents do not expect any repayments from me and this suits me fine."  Mr Faraday denies these conversations. Mr Faraday says that he obtained all of the moneys to buy his share of the Broadbeach property from his savings. There are no contemporaneous documents to corroborate one version of events or the other. Neither version of events is consistent with paragraph 45 of Thomas Rappaport's first affidavit in which he deposed that Rosalia
Rappaport's money had been channelled to him by Mr Faraday, and used in the purchase of "each property". I am not satisfied that moneys were provided to
Mr Faraday by way of loan from Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport. There is nothing to corroborate Thomas Rappaport's evidence that Mr Faraday made admissions to this effect.  
Thomas Rappaport's Denial of Receiving Money from Mr Faraday for Investment  In paragraph 28 of Mr Faraday's affidavit of 2 December 2003, he deposed that some time after 1981 "I began giving money to my nephew from time to time. Whenever I had a few thousand dollars, I would give him the money in cash." In response to that paragraph, Thomas Rappaport said:  "I strenuously deny paragraph 28. During the whole of the period between 1986 to 2000, there has always been friction arising from arguments and disagreements between my wife and the plaintiff, and my wife was always against any other form of investment with the plaintiff after our previous purchase together with him of the unit in Broadbeach in December 1985.
Accordingly, she would never have approved the alleged receipt of moneys by me pursuant to the alleged agreement."  In paragraph 35 of Mr Faraday's affidavit of 2 December 2003, he deposed that:  "I continued to give TGR (Thomas Rappaport) money from time to time for the purchase of further investment properties."  
This sentence was objected to and rejected. It was a conclusion about other primary facts not deposed to. The requirements of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s78.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) were not met for it to be admitted as lay opinion evidence. However, the Rappaports read the following paragraph in Thomas Rappaport's affidavit of 7 July 2004 (paragraph 37):  "I say that the plaintiff at no time continued to give me money to purchase further investment properties or at all as alleged in paragraph 35. At that time, the plaintiff had a debt to my parents with regards to the purchase of the Broadbeach unit, his home at Dundas and also his unit at Bondi and accordingly it is my belief that the plaintiff throughout this period had no surplus cash to give to me."  In relation to the purchase of the Chevron Island property, Thomas
Rappaport deposed (paragraph 41a):  "... The property at Chevron Island was purchased on 9 February 1987 by my wife Vivian and I only as joint tenants and the plaintiff never had any interest whatsoever in it. ... It was purchased for $169,000 plus a further $6,000 approximately for stamp duty, legal and other expenses. Thereby making a total of $175,000. The source of these funds are as follows:-  
Cash savings used as our deposit $ 7,450.00 
Two term deposits in the joint names  of my wife and myself $38,784.52 
Flexi Plus Mortgage Line of Credit 
Account with NAB $ 4,792.50 
National Australia Bank $15,000.00 
Line of Credit from Select  
Credit Union $37,000.00 
Balance being from Line of Credit 
With the NAB $65,972.98"  Thomas Rappaport went on to say that:  "We had no further business or financial arrangements whatsoever with the plaintiff after January 1987."  
In paragraph 44 of that affidavit, Thomas Rappaport deposed:  "... It is most unlikely that [Mr Faraday] would have given any moneys to me and my wife jointly by way of a contribution towards the purchase of an investment property as there had been many arguments and disagreements between my wife and [Mr Faraday] since December 1985 after the purchase of the
Broadbeach apartment. Both my wife and I would check our banking statements on a weekly basis and would have noticed any unusual or unexplained deposits into our accounts. No such deposit [has] ever been made. ... I state that there had been no further business or financial arrangements whatsoever as between the plaintiff and myself and/or my wife Vivian Rappaport after January 1987 when we purchased his 50% share in the Broadbeach unit."  It follows that Thomas Rappaport denied receiving money from Mr Faraday for investment after the purchase of the Broadbeach property.  
Sale of Mr Faraday's Half Interest in the Broadbeach Property  Mr Faraday sold his half interest in the Broadbeach property to Thomas and
Vivian Rappaport on 16 January 1987. The transfer is dated 21 January 1987. Mr
Faraday says that he was unaware that he was selling his interest to Thomas and Vivian Rappaport. I do not accept that evidence. The contract for sale and the transfer were prepared by Mr Faraday himself. The transfer is in his writing. It is unquestionably his signature. It plainly shows Thomas and
Vivian Rappaport as the transferees of his interest. He also signed the contracts for sale of his interest and answers to requisitions on title. The contracts were signed by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport as purchaser. Mr Faraday witnessed their signatures and Thomas Rappaport witnessed his. The signatures were placed immediately under certain typed special conditions which included a condition that:  "the mentioned $38.000. represents 50% of the total value of the home unit the vendor is selling. The purchaser already owns the other 50% of the property."  Mr Faraday's denial that he knew that he was selling his half interest in the Broadbeach property to Thomas and Vivian Rappaport, and his assertion that he sold the Dalley Street property in 1979 rather than in 1987, show that he does not have a rational appreciation of events. Whatever might be the truth underlying his contentions in the proceedings, it is unsafe to rely upon his testimony if it is not corroborated.  Mr Faraday denied receiving the $38,000 payable to him on the sale of his half share in the Broadbeach property. Thomas Rappaport said that he paid Mr
Faraday $38,000 in fifty dollar notes. He says that he was present when he handed over this cash to Mr Faraday, and that Mr Faraday then counted out $20,000 in cash and handed it over to Alexander Rappaport. He says that he was later told that Mr Faraday had paid Rosalia Rappaport $17,000 in cash. He did not explain why the payments were made in cash except that he said that that was what Mr Faraday wanted. Again, there is no objective evidence to support either party's version of events. On the one hand, Mr Faraday signed the memorandum of transfer which acknowledged the receipt of the purchase price.
However, that is consistent with his leaving the $38,000 with Thomas Rappaport for further investment. One would expect such an arrangement to be documented.
On the other hand, one would expect some documentation of the receipt by
Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport of $37,000. It is not possible to come to a definite conclusion on whether the purchase price for Mr Faraday's half interest in the Broadbeach property was paid to Mr Faraday and remitted by him in repayment of a loan to Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport, or, on the other hand, whether the purchase price was left with Thomas Rappaport for further investment.  
The Chevron Island Property   The Chevron Island property was purchased by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport on 9 February 1987. The purchase price was $169,000 and the total cost of purchase including stamp duty and other expenses was $175,000. As I understand
Thomas Rappaport's evidence, about $46,000 was provided by him and his wife from cash savings and two term deposits in their joint names, and the balance of the purchase price was borrowed by them from the National Australia Bank or the Select Credit Union.  Mr Faraday gave the following evidence about the purchase of the TAB premises. He said that in late 1986, Thomas Rappaport said to him:  "In or about late 1986, my nephew and I had a further conversation to the following effect:  
TGR: 'There is a shop for sale in Surfer's Paradise which has a TAB as the tenant. As you know the Gold Coast is booming and the TAB would be an excellent tenant.'  
SF: 'Yes, that sounds interesting. If you think it's a good idea I'm happy to go in with you.'"  
Mr Faraday said that he later inspected the property and told Thomas
Rappaport:  "I like the property. It does not look like the tenant will go bankrupt. I'd like to go ahead with the purchase."  
Mr Faraday said:  "I do not recall giving my nephew a lump sum of money. I had been giving him accumulated savings from time to time as they reached a couple of thousand dollars. I do not recall ever discussing that the property would not be in my name. "  Mr Faraday did not depose to any conversation in 1986 or up to February with Thomas Rappaport in relation to the proportions in which the property would be owned. There was no evidence as to how much of Mr Faraday's money was contributed to the purchase price. There was no evidence as to how much of Mr Faraday's money, or Rosalia Rappaport's money, was held by Thomas
Rappaport. Mr Faraday said that from 1987, he started to receive running statements of account from Thomas Rappaport showing what moneys had been received from Mr Faraday, what income from the properties was credited to Mr
Faraday, what property expenses were debited to him, and what payments were made to him. Mr Faraday said that such running sheets were provided to him at the end of each financial year, and otherwise from time to time. No such statements were produced prior to the period commencing 25 May 1995.  
Thomas Rappaport's 1987 Will  On 24 September 1987, Thomas Rappaport made a will by which he left a legacy to Mr Faraday of $135,000 indexed according to movements in the
Consumer Price Index from the date of execution of his will to the date of death. He left his residuary estate to his wife, or if she did not survive him by 30 days, to his children. At this time, Thomas Rappaport's two children were aged 7 and 10. Relations between Vivian Rappaport and Mr Faraday were unhappy. Thomas Rappaport said that the principal reason for he and his wife buying Mr Faraday's interest in the Broadbeach property was that there had been disagreements between Vivian Rappaport and Mr Faraday. He said that:  "A considerable amount of ill-feeling had developed as well as arguments and disagreements between [Mr Faraday] and my wife." (Paragraph 39 of affidavit of 7 July 2004.)  In September 1987, Mr Faraday was 62 years old. He had a wife but no children. He described his marriage as a marriage of convenience. He was earning income through the provision of piano lessons. He lived in a house in
Dundas which had no mortgage and had recently sold both his unit in Dalley
Street property and his share in the Broadbeach property. On the face of it, there is no obvious reason as to why Thomas Rappaport should have left a substantial legacy to Mr Faraday when Thomas Rappaport had a wife and two young children with a claim on his bounty.  Thomas Rappaport said that the reason for making the will was that Mr
Faraday told him that he, Thomas Rappaport, would ultimately inherit the family property, that is, that Mr Faraday's assets would be left to his sisters, Rosalia Rappaport and Ms Hollander. Ms Hollander had no children and
Rosalia Rappaport had only one child, Thomas Rappaport. Accordingly in due course, Thomas Rappaport could be expected to inherit all of the family's assets. According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday told him that he was lucky that he would inherit from the other family members and that he should reciprocate. Thomas Rappaport said that Mr Faraday told him that the value of
Mr Faraday's assets was $135,000 after making an allowance for money he owed to Thomas Rappaport's parents, and accordingly, Thomas Rappaport agreed to leaving a legacy of $135,000 indexed according to changes in the Consumer
Price Index, to Mr Faraday if he died first. He said he was quite happy to do that because, being a much younger man, he did not expect to die first. He gave no evidence in his affidavit of Mr Faraday's threatening to leave his estate outside the family if Thomas Rappaport did not "reciprocate". It was also pointed out that as most of Thomas Rappaport's assets consisted of real property which he owned as joint tenant with his wife, Vivian Rappaport, it was likely that most of the property would pass to his wife through survivorship, rather than forming part of his estate.  Mr Faraday said that the reason for the legacy in Thomas Rappaport's will was that Mr Faraday was concerned by September 1987 that Thomas Rappaport had property partly belonging to him but standing in Mr Rappaport's name, and that
Mr Faraday had nothing to prove his title should anything happen to Thomas
Rappaport. He says that he said to Thomas Rappaport "I want something so that if anything happens to you, I can prove that I am owed money from our investments." Thomas Rappaport told him that he would draw up a document so that "you have some security in the event of anything happening to me."
According to Mr Faraday, Thomas Rappaport later gave him a copy of his will and told him that "what is left to you represents your share of what is being invested." This satisfied Mr Faraday.  According to Thomas Rappaport, he made no enquiries of Mr Faraday to ascertain how it was that Mr Faraday came up with the figure of $135,000 as being the value of the assets which Thomas Rappaport could eventually expect to inherit. According to Mr Faraday, Thomas Rappaport provided him with no explanation as to how he quantified the value of Mr Faraday's investments with him.  A further difficulty with Thomas Rappaport's explanation of events is that, according to him, Mr Faraday wanted a reciprocal arrangement in relation to inheritance. Thomas Rappaport understood that Mr Faraday had left his property to his sisters and it would only pass directly from Mr Faraday to
Thomas Rappaport if Mr Faraday's sisters predeceased him. No such reciprocal arrangement was made in Thomas Rappaport's will. That is to say, Thomas
Rappaport did not leave the legacy of $135,000 to Mr Faraday only if Mr
Faraday's sisters predeceased him.  Mr Faraday's appears the more likely explanation. However, whilst Mr
Faraday's explanation is consistent with his making investments through Thomas
Rappaport, it is not consistent with the parties' intending that he have an enforceable beneficial interest in the properties acquired. If Mr Faraday had a beneficial interest in property held in Thomas Rappaport's name, Thomas
Rappaport could not have disposed of that interest by will. He could only dispose of property which he owned, not of property which Mr Faraday owned. On
Mr Faraday's case, had Thomas Rappaport died first, Mr Faraday could not have expected both the legacy and a beneficial interest in the property. His acceptance of a legacy as sufficient security for his investment is inconsistent with his believing he had an enforceable beneficial interest in the property.  
Purchase of the Belmore Road Property  On 30 November 1988, Thomas and Vivian Rappaport purchased a butcher's shop in Belmore Road, Randwick. The cost of purchase was $244,000. Thomas
Rappaport deposed that the money for the purchase came partly from a loan of $180,000 from the Advance Bank, and the balance of $72,600 was obtained from the net proceeds of sale of their unit at 28A Imperial Avenue, Bondi. He said "at no time did I receive any funds from the plaintiff for investment purposes".  According to Mr Faraday, Thomas Rappaport told him the property would cost about $150,000. Mr Faraday said that he did not think that he had that much in his account with Thomas Rappaport. Thomas Rappaport told him that if he did not have enough money to go halves, he could buy a smaller share. Mr Faraday said that he thought he had enough to buy 40%. Thomas Rappaport told him that he thought he had about $60,000 in his account and that would give him an interest of about 40%. Mr Faraday says that they agreed that Mr Faraday would be a "40% shareholder".  Again, there is no evidence of what moneys Thomas Rappaport had received from Mr Faraday at this time. There is no evidence as to how much of any money given by Mr Faraday to Thomas Rappaport for investment was applied towards the purchase.  
Purchase of the Brisbane Road Properties   On 10 January 1989, Thomas and Vivian Rappaport purchased the two Brisbane
Road properties off the plan for $95,000 each. The total cost of the purchase was about $194,000. Thomas Rappaport deposed that the whole of the purchase moneys to complete the purchase came from a National Bank loan to him and his wife. At the time of the purchase, Mr Faraday was overseas on a ten-month trip. The purchase was apparently completed on 16 March 1990.  According to Mr Faraday, he had conversations with Thomas Rappaport in about buying the Brisbane Road properties. However, the contract for purchase of the two properties was entered into in January 1989. Again, there is no evidence of how much of Mr Faraday's money Thomas Rappaport was then holding, or as to what parts of Mr Faraday's money were used to buy the properties. Mr Faraday said that it was agreed that one of the two properties would belong to Mr Faraday and the other would belong to Thomas Rappaport, or to Thomas & Vivian Rappaport. However, Mr Faraday gave no evidence of their identifying which unit would belong to whom.  
Thomas Rappaport's First Affidavit  If the evidence rested there, Mr Faraday's case would be paper thin. It would depend on his own evidence, which, in important respects, was contrary to objectively established facts, and the inferences which might be drawn from
Thomas Rappaport's 1987 will. There was no evidence beyond Mr Faraday's generalised assertion that any money was provided by him for the purchase of the properties. Thomas Rappaport deposed that all the money for the purchase of the three properties were provided by him and his wife from their savings or from borrowings made by them.  However, a different picture emerged from Thomas Rappaport's first affidavit sworn on 7 July 2003 in proceedings No. 3668/03. This was before Mr
Faraday's first affidavit was sworn, but after service of Mr Faraday's statement of claim in proceedings 2649/02 in which Mr Faraday claimed a beneficial interest in the three properties. In that affidavit, Thomas
Rappaport deposed that up to 1982, Mr Faraday did the banking for Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport into their joint account. He also said that Mr Faraday did all of the banking for him and his wife. Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport separated in 1982. Thomas Rappaport deposed:  "44. After my parents separated in 1982, I recall that my mother would say to me repeatedly, 'All of my savings have been put aside and will be given to
Steven to bank into your account. I have asked Steven to do this so he can help keep track and manage this money for us. I have no one else to do it for me and you are too busy with your work and your family. I want to make sure that this money will be used to buy investment property for our future security and for you and your children. ... I can trust Steve to keep an eye on this money for me. ...' Between 1982 until 1996, [Rosalia Rappaport] continued to give moneys to [Mr Faraday] to bank into my National Australia
Bank account. These moneys were derived from her half share of the rental moneys from 86 Ware Street Bondi as well as her surplus pension moneys which she was able to save. ...  ...  
During the said period between 1982 and 1996, [Rosalia Rappaport] and [Mr Faraday] continued to remain very close and it became common knowledge in our family including [Mr Faraday] that I was accumulating the surplus savings and earnings of both [Rosalia Rappaport] and my father for the purpose that such moneys would be invested in real estate for long-term security of all the members of my immediate family but excluding [Mr Faraday]. From time to time, my wife and I would purchase real estate using these moneys as a deposit and we would borrow the balance to complete each purchase. We would take [Rosalia
Rappaport] with us to inspect these properties both before and after their purchase. [Mr Faraday] never attended with us to inspect these properties and his only involvement was to do the banking and to reassure [Rosalia Rappaport] and to account to her that her moneys had in fact had been used as a deposit towards each purchase. Moreover, prior to the purchase of each particular property, my wife and I would discuss with [Mr Faraday] the purchase price for such property and also we would quantify what proportion of [Rosalia
Rappaport's] money was contained in the deposit for that particular purchase.
During the whole of this period, [Mr Faraday] at no time asked me to produce any form of statement setting out the amount of money which had been contributed towards the accumulated deposits for any particular purchase.
There was never any need to do this as I was in regular contact with both [Rosalia Rappaport] and my father and we frequently discussed with each other how much of their savings were contained in each deposit. They were also aware that the property which my wife and I were purchasing was for the long-term benefit of my immediate family and also they formed the financial security should it be required to support both the plaintiff and my father in their old age.  ...  
In ... proceedings [No. 2649/02], [Mr Faraday] now claims that the moneys which he had been given by [Rosalia Rappaport] to be used as a contribution towards the deposit with respect to some of those properties are indeed his own money."  It follows therefore from Thomas Rappaport's first affidavit, that contrary to his later denial, he regularly received moneys from Mr Faraday to be used towards a deposit on the purchase of each investment property. The position taken by Thomas Rappaport in his first affidavit was that those moneys had been given by Rosalia Rappaport to Mr Faraday and were her moneys, not his.  I decided that Thomas Rappaport should be afforded the opportunity to explain the apparently inconsistent evidence as to the sources of funds used to acquire the investment properties. Mr Faraday was incapable of conducting a cross-examination about that. Counsel for the Rappaports had submitted that they would have welcomed a professional cross-examination. Reluctantly, I asked Thomas Rappaport questions about his evidence whilst seeking to avoid leading questions. Initially, he confirmed what appeared from his affidavit in the 2002 proceedings, that is, that all of the moneys used in buying the properties were from loans taken out by him and his wife, or from savings belonging to them. He said that part of the savings used in the purchase of the Chevron Island property had come from a gift made to him by his uncle.  Initially, his explanation for paragraphs 44 and 45 of his affidavit of 7
July 2003 was that the investment properties referred to were different properties from those to which Mr Faraday makes a claim. When asked about paragraph 46(c), he said that Rosalia Rappaport's money was paid into a Flexi-
Plus mortgage account and used to reduce his and his wife's borrowings, such that it was impossible to distinguish whether it was used for the purpose of purchasing the properties.  This evidence was not consistent with his affidavit of 7 July 2003.
However, it did confirm that Mr Faraday was providing money to Thomas
Rappaport (which Thomas Rappaport says was Rosalia Rappaport's money) for investment, by its being deposited into his and his wife's bank account.  Vivian Rappaport gave evidence that Rosalia Rappaport regularly brought out envelopes containing cash which she counted out over the dining room table and gave to Mr Faraday. She said that Mr Faraday then wrote out a receipt and took the money. She said that Rosalia Rappaport kept bundles of these receipts but says they could not be located after Rosalia Rappaport moved to the nursing home. The implication was that Mr Faraday stole them. Vivian Rappaport said that Rosalia Rappaport told her that "these are all the receipts that
Steve has given me from moneys we invested with him to buy property."  In the course of opening, Mr Bradford said that from about 1971 to the early 1980s, Alexander and Rosalia Rappaport were in the habit of giving cash to Mr Faraday from time to time. He said this normally occurred over dinner.
He said the reason for the making of these gifts was the closeness of the family. He said that the gifts probably stopped in 1983 when Mr Faraday married Valeria Faraday. Counsel said:  "It is the defendant's case that when money was given to him Rosalia
Rappaport asked him to provide a receipt for the money. ... In a family arrangement like this, presumably, according to the defendant's case, Rosalia
Rappaport simply wanted some acknowledgement that Mr Faraday had received a certain sum of cash."  Counsel said the significance of the Rappaports' allegation that Mr
Faraday took the receipts was that "Mr Faraday did not want it known that
Rosalia Rappaport had given him money." The case advanced by the Rappaports at the hearing was not that Mr Faraday had used Rosalia Rappaport's money to make investments with Thomas Rappaport, but that no investments were made with moneys paid by Mr Faraday after the purchase of the Broadbeach property. That was Thomas Rappaport's evidence in his affidavit of 7 July 2004 sworn in the proceedings.  Rosalia Rappaport swore a statutory declaration and an affidavit for the proceedings. Mr Gellert gave evidence, which I accept, that he received instructions to prepare the statutory declaration from Thomas Rappaport. A draft of her statutory declaration was provided to him by Thomas Rappaport. I reject Thomas Rappaport's denial of his involvement in the preparation of his mother's sworn statements to be used in the proceedings. I also accept Mr
Gellert's evidence that Rosalia Rappaport was rational and alert and understood what she was signing. She made her statutory declaration on 22
November 2000. As originally drafted, it said that during the previous 15 years, she had entrusted Mr Faraday with her savings of approximately $100,000 to invest at his discretion for her benefit, with money left over at her death to be given to her son and grandchildren. She amended the draft to state that
Mr Faraday was to invest her savings with her son for her benefit.  Thomas Rappaport's first affidavit corroborates Mr Faraday's assertion that he provided money to Thomas Rappaport which was used by Thomas Rappaport for the purchase of investment properties. Thomas Rappaport's assertions that these moneys belonged to Rosalia Rappaport are corroborated by her statutory declaration of 22 November 2000. However, he was involved in the preparation of the statutory declaration. The document is self-serving. Both Thomas
Rappaport's evidence as to his mother's providing moneys to Mr Faraday for investment on her behalf and Rosalia Rappaport's statutory declaration, in the form they were given, would have been inadmissible if objected to. The evidence was not objected to, but has minimal weight, except so far as it contains admissions.  I think it very likely that some money was given by Rosalia Rappaport to her brother as she deposed to. But I do not accept that it was given to him to be invested with her son on her behalf. If that were to be the case, there is no sufficient explanation as to why Mr Faraday was an intermediary. On Thomas
Rappaport's evidence, it was done because it was convenient for Mr Faraday to go to the bank, as he had the time. According to Thomas Rappaport's affidavit, it was also so Mr Faraday could manage and keep track of Rosalia Rappaport's money. But Thomas Rappaport said he never provided any form of accounting to
Mr Faraday to allow him to do that, and he expected Mr Faraday to do it by his checking Thomas Rappaport's bank statements, invoices and receipts. Whilst there is evidence of Mr Faraday looking after the Rappaport's financial affairs in their absence, I consider this evidence to be improbable.  Tovir has not accounted to the executors of Rosalia Rappaport's estate for any share of the rent. Nor has Thomas Rappaport made any arrangements to account for a share of the capital. This is inconsistent with Rosalia
Rappaport having had a beneficial interest in the properties.  I conclude that some unidentified moneys from Mr Faraday were used by
Thomas Rappaport in the purchase of investment properties. These moneys may have consisted of, or included, moneys given to Mr Faraday by Rosalia
Rappaport. But if that were the case, I do not accept that he was investing moneys as trustee on her behalf.  It does not follow that it was agreed Mr Faraday should have a 50% and 40% interest in the Chevron Island and Belmore Road properties, or one of the two
Brisbane Road properties. Nor does it follow that he contributed 50% or 40% to the purchase price of the properties.  
Documentary Corroboration  Mr Faraday claimed corroboration of his case from four classes of documents which he said were produced or written by Thomas Rappaport. The first was Thomas Rappaport's 1987 will, together with handwritten changes to the will. The second was a number of notes purportedly created between March and September 1990. Mr Faraday claimed these were written by Thomas
Rappaport. They credited Mr Faraday with rents from the TAB premises on the
Chevron Island property, and the butcher's shop on the Belmore Road property.
The third is a document headed "Taxable Income Calculation 93/94". Thomas
Rappaport admits part of the handwriting is his. It contains a calculation of tax payable by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport on rent from the Queensland and
Belmore Road properties attributable to another person's share of that income.
The fourth is the "running sheets" which Mr Faraday claimed Thomas Rappaport gave him showing the balance of an account between Thomas Rappaport and Mr
Faraday.  
Handwritten Changes to Thomas Rappaport's 1987 Will  I have already referred to Thomas Rappaport's will of September 1987. Mr
Faraday deposed that sometime after 1987 he had a further conversation with
Thomas Rappaport in which he asked to be given something showing the market value of the three investment properties. According to him, Thomas Rappaport told him that:  "What I can do is mark the changes on your copy of the will and initial it to show the value of the increase to what the investments are now worth."  Mr Faraday said that on the first occasion, Thomas Rappaport increased the amount of the legacy to $320,000. On the second occasion, in October 1995, after a similar discussion, Thomas Rappaport altered Mr Faraday's copy of the will to show an amount of $410,000. On each occasion he initialled the changes.  Mr Faraday annexed to his first affidavit a photocopy of the will with the handwritten amendments. In his affidavit, he deposed to having been given by
Thomas Rappaport a copy of Thomas Rappaport's will and that on two subsequent occasions Thomas Rappaport altered the copy will.  Mr Faraday engaged the services of a document examiner, Mr Dubedat. He provided Mr Dubedat with a photocopy of Thomas Rappaport's will of 24
September 1987 with original red and blue ink handwriting containing the figures "$320,000" and the initials "TR" in red ink; and the numbers "$410,000", the initials "TR" and the date "29/10/95" in blue ink. This was one of what Mr Dubedat called the "questioned documents".  Mr Faraday provided to Mr Dubedat photocopies of specimen handwriting of
Thomas Rappaport. Some of the handwriting on the photocopies was Mr Faraday's.
Some was Thomas Rappaport's. Thomas Rappaport claimed that some of the handwriting which Mr Faraday claimed was Thomas Rappaport's writing was in fact Mr Faraday's writing. However, there were substantial parts of the specimen documents which were unquestionably in Thomas Rappaport's writing.
The cross-examination of Mr Dubedat did not establish that he had used any of the disputed handwriting in the specimen documents for the purposes of comparison with the questioned documents. Mr Dubedat concluded that the author of the specimen documents probably wrote the original handwriting on the questioned documents.  Mr Bradford submitted correctly that the evidence of Mr Dubedat was not decisive of the question whether Thomas Rappaport was the author of the questioned documents, even though there was no contrary expert opinion. The weight to be given to Mr Dubedat's opinion depends not only on the extent of his opportunity to make a comparison of the handwriting and what counsel called the inherent reliability of his evidence. It also depends on the objective circumstances and the cogency of other evidence as to the likelihood of the documents having been written by Thomas Rappaport or manufactured by Mr
Faraday.  Mr Bradford also submitted that one of the questioned documents provided to Mr Dubedat (document Q3 at JB 226) was prepared from a document at JB 153 which contained clear evidence of re-tracing. The document at JB 153 is purportedly a photocopy of the last page of annexure J to Mr Faraday's affidavit of 2 December 2003. The document Q3 as JB 226 is a photocopy of the annexure. Mr Bradford submitted that it should be inferred from the re-tracing apparent on page JB 153 that Mr Faraday, and not Thomas Rappaport, was the author of the questioned writing at Q3, JB 226.  I do not accept this submission. The judge's bundle of documents was not prepared by Mr Faraday. Annexure J to Mr Faraday's affidavit, from which the photocopy given to Mr Dubedat (i.e. document Q3) was made, does not include the re-tracing. Whoever made the re-tracing on the copy of the annexure which was included in the judge's bundle at page JB 153, it does not affect Mr
Dubedat's opinion. I do not accept that the last page of annexure J to Mr
Faraday's affidavit was prepared from the document at JB 153. To the contrary, page JB 153 appears to be a photocopy of a photocopy of the annexure on which there was re-tracing. There is no evidence that Mr Faraday did the retracing.
In any event, it does not affect the reliability of Mr Dubedat's opinion.  During the course of the hearing, Mr Faraday was required to produce original documents which he had discovered. Initially, those documents were not in Court. Ultimately, Mr Faraday produced a suitcase of documents and consented to the defendants' solicitors having access to the suitcase to seek to identify the original documents which had been called for. As a result of that inspection, there was produced during the course of Mr Faraday's cross- examination a further photocopy of Thomas Rappaport's 1987 will which also contained in red ink the handwritten figures "$320,000" and the initials "TR".
This version of the will did not include the further handwriting in blue ink which appeared on the document provided to Mr Dubedat. It was Mr Faraday's case that the writing on the second document was also Thomas Rappaport's writing. He denied that any of the writing on that document was his. If Mr
Faraday's evidence were correct, it would necessarily follow that Thomas
Rappaport must have provided Mr Faraday with two photocopies of his 1987 will on which he wrote the figures of $320,000 and which he initialled.  There was no explanation as to why Mr Faraday did not provide the second document allegedly containing Thomas Rappaport's writing to Mr Dubedat for his report. Mr Dubedat was shown the second document during the course of his cross-examination but was unable to say in the witness box whether the writing on the second copy of the will was in the same hand as the writing on the will he had been shown previously. He noted that there were differences in the construction of the letters but could not say whether that indicated another writer. Mr Dubedat said that there were some similarities between the figures but also some subtle differences, and it was impossible to say whether those differences were evidence of another writer or natural variations of the one writer.  On the eighth day of the hearing, Mr Faraday cross-examined Mr Ardino, a solicitor. Mr Faraday asked Mr Ardino whether he had seen a will made by
Thomas Rappaport with a $410,000 sum which Mr Faraday said represented Thomas
Rappaport's debt to Mr Faraday. Mr Faraday produced a copy of that document and showed it to Mr Ardino. The document which he produced was another photocopy of Thomas Rappaport's will of 24 September 1987. It contained original handwriting in black ink with the figures $320,000 and the initials "TR". That figure had been crossed out in blue ink and in blue ink there was inserted the figures "$410,000.00", the initials "TR" and the date "29/10/95".
Mr Faraday was further cross-examined on this document. He maintained that he had not made any of the alterations on any of the wills. He said that the handwriting was all that of Thomas Rappaport. He said that "probably he gave me all three". However, he also said in cross-examination that he was 99% sure that he would only have taken one copy of the will on each occasion. No explanation was proffered as to why Thomas Rappaport may have provided Mr
Faraday with three copies of the will on which he had written the figures $320,000. Nor was there any explanation as to why Thomas Rappaport would have provided Mr Faraday with two copies of the will with the figure of $320,000 crossed out and the figure of $410,000 and the date 29/10/95 inserted. In his affidavit, Mr Faraday described having received only one copy of the will, which Thomas Rappaport amended on two occasions.  It is possible that Thomas Rappaport made the handwritten changes on one copy of the will which he gave to Mr Faraday, and that Mr Faraday, during the course of the case, made the other handwritten changes himself on other copies of Thomas Rappaport's will which he obtained on discovery. Mr Faraday denied that any of his handwriting was on the documents. However, he does have a tendency to make copies of important documents and to make his own handwritten notes on those documents. Mr Faraday made such notes on the "running sheets" which he tendered. He also wrote on copies of documents he obtained as specimens of Thomas Rappaport's writing.  During cross-examination, Mr Faraday gave the following unresponsive but revealing answer:  "Q Again, Mr Faraday, can I ask you to explain to the Court how it is that you've come to have three copies of the same will with original handwriting put on apparently at different times?  
A My handwriting is the same today and one month ago and will be if I am alive three months from now on."  When asked to explain why he had given this answer if he had not put his handwriting on the documents, Mr Faraday said that if he had put his handwriting on the documents the writing on them would appear the same. The writings do appear to be similar. On his case, the writing on the documents is the same.  There is no plausible reason why Thomas Rappaport would have given Mr
Faraday three copies of his will with the handwritten figures of $320,000, nor why he would have given him two copies amended to read $410,000. In his affidavit, Mr Faraday deposed to having received one copy of the will on which handwritten changes were made on two occasions. He ultimately adhered to that evidence in cross-examination. I therefore conclude that the handwriting on at least two of the wills was not that of Thomas Rappaport, but of Mr Faraday. I am reinforced in that conclusion by the fact that Mr Faraday did not submit two of the wills for examination by a document examiner.  It does not necessarily follow that Mr Faraday also wrote on the first will. However, enough doubt is cast on the provenance of the handwriting on those documents that I cannot conclude that the handwriting on them belongs to
Thomas Rappaport. It does not follow that the other disputed documents said to be in Thomas Rappaport's writing should also be discounted. They contain more handwriting than the figures, the dollar sign, and the initials which appear on the will. However, I must take into account that apparently Mr Faraday was prepared to forge Thomas Rappaport's initials and writing. I therefore have to approach the other documents with especial caution.  Notes of Remittances  The second class of documents consisted of a number of notes apparently prepared in 1990 which explained the make up of payments made to Mr Faraday by
Thomas Rappaport between March and September 1990. According to Thomas
Rappaport, whilst Mr Faraday was overseas during 1990, arrangements were made that Mr Faraday's pension and his half share of rental moneys from the Warners
Avenue property were deposited into his credit union account. Thomas Rappaport was an authorised signatory on that account. Whilst Mr Faraday was overseas,
Thomas Rappaport would draw $800 from the Select Credit Union account and deposit it into Thomas Rappaport's National Bank Mastercard account. Mr
Faraday held a card on Thomas Rappaport's Mastercard account from which he could access funds whilst he was overseas. According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr
Faraday asked if he could borrow $1,100 per month for about six months whilst he was overseas. Thomas Rappaport agreed to this, and for the six months in question deposited $1,100 (or in one case $1,080) in addition to the $800 drawn from Mr Faraday's credit union account. Sometimes the deposit was by cheque. Sometimes it was by cash. Sometimes it was a mixture of the two.  However, Mr Faraday produced handwritten documents said to be in the hand of Thomas Rappaport. An example is the following questioned document No. 6:  "FOR MONTH OF APRIL 90 
Butcher $ 380.00 
TAB $ 720.00  $1,100.00 
Plus $800 from your S/acc 
TOTAL $1,900.00 
Deposited to NAB 
MASTER"  There is then what appears to be Mr Faraday's writing recording "S/acc = saving acc". Thomas Rappaport denies that the notes are in his hand. He says that the figures of $380 referable to the butcher's shop and $720 referable to the TAB premises have no bearing on the actual rentals being received from those properties in 1990. The rent on the butcher's shop was about $2,936 per month. The rent from the TAB premises was $1,128 per month. If the documents are under the hand of Thomas Rappaport, they do not corroborate Mr Faraday's claim that he had a 50% beneficial interest in the TAB premises, and a 40% beneficial interest in the butcher's shop. However, they would corroborate his claim that he had some beneficial interest in the properties.  Four of the five notes were provided to Mr Dubedat (questioned documents number 6, 7, 8 and 9). Mr Dubedat commented that:  "The reproduction nature of the specimen documents, and some questioned documents does not enable a detailed assessment to be made on the line quality and other construction details in the handwriting. This has limited the comparison of the handwriting on these documents to the pictorial features only which may preclude an unqualified opinion being expressed as to whether or not the writer of the specimen handwriting also wrote the questioned handwriting.  
A comparative examination of the specimen handwriting reproduced on documents [S1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s1.html) to
S[6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s6.html) with the questioned handwriting on documents Q1 to Q9 revealed a number of similarities between them, with no apparent significant differences.
Similarities were found in the size, construction and form of all the letters except the upper case 'H', the layout of documents Q4 compared to [S6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s6.html), spatial relationships of the letters to one another, slope, letter spacing and connections. Furthermore, with the exception of the apparent difference in the uppercase letter 'H' on documents Q6 (1 only) and [S2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s2.html) (1 only), no other evidence was found to suggest that anyone other than the writer of the specimen handwriting wrote the questioned handwriting.  
Certain questioned documents, in particular Q1 and Q2 only have a limited amount of writing for comparison, and no definite conclusion can be reached as to who wrote these documents. However, if the questioned documents are compared collectively which is based on the assumption that the questioned documents were written by the same writer, then I can conclude that the writer of the specimen handwriting reproduced on documents [S1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s1.html) to
S[6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s6.html) probably wrote the original handwriting on or reproduced on documents Q1 to
Q8. That is to say, it is unlikely in my opinion that anyone other than the writer of the specimen handwriting wrote the questioned handwriting."  Mr Dubedat formed the view that if one assumed that the same person wrote the documents Q6, Q7, Q8 and Q9, it is probable that that person was also the writer of the specimen documents which he was given. Mr Dubedat did not find any evidence to suggest that the same person did not write each of the documents which are Q6, Q7, Q8 and Q9, except for an upper case H on the document Q6. Mr Dubedat was taken to various of Mr Faraday's writings and it was suggested to him that Mr Faraday's handwriting was similar to the handwriting on the questioned documents. However, Mr Dubedat did not accept that the handwritings were of the same construction.  Mr Dubedat was not examined or cross-examined upon the significance of the difference in the construction of the letter H in the document Q6 from the specimen document [S2.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s2.html) He noted that there was only one capital H in the specimen documents with which he was provided. When cross-examined about another document, he observed that as there was only one such letter in the specimen material, it was difficult to determine what significance should be attributed to a different construction of the letter H. I think the same must follow in relation to his comparison of the questioned document 6 and the specimen document [S2.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s2.html) That is to say, that difference does not warrant a rejection of his opinion that the writer of the specimen documents was probably the writer of the questioned documents. It is true that that opinion was given on the assumption that the same person wrote the questioned documents, but Mr Dubedat did not see anything to cause him to form a different conclusion and there is no reason to think that more than one person wrote the questioned documents.  It is also very significant that Thomas Rappaport did not himself call any evidence from a handwriting expert, even to say that the materials were insufficient to form a conclusion as to whether the handwriting on the documents produced by Mr Faraday was Thomas Rappaport's handwriting. The questioned documents were for the most part original documents. Thomas
Rappaport would have had ample original handwriting available to him which could have been submitted to an expert for the purposes of comparison. The fact that no such evidence was called more readily permits me to conclude on the basis of Mr Dubedat's evidence that Thomas Rappaport was the author of the handwritten documents.  I do conclude, contrary to his denial, that Thomas Rappaport was the author of the 1990 notes of remittances. In reaching that conclusion, I also take into account my conclusions on the next disputed document.  
Taxable Income Calculation 93/94  Annexure J to Mr Faraday's affidavit was a four-page statement headed "Taxable Income Calculation 93/94". One page of the annexure is a typed document containing some handwriting whose authorship Thomas Rappaport denies.
This page was document Q3 provided to Mr Dubedat who expressed the same opinion as to the disputed handwriting on it as he did with the other questioned documents. However, it is the other three pages which are of present relevance. The remaining three pages are the "taxable income calculation 93/94".  Mr Faraday said this document was in the handwriting of Thomas Rappaport.
Thomas Rappaport admits that some of the writing on the document is his and denies that other parts of the writing are his. I conclude from Mr Dubedat's evidence, and from the failure of Thomas Rappaport to call any handwriting evidence on the question, that it is probable that Thomas Rappaport is the author of the document. In any event, it appears from the writing which is admittedly Thomas Rappaport's that he made a calculation of the income tax payable by him and his wife on the rents of the TAB premises, the Belmore Road property, and the Brisbane Road properties referable to someone else's share of the income from those properties.  One page of the document contains a statement of rent and expenses for a property said to be the TAB premises, and the Belmore Road property. In relation to the Belmore Road property, Thomas Rappaport admits that the writing is his, save for words at the bottom of the page reading "net $3212.00" and "one-sixth share $5,353.33". The writing which he admits is his contains a statement of income totalling $32,872 and a statement of expenses totalling $752.00. The difference is $32,120.00. Another page of the statement is in writing which is admittedly Thomas Rappaport's. It is headed "Taxable
Income Calculation 93/94". In writing which is admittedly Thomas Rappaport's, there are three figures, namely, $9,560.58, $5,353.33, and $3,581.50, making a total of $18,495.41. In writing which is admittedly Thomas Rappaport's, there is then a division of this sum between "Viv" and "Tom" in equal shares. The sum of $5,353.33 is one-sixth of the net income of $32,120 for the Belmore
Road property.  Other figures on a page which are admittedly in the writing of Thomas
Rappaport show rent for a property (said to be the TAB premises, although that is not admittedly in Thomas Rappaport's writing) of $19,372.17 and various expenses which when added together would reduce the rent to $19,121.17. Thomas
Rappaport denies the figure of $19,121.17 is in his writing. Nonetheless, the expenses which he admits are in his handwriting add up to $251 so that the difference is $19,121.17. On the front page of the income tax calculation, there is a figure which is admittedly in Thomas Rappaport's writing of $9,560.58. This is half of the net income of $19,121.17. That, in turn, is divided equally between Thomas and Vivian Rappaport in order for a taxation calculation to be made. This is consistent with Mr Faraday's case that he had a half-interest in the Chevron Island property. A comparison with Thomas
Rappaport's income tax return for 1993-94 shows that the property referred to is the TAB premises on Chevron Island. Thomas Rappaport accepted this. The apparent calculation is of income tax paid by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport on somebody else's half-share of the income.  Another page, which is admittedly in Thomas Rappaport's writing, is said to be the income and expenses for the Brisbane Road properties. Thomas
Rappaport denies that the words at the top of the page headed "Gold Coast
Brisbane Road" are in his handwriting. He does not deny that the figures on the page are in his writing, or that they relate to the Brisbane Road properties, other than the concluding words "taxable $7,737 half-share $7,163 half-share $3,581.50". Again, comparison with the tax return establishes that the properties in question were the Brisbane Road properties. Leaving the disputed handwriting out of account, Thomas Rappaport does not deny that the narration of income and expenses in relation to this property is in his writing. The income shown is $14,900. The expenses, admittedly in his handwriting, total $7,737. The difference is $7,163. That is the difference, even though Thomas Rappaport denies having written the figure of $7,163.00 on the document. The first page of the document showing the division of taxable income equally between Thomas Rappaport and Vivian Rappaport, which is admittedly in Thomas Rappaport's writing, has a figure of $3,581.50. Although
Thomas Rappaport denies that the handwriting on the second page "half-share $3,581.50" is in his handwriting, the fact is that the figure of $3,581.50 on the first page of the document, which he admits is in his handwriting, represents half of the net income calculation admittedly made by him on the second page.  The only explanation I can see for Thomas Rappaport having made the calculations which are admittedly in his hand is that he was proceeding on the basis that although the Brisbane Road properties, the TAB premises and the
Belmore Road property were registered in the name of him and his wife, there should be an allowance as between them and another person for the income tax which he and his wife would have to pay in respect of those properties. As between them and another person, there should be an allowance for 50% of income tax referable to the Queensland properties, and one-sixth of the income tax on the Belmore Road property.  I conclude that all of the writing on the document except that which was admittedly added by Mr Faraday, is in Thomas Rappaport's hand. In any event, the same conclusions can be drawn from the writing which Thomas Rappaport admits to be his.  There is no suggestion that Thomas and Vivian Rappaport did not pay all of the income tax properly payable on all of the properties. There is no suggestion that either Rosalia Rappaport or Mr Faraday paid tax, or claimed deductions for the income and expenses of the properties. Rather, the calculation was a calculation of the "total tax on your share". That calculation was made by taking 50% of the net income from the Queensland properties and one-sixth of the net income of the Belmore Road property, and calculating the tax borne by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport referable to such income (without allowance for interest on borrowings). This is consistent with another person having a 50% beneficial interest in the Queensland properties and a one-sixth interest in the Belmore Road property. The fact that the calculation includes no expense for interest on borrowings is consistent with the Rappaports having acquired their interest in the properties by borrowing, and the other person having acquired his or her interest by investments in cash.  Thomas Rappaport could offer no explanation for having made these calculations. They might have been calculations of an interest Rosalia
Rappaport had in the properties, except that if that were so, there would be no reason for the calculation to be confined to the three properties. The documents corroborate Mr Faraday's claim to a share of the income from the three properties, except that they refer to a one-sixth share of the income from Belmore Road rather than a 40% share.  Mr Bradford submitted that Mr Faraday stole the document from the
Rappaports and then tampered with it by forging Thomas Rappaport's handwriting. He submitted that Mr Faraday is disentitled to relief in equity because he does not have clean hands. I accept that the document was stolen. I do not accept that Mr Faraday attempted to forge Thomas Rappaport's handwriting on it. For the reasons below, it will not be necessary to decide whether the doctrine of clean hands precludes a plaintiff from using a stolen document to rebut a false denial of the plaintiff's equity. For other reasons,
Mr Faraday has not established an equitable interest in the properties.  
The Running Sheets  The fourth class of documents produced by Mr Faraday are the statements of account or "running sheets". They were in the form of Excel spreadsheets.
Thomas Rappaport said they were fabrications. Mr Faraday denied producing them and said that he did not know how to use a computer. This last proposition was not seriously contested, but it was pointed out that Mr Faraday had students lodging with him as boarders who, it could be assumed, were well able to prepare the accounts as Excel spreadsheets. Mr Faraday also had the opportunity to obtain the information which appeared on the running sheets as he had spent periods staying in Thomas and Vivian Rappaport's house. To a certain extent, he had assisted them by looking after their financial affairs whilst they were overseas. He had access to the financial records from which the running sheets were prepared.  Of course Thomas Rappaport also had access to that information. He could have prepared the running sheets. The running sheets were not located on the hard drive of Thomas Rappaport's computer. The last entry on the running sheets was in March 2000. Thomas Rappaport sold his computer in February 2001 and bought a new one. According to him, the whole of the data and software on the existing hard drive of his old computer was transferred to his new computer. However, there is no corroboration that that in fact was done.
Accordingly, either Thomas Rappaport or Mr Faraday, the latter using the services of a university student, could have produced the documents in question.  The records covered overlapping periods. First, there were three sheets covering the period from 25 May 1995 to 5 September 1996. Each had the words "Sheet 1"at the top of the page and page numbers 1, 2 and 3 on the bottom.
Someone, apparently Mr Faraday, had written 3A (the "A" being in handwriting) on the last page. That page covered the period from 25 July 1996 to 5
September 1996. There was then another page 3 (numbered 3B) covering the period 25 July 1996 to 17 September 1996.  Next, there was a bundle of five pages covering the period from 25 May to 30 December 1997, in other words, overlapping with the earlier period.  All of the records produced, and Mr Faraday produced multiple copies of the documents, were heavily annotated by Mr Faraday.  The second bundle, annexure E to Mr Faraday's affidavit of 2 December , contained on the front page the words "Printed 28/8/97", which Mr
Faraday said was in Thomas Rappaport's writing. Thomas Rappaport denied that this was so.  The typeface on the first two bundles of documents was different. There were also differences between the font on the words "page 1", "page 2", "etc." and the body of the record. However, I do not draw any conclusions about the differences of font. There was no relevant expert evidence about it, and the differences appear to me to be consistent with either Thomas Rappaport or Mr
Faraday having produced the documents.  The documents start with what is called a "previous balance" of $43,848.
There are then various credits, e.g. $5,000 on 25 May 1995, $3,600 on 30 May , and $7,500 on 30 May 1995. Mr Faraday says that those credits were a record of cash which he deposited with Thomas Rappaport. Thomas Rappaport did not produce his bank statements to show that there were no deposits of those amounts corresponding to the credits shown on the statements of account.
Rather, his case was that Mr Faraday had access to such records and so was able to produce the statement of account which would show a plausible correlation with Thomas Rappaport's financial records.  The statements also showed as credits amounts described as "TAB" and "butcher". The amount for "TAB" for the period from 1 June 1995 to 1 January was for an amount of $837.50 per month. In the first bundle of the statement of account, there was no credit in respect of TAB after 1 January , except for an amount of $200 on 8 August 1996 against the notation "TAB rent $400". On the second bundle of documents (annexure E) there was a credit for TAB rent of $1,333 on 6 March 1997 against the notation "TAB 2666.00", and thereafter monthly credits of $1,333.33 against the notation "TAB 2666.66" on April 1997, 28 April 1997, 27 May 1997, and 10 June 1997. There was also a notation of a credit of $1,333 on 19 May 1997 against the description "TAB bond $5333.32". On 11 June 1997, there was a further credit of $2,666.66 against the notation "TAB $5333.33". There were further credits of $1,333 against the description "TAB $2666" on 30 July 1997 and 19 August 1997. There were further credits of that sum against the description of "Tab" on 15
September 1997, 15 October 1997, 15 November 1997, and 15 December 1997.  A third bundle of documents (annexure F) consisted of three pages covering the period from 15 November 1997 to 20 February 1999. The fourth bundle consisted of two pages covering the period from 1 January 1998 to 12 January
The fifth bundle covered the period from 1 January 1998 to 3 February
The second page of the fourth bundle is clearly a "cut and paste" copy.  The running sheets showed seven items of credit apparently for rent in relation to the TAB premises in the period between 1 July 1995 to 30 June , each in the amount of $837.50, a total of $5,862.50. The income tax returns for the Rappaport family prepared by their accountant for the financial year ended 30 June 1996 showed that Thomas and Vivian Rappaport declared income from rents received from the TAB premises of $12,625. Thomas
Rappaport made the point that there was no correlation between the rents credited to Mr Faraday in the running sheets and the gross rents received.
Moreover, it appears from the income tax return that there were expenses incurred in relation to the property totalling $9,145 in the year ended 30
June 1996 for advertising, council rates, management fees, legal costs, maintenance levies, postage, repairs and maintenance, telephone, travel expenses and depreciation. Only a handful of such expenses was included in the running sheets. There was a debit of $140 as at 20 October 1995 against the notation "CH000353 TAB assign". There was another debit of $70 on 4 December against the notation "TAB assign CH000353 paid $140". There was another debit of $75 on 30 December 1995 against the notation "CH000356 TAB assign $150". Otherwise, the expenses are not reflected in the statement of account.  Thomas and Vivian Rappaport's income tax returns for the year ended 30
June 1997 were not tendered. However, the income tax returns for the year ended 30 June 1998 were tendered. They showed gross rental from the Chevron
Island property of $25,436. The rent recorded in the statement of account attributable to "TAB" was $15,996 (twelve instalments of $1,333). This represented over 60% of the rents received. Thomas Rappaport's income tax return also showed that expenses were incurred for management fees, maintenance levies, council rates, telephone, postage etc, maintenance and depreciation totalling $7,854.  In the year ended 30 June 1996, the gross rents for the Belmore Road property as shown in the Rappaports' tax returns totalled $36,160. The expenses totalled $4,929 comprising partly interest but also comprising management fees of $3,616, repairs and maintenance of $850 and other small amounts for postage, stationery, telephone and depreciation. The total of expenses, other than interest and depreciation, was $4,539.  The rent shown on the running sheets produced by Mr Faraday as having been credited to him for the Belmore Road property for the financial year ended 30
June 1996 comprised twelve payments of $502.22, being a total of $6,026.64.
This was exactly one-sixth of the rental income for that year. This is consistent with the 1993/94 income tax calculation document referred to above.
There were no entries in the running sheets for Mr Faraday being debited with a share of expenses.  It appears from Thomas Rappaport's income tax return for the year ended 30
June 1998 that in that financial year, the same gross rent was earned from the
Belmore Road property. Expenses, other than interest, bank charges and depreciation, consisted of management fees of $3,615, legal expenses of $450, and painting of $1,495. The running sheets produced by Mr Faraday showed twelve monthly credit entries of $502.22, again, precisely one-sixth of the gross rents for the Belmore Road property. The statement of account showed a debit of $75 as a "legal expense", which was also one-sixth of the expense for this item shown in the income tax return. There was no debit of any expense for the managing agent's commission, or for the cost of painting.  The running sheets are inconsistent with Mr Faraday's case that he had a % interest in the Belmore Road property. Except for the omission of all of the expenses, they are consistent with his having a one-sixth interest in the property.  The income tax return for the year ended 30 June 1996 for Thomas and
Vivian Rappaport shows the receipt of gross rents from the two Brisbane Road properties totalling $14,400. The income tax return shows expenses in respect of those properties of $26,668 for interest on borrowings, and $11,719 for other expenses in relation to the properties, namely, council rates, maintenance levies, management fees, pest control, postage, repairs and maintenance, stationery, telephone, travel, and depreciation. The running sheets produced by Mr Faraday showed credits for the period from 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996 totalling $13,710. (Thomas Rappaport calculated the total as $12,530, but he omitted a credit entry for 26 November 1995.) Obviously, this is not consistent with Mr Faraday's being credited with half of the rental income from the two properties.  The running sheets included debits for some of the expenses associated with the Brisbane Road properties totalling $5,200.52. It is not possible to reconcile these expenses with the property expenses recorded in Thomas and
Vivian Rappaport's 1996 income tax return. The debits did not represent 50% of the expenses of the two properties.  In the 1998 financial year, the rents credited on the running sheets in respect of the Brisbane Road properties totalled $16,037.50. This was more than the rental income for both of the Brisbane Road properties as disclosed in Thomas Rappaport's 1998 income tax return for the two properties. Again, there was no correlation between the expenses shown on the running sheets in relation to these properties and the income tax return. Substantially more was charged as an expense on the running sheets for council rates, water rates and body corporate levies than was claimed as deductions for the two properties in the income tax return.  These inconsistencies between the statements in the running sheets of Mr
Faraday's share of income and expense in relation to the three properties compared with the information in Thomas and Vivian Rappaport's tax returns as to the income derived from the properties and the expenses incurred in relation to them, cast considerable doubt on the authenticity of the running sheets.  I have already observed that the debit of $100,000 on 27 July 1995, which
Mr Faraday attributed to the purchase of one of the Brisbane Road properties, was made years after the purchase of those properties. Of course it is possible that the debit relates to something else; possibly moneys provided by
Thomas Rappaport to Mr Faraday in anticipation of his overseas trip which neither Mr Faraday nor Thomas Rappaport was prepared to acknowledge. That, however, is speculation.  The running sheets do not cover the 1993-1994 financial year, and there is no entry correlating with the calculation made by Thomas Rappaport of the allowance to be made to him and his wife of $6,519.62 for income tax paid in respect of income derived from the Queensland and Randwick properties in the /94 financial year. However, there are debits of $7,197.25 for "Income Tax /95", $6,926.00 for "Income Tax year 1995/96", $4,600 for "Estimated
Income tax 1996/97", $4,800 for "Income tax 1997/98" and $4,998.00 for "Income tax 1998/99".  Apart from this and the correlation between the share of gross rent from the Belmore Road property and Thomas Rappaport's 1993/94 income tax calculation, there are two further matters that suggest the documents were produced by Thomas Rappaport. The first is that they are the only documents either party has produced, other than Thomas Rappaport's notes for the /1994 calculation of income tax, which provide any sort of account by
Thomas Rappaport for somebody else's share in any of the investment properties. It follows from Thomas Rappaport's first affidavit that he understood that his mother intended that Mr Faraday should keep track of her money which was invested in properties registered in the name of Thomas and
Vivian Rappaport, and that Mr Faraday should manage that money for Thomas
Rappaport's mother. It is hard to see how Mr Faraday could do that without obtaining some account from Thomas Rappaport. Whether Thomas Rappaport received his mother's money from Mr Faraday for investment, or Mr Faraday's money, some account would be needed. The only documents produced which could be of that character are the running sheets. They are consistent with the investment being of Mr Faraday's money in that the running balance has debits and credits for moneys received from Mr Faraday, and moneys paid to him.  The second feature of the statements which points to their authenticity is the handwriting "printed 28/8/97" on the first page of the second bundle. The word "printed" was written in distinctive running writing. Although it was only one word, Mr Dubedat was able to form the view that it was unlikely that anyone other than the writer of the specimen documents wrote the questioned handwriting, including the questioned handwriting on this document. He did observe that the limited amount of writing for comparison did not allow for a "definite conclusion" as to who wrote the questioned documents. Mr Dubedat made a comparison chart of the handwriting on this document in which some of the distinctive letter shapes were enlarged and compared with documents from the specimen documents. The parts of the specimen documents which were used for this purpose did not include the parts of those documents where Thomas
Rappaport had disputed the handwriting was his. The cross-examination of Mr
Dubedat did not give me any reason to doubt the reliability of his conclusions.  The bundle of five pages containing the handwriting "Printed 28/8/97" covered the period from 25 May 1995 to 30 December 1997. All five pages could not have been printed on 28 August 1997. That does not mean that Thomas
Rappaport did not write the words on the document. He could have placed them on the document after 30 December 1997. He could have placed them on the first page and attached some or all of the remaining pages at a later date.  There are conflicting objective indicators as to the authenticity of the running sheets. The sheets do not reflect the rentals and expenses for the
Queensland properties. However, there is a correlation between the rentals received for the butcher's shop and Thomas Rappaport's 1993/1994 income tax calculation, i.e. that there was a credit of one-sixth of the rentals received. It is unlikely that Mr Faraday would have fabricated these figures but not asserted a one-sixth interest in the property. The debit entry of $100,000 on 27 July 1995 is unexplained. However, it is unlikely that Mr
Faraday would have fabricated this entry which was inconsistent with his own interests. Having regard to the writing on the first page of one of the documents, which I accept is in Thomas Rappaport's hand, and having regard also to the considerations referred to in paragraph [254] above, I consider that the documents were produced by Thomas Rappaport and provided by him to Mr
Faraday.  Payments to Thomas Rappaport  In 1995, Mr Faraday sold the Warners Avenue property and received approximately $75,000 from the sale. According to the running sheets, he made deposits with Thomas Rappaport between 30 May 1995 and 21 August 1995 of $69,450. According to the running sheets, there were sixteen different deposits over that period. Mr Faraday's passbook with the Commonwealth Bank does show withdrawals consistent with the making of such deposits, save that in one case the running sheets credit Mr Faraday with a deposit of $12,000 some days before the corresponding moneys were withdrawn from his account with the Commonwealth Bank.  Thomas Rappaport admitted to receiving approximately $65,000 in cash from
Mr Faraday at this time. According to Thomas Rappaport, the money was not paid to him as moneys to be invested. It was paid to him in instalments of approximately $10,000 on six or seven separate occasions. Thomas Rappaport took these amounts of cash in Australian dollars and converted them into foreign currency, and then delivered the foreign currency to Mr Faraday. This was in anticipation of Mr Faraday's leaving for an overseas trip, which he did on 11 November 1995.  Mr Faraday was away until September 1996. It does seem likely that he needed moneys to support him whilst he was overseas. Mr Faraday said that whilst he was overseas in 1995, he had use of a National Bank Visa Card on
Thomas Rappaport's account. However, the card he produced was a card in the name of Thomas Rappaport and which would have required Thomas Rappaport's signature so that it could be used. Mr Faraday was asked how he came into possession of that card and was unable to give an explanation. Thomas
Rappaport has accused Mr Faraday of stealing a number of documents from his house. I do not accept that Mr Faraday had the use of a secondary card on
Thomas Rappaport's account when he made his overseas trip in 1995 and 1996.  Mr Faraday said that he lived very cheaply in Europe, staying with friends and at YMCA accommodation and in "bed and breakfast youth hotels". At the time, he was 71 and 72. According to Mr Faraday, during his trip of almost ten months in Europe, he spent in total a sum equivalent of $11,000, not including his airfares. Even allowing for Mr Faraday's frugality, that stretches credulity.  There is an odd feature of both parties' account of this transaction.
According to Mr Faraday, Thomas Rappaport asked him to provide the moneys in smaller amounts. According to Mr Faraday, Thomas Rappaport told him he did not want a cheque and he did not want $75,000 in cash. According to Mr Faraday,
Thomas Rappaport asked him to give him smaller amounts which he did, and he visited Thomas Rappaport regularly to deposit the money with him, apparently about seventeen times. According to Thomas Rappaport, Mr Faraday visited him on at least six or seven occasions with amounts of up to $10,000 in cash for him to exchange into foreign currency, and he made at least six or seven foreign currency conversions, and handed the foreign currency cash back to Mr
Faraday. Why the parties thought it necessary to deal in this way remains a mystery unless it was to ensure there was no reporting of the cash transactions.  Again, there is no real corroboration of either story. I do not think these events assist in resolving the issues of credit.  
Conclusions on Mr Faraday's Claim to a Beneficial Interest in the Three Properties  On the basis of the admissions in Thomas Rappaport's first affidavit, his notes, his 1993/94 tax calculations, and the running sheets, I conclude that Mr Faraday paid cash to Thomas Rappaport for Thomas Rappaport to invest for him. It is impossible to say whether some or all of the money came from gifts which Rosalia Rappaport made to him. It is possible he was investing the money as trustee for Rosalia Rappaport, but the evidence does not establish that that was so. It is impossible to say how much money was provided by Mr
Faraday to Thomas Rappaport. The documents which I accept are in the hand of
Thomas Rappaport confirm that someone other than Thomas and Vivian Rappaport was intended to have a share of the income from the three properties, and, by inference, a beneficial interest in them.  However, I do not accept Mr Faraday as a reliable witness. I do not accept his evidence of the agreements he said he made with Thomas Rappaport.
Moreover, he gave no evidence of an agreement that he should have a 50% beneficial interest in the Chevron Island property. His evidence that he should have a 40% beneficial interest in the Belmore Road property was not corroborated, although it appears that Thomas Rappaport proceeded on the basis that he and his wife had only a five-sixth interest in that property (or at least the income from it). Nor is it possible to say how much of the money provided by Mr Faraday was contributed to the purchase price of any of those properties. Further, for the reasons I gave earlier, Mr Faraday conducted himself on the basis that his investments with Thomas Rappaport did not give him a beneficial interest in any of the properties.  Whatever might be the true arrangements in relation to the investment into the three properties, the evidence does not establish that the arrangements were those alleged by Mr Faraday. I am not satisfied that it was agreed that
Mr Faraday should have a particular beneficial interest in any of the properties. There was no written or oral declaration of trust in respect of any of the properties. The arrangement for investment was of the loosest kind.  It has been necessary to review the conflicting strands in the evidence to conclude that Thomas Rappaport produced the running sheets. It was necessary to reach a conclusion about that because of Mr Faraday's claim that Thomas
Rappaport should account for the credit balance on those sheets.  Mr Faraday's claim to a beneficial interest in the three properties can be dealt with more simply. [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) provides:  "54A Contracts for sale etc of land to be in writing  
No action or proceedings may be brought upon any contract for the sale or other disposition of land or any interest in land, unless the agreement upon which such action or proceedings is brought, or some memorandum or note thereof, is in writing, and signed by the party to be charged or by some other person thereunto lawfully authorised by the party to be charged.  
This section applies to contracts whether made before or after the commencement of the Conveyancing (Amendment) Act 1930 and does not affect the law relating to part performance, or sales by the court.  
This section applies and shall be deemed to have applied from the commencement of the Conveyancing (Amendment) Act 1930 to land under the provisions of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/)."  This section applies to agreements to dispose of an interest in land by creating a trust (Khoury versus Khouri).  [Section
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) provides:  "23C Instruments required to be in writing  
Subject to the provisions of this Act with respect to the creation of interests in land by parol:  no interest in land can be created or disposed of except by writing signed by the person creating or conveying the same, or by the person's agent thereunto lawfully authorised in writing, or by will, or by operation of law,  a declaration of trust respecting any land or any interest therein must be manifested and proved by some writing signed by some person who is able to declare such trust or by the person's will,  a disposition of an equitable interest or trust subsisting at the time of the disposition, must be in writing signed by the person disposing of the same or by the person's will, or by the person's agent thereunto lawfully authorised in writing.  
This section does not affect the creation or operation of resulting, implied, or constructive trusts."  The equivalent Queensland provisions are [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/s11.html) and [59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/s59.html) of the [Property Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/) (Qld).  In this case, Mr Faraday did not plead that any of the properties were held for him on a resulting or constructive trust. Nor did the facts indicate that such a claim was available to him. There was no evidence of what moneys were provided by him which were applied towards the purchase of any of the properties. There was no evidence of his acting to his detriment on the assumption that he had a beneficial interest in the properties in circumstances that made it unconscionable for Thomas and Vivian Rappaport to deny such an interest.  Sections 23C and 54A of the Conveyancing Act and [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/s11.html) and [59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/s59.html) of the [Property Law
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/) (Qld) embody the policy of more than 500 years of Anglo-Australian law that the title to land should not depend on disputed conversations, or conflicting or uncertain inferences, of the kind raised in this case.  Mr Faraday's case was that there was a contract to dispose of an interest in land when it was acquired by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport. To be enforceable, the essential terms of such an agreement must be in writing and signed by the parties to be charged, or some person authorised by them.  None of the documents relied on by Mr Faraday is of that kind. Neither the notes, nor the running sheets, identify any percentage beneficial interest in the property. Such a percentage can be inferred, but is not stated in the 1993/94 income tax calculations. None of the documents identifies Mr
Faraday as the person entitled to a beneficial interest in the properties.
None of the documents is signed by Thomas or Vivian Rappaport.  Accordingly, the agreement and trust asserted by Mr Faraday, if established, would be unenforceable. Mr Faraday did not plead or argue that there were acts of part performance or circumstances giving rise to an estoppel which would preclude Thomas and Vivian Rappaport from relying on the statutes. Mr Faraday was incapable of understanding the concepts involved. I do not consider that there were sufficient acts of part performance to take the case outside [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/s59.html) of the [Property Law
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/). The only acts of Mr Faraday were the payment of some unknown amounts of money to Thomas
Rappaport. Such payments are not sufficient. They are not unequivocally referable to some such contract to create a trust in favour of Mr Faraday (Khoury versus Khouri at [88]-[92]).  As in Khoury versus Khouri, in this case there were no acts such as the taking of possession of property, or the payment for the upkeep or the rates for the properties or the receipt of rents. I do not regard the provision by
Thomas Rappaport of an account in which such rents were credited and expenses debited to Mr Faraday as acts of part performance by Mr Faraday. He did not carry out any relevant act, apart from the payment of money.  Nor can Mr Faraday rely on the principle that equity will not allow the
Statute of Frauds to be used as an instrument of fraud. Whatever the scope of that principle, before it can be invoked, it is essential for the plaintiff to prove the bargain "under which some sufficiently defined beneficial interest was to be taken by another" (Bannister versus Bannister [[1948] 2 All ER ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1948%5d%202%20All%20ER%20133 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 136). Here, there was no proof of such a bargain. Instead, this case exemplifies the policy behind the requirement that the essential terms of agreements for the disposition of interests in land be evidenced by a signed memorandum.  For these reasons, Mr Faraday's claim to a beneficial interest in the properties should be dismissed.  
Account for Balance of $84,159.53  In his statement of claim, Mr Faraday made no claim for the balance of $84,159.53 shown as owing to him as at 3 February 2000 on the last of the running sheets.  However, Mr Faraday made such a claim in opening. The defendants did not oppose his having leave to amend to make such a claim. I granted such leave, but Mr Faraday was incapable of producing an amended pleading. During the hearing, I directed that the statement of claim should be taken to be amended by the inclusion of a claim for the recovery of those moneys.  Naturally, no defence was filed to this claim. It was submitted for Thomas
Rappaport that a portion of the claim was statute-barred by reason of [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html), [15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s15.html), [23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s23.html) and [48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s48.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/).  I have concluded that Mr Faraday provided moneys to Thomas Rappaport for investment and that Thomas Rappaport produced the running sheets. [Sections
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) and [23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) are not a defence to the claim for the return of moneys. The evidence does not show what moneys were provided by Mr Faraday or when they were provided. However, the running sheets contain an acknowledgment that $84,159.53 was owed to, or held on behalf of, Mr Faraday as at 3 February 2000. In my view, the sheets acknowledge the existence of a debt, not a trust of money. There was no obligation on Thomas Rappaport to keep the money given to him in a separate account. There was no evidence of a declaration of trust of the moneys.  The provision of the running sheets to Mr Faraday was an admission that a debt of $84,159.53 was due to him as at 3 February 2000. It was a confirmation made to him of that cause of action. A claim for recovery of that sum was not statute-barred when Mr Faraday's proceedings were commenced on 13 May 2002 ([Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), [s ).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s54.html)  The amendment which is taken to be made of the statement of claim substitutes a new cause of action arising from the same facts as those giving rise to the causes of action and claims for relief in the statement of claim.
Therefore, unless the Court otherwise orders, the amendment is taken to have had effect from the date on which the proceedings were commenced ([Civil
Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) , [s (2)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s65.html) and (3)). I see no reason to make a contrary order. Nor was I asked to do so.
The claim to recover $84,159.53 owed as at 3 February 2000 is not statute- barred.  Mr Faraday is entitled to judgment for the debt of $84,159.53, together with interest at the rates prescribed pursuant to <case> of the Civil
Procedure, Act from 3 February 2000 to the date of judgment. As at 7 March interest on that sum totals $56,412.49.  
Summary of Conclusions  In summary, in proceedings No. 2649/02, whilst I have found that Mr
Faraday provided moneys to Thomas Rappaport for investment, and that Thomas
Rappaport produced the running sheets, I have concluded that Mr Faraday has not established the making of an agreement for him to have any defined beneficial interest in the properties acquired by Thomas and Vivian Rappaport.
In any event, his claim to a beneficial interest in the three properties would be defeated by <case> or <case>(a) of the Conveyancing Act or by <case> or [s (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/s11.html) of the [Property Law
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/pla1974179/) (Qld).  Mr Faraday did not plead, and the evidence does not support, a claim that the properties are held on a resulting or constructive trust for him. I have concluded that he is entitled to the credit balance shown on the running sheets of $84,159.53 as at 3 February 2000 with interest at the prescribed rates.  In proceedings No. 1684/03, I have concluded that Mr Faraday is entitled to the return of his certificate of title to the Dundas property and an order for the removal of the caveat over that property.  In proceedings No. 3668/03, the first of Rosalia Rappaport's claims was not pressed. As to the second claim, I have found that a payment of $12,500 was made to Mr Faraday as a gift, not as a loan or pursuant to a contract to leave the Dundas property by his will to Rosalia Rappaport or her estate or her relatives. As to the third claim, I have found that the moneys and goods were handed to Mr Faraday as alleged, but that the cause of action for their return, or damages for their detention, is barred by the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). As to the fourth and fifth claims, I have found that the plaintiff has only proved that
Mr Faraday received the sums of $4,074.18 and $3,600 which he admitted. He is liable to pay the funds he admitted receiving with interest to the representative of Rosalia Rappaport's estate.  
Orders  For these reasons, in proceedings No. 2649/02, I give judgment for the plaintiff against the first defendant in the sum of $140,572.02. I order that those proceedings be otherwise dismissed.  In proceedings No. 1684/03, I order that within 21 days, the defendant deliver or cause to be delivered to the plaintiff Certificate of Title Volume Folio 222 in respect of the property known as 113 Moffats Drive, Dundas,
NSW. I order that caveat AA813156G lodged in respect of that land be removed forthwith. I order that those proceedings be otherwise dismissed.  In proceedings No. 3668/03, I order that within 21 days, the defendant pay
Michelle Rappaport as representative of the estate of Rosalia Rappaport the sum of $11,173.52. I order that those proceedings be otherwise dismissed.  The exhibits may be returned after 28 days.  I will hear the parties on costs.  
LAST UPDATED: 7 March 2007 * * * 
