

Regina versus Cheney Matter No Cca 60173/95 [1998] NSWSC 129 (28 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
REGINA versus ROGER DAVID CHENEY /95 April 1998 
Studdert J, Levine J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The appellant Roger David Cheney pleaded not guilty to each of three counts in an indictment presented against him the District Court in March 1995. The first count charged the appellant that he on 3 May 1991 maliciously inflicted actual bodily harm on the victim with intent to have sexual intercourse. The second count charged him, in the alternative, with having assaulted the victim thereby occasioning actual bodily harm. The third count charged the appellant on the same date with having assaulted Constable Meredith occasioning him actual bodily harm. 
The appellant was tried by a judge sitting alone pursuant to <case> of the
Criminal Procedure Act.

The learned trial judge, his Honour Judge Shillington of Queen's Counsel, found the offences charged in the first and third counts to have been proved beyond reasonable doubt and having convicted the appellant, sentenced him on the first count to a minimum term of four years eight months penal servitude commencing 8 December 1993 and an additional term of two years. On the third count his Honour imposed a fixed term of penal servitude for one year commencing 24 March 1995.

The appellant appeals only against his conviction in respect of the offence charged in the first count. The appellant does not seek leave in the alternative, to appeal against the sentence imposed following that conviction.

It is submitted that the verdict in the District Court is unsafe and unsatisfactory for the following reasons: the absence of evidence by the alleged victim of the offence; the quality of evidence of identification of the appellant as the assailant; the evidence supporting the correctness of the evidence of identification.

The alleged victim did not give evidence at the appellant's trial. Dr Wu, psychiatrist, was called at the trial and gave evidence that this lady was suffering from a post traumatic stress disorder, as a consequence of her experience on 3 May 1991 and it was the doctor's opinion that the effect of her giving evidence would be catastrophic for her condition.

Before considering the various grounds, it is appropriate to review certain of the evidence adduced in the case for the prosecution.

The offences charged allegedly took place at about 7.00 pm on the evening of 3
May 1991 in Everton Lane, Strathfield. Mrs Long lived in a unit on the third floor of a building in Everton Road, Strathfield. The rear section of that block of units faced Everton Lane and Mrs Long, who lived in a rear unit, said that she heard that evening some grunting out in the laneway. The Strathfield
TAFE was beside the lane and there was some light into the laneway from the
TAFE buildings. When Mrs Long looked out, she saw two figures across the lane, one of which appeared to be straddled over the top of the lower figure. She observed the figure on top drag the lower figure along some distance away from her position and she eventually lost sight of the figures. She then rang
Burwood police station and according to her, police vehicles arrived quickly.

Constable Meredith was on patrol nearby in a police panel van with Constable
Wicks as his offsider. In prompt response to a police radio message, Constable
Meredith drove the van down Everton Lane with the headlights on high beam and the roof spotlight shining ahead. According to Constable Meredith, he saw ahead of him and to the right, a male person on top of another figure. The male person had his trousers down and Constable Meredith said he could see his buttocks. Having stopped the vehicle Constable Meredith began to alight. As he did so the male ahead stood up. According to Constable Meredith that person's penis was erect. As the constable left the van, the figure ahead began to pull up his tracksuit pants and run away. Constable Meredith said that he noticed that this person was wearing a blue and bright yellow spray jacket, a black coloured beanie and he had long fair hair protruding below his headwear.

Constable Meredith gave evidence that he chased this person over a set of wooden gates, up beside a building, over another two fences, through a gate and across on to the roadway, Everton Road, which runs parallel with Everton
Lane, at the front of the block of units in which Mrs Long lived. As the blond haired person set off to cross the road there was a moving vehicle in his path and Constable Meredith said that the fugitive ran into the near side of the vehicle, stumbled, regained his balance and continued to flee. The chase continued into other premises along the side of which the fugitive ran, followed by Constable Meredith. Eventually, when the fugitive reached the back of the premises which adjoined Cowdery Lane, Constable Meredith caught up with him and tackled him. A struggle followed, during which Constable Wicks also arrived. The two police officers were attempting to but were unable to securely handcuff the fugitive. Further officers arrived and he was in due course handcuffed. There is no dispute that the person arrested in that fashion was the appellant. Thereafter, when the appellant stood up, he kneed
Constable Meredith in the testicles. That incident gave rise to the third count in the indictment.

It was the evidence of Constable Meredith, that he was two or three metres away from the appellant when he commenced his flight and this police officer said that he never lost sight of the appellant between that point and the time when he later tackled him beside Cowdery Lane.

Constable Wicks gave evidence that as the van proceeded along Everton Lane,
Constable Meredith said something to him and he then saw Constable Meredith leave the van and he saw the offender climbing a wooden fence. Constable Wicks did not notice if the offender had anything on his head but he did see that he was wearing a blue and gold spray jacket and black tracksuit pants and that he had shoulder length blond hair. Constable Wicks was behind Constable Meredith in the chase that followed. When Constable Wicks left the vehicle he saw the victim lying on the ground and he spoke to her and he then took up the chase, although he lost sight of Constable Meredith after crossing Everton Road.
However, he came upon his colleague struggling with the appellant. He confirmed Constable Meredith's account concerning the struggle and the eventual overpowering of the appellant. Constable Wicks confirmed that when the appellant was handcuffed and stood up, he kneed Constable Meredith in the groin.

Christopher Cobb attended the Strathfield TAFE on 3 May 1991 and he was driving away along Everton Road on that evening, when he saw somebody run out and collide with the side of his car. That person he observed to be a tall male person wearing a black beanie, with either light brown or blond hair straggling from underneath it. He said that that person had a dark blue, or black tracksuit type outfit on. He described the top as being a spray jacket type outfit and that the hair was below shoulder length. He saw the police officers giving chase to the long haired male who, having struck his car, ran off. He said he observed the three men disappear into a block of units.

Christian Cipolat had also been at the Strathfield TAFE. He was driving his car along behind Mr Cobb. He saw the person strike Mr Cobb's car, stumble, become upright again and continue running across the road. He said that the person involved in that collision was wearing a black beanie and that he had long hair and a bright coloured top of some sort, although in cross- examination he agreed that at the earlier committal proceedings in 1991, he had described the person as having long hair, or may be a beard, that he was wearing a beanie but that he had a football jersey on.

The appellant at no time made any admissions to the police. Indeed he complained that he was roughly handled by the police. Whilst he acknowledged that he was arrested where on the prosecution case he was arrested, he said that his presence in Cowdery Lane was entirely innocent, in effect, that he was tackled unexpectedly by a police officer.

In his unsworn statement the appellant said this: "Your Honour, I am not guilty of these charges before the court. I did not assault the woman at the back of the lane as the police are saying. I did not assault Constable Meredith or knee him. I was not in the lane that the police are saying on 3 May 1991. I did not have my pants down at any time on that night. I was not chased by police at any time. I was not hit by a car at any time.

I was walking down Cowdery Lane on that night. I was tackled by a police officer from the roadway of Cowdery Lane. As he tackled me he propelled us towards the units - towards the unit's, backyard of the units. He attempted to handcuff me and I protested and kept saying, 'What am I under arrest for?' And
I refused to let him handcuff me until he said - he explained to me what I am under arrest for. At no time did he say why I was under arrest".

Apart from the witnesses to whose evidence I have referred already, there were other police officers who attended the scene, one of whom was Constable
Johnson. She succeeded in putting the second handcuff on the appellant. She also saw the appellant knee Constable Meredith in the groin.

Sergeant Brown and Constable Andrea gave evidence of the interview which
Sergeant Brown had with the appellant following his release on 4 May 1991.
Sergeant Munro, Detective Constable Cleary and Detective Constable Cushway gave evidence concerning their involvement in the arrest and his being taken to the police station on 3 May 1991. It appears that he was only charged, at that time, with assaulting the police officer and resisting arrest. The charge, which led to his conviction on the first count, was not presented until after the interview on 4 May with Sergeant Brown and Constable Andrea.

Apart from the evidence of those police officers, there was scientific evidence given by Dr Gunn and by Mr Jackowski. Professor Pailthorpe gave evidence too but it is unnecessary to record any further detail of the evidence at the trial, before turning to consider the various bases upon which it is contended that the verdict on the first count is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Mr Byrne of Senior Counsel, who appears for the appellant, has presented written submissions on which he has elaborated on the hearing of this appeal.

The first matter dealt with was the absence of the complainant. It has been submitted that the absence of the complainant is a critical deficiency in the case for the prosecution. It is submitted this is so for several reasons.
Firstly, absent her description as to what happened, the precise nature of the assault upon her could not be determined. It was critical for the Crown to prove not only that the complainant was the victim of a malicious assault, in which actual bodily harm was occasioned to her, but that that assault occurred with intent to have sexual intercourse.

Without evidence from the complainant and bearing in mind the denial of any assault by the appellant, it was submitted that the evidence failed to establish the requisite intent. It was submitted that the evidence before the court was just as consistent with intent to carry out a sexual assault, not involving penetration, as it was to commit an assault involving penetration.

I am unable to accept that submission. Sexual intercourse of course, has an extended meaning for the purposes of the Crimes Act. The evidence in the case for the prosecution, if accepted, establishes that the appellant had his tracksuit pants down, his buttocks exposed and his penis erect and exposed.

The evidence of Detective Constable Cleary was that he was driving in a second police vehicle immediately behind the vehicle driven by Constable Meredith. He stopped the vehicle he was driving, behind the leading police panel van. When he left it, he went across to the victim who was sitting in the grass. He observed, when he approached her, that she had one leg of her ski pants off and he could see that she was partly naked in the groin area. She was crying and her lips were swollen and red.

Constable Johnson, who observed the victim at the police station shortly after the events described, saw her there in a cream coloured cardigan, white shirt and aqua coloured stirrup pants but no shoes. She noticed that the victim had a grossly swollen top lip, dried blood along the bottom lip, a small cut on the right side of the cheek and a small cut on the nail of the right ring finger. She observed grass in the victim's hair, blood on the collar of her shirt and on the cardigan and there was grass attached to both legs of the pants she was wearing.

Then Dr Palmer, who examined the victim at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital on the night of 3 May 1991, observed of her, apart from her obvious distress, that she had bruising across the right side of her face and under her left eye, swelling of the lips and bleeding from them, redness in the shoulders, a scratch across the left upper abdomen extending towards the navel, bruising in the hands, abrasion on the right wrist and knuckles, redness on the back at the nape of the neck, extending down both shoulder blades to the middle of the back. She also noticed on genital examination, that the victim had grass attached to the labia majora and that the introitus was red and raw.

In my opinion there was ample evidence to support the conclusion that the trial judge reached, not only that actual bodily harm had been maliciously inflicted upon the victim but that this had been done with intent to have sexual intercourse as defined by the Crimes Act.

The appellant next submits that the scientific evidence established that there were traces of semen in various parts of the victim's body and in the underwear that the victim was wearing. The DNA evidence was that the traces of semen on the underwear did not match the appellant. The swabs from the person of the victim produced conclusive results. Thus the inference arose that somebody, other than the appellant, had had intercourse with the victim and therefore, somebody other than the appellant had been her attacker. Mr Byrne submitted at least that evidence gave rise to a real possibility that somebody, other than the appellant, was the attacker.

The learned judge described the DNA evidence as being equivocal but Mr Byrne submitted this was to understate the significance of Dr Gunn's evidence from the appellant's point of view. However it is clear from Dr Gunn's evidence, that it was not possible to determine when the semen had been deposited on the underwear but its presence, whilst not adding to the prosecution case, cannot be considered of itself to be exculpatory of the appellant. It does no more than to afford a basis for an inference that the victim had intercourse at some time with somebody other than the appellant. It was not possible, according to Dr Gunn, to determine the age of the deposited semen.

It was next submitted, that the quality of the identification evidence depends very much upon an acceptance of the evidence of Constable Meredith and that there were features of the evidence to expose unreliability in that officer's evidence.

The first of these, it was submitted, was the evidence of Constable Wicks. He made reasonably contemporaneous notes, unlike Constable Meredith. His first observation of the offender was to see him climbing the fence. That was a very different observation from that of Constable Meredith. Constable Meredith did not make any statement until about a month later.

The next feature was that the appellant, having been held in custody overnight, was released on bail the following day and it was not until after his release that he was arrested again and charged with the offences against the victim. If Constable Meredith had seen what he claimed to have seen on the night of the offence, it was surprising, it was submitted, that his observations and the evidence that he could give was not regarded as sufficient to have the appellant charged and detained immediately following the arrest on the night of 3 May.

The next feature is that since Constable Meredith caught and arrested the appellant, he was undoubtedly then wearing the clothing Constable Meredith described. It was easy for the police officer to later give evidence describing that clothing and the appellant's long fair hair, as having been observed when the police officer approached in the laneway. It was submitted that this is an outstanding example of the displacement effect at work and that his Honour should have been alert to this and should have attached little or no weight to Constable Meredith's description of the offender in Everton
Lane.

Obviously Constable Meredith's evidence was of central and critical importance to the prosecution case. I do not find it surprising that his first observation of the offender did not coincide with the observation of Constable
Wicks. The differing first observations are consistent with the two police officers having been looking in different directions. Plainly Constable
Meredith was the first one to see the offender and what happened after that, happened very quickly. He spoke to Constable Wicks according to Constable
Wicks and it was thereafter that Constable Wicks first saw the offender. The evidence of the two police officers, viewed together, indicates that it was what Constable Meredith said to Constable Wicks that first alerted him to look in the direction of the offender and that analysis of the evidence also indicates that it was Constable Meredith who was the first one to see the offender.

Why it was that the appellant was not charged with the offence giving rise to the first count on the night of 3 May is not clear but the evidence indicates that Constable Meredith had little or no involvement in the events in the police station to which the appellant was then taken. He had been injured and went away for medical treatment. This may well account for the failure to place the charge concerning the sexual offence on 3 May.

Constable Meredith remained steadfast throughout extensive cross-examination, in his evidence that at no time from the first sighting of the appellant over the victim's body, to the time that he tackled the appellant in Cowdery Lane, did he ever lose sight of the appellant.

So far as the displacement effect is concerned, Constable Meredith was cross- examined about that matter and he was asked these questions and he gave these answers (at pp 131-132): "Q. And really what the situation is in relation to this blue and yellow spray jacket and the tracksuit pants, they are the clothes you recall the man you arrested wearing rather than the man you initially saw at the scene?" 
A. No, that's incorrect.

Q. Furthermore, when we went through the nature of the chase and the obstacles etc etc, I put it to you that the man you had arrested was in fact the man you initially saw at the scene? 
A. No, that's incorrect. I observed your client at the scene. I pursued your client. I never lost sight of your client and the accused was the person I arrested at the scene, at the arrest site".

There is no reason to consider that this experienced trial judge would have overlooked consideration of the displacement effect to which Mr Byrne has directed his submission but it was a matter for the trial judge to evaluate that evidence of Constable Meredith and indeed, all his evidence.

It is obvious that the judge accepted the evidence of Constable Meredith and having considered that evidence in its entirety, I find no occasion for concern, that in his Honour's acceptance of it, he has fallen into error.

Mr Byrne next referred to the scientific evidence concerning bodily fluids, the most significant of which was the evidence concerning the semen on the victim's underwear. I have already adverted to this evidence. The trial judge plainly had regard to the nature of that evidence and to the significance of it and it is plain that the DNA evidence was not used in any way against the appellant.

It was submitted that if the appellant had struck the side of the car, as the evidence in the prosecution case suggested, he would have been injured in some way in which he was not. There would have been damage to his clothing, which was not found to exist. Absence of such injury and such damage, it was submitted, invited the conclusion that the man who struck the car could not have been the appellant, or at least the absence of injury and clothing damage, must have given rise to a reasonable doubt about the appellant's involvement in the offences charged.

The evidence that there was a collision between the person that Constable
Meredith was pursuing and Mr Cobb's car was powerful, including as it did, the evidence of the two motorists. Mr Cobb's description of the man who ran into the car accorded sufficiently with the appellant's appearance, to afford significant support for the evidence of Constable Meredith. So too I would add, did the evidence of the other motorist.

The trial judge considered the significance of the fact that there were no signs of injury to the accused. However, his Honour had regard to the fact that the car was not travelling quickly and that there was no suggestion that the appellant had been struck a direct blow but rather a glancing one. His
Honour further had regard to the fact that the person who collided with the car, was able to run on immediately. His Honour considered that it was quite consistent with the appellant having been that person, notwithstanding the absence of injury to him and notwithstanding the absence of damage to his clothing. It seems to me that that was a conclusion which was entirely open to the trial judge.

The next feature referred to is that there was evidence that at the scene of the assault upon the woman, there were patterns of shoes found. There was no evidence matching those findings, with the shoes worn by the appellant.
However, the absence of such evidence does not detract from other evidence in the case, which pointed to the appellant's guilt.

Professor Pailthorpe, who has a doctorate in textile technology, tested the samples of fibre taken from the victim's cardigan and from the tracksuit pants the appellant was wearing. A number of tests were carried out, which indicated that the samples so taken and analysed each were of pure wool and of the same approximate diameter of fibre. Each sample had no dye in it. Neither sample had been exposed to detergent, so that the professor concluded that the samples could have been from the same origin. Professor Pailthorpe's evidence was that wool comprised only five percent of clothing fabric and undyed white wool, such as that analysed, made up only ten percent of that five percent.

Mr Byrne referred to a question which the trial judge then asked: "Q. So it is five in 10,000 is it? 
A. Yes. .5%, or five in 10,000, correct." 
Mathematically that is incorrect and Mr Byrne has argued that the judge attached undue weight to this evidence. I do not think that that conclusion is warranted. There was a later passage of evidence in the appeal book and the judge asked the professor: "Q. Ten percent of five percent? 
A. Ten percent of five percent is white apparel wool.

Q. So you multiply ten over 100 by five over 100? 
A. You end up with, .5 percent world-wide would be white apparel wool." 
It seems to me, following that second piece of evidence, that there is no reason for concluding that his Honour considered that the incidence of white apparel wool was any more that five in a thousand cases.

In considering the significance of the evidence of the fibres found on the appellant's tracksuit, his Honour was alive to the possibility that that fibre might have found its way on to the appellant's tracksuit in an innocent way, perhaps through the police officer who helped the victim into the car and who might possibly then have transferred the fibre on to the clothing of the victim. However, his Honour remarked that the evidence was consistent with the appellant being the assailant and there can be no criticism of that observation.

Mr Byrne also referred in his written submissions, to some evidence given by
Dr Knowlden, after the appellant's conviction but prior to sentence. That evidence concerned the condition of the victim. Dr Knowlden saw the victim for the first time in May 1991 and she saw her again in June 1991.

In the history taken from the victim, who was significantly disturbed according to the doctor, the victim told the doctor that on one occasion she thought she had seen the person who had assaulted her and she ran across the road with her son without even looking at the traffic. That suggested sighting occurred at a time when the appellant was in custody.

Dr Knowlden was not called as a witness at the trial because counsel for the appellant objected to her being called. However, the behaviour on the part of the victim was, as the Crown has submitted, part of the pattern of abnormal things that the victim has done, such as being found staring blankly into space and standing on a balcony holding a knife. It does not seem to me that this evidence of the history taken by the doctor, impacts upon the strength of the Crown case.

The task of this court, in considering a ground that a verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory, has been most lucidly considered by the High Court in M [(1994) 181 CLR 487], by this court in Kurtic [(1986) 85 A Crim 57] and by the High Court most recently in Jones 72 ALJR 78. In the joint judgment of Gaudron, McHugh, and Gummow JJ in Jones, their Honours said: "the test formulated by the majority in M must now be accepted as the appropriate test for determining whether a verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory." 
I have closely considered all the evidence which was placed before the learned trial judge and I have considered his Honour's judgment in its entirety. His
Honour carefully recorded the various matters to be proved by the prosecution and the evidence that established those essential elements. There is, in my opinion, no error to be found in his Honour's judgment.

Paying due regard to all the submissions made by counsel and in particular, the submission made concerning the DNA evidence, it does not seem to me that there is any reason for concern as to the result of the trial. I do not consider that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted and I regard the conviction as soundly based. Accordingly, in my opinion this appeal should be dismissed.

LEVINE J: I agree. 
SIMPSON J: I agree. 
STUDDERT J: The order of the Court will then be as I have proposed. * * * 
