

Regina versus Michael James Wratten [1998] NSWSC 1047 (9 November 1998) 
REGINA versus MICHAEL JAMES WRATTEN /95 
MONDAY 16 DECEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
JAMES J, BELL AJ 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: This is an application by Michael James Wratten for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him by Judge Ducker in the District Court on 10 November 1995, following pleas of guilty to eight charges of fraudulent misappropriation, which were offences under s178A of the Crimes Act, and one charge of obtaining a benefit by deception, an offence under s178BA of the Crimes Act.

On each of the first two counts in the indictment his Honour imposed a fixed term of penal servitude of two and a half years to date from 10 November
On each of counts 3, 5, 6 and 7 in the indictment, his Honour imposed a fixed term of penal servitude for two years to date from 10 November 1995. On the 8th count in the indictment, which was the sole count charging an offence under s178BA, his Honour imposed a sentence of imprisonment for two years to date from 10 November 1995. On the 4th count in the indictment, his Honour imposed a sentence of penal servitude for three and a half years, consisting of a minimum term of two years to date from 10 May 1998 and an additional term of 18 months. On the 9th count in the indictment his Honour imposed a fixed term of penal servitude for two years to date from 10 November 1995.

It can be seen that the overall effect of the sentences imposed by his Honour, was that the applicant was sentenced to fixed terms or minimum terms of imprisonment or penal servitude totalling four and a half years and an additional term of 18 months.

There has been no challenge on the hearing of this application to his Honour's findings of the objective facts of the offences. The applicant carried on the occupation of an insurance and investment adviser, as an agent for a life assurance company. All the offences were committed when he misappropriated moneys which had been entrusted to him by clients for payment to a third party, such as a life assurance company or some other financial institution, or for investment by the applicant on behalf of the clients.

The order in which the offences were charged in the indictment on which the applicant was arraigned, is not in accordance with the chronological order in which the offences were committed. Particulars of the offences of fraudulent misappropriation in the order in which they were committed, can be tabulated as follows: 
Approx.Chrono-logical order of offence 
No. of count in indict-ment 
Date of offence 
Client 
Amount mis-appropriated according to Crown 
Between Jan 91 - 
Jan 92 
Mr Ashcroft $120,000 .1.92 
Mr & Mrs Symons $23,000 
Between 1.9.92 - 7.11.94 
Mr Shore $229,523.43 & 3 .5.93 
Mrs Walsh 
Mr Walsh $87,708 $11,153.23 
Between 24.3.94 - .10.94 
Mr Gullo $30,000 , 6 & 8 
Between .8.94 -17.10.94 
Mr O'Farrell 
Mr O'Farrell $20,000 $34,500 
The one offence of obtaining a benefit by deception was committed between 16
August 1994 and 17 October 1994 and involved a sum of $1,647.75.

There were accordingly six separate sets of offences of fraudulent misappropriation committed over a period of more than three years, involving a total amount of money in excess of half a million dollars.

Mr and Mrs Walsh were fortunate enough to be indemnified by the life insurance company for which the applicant acted. All the other victims lost all, or practically all, of their capital and also income which they would have received from the investment of their capital. There was no indemnity fund to which any of the victims of the applicant's fraud could have recourse. The extent to which the applicant made payments of capital or interest to the victims of the offences is a matter to which I will return later in this judgment.

The applicant had been arrested on 7 November 1994. He was allowed bail and he remained on bail until he was sentenced on 10 November 1995.

The applicant was not legally represented in the proceedings on sentence before Judge Ducker. He told Judge Ducker that he had been trying to get funds transferred from his parents to his solicitor's trust account but the funds had not arrived in time for his solicitor to continue representing him.

In the proceedings on sentence Judge Ducker told the applicant that he could give evidence or simply address on penalty. The applicant said that he would address on penalty. The applicant told Judge Ducker that he had never been in similar trouble before, that he apologised profusely to the victims of his fraudulent conduct and that he believed that some of the moneys had been repaid.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge referred to the number of offences, the number of victims and the time over which the offences had been committed, the abuse of trust involved in the commission of the offences and the total amount of money fraudulently misappropriated or obtained.

His Honour noted that the victims had received some payments. Mr and Mrs
Symons had received some payments of interest down to September 1994. Mr Shore had received a total amount of $52,250. The sentencing judge said in his remarks on sentence - "The prisoner suggests that the intermittent payments that were received by those people who were fortunate enough to receive anything, represent payments of the capital fund. In other words, repayment of the capital received. I do not propose to become involved in the strict legalities of that situation as to how those matters are characterised. However, the plain fact of the matter is that each of these persons has lost not only the capital sum, (totalling in all over five hundred and fifty eight thousand dollars) but they also lost the earnings that that capital sum no doubt would have made if properly invested." 
His Honour noted in favour of the applicant that he had pleaded guilty and that he had no previous criminal history. However his Honour remarked that from the time the applicant committed the first of the offences, he was no longer a first offender. His Honour also considered that the remorse the applicant had expressed was a "last minute statement of regret".

His Honour observed, "This was a naked, deliberate, premeditated fraud, in each instance committed in a most blatant breach of trust. Not one cent was offered in compensation." 
His Honour concluded that a total sentence of six years was indicated and he saw no special circumstances by reason of which the ordinary ratio of a minimum term to an additional term should be varied.

The applicant has been represented on this application by Mr Doris of Counsel.
Mr Doris has submitted that the Court should receive some additional evidence, that this additional evidence discloses significant matters of which the sentencing judge was unaware, that in the light of this additional evidence the total overall sentence imposed by his Honour should be held to be excessive and that his Honour should have imposed a proportionally longer than usual additional term.

The additional evidence consists of an affidavit by the applicant; affidavits by Ms McKenna, a solicitor, and Mr Knight, a police officer; an affidavit by a solicitor of the Legal Aid Commission, Ms Leal, to which a report by Messrs
McKenzie & Sutton, Business Interruption Consultants is annexed; and an affidavit by a Ms Van der Poel.

In his affidavit the applicant sets out what he says was the background of the offences, states that he had intended to give himself up to the police but was deterred from doing so by advice from Ms McKenna and describes his attempts to obtain legal representation and professional accounting assistance, which however, he was unable to afford.

The affidavits by Ms McKenna and Mr Knight confirm in certain respects the applicant's account that he had been proposing, before he was arrested, to give himself up to the police. The affidavit by Ms Leal to which the report by
Messrs McKenzie & Sutton is annexed and the affidavit by Ms Van der Poel are concerned with what payments were made by the applicant to the persons who were defrauded by the applicant.

In her affidavit Ms Van der Poel discloses that she has become engaged to the applicant. She has completed a business accounting course. On the basis of records supplied to her by the applicant, she asserts that she has calculated what she describes as "the total amount repaid" by the applicant as being $174,403.

The report from McKenzie & Sutton shows that McKenzie & Sutton were supplied with various documents, including Ms Van der Poel's calculations. In their report Messrs McKenzie & Sutton say that payments made by the applicant fell into a number of categories, only one of which was repayment of capital to the clients who were defrauded. McKenzie & Sutton conclude that the maximum amount of capital repaid by the applicant to the defrauded investors was $38,431, consisting of $1000 repaid to Mr Ashcroft and $37,431 repaid to Mr Shore. In my opinion, it is clear that the evidence by Messrs
McKenzie & Sutton concerning the amount of capital repaid by the applicant, would have to be preferred to the evidence of Ms Van der Poel.

It was conceded by Mr Doris that the evidence sought to be relied on is not fresh evidence, in the strict sense of that term. However, it was submitted that the evidence should be admitted on this appeal, as satisfying the conditions of admissibility laid down in such cases as Regina versus Harris (Unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 13 December 1985), Regina versus Goodwin [(1990) 51 ACrimR 328] and Regina versus De Marco (Unreported Court of Criminal
Appeal 22 November 1995).

These conditions were stated in Goodwin as follows: that the additional material sought to be placed before the Court of
Criminal Appeal is of such significance that the sentencing judge may have regarded it as having a real bearing upon his decision, that although its existence may have been known to the applicant, its significance was not realised by him at the time, that its existence was not made known to the applicant's legal advisers at the time of the proceedings on sentence.

The Crown has not opposed the reception by the Court of the additional evidence and I have concluded that the Court should admit the additional evidence. In the present case condition 3 is irrelevant, as the applicant was not legally represented in the proceedings on sentence. If the additional evidence had been before the sentencing judge, then I consider that he may have regarded it as having a real bearing upon his sentencing decision. In the proceedings on sentence the sentencing judge was not given any explanation at all of how the applicant had come to commit the frauds. The additional evidence also shows that a small part of the capital was repaid by the applicant. The sentencing judge sentenced the applicant on the basis that the applicant had not offered police any explanation of where the money misappropriated had gone or what it had been used for. The additional evidence provides some explanation of those matters. The sentencing judge sentenced the applicant on the basis that he had not previously expressed any regret to the defrauded clients, so that any contrition expressed in the proceedings on sentence was to be regarded as belated. The additional evidence suggests that, in not earlier offering any explanation of what had happened to the money and in not earlier expressing any regret, the applicant may have been acting on legal advice from Ms McKenna that he should exercise his right to silence.

As regards the second condition of admissibility of the additional evidence, a lay person who was unrepresented might not have realised the significance of evidence, the significance of which would have been clear to a lawyer.

A consequence of admitting the additional evidence is that this Court is required itself to consider what sentence should be imposed on the applicant.
As the Court is re-sentencing, the Court admitted a number of character references.

Earlier in this judgment I endeavoured to summarise the principal evidence which was before the sentencing judge. The additional evidence by the applicant about the background to the commission of the offences, shows that he and his partner in an insurance agency business had received an agency development loan of $250,000 from an insurance company at a low rate of interest. However, the insurance company ceased carrying on business and the loan was called up. When the partners were unable to repay the loan, a penal rate of interest was charged and the insurance company threatened to evict the applicant from his home. In these circumstances the applicant committed the offence of misappropriating funds from Mr and Mrs Symons. The applicant refinanced his loan but again fell behind in his payments. The applicant sold his house but the price realised was below his expectations. The applicant misappropriated Mr Ashcroft's money in order to pay debts and expenses. The applicant's position became worse and he misappropriated more and more money.
His marriage broke up.

The applicant decided to give himself up to the police. He made an appointment to have lunch with Mr Knight, a police officer he knew. However, on the day he was to have lunch with Mr Knight, he called in to see Ms McKenna and explained to her what had happened. Ms McKenna advised him not to keep the lunch appointment, not to say anything to the police and to wait until the police contacted him. The applicant took this advice. After the police had contacted the applicant, Ms McKenna advised him not to say anything to the police. At a later stage Ms McKenna ceased acting for the applicant.

I stated earlier in this judgment that the affidavits by Mr Knight and Ms
McKenna confirm the applicant's evidence in certain respects. I have already dealt with the additional evidence concerning payments made by the applicant to the victims of the offences.

The character references show inter alia that in 1995, while he was on bail, the applicant worked as a maintenance employee and then as assistant manager at a tourist resort on the Gold Coast, that he has formed a relationship with
Ms Van der Poel, to whom he has become engaged to be married and that he has enrolled as a student in a Bachelor of Business course in Tourism. He is working as Head Printer in the Correction print Business Unit at the Grafton
Correctional Centre.

In re-sentencing the applicant, it is important to keep in mind the objective facts of the offences, the gravity of which was appropriately emphasised by
Judge Ducker. It is frequently the case that a person in a position of trust who commits a series of frauds did not initially set out to be fraudulent and has resorted to misappropriating trust money only because of what he regards as pressing financial needs. It is also frequently the case that a person being sentenced for what is loosely described as "white collar crime" has favourable subjective circumstances. Although the applicant may have intended to give himself up, it is apparent that by that stage some at least of his fraudulent activities had already been discovered or would inevitably have been discovered in the near future. I have formed the view that an appropriate overall total sentence would be five years.

Judge Ducker found that there were no special circumstances within [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).

We were referred by counsel for the applicant to the decision of this Court in
Regina versus Corbett [(1991) 52 ACrimR 112] in which the Court said at p117 - "Nevertheless, a feature of past sentencing for 'white collar' crimes involving fraudulent abuse of trust, and sometimes involving fraud on the public purse, has been the imposition of lengthy head sentences, but with a substantial gap between head sentence and non-parole periods or minimum terms.
This has probably been a consequence of a desire on the part of the courts, on the one hand, to reflect the need for general deterrence and, on the other hand, to give due account to the fact that the offenders involved frequently have no prior criminal history, are unlikely to re-offend, and have good prospects of rehabilitation".

In subsequent cases in this Court, the decision of Corbett has been referred to with approval, for example in Regina versus Bracken (Unreported Court of
Criminal Appeal 4 November 1994), where the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge had been in accordance with the so called "statutory ratio". The Chief
Justice said at p6:- "As has been acknowledged by counsel for the Crown, an examination of the sentences imposed in comparable cases involving white collar crime and fraud on the Government indicates that the relationship between the non-parole period and the head sentence in the present case (I interpolate that that was a Commonwealth case) is out of line with the typical sentencing pattern." 
We were not referred by the Crown to any later authority of this Court in the field of sentencing for white collar crime or social security fraud, which would be inconsistent with Corbett.

In my opinion, this Court of two judges, in conformity with authorities like
Corbett and Bracken, should find that there are special circumstances in the present case, consisting of the unlikelihood of the applicant re-offending, the need for the applicant to undergo retraining and the applicant's good prospects of rehabilitation. In my opinion, keeping in mind the serious objective circumstance of the offences, the total period which the applicant should have to serve in prison before becoming eligible for release on parole, should be three years.

The conclusions I have reached are that the overall total sentence should be five years and that the overall total fixed terms and minimum terms should be three years. This conclusion can be given effect to, by varying the sentence imposed by Judge Ducker on the 4th count, which was a cumulative sentence. I would propose that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal against the sentence on the 4th count be allowed, that the sentence imposed by Judge
Ducker on the 4th count be quashed and that in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced on the 4th count to a sentence of penal servitude for two and a half years, consisting of a minimum term of six months, commencing on 10 May 1998 and expiring on 9 November 1998 and an additional term of two years. The earliest date on which the applicant will be eligible for release on parole will be 9 November 1998.

BELL AJ: I agree with the proposed orders. I just want to add this, that but for concessions made at the outset by the Crown, I would have had considerable difficulty in accepting three things. The first is the appropriateness of our proceeding to resentence and one problem I had there stems from a foreshadowed argument contained in the written submissions, in which reliance was to be placed on Dietrich. It had seemed to me that there might be some risk of our establishing a precedent, that a person could treat a sentencing procedure in which he was unrepresented as a kind of formality, saving his ammunition until the real hearing in this Court.

The next problem that I had, was as to the relevance to sentencing pursuant to the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/), of what has been described as the Corbett principle, that being what is contained in the passage referred to by the Presiding Judge from the judgment of the Chief Justice in that case. The third is what flows namely from that, the difficulty in finding special circumstances in this case. However, those matters are not now in issue and once we have come to resentence on the material that is now before us, I have no difficulty in accepting the orders and reasons that have been delivered by the Presiding Judge.

JAMES J: The orders will be as proposed by me.
 * * * 
