

David James Hough and Anor versus Third Szable Holdings P/L [1996] NSWSC 284 (19 July 1996) 
DAVID JAMES HOUGH & ANOR versus THIRD SZABLE HOLDINGS PTY LTD /96 
FRIDAY 19 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a summons to extend a caveat. The case has not been particularly well presented because the caveators' acted for themselves. They do not appear to have appreciated the issues involved and although Mr Grinter of counsel who has appeared at short notice today, assisted by Mr Anstee, has put forward everything that possibly could be said he was very much shackled by the fact that the appropriate evidentiary material was not put before the court in the proper way.

Mr Grinter did apply for an adjournment to put on further evidence, or alternatively to lead that evidence orally today. This was objected to by Mr
Reeves for the defendant. One of the reasons why Mr Reeves objected is that the relevant property is being auctioned tomorrow and the lapsing notice had been given on 28 June or 1 July. This put the court in an awkward position.
The only way of dealing with the matter was to ask Mr Grinter to state in summary form what the evidence would have been. He did this and it did not seem to me that even if that evidence had been given the result of the case would have changed. Accordingly, I decided not to give leave to adduce the further evidence.

Mr Grinter put further that the matter could be adjourned for two weeks so the evidence could be put on and that any auction sale tomorrow could still take place because normally conveyancing transactions take six to eight weeks to be completed so that this particular case could be dealt with before completion.
I did not find this argument particularly attractive.

The present case really involves whether the caveats should be maintained. It does not affect the plaintiffs in due course seeking an injunction or a declaration that their rights are superior to the rights of the mortgagee or the purchaser from the mortgagee. However, on the present material it would appear most unlikely that that can be established, but if it can be then the way is still open for it to be presented in a new suit.

The basic facts appear to be that a Mr Silverstein, or someone connected with him, was the registered proprietor of lot 6 in deposited plan 833586 at
Berrima. Mr Silverstein purported to contract to sell to various people, including Mr and Mrs Hough, portions of lot 6. A copy contract is in evidence as PX01, which tends to show that on 28 July 1993 Mr and Mrs Hough as joint tenants inter se agreed to purchase two-thirds undivided share in part of /833586, being land described as lot 9, and a Mr Mangold, who has given evidence in this case but is not a plaintiff because it appears he did not caveat, took the other one-third undivided share.

The proposed evidence was that the three purchasers had been in possession of part of the land since 1993 and had established some christian camp site on it.

The two matters that the plaintiffs need to establish in order to maintain their caveat, that is to show that it may have validity, is that they have an interest in the land and that their interest is arguably superior to the interest of the mortgagee.

As to the first, the evidence would suggest that there has never been an approved plan of subdivision of the subject land. I consider that authorities, such as McWilliam versus McWilliams Wine Pty Ltd <case>; [(1964) 114 CLR 656], particularly at 661, mean that one should approach this type of contract on the basis that it is a condition that the vendor will obtain subdivisional approval and that the contract is conditional upon that consent being given. No interest in land is created until that consent is given. The consequence is, I think, that there is no interest in land to support the present caveat. There may be some happy consequence too, in that the stamp duty might be refundable in full and there might be a claim that the deposit, which appears to have been paid under the contract to Mr Silverstein, might be held in some sort of trust, rather than merely being a claim against his trustee under a deed of arrangement, but that is not a matter which I need consider further.

The second situation is that the mortgagee, who is the defendant and who had caused the lapsing notice to issue, registered its mortgage and the mortgagee under that mortgage would, accordingly, take an indefeasible title free from all interest, except those which are protected by ss 42 and 43 of the [Real
Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). There may be some argument on the evidence that was outlined that as the purchasers were in possession there was constructive notice of their interest, but even this would not be sufficient to amount to fraud within the meaning of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) which would entitle the purchasers to succeed as against the mortgagee.

Accordingly, although one feels sympathy for people who have apparently in good faith paid out good money for an interest in land to be defeated by circumstances over which they have no control, I can only decide this case in accordance with the legal and equitable principles and on the material before me there is not sufficient to enable me to extend the caveat.

It follows that the summons must be dismissed with costs and the exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
