

Regina versus F Q Matter No Cca 60082/98 [1998] NSWSC 263 (17 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus F Q 
CCA 60082/98 June 1998 
Hulme J, Hidden J, Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown Appeal against inadequacy of sentence 
FILE NO/S: CCA60082/98 
REASONS DELIVERED: 17 June 1998 
ORDERS MADE: 28 May1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 28 May 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus F Q 
JUDGMENT OF: HULME J, HIDDEN J, CARRUTHERS AJ 
COUNSEL 
Crown: R D Cogswell 
Respondent: A C Haesler 
SOLICITORS 
Crown: S E O'Connor 
Respondent: T A Murphy 
CATCHWORDS: CROWN appeal against Griffiths remand - whether offence called for full-time custodial sentence-Respondent aged 15 years with bad prior record but strong subjective circumstances-desirability of back-dating sentence imposed on appeal to allow Respondent to continue with rehabilitation courses-Children (Detention Centres) Regulations 1995, Regs 34 and 35. 
RESERVED/EX TEMPORE Orders: Ex tempore; Reasons: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 16 
REGINA -v- F Q 
JUDGMENT 
HULME J: I agree with the Reasons of Carruthers AJ. 
REGINA versus "FQ" 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: It was only after anxious consideration that I agreed with the orders made on 28 May 1998. Acting Judge Horler was undoubtedly presented with a most difficult sentencing exercise, and it was entirely appropriate that his Honour should give great weight to fostering the rehabilitation of the young respondent. Nevertheless, for the reasons expressed by Carruthers AJ, I am satisfied that this Court should intervene. The sentence is structured in such a way as to mark the seriousness of the crime, while recognising the respondent's youth and allowing him the opportunity to continue his efforts towards reform.

R versus F Q 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
CARRUTHERS AJ: The Director of Public Prosecutions appeals under [s 5D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against the order by way of a sentence imposed by his Honour Acting Judge Horler QC in the District Court at Sydney on 15 January 1998. 
On 2 October 1997 the respondent pleaded guilty in the Bidura Children's Court to one charge of armed robbery with wounding. This is an offence under [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s98.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and is punishable by penal servitude for a maximum of twenty five years. He was committed for sentence to the District Court.

On 15 January 1998 the respondent's sentence proceedings which were being heard by his Honour were disposed of by an order remanding the respondent for sentence on Thursday 18 June 1998. His Honour allowed bail on the following conditions: 
That he be and remain of good behaviour during the period of remand.

That he report to Auburn Police Station each Monday, Wednesday and
Friday. The first day of reporting to be on the first of those days following upon his release on 14 March 1998. [He was also in custody on another matter].

That he continue to reside with his father throughout the period of the remand and accept the directions, particularly when he goes out and when he stays home, that his father shall require of him.

That he accept the supervision and guidance of the Juvenile Justice
System throughout the period after his release on 14 March 1998 and to obey all their reasonable directions and instructions during that period, including any direction or instruction to undertake any treatment or urine analysis.

That he report to the Blacktown Office of the Juvenile Justice Service not later than 4pm on Monday 16 March 1998.

The respondent therefore obtained the benefit of what is commonly known as a
Griffiths remand: see Griffiths versus The Queen (1977) 137 CLR 293.

The respondent was born on 27 October 1982 and was accordingly only fifteen years of age when he came before his Honour.

The respondent is of Afghani background having migrated to this country with his parents and siblings in 1993. He was only aged thirteen when he first came into conflict with the law. He came before Cobham Children's Court, Parramatta on 9 July 1996 on a charge of steal from the person. On this occasion he received the benefit of a twelve months recognisance. One month later, however, he was back before the same Court on four counts of robbery with aggravation and one count of assault with intent to rob. On each count he was sentenced to a control order without conditions of six months with an additional term of nine months. All sentences were concurrent. The minimum terms were fixed to commence on 29 July 1996 and to expire on 28 January 1997 and the additional terms were fixed to commence on 29 January 1997 and to expire on 27 October 1997.

After being assessed in terms of his suitability for inclusion in the
Blacktown Intensive Programmes Unit the respondent was granted conditional discharge from his control order on 24 December 1996, after having completed almost five months of the minimum terms. The conditional discharge to attend this Unit was in accordance with the sentencing magistrate's recommendation for such and pursuant to [s (1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s24.html) of the Children (Detention Centres) 1987. Thereafter the respondent attended the Unit where he participated both in one to one counselling and group counselling. The respondent complied with the conditions and requirements of attendance and participation specified by his conditional discharge and successfully completed the course. He was, thereupon, discharged from his control order minimum terms on 28 January 1997. He was then at liberty, albeit subject to parole pursuant to the additional terms which commenced on 29
January 1997.

Thereupon he attended the Canley Vale Cottage School commencing at the beginning of the 1997 school year. This school is an alternative/specialist education programme which he attended until being remanded in custody on 25
May 1997 consequent upon his arrest on the subject offence. Bail was refused in relation to this offence.

On 26 September 1997 an order was made by the Senior Children's Magistrate at the Bidura Children's Court revoking his parole as from 25 May 1997. In a parole review held on 17 October 1997 the Senior Children's Magistrate determined that revocation of parole be confirmed. The respondent was therefore ordered to serve the unexpired portion of his additional term to expire on 28 October 1997. He remained in custody following the expiration of that additional term because bail was still refused in relation to the subject matter.

The respondent's position was made worse by reason of the fact that on 10
September 1997 whilst in custody he assaulted another inmate, and on the following day, by spitting, assaulted one of the youth workers at the Rerby
Detention Centre. That matter came before the Bidura Children's Court on 12
December 1997 when the respondent was sentenced on each count of assault to a three months fixed term control order to commence on 12 December 1997 and to expire on 11 March 1998 i.e. to be severed concurrently. Thus, when the respondent came before Judge Horler on 15 January 1998 he was in custody pursuant to those control orders.

The facts of the subject offence are conveniently summarised in the appellant's submissions on this appeal. I adopt those facts as they have not been challenged.

The respondent was one of three young men who participated in an armed robbery of a service station in Carlingford. Shortly after 6.20 am on Sunday, 25 May two young men entered the service station and approached the console operator One of the men was armed with a knife and the other produced a cylindrical object about six to eight inches long. At about this time the console operator saw a third person inside the service station. His jumper was pulled over his head by the men and he was pushed down onto the ground. He was then hit over the head a number of times and dragged into the storage area.
Whilst this was happening he was kicked about the face and head. The offenders continued to hit the victim over the head and someone placed their hands around his throat. On a number of occasions the offenders threatened to kill the victim and one said that they knew where he lived. The offenders then stole cigarettes, the security video cassette recorder, and car keys and $50 from the victim's locker. They attempted to remove the safe but were unable to move it. They then stole $100 from the cash register and pulled the telephone from the wall. They bound the victim's hands with tape and escaped in the victim's motor vehicle. The respondent was arrested shortly thereafter and participated in an ERISP in which he denied being involved in the robbery. As a result of the incident, the victim attended at Ryde Hospital where he received four sutures to a head wound. He also suffered contusions to his back, a two centimetre laceration to his left arm and a right blackened eye.
When informed of the victim's injuries after the ERISP the respondent replied "I don't give a fuck".

That brief summary is sufficient to demonstrate the very serious objective circumstances of the offence. As to the subjective circumstances his Honour had the very considerable assistance of a detailed report dated 7 January 1998 under the hand Ms Sandra Stamos, psychologist attached to the forensic programme of the Liverpool Intensive Programmes Unit of the Department of
Juvenile Justice. Ms Stamos had conducted a battery of psychometric tests upon the respondent and had carefully traced his history. That history demonstrated a tragic story. The respondent is one of four children born to parents of
Afghani background, which family originally lived in Afghanistan and due to ongoing civil war action and continued unrest in that country fled to India in before migrating to Australia in 1993. Since arriving in Australia the family has lived in the Auburn area, having relocated on a couple of occasions, and the respondent reported that while some English was spoken at home, the first language is Persian. The family has experienced difficulties in adjusting to the challenges of life in this country, aggravated by the fact that the family has lost status and fortune in the course of this migration as the respondent's father reportedly held a powerful and influential position in the military. The family is, however, one of a close knit nature with a strong adherence to Muslim traditions and a strong sense of cultural identity.

Ms Stamos reported that the respondent was during his early childhood - " ... constantly and repeatedly exposed to horrific and extensive war related trauma and carnage. One of these experiences included the bombing of his school which resulted in the death of many of his school peers, including that of a very significant childhood friend when the respondent was approximately seven years of age." 
The respondent complains that he continues to experience vivid flashbacks of this incident and memories of his maimed friend.

The respondent has been quite unable to adapt to the requirements of normal educational institutions in this State. He has demonstrated aggressive behaviour towards staff, general disruptions and a violent loss of temper in the classroom.

Ms Stamos notes: "He has been reported to be abusive to staff, especially when his demands are not met, and has also sexually harassed or related inappropriately with female staff on occasions." 
Whilst in custody he has demonstrated aggressive behaviour. According to the report, on separate occasions he spat at a female staff member and assaulted another resident by hitting him with a sock filled with rocks.
 "His level of expressed hostility and angry outbursts have also continued to be problematic according to staff reports and file records." 
The results of the psychometric tests are disturbing and he is obviously operating at a low intellectual level.

According to Ms Stamos the respondent was reluctant to discuss his offending behaviour and expressed no remorse for his actions.

There was psychiatric evidence to the effect that the respondent was suffering from a post traumatic stress disorder but such disorder seemed to be lessening. Some elements of the respondent's personality traits were described as almost psychopathic in nature.

Ms Stamos concluded that the likelihood of him re-offending is considerable.
Counselling was recommended. Ms Stamos commented: "Whilst his amenability to counselling is questionable and limited, there nevertheless remains a window of opportunity at present and it should be utilised." 
However, there were some encouraging signs in the report of Mr Spiro
Manopoulos, Juvenile Justice counsellor, dated 27 May 1998 of the Blacktown
Intensive Programmes Unit of the Department of Juvenile Justice. That report records that after discharge from the Reiby Juvenile Justice Centre on 11
March 1998 consequent upon the Griffiths remands the respondent attended the
Blacktown Intensive Programmes Unit on 12 March 1998 and has been satisfactorily been attending weekly appointments since then. He also attended an initial interview at the Service for Treatment and Rehabilitation of
Torture and Trauma Survivors on 1 April 1998 and he has attended two subsequent appointments. This is a specialist health service located in
Carramar and it is considered that many of the respondent's needs and issues may be most appropriately addressed through his participation in that service.
However, it would appear that in one area the respondent has not been entirely compliant in his adherence to the conditions of the Griffiths remand in that his mother has reported that he has within the two weeks preceding the 27 May been "decidedly less responsive to parental supervision" evidenced by his regularly staying out far too late and much later than is acceptable to his parents.

Mr Manopoulos said that the Service is prepared to continue supervising the respondent if the Court considers this appropriate and provided that the issue of adequate and appropriate parental supervision and control is exercised in relation to the respondent and the respondent being accepting and responsive in this regard.

By reason of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s17.html) of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) the respondent must (notwithstanding his youth) be dealt with according to law and not as if he was being dealt with in the Children's Court. Regard must be given however to the principles set out in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s6.html) of that Act when sentencing a child although, as Mathews J pointed out in
Regina versus GDP [(1991) 53 A Crim R 112] at "Some of these guidelines consist of sentiments and admonitions which are so general as to be of little assistance in the sentencing of young offenders." 
In that judgment with which Gleeson CJ and Samuels JA agreed, Mathews J refers (at 116), to the relevant principles so far as sentencing young offenders are concerned as explained in a number of cases. I quote: "In Wilcox (unreported, Supreme Court, NSW, 15 August 1979) Yeldham J remarked during the course of sentencing a young offender that `in the case of a youthful offender ... considerations of punishment and of general deterrence of others may properly be largely discarded in favour of individualised treatment of the offender, directed to his rehabilitation'. His Honour relied upon Smith [[1964] Crim LR 70], where it was said: `In the case of a young offender there can rarely be any conflict between his interest and the public's. The public have no greater interest than that he should be come a good citizen.' This principle was also adopted by Hunt J in Bellavia (unreported, 16 August 1980).

Subsequent decisions of this Court, however, suggest that considerations of general deterrence should not be ignored completely when sentencing young offenders. In Broad (unreported, 30 March 1984), Street CJ referred to `the necessity to deter antisocial conduct ... commonly manifested by vandals in this city in current times' but also was `concerned that for a young man of 19 with a clear earlier record and a supportive family background, importing as it does the prospects of real confidence in rehabilitation, a custodial sentence does not reflect the appropriate approach to be taken'.

In C S and T (UNREPORTED, Court of Criminal Appeal, NSW Gleeson CJ, Allen and Studdert JJ, 12 October 1989), Gleeson CJ accepted a submission that `in sentencing young people ... the consideration of general deterrence is not as important as it would be in the case of sentencing an adult and considerations of rehabilitation should always be regarded as very important indeed.'" 
For present purposes it is necessary to note that general deterrence still retains a place in the sentencing of young offenders. The extent to which regard will be paid to general deterrence depends upon the particular circumstances of each case. Thus the Crown argues in the instant case that it plays a greater role than usual because despite his youth the respondent has demonstrated a continuing contempt of the law and (to say the least) regrettably very uncertain prospects as to rehabilitation. The Crown focuses upon the applicant's prior robberies with aggravation as well as a previous conviction from stealing from the person. The very serious objective circumstances of the subject offence are aggravated by the fact that the respondent was still on recognisance on the steal from the person offence and was still serving the additional term by way of parole for the robbery with aggravation offences. Committing offences whilst on conditional liberty is regarded by this Court as a seriously aggravating feature: see Richards [[1981] 2 NSWLR 464] at 465.

Thus the Crown argued that the case fell within the principle stated by Hunt
CJ at CL speaking for the Court in Bus and AS (CCA, unreported 3 November at 11) when the Chief Judge said with regard to the relevance of the youth of an offender:- "Rehabilitation plays a more significant role and general deterrence a lesser role. But that principle is subject to the qualification that, where a youth conducts himself in the way an adult might conduct himself and commits a crime of considerable gravity, the function of the courts to protect the community requires deterrence and retribution to remain significant elements in sentencing him." 
Mr Haesler of counsel in his earnest plea on behalf of the respondent stressed the relevant subjective circumstances and submitted that despite the prior criminal record of the respondent he had not yet reached a position where it was incumbent upon the Court to impose a full time custodial sentence upon him. Such a sentence, he argued, was inimical to the interests of both the respondent and the general community. He submitted that the sentencing judge correctly discarded considerations of punishment and of general deterrence of others in favour of individualised treatment of the respondent directed to his rehabilitation in accordance with the statement of Yeldham J in Wilcox referred to above.

He submitted that the grant of a Griffiths remand was within the sentencing discretion available to the sentencing judge who adopted this approach in an attempt to break the existing cycle of criminal offences.

It is perfectly clear from a perusal of the transcript of proceedings before the sentencing judge that his Honour became so engrossed with the need for rehabilitation of the respondent and the subjective circumstances, particularly his horrific experiences as a younger child in Afghanistan, that he overlooked the Court's obligation to the community and in particular the need for deterrence as an element in sentencing the recalcitrant young offenders. His Honour said for example: "What he did with others was very serious, but when I consider the special circumstances which are of a high order, and the subjective matters, it seems to me that rehabilitation and treatment looms larger than requiring him to be restrained any further." 
The problems associated with the grant of a Griffiths remand were adverted to by this Court Tindall & Gunton [(1993) 74 A Crim R 275.] In that case Hunt CJ at CL said at pp 276-277: "More importantly, such a remand should only be granted where, in the event that rehabilitation and reform are achieved it would be appropriate to impose a non custodial sentence." 
I have no doubt as to the validity of the Crown's argument in this appeal that an offender would have a justifiable sense of grievance if a custodial sentence were to be imposed after he had complied with all the terms of a
Griffiths remand". The present case is one which demanded a full time custodial sentence and it was quite inappropriate for the sentencing judge to have dealt with the matter by way of a Griffiths remand. Where a custodial sentence is required it is better that it be imposed sooner rather than later: (Tindall & Gunton at 282).

In our view the Crown submission that the respondent has by reason of his past criminal behaviour forfeited the right to the benefit of a non custodial sentence for the subject offence is correct. Unfortunate as it may be, this case called unequivocally for a custodial sentence at first instance, and this is the course which Horler DCJ should have taken when the matter came before him on 8 January 1998. In view of the delay which has already occurred we took the view that it would be inappropriate to remit the matter to Judge
Horler and resolved that this Court should re-sentence the respondent. The case presented a difficult sentencing exercise particularly as the Court was anxious that despite full time custody the respondent should be able to continue with the rehabilitation courses referred to in the report of Mr
Manopoulos. The attendance at such courses would necessarily require day leave. A difficulty arose here because regulation 34 of the Children (Detention Centres) Regulations 1995 specifies that day leave must not be granted to a person subject to control unless the prescribed portion of each detention period being served by the person has expired. In the case of the respondent the prescribed portion to be served is one half of the minimum term: see sub clause 4(a). If overnight leave were required it would be necessary for the respondent to have served two thirds of the minimum term: see Regulation 35(4)(a). Thus if the sentence which the Court proposed to impose were not backdated then the respondent would have a hiatus before being available to continue with his rehabilitation. It seemed to the Court, in the circumstances, the appropriate sentence for this offence (balancing the objective and the subjecting factors), should be determined upon the basis that it would be backdated to 25 May 1997. Consideration should also be given to the fact that the respondent had served from 28 October 1997 to 12 December as a period solely referrable to the subject offence. Further it was the commission of this offence which required the respondent to serve the additional terms under the sentences imposed on 19 August 1996 with regard to the aggravated robberies.

The respondent's youth and history, as outlined in these reasons, make it desirable that he be subjected to an extended period of conditional release subject to supervision on parole. Accordingly there are special circumstances within the meaning of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/).

For these reasons, and taking into account the double jeopardy associated with a Crown appeal, the Court made the following orders on 28 May 1998: "The Appeal allowed and the orders made by Horler ADCJ on 15 March, 1998 be quashed. In lieu thereof the respondent is sentenced to a minimum term of 18 months penal servitude to date from 25 May, 1997 and to expire on 24 November , with an additional term of 12 months penal servitude to commence on 25
November, 1998 and to expire on 24 November, 1999.

The Court directs that the sentence is to be served in a detention centre.
This Court recommends that the respondent be allowed to continue with his existing courses, namely at the Blacktown Intensive Programs Unit, conducted by the Department of Juvenile Justice, and the course conducted as part of the service for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture and Trauma Survivors, and that he be granted such leave under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987260/s24.html) of the [Children (Detention Centres) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987260/) as may be necessary for these purposes." * * * 
