

Multicon Engineering P/L versus Federal Airports Corporation [1996] NSWSC 212 (20 June 1996) 
MULTICON ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED versus FEDERAL AIRPORTS CORPORATION /91 
THURSDAY, 20 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION CONSTRUCTION LIST 
ROLFE J 
Application by a successful defendant for indemnity costs based on the unreasonable pursuit of litigation prior to the making of an offer of settlement: refused.

Application by a successful defendant for indemnity costs based on the making of an offer by way of a Calderbank letter and by an Offer of Compromise: granted.

Held: 
Before indemnity costs will be awarded for the period prior to the making of an offer of settlement the offeror must establish that the offeree has been guilty of some wrong-doing or relevant misconduct in the institution or prosecution of the proceedings.

After an offer of settlement has been made the prima face presumption should be that an order for costs on an indemnity basis will be made unless the party rejecting the offer can establish that it was reasonable for it not to accept the offer: each case depends on the exercise of the judicial discretion having regard to its particular circumstances.

In the face of a rejected offer, which is not bettered, the Court should not approach the award of indemnity costs on the basis that the case was one which had no prospect of success, or the rejection of the offer was "plainly unreasonable". Prima facie the unreasonableness is the failure to accept an offer of settlement, which is not bettered by judgment or order.

The position of a wholly successful defendant, which is not accommodated by the rules considered: need to re-consider the rules referred to.

Need for careful consideration to be given to settlement of commercial litigation: NRMA Insurance Limited versus F.R. Coyle Pty Limited & Ors (Cole
J - 13 May 1994 - unreported) followed.

Offer of Compromise or Calderbank letter offer by a wholly successful defendant not covered by the rules: what should be done and the correct approach in that situation:- 
State Authority Superannuation Board versus Property Estates (Queensland) Pty
Limited (Cole J - 8 February 1991 - unreported) 
AWA Limited versus Daniels & Ors (Rogers CJCommD - 17 September 1992 - unreported) 
Beregold Pty Limited versus Mitsopoulos (Cole J - 20 November 1992 - unreported) 
Macquarie Bank Limited versus National Mutual Life Association of Australasia
Limited & Ors (Cole J - 27 July 1994 - unreported), which refers to:- [Baillieu Knight Frank Pty Limited versus Ted Manney Real Estate Pty
Limited [(1991) 30 NSWLR 359];
Colgate-Palmolive Pty Limited & Ors versus Cussons <case>; [(1993) 118 ALR 248]; Maitland Hospital versus Fisher (No 2) [(1992) 27 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281992%29%2027%20NSWLR%20721 "View LawCiteRecord" ); Crisp versus Keng (Court of Appeal - 27 September 1993 - unreported) and
Fowdh versus Fowdh (Court of Appeal - 4 November 1993 - unreported)] 
Wallace versus Baulkham Hills Smash Repairs Pty Limited (No 2) (Young J - 21
August 1995 - unreported) 
Singleton & Anor versus Macquarie Broadcasting Holdings Limited [(1991) 24
NSWLR 103] 
Baltic Shipping Co versus Dillon [(1991) 22 NSWLR 1] 
Rouse versus Shepherd & Ors (No 2) [(1994) 35 NSWLR 277] considered 
R.T. Thomas & Family Pty Limited versus Jeffries Industries Limited & Ors (Giles CJCommD - 2 February 1996 - unreported) followed 
Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Limited versus International Pools Australia
Limited [(1995) 36 NSWLR 242] considered 
John S. Hayes & Associates Pty Limited versus Kimberley-Clark Australia Pty
Limited [(1994) 52 FCR 201] and The Sanko Steamship Co Limited and Grand Slam
Enterprise Corporation versus Sumitomo Australia Limited (Federal Court of
Australia - Sheppard J - 7 February 1996 - unreported) not followed 
No Offer of Compromise 
Hobartville Stud Pty Limited versus Union Insurance Co Limited [(1991) 25 NSWLR ]
noted 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The history to date of and the issues raised by these proceedings, which have been bitterly contested at all points, are set forth sufficiently, for present purposes, in the report of the Referee made on 10 February 1995 and in my reasons adopting essentially the whole of that report published on 11 March
Save in so far as is absolutely necessary I do not propose to re-visit the matters set forth in the report and my judgment.

At the conclusion of my judgment I noted that it had been agreed by the parties that the question of costs before the Referee and before me should await my determination on the application to adopt the report and I expressed my prima facie view that the plaintiff, Multicon Engineering Pty Limited, ("MCE"), should pay the costs before the Referee and the costs occasioned by the application to adopt his report.

By a Notice of Motion filed on 22 April 1996 the defendant, Federal Airports
Corporation, ("FAC"), sought the following orders:- "1. That the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of and incidental to the proceedings including the cost of the reference and the Application for adoption of the Referee's report on an indemnity basis.
 . In the alternative, the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of and incidental to the proceedings on a party-party basis up to 17 March 1993 and thereafter on an indemnity basis.
 . Costs incurred by this application be paid by the plaintiff on an indemnity basis.
 . Such further order as the Court sees fit." 
The Notice of Motion was supported by the affidavit of Ms Pamela Margaret Jack, sworn 19 April 1996, and came on for hearing before me on 20 May 1996 when Mr C.G. Gee of Queen's Counsel and Mr G. Inatey of Counsel appeared for FAC and Mr P.M. Biscoe of Queen's Counsel and Mr M. Orlov of Counsel appeared for MCE.

The Further Evidence 
In her affidavit Ms Jack set forth the history of the matter from the institution of the proceedings by MCE on 13 March 1991 to the commencement of the reference before the Referee on 7 May 1992, and their progress thereafter until the Referee's report was made available on 10 February 1995. This requires no detailed repetition by me. I should note, however, that I was told from the Bar table, without any objection, that the hearing before the Referee occupied several hundred days.

She then set forth various correspondence between the parties which, for obvious reasons, had not been disclosed previously. On 14 September 1992 the
Chairman of FAC wrote to the Chairman of Leighton Holdings Limited of which, I think, MCE is a wholly owned subsidiary, regarding the litigation and the suggestion that an alternative dispute resolution process should be considered. The letter asserted that FAC had concluded there was no merit in
MCE's claim "and that it should be resisted". It stated that FAC had made two offers to end the proceedings, although there is no evidence before me as to what they were, and that if MCE was prepared to consider alternative means of dispute resolution, it "must be ready to accept a realistic compromise of its demands, since that is the only possible outcome of such a process". The letter concluded that FAC did not see any advantage in referring the matter to another form of dispute resolution and repeated that if MCE had any proposal to put it should be done.

On 15 September 1992 the Chairman of Leighton Holdings Limited responded to the letter of 14 September 1992. The letter dealt generally with the situation as Leighton Holdings Limited perceived it and proposed that the parties advance the process of a realistic outcome "by contacting Sir Laurence Street to ascertain his availability to assist in the resolution of this matter".

On 28 September 1992 the Chairman of FAC responded stating that there was no obstacle to direct negotiations between the parties, and that he was unable to understand MCE's refusal to enter into such negotiations. The letter put the position of FAC and referred to its desire to enter into direct negotiations.

On 2 October 1992 the Corporate Secretary and General Counsel of FAC wrote to the Legal Officer of Leighton Holdings Limited referring to direct negotiations, which were apparently scheduled for some date thereafter.

On 17 March 1993 the Corporate Secretary and General Counsel of FAC wrote to the Legal Officer in the following terms, the letter being headed "Without
Prejudice Except As To Costs":- "I refer to our conversation on 16 March 1993. The offer set out below is made without prejudice, except as to costs.
 
The Corporation will settle all disputes between us on the following basis:- 
Judgment to be entered for the Corporation on Multicon's Trade Practices Act claim; 
The Corporation is prepared to have its cross-claim against Multicon dismissed after withdrawal but the Corporation is to retain liquidated damages applied to date; 
The Corporation will forego any Liquidated Damages beyond those referred to in (b) above; 
Each party to pay its own costs of the current and past proceedings; 
There are to be mutual releases in respect of any claim each party may have against the other, such releases to Concrete Constructions and Kinhill Stafford Moor & Farrington, in relation to or arising out of the contract and project, (except the usual contractual obligations such as defects liabilities warranties etc and future tortious liabilities, if any); 
The releases and terms are to be embodied in a Deed to be executed; and 
The Corporation, without any admissions of liability and in consideration of the above, will pay $3m by way of a variation payment.
 
The above offer remains open for fourteen days and is made in the interests of obtaining a commercial settlement and with a view to the considerable legal costs yet to be expended by both parties. The Corporation remains convinced that Multicon's claim has no merit." 
This offer should be contrasted immediately with the conclusions reached by the Referee, which I adopted. He found:- that MCE's claim should be dismissed; that FAC was entitled to liquidated damages on its Cross-Claim in the sum of $1,607,000 of which all but $293,302 had been paid, and he proposed that that amount and interest on it be paid to FAC; he reserved the question of costs.

MCE does not dispute it is liable to pay FAC's costs. The matter in issue is the level at which they should be paid. However, allowing for the very lengthy reference, the necessity to pay the Referee's fees and for the hearing room, and the cost of the adoption of the report the amount must be enormous, even on a party and party basis. In a letter of 3 May 1993 MCE asserted that a monetary offer of $3m fell "well short" of covering MCE's legal costs to that point, which in an earlier letter were said to be running at $350,000 per month.

Although it was proposed in the letter of 17 March 1993 that the claim should be disposed of in a way whereby, in effect, MCE gave up its rights as claimed in the litigation, the substance of the offer was one which provided for a monetary settlement and it appears from the letter of 25 March 1993 that MCE took no objection to that form. It was not concerned with the form of the settlement, but the ultimate financial position. The letter stated:- "We thank you for your letter of 17th March 1993. We have now had the opportunity to review this matter and confirm our preliminary advice of 16th March that, whilst the general approach adopted in your proposal is acceptable, the proposed settlement sum contained in Item (g) is inadequate.
 
On a number of occasions comment has been made that the Court's decision in relation to the primary issue of whether 'misleading conduct' has occurred will be on an 'all or nothing' basis. We agree with this proposition and are confident that Multicon has established the primary issue of its case.
 
However, notwithstanding our belief in Multicon's case, it is our preference to resolve this matter by negotiation. We are pleased that a meaningful settlement dialogue is now open. We look forward to your further co-operation in resolving this matter.
 
We remain available at any mutually convenient time to discuss this matter with a view to resolving it." 
It is useful, at this point, to refer to the position the reference had reached by March 1993 which, according to Ms Jack's chronology, was that the examination of MCE's witnesses had re-commenced. It was common ground that by that date MCE's "reliance" witnesses had given all their evidence. The significance of this was that MCE's claim was based on allegations that FAC had engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct of the type proscribed by s.52 of the Trade Practices Act and it is a matter to which I shall refer later. On 7 June 1993 MCE closed its case and, on 5 November 1993 the evidence was concluded.

On 20 April 1993 FAC wrote, the letter once again being headed "Without
Prejudice Except As To Costs":- "I refer to your letter of 25 April 1993 and our telephone conversation of 19 April.
 
I am concerned that your company, albeit consistent with its earlier actions, has failed to respond to the Federal Airports Corporation's significant offer of compromise with any meaningful offer on behalf of Multicon. Pursuant to my letter of 17 March 1993 the Corporation's offer has now lapsed. 
Your comment, that Leighton intends to review this matter at some time in the future when further evidence has been heard by the Referee, astounds me in view of the significant costs being incurred by both parties. I stressed to you, and I believe you understand, that Leighton's failure to respond to the Corporation's offer with any substantial proposal means that settlement of this matter is now very unlikely. 
Nevertheless, when, or if, your company has anything of substance to propose to the Corporation, please contact me." 
On 28 April 1993 MCE made an Offer of Compromise in accordance with Part 22 of the Supreme Court Rules, it stating:- "1. The plaintiff offers to compromise the claim and cross-claim in the proceedings, including any claim or cross-claim for interest, on terms that: 
The defendant pay to the plaintiff the sum of Five million dollars ($5,000,000); and 
Such costs as may be awarded to the plaintiff by the Court.
 . The offer may be accepted at any time within twenty eight days after the date of service of the offer on the defendant." 
MCE's Offer of Compromise was forwarded with a letter of 28 April 1993 headed "Without Prejudice". It was tendered before me by MCE. It stated that the offer had been prompted "by a continuing concern on the part of senior management at the length and cost of this litigation" and by the inappropriateness of time estimates. It stated MCE was continuing to incur legal costs of approximately $350,000 per month, without taking into account the costs of the Referee, room hire "and the other real, though often hidden, costs of litigation".

The concluding paragraphs of the letter stated:- "Sufficient time, money and effort has been expended by now for it to be abundantly clear that neither the FAC nor Multicon will capitulate. In long, and in some respects bitter, litigation it is not surprising that views have become entrenched, particularly on the part of people 'on the ground'. The nature of this dispute in itself is not conducive to compromise. However, it is ultimately a commercial, not a legal, judgment whether the continuation of the litigation can be justified having regard to the attendant cost and risk. In the view of Multicon's senior management what is required at this stage is a careful and rational re-assessment of the commercial value of continuing the litigation.
 
Having worked as Solicitor for a Statutory Corporation I realise that the present Offer of Compromise and for that matter any offer of compromise made under Part 22 of the Rules - may most likely not be acceptable to the FAC because acceptance of such an offer will necessarily result in judgment being entered for Multicon against the FAC.
 
As previously mentioned to you the form of any settlement is not a matter which particularly concerns senior management at Multicon and therefore Multicon remains prepared to structure a settlement around the current terms proposed by the FAC." 
On 30 April 1993 FAC wrote thanking MCE for the Offer of Compromise. The letter was headed "Without Prejudice Except As To Costs" and noted FAC's agreement that the litigious path before the parties was lengthy. It dealt with certain matters in issue and the course negotiations had taken, and suggested that "a careful and rational assessment of the litigation" be undertaken. It concluded:- "Although your Offer of Compromise is open for twenty eight days, you may take it that it will not be accepted. However, our recent offer of $3m inclusive of costs in full settlement on the terms set out in my letter of 17 March 1993 is renewed, without discounting in respect of the costs incurred since 17 March, and will remain open for a short period of time." 
On 3 May 1993 a further letter was written by MCE referring to FAC's letter of 30 April 1993 and dealing, generally speaking, with a telephone conversation, which it was thought had been misunderstood. The letter stated that FAC's offers had fallen well short of covering MCE's legal costs, without providing any measure of recompense. It referred to the "uncompromising nature" of the letter of 30 April 1993 and concluded:- "In the light of the attitude adopted in your letter of 30 April, combined with the apparent misunderstandings which have arisen when we speak on the telephone, it seems best that, at this stage anyway, we keep our lines of communication open by the flow of written correspondence between us. That way, if there are any further misunderstandings we will be readily able to ascertain from whence they have come." 
On 13 May 1993 FAC wrote again to MCE, the letter being headed "Without Prejudice Except As To Costs", and referred to a letter of 5 May 1993, which may well be the letter of 3 May 1993. It continued:- "The offer set out in my letter of 30 April 1993 is withdrawn." 
On 28 May 1993 FAC filed a Notice of Offer of Compromise pursuant to Part 22, whereby it offered to compromise the action on the basis that:- "The defendant pay to the plaintiff the sum of One million dollars ($1,000,000) in settlement of the claim and the cross-claim." 
The offer was not accepted and, on 20 July 1995, after the Referee published his report, FAC again wrote to Multicon referring to the orders made, going over the merits of the case and settlement negotiations, and concluding:- "Accordingly, the Corporation, desirous as it is to terminate these proceedings and to avoid the waste of further large resources of both sides, offers to settle the claim and the Cross-Claim upon the basis that: . There be entered a verdict for the Corporation in MCE's claim; . That the Corporation's Cross-Claim be dismissed; . That the Corporation retain such liquidated damages as it has already deducted, but otherwise foregoes any claim for such damages and interest thereon; . That there be mutual releases in respect of any claims either party may have against the other in relation to or arising out of the contract and the project, such release is to extend to all agents of the Corporation, including Concrete Constructions and Kinhill-Stafford Moor & Farrington; and . That MCE pay sixty per cent of the Corporations actual cost of the proceedings, together with the costs of the Reference, i.e. Referee's fees, venue hire, transcript fees and the like.
 
The offer is open for acceptance up to 5pm on 27 July 1995.
 
Should this offer not be accepted, we reserve the right to produce this letter in any future proceedings relating to costs, including but not limited to the Corporation's application after final orders in its favour for payment of the whole of its costs on an indemnity basis." 
On 14 November 1995 there was a response to the letter headed "Without Prejudice Except As To Costs", which referred to the failure to respond earlier because the lawyers were considering the position. The letter then sought to re-open negotiations, suggested that the offer in the letter of 20 July 1995 required "in essence a capitulation by" MCE, which outcome was unacceptable, and stated that the view of MCE was that the Referee had made a number of errors, which would lead the Court, on review of the report, to "substitute a finding in the plaintiff's favour on the question of liability of the FAC". No offer of settlement was made however.

It is not in issue that the Offer of Compromise comprised in the letter of 17
March 1993 and in the Offer of Compromise of 28 May 1993 provided a substantially better result for MCE than it achieved in the litigation, and that had the Offer of Compromise of 28 May 1993 been accepted then, in addition to the amount of $1m, MCE would have been at liberty to tax its costs in respect of the claim against FAC up to and including the day the offer was accepted, unless the Court otherwise ordered: Part 52 rule 17(1). Finally, it was not in issue that the hearing of FAC's Cross-Claim occupied an insignificant portion of the hearing time before the Referee, it being conceded, as I understand it, before the Referee, as it was before me, that if
MCE's principal claim under the Trade Practices Act failed, there was no defence to the Cross-Claim.

The Primary Issue On The Present Application 
In paragraph 1 of its written submissions of 10 May 1996 MCE stated:- "MCE does not take issue with Rolfe J's prima facie view that it should pay the costs before the referee and the costs occasioned by the application to adopt the report (judgment 130) on a party and party basis. However, the FAC seeks indemnity costs which MCE opposes." 
The submissions on behalf of FAC were, firstly, that it is entitled to indemnity costs for the whole of the proceedings. In the alternative it submitted that MCE should pay its costs on a party and party basis up to 14 September 1992 or, in the further alternative, up to 17 March 1993 and, thereafter, on an indemnity basis "up to and including the present time".

The Submissions Made 
Section 76(1) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) provides:- "76(1) Subject to this Act and the Rules and subject to any other Act - costs shall be in the discretion of the Court; the Court shall have full power to determine by whom and to what extent costs are to be paid; and the Court may order costs to be assessed on the basis set out in Division 6 of [Part 11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p11) of the [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) or on an indemnity basis." [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p52) rule 28A further recognises the power of the Court to order costs on an indemnity basis.

At this stage it is convenient to set out the provisions of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p52) [rule (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s17.html) and (5): "(4) Where an offer is made by a plaintiff and not accepted by the defendant, and the plaintiff obtains an order or judgment on the claim to which the offer relates no less favourable than the terms of the offer, then, unless the Court otherwise orders, the plaintiff shall, subject to rule 24, be entitled to an order against the defendant for his costs in respect of the claim from the day on which the offer was made, taxed on an indemnity basis in addition to his costs incurred before and on that day, taxed on a party and party basis.
 
Where an offer is made by a defendant and not accepted by the plaintiff, and the plaintiff obtains an order or judgment on the claim to which the offer relates not more favourable to him than the terms of the offer, then, unless the Court otherwise orders, the plaintiff shall, subject to rule 24, be entitled to an order against the defendant for his costs in respect of the claim up to and including the day the offer was made, taxed on a party and party basis, and the defendant shall be entitled to an order against the plaintiff for his costs in respect of the claim thereafter, taxed on a party and party basis." 
Each rule therefore assumes that the party making the "successful offer", i.e. an offer which is not bettered by the order or judgment in favour of the offeree, is entitled to have costs paid on the bases stated "unless the Court otherwise orders", the justification for that entitlement being nothing more than the making of a "successful offer". [Rule 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s5.html) assumes that the plaintiff will recover some order or judgment and hence provides for the plaintiff's costs up to the making of the offer. There is no rule which provides for a defendant having made an offer where the plaintiff fails entirely, such that the plaintiff is not entitled to any costs. This is strange and gives rise to some of the difficulties. However this Court has held that where a completely successful defendant has made an Offer of Compromise, either by a document so entitled or by a Calderbank letter, to both of which I shall refer as an offer or an Offer of Compromise, the same principle should be applied, viz that as from the date of the offer the plaintiff should pay the defendant's costs on an indemnity basis, unless the Court otherwise orders. Thus the obligation is on the plaintiff to satisfy the Court that such an order should not be made, the presumption being that the making of the successful order prima facie entitles the defendant to costs at that level.

The effect of the rules is, in my opinion, to displace certain accepted principles in relation to the award of costs, at least in the circumstances of the making of a successful order. In the absence of those circumstances the general rule is that the successful party is entitled to an order that the unsuccessful party pay its costs on a party and party basis.

On the other hand, in the absence of an Offer of Compromise the circumstances in which the Court will order indemnity costs are, generally speaking, confined to cases where there is some "misconduct" in the bringing or prosecuting of the proceedings. The categories have been referred to in many authorities and do not require any repetition at the moment. Suffice to say that they are not closed and that the exercise of discretion will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. However, in these cases the presumption is that costs will be paid on a party and party basis unless the party seeking costs on the more favourable basis can satisfy the Court that it is entitled to such an order.

FAC's claim to indemnity costs from the inception of the proceedings can, I think, best be set out by reference to the following steps, although this was not necessarily the precise way in which Mr Gee put his submissions. I hope, however, that I will do no injustice to them.

FAC and MCE entered into a contract for the carrying out of building work, which contract defined the circumstances in which MCE would be entitled to the various additional payments, which it was seeking in the proceedings.

Initially in the proceedings MCE followed the conventional path of seeking to recover moneys pursuant to contractual provisions.

Subsequently MCE abandoned this approach and alleged that it was induced by misleading and deceptive conduct on the part of FAC and its agents to enter into the contract on the basis that there would be no variations to the work to be performed under the contract. In support of this case it alleged representations, which were not proved, and misleading and deceptive conduct, which was not proved.

As the case proceeded it became clear, so it was submitted, that MCE could not establish that it entered into the contract in the belief that there would be no changes to the ambit of the contractual work and, save for that belief, that it would not have entered into the contract at all. In short MCE's case was that had it not entered into the contract it would not have incurred the additional expenses of some $9.5m, which it was, therefore, entitled to recover by way of damages for breach of [s.52.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s52.html) 
Shortly prior to the hearing before the Referee MCE must have become aware of some difficulty in this presentation of its case because an application was made to Giles J to amend the Summons to plead again contractual counts which had been abandoned, which his Honour refused.

Any proper consideration of the evidence and of the preparation of the case would have made it clear to MCE and those advising it that it could not establish the belief that the contract was not to be varied. Even if this was not apparent during the preparation of the case it must have become, so it was submitted, apparent after the evidence of the "reliance" witnesses had been given, which, according to Ms Jack's chronology, was by the end of 1992.

Any realistic evaluation of MCE's case at that stage would have revealed that it could not succeed on the claim as propounded and, so it was submitted, would have alerted MCE to the inevitable consequence that there would be findings against it on this issue and, accordingly, MCE would lose the substantial part if not the whole of the litigation.

There was adequate opportunity for MCE to settle the proceedings and, when the offer was made on 17 March 1993 MCE had ample time to consider it and to make a commercial decision, in the light of all the facts then known, including the concessions made in cross-examination by the "reliance" witnesses, whether the offer of that date or the subsequent Offer of
Compromise should be accepted.

The Referee held that the representations alleged to have been made were not made and that there had not been misleading and deceptive conduct. The
Court has adopted his report in so far as these findings were made.

It was submitted that when all this is looked at it is clear that the action was, from the outset, speculative; that any proper evaluation of it would have indicated that there was no reasonable chance of success on the way in which
MCE decided the case should be fought and, by dint of the refusal of Giles J to allow the amendment, was forced to fight it; and that, in the circumstances, the conduct of MCE in pursuing the claim was vexatious and wrongful in circumstances which should give rise to an order for indemnity costs for the whole of the proceedings.

Mr Biscoe submitted that whilst there may be an air of novelty in bringing such a claim pursuant to s.52 of the Trade Practices Act it could not be seriously doubted that if the evidence had supported the claim MCE would have been entitled to the damages it sought, so that the novelty of the claim should not, of itself, attract any judicial criticism. I agree with this submission in principle. Mr Biscoe submitted that notwithstanding that the evidence of the "reliance" witnesses conceded that they did not believe there would be no change to the contract, none-the-less there was other evidence called by MCE which, if it had been accepted, would have established that persons independent of MCE were of the view that the contractual provisions provided there would be no change to it. I think, with respect, this submission overlooks the important point that for the purposes of s.52 it is necessary for the party, which asserts it has acted to its detriment in reliance upon conduct said to be misleading or deceptive, to prove that it was misled or deceived by virtue of conduct on the part of the other party. The absence of such evidence, so it seems to me, is not overcome by evidence that other people may have been misled or deceived when the party complaining is found not to have been. The evidence of others may, in certain circumstances, be corroborative if the party complaining is found to have been. Further Mr
Biscoe submitted that MCE was seeking to obtain admissions on the "belief" point from witnesses it thought would be called by FAC. In the event FAC proffered no evidence on this point, and, although those representing MCE thought it would, no criticism is levelled at FAC for electing not to lead such evidence.

However all this has to be put in the context of the litigation. By the time it emerged that evidence of the "reliance" witnesses would not support the primary case put forward by MCE, the proceedings were well advanced. Granted it may be said that better preparation would have resulted in a realisation that this result would or may well flow from the evidence, but it seems to me that I cannot, and should not, simply infer that there was carelessness in the preparation by virtue of the fact that the primary evidence did not stand up to cross-examination. Any such conclusion would require a far more detailed evidentiary exploration than was undertaken before me and, on the evidence before me, I am not prepared to find that there was carelessness.

I can appreciate it being said that once the evidence had faltered, in the way to which I have referred, careful consideration should have been given to settlement but, by that time, the settlement position of MCE had no doubt been eroded and the questions confronting MCE were whether it should, in effect, settle on the basis that it would recover part of its costs, but forego the damages it claimed it was entitled to, or whether it should proceed in the hope that it would obtain a better result at the end of the day. The prospect of obtaining such a result was, on one view of the available evidence, still open, although, as I have said, a better view may well have been that the further evidence did not assist if the principal evidence was not accepted.

I have taken the matters referred to in the last two paragraphs into account for they must be considered in determining whether it was reasonable, (leaving aside for the moment where the burden of persuasion lies), for MCE not to accept the offer.

Mr Gee submitted, nextly, that there is an obligation on parties involved in commercial litigation to consider settlement in a careful manner, especially litigation as extensive in time and as expensive as this litigation. He called in aid, particularly, the remarks of Cole J in NRMA Insurance Limited versus F.R.
Coyle Pty Limited & Ors (13 May 1994 - unreported). It is, if I may say so with respect, appropriate to quote a passage from his Honour's reasons, which it would be well for all commercial litigants and their legal advisers to bear in mind:- "... in modern society, whilst a person or corporation engaged in business may, as an incident of business run the risk of being subjected to litigation, society requires that careful consideration be given by those intending to litigate before the claim is brought. That is particularly necessary with the current high legal costs. A person in business is entitled to assume that he will not be subjected to untenable litigation causing disruption to his business and cost. If litigation is brought against it, and it is held to be untenable, he should not in consequence suffer in a monetary sense. Great care must be taken by prospective plaintiffs and their legal advisers before proceedings are commenced." 
I entirely agree, with respect, with what fell from his Honour. However, it must be borne in mind that that was in the context of his deciding whether a party, which had struck out the originating process against it as failing to disclose a cause of action, was entitled to indemnity costs.

Mr Gee submitted that when one looks at the present proceedings it becomes clear they should never have been brought or, alternatively, it must have become clear on any reasonable examination of them after the evidence of the "reliance" witnesses was given, that they were doomed to failure, and that in either of those circumstances an award of costs on an indemnity basis is justified. Mr Gee also made reference to what I said at page 109 of my reasons for judgment, where I noted that Mr Collins of Queen's Counsel, who appeared for MCE before the Referee and before me on the adoption of the report, had submitted "it was never the case for MCE that there could not be any changes and that the variations clause could not apply" and that "MCE's case was that such a view was untenable". Mr Gee pointed to the fact that this disclosed a different case to that run before the Referee and amounted to jettisoning the evidence of the "reliance" witnesses. There was some debate about the extent of this, but it was not in issue that it was open to the Referee to reject the evidence of the "reliance" witnesses on the primary point that they did not believe there would be a variation to the contract.

Conclusions As To The Period Up To 17 March 1993 
It seems to me that conceptually MCE's case was one which was open and, on the basis of the untested evidence of the "reliance" witnesses, which received corroboration from independent witnesses, it was one which, if the "reliance" witnesses had adhered in cross-examination to their evidence in chief and ultimately been believed, may have provided relief to MCE by way of damages arising from a breach of s.52. There can be little doubt that the case thus formulated had difficulties. But most cases do and it is not every case, which has difficulties, which ultimately fails. Whilst I am not to be taken as acquitting litigants and their advisers of investigating as thoroughly as possible a case brought, I am not to be taken as suggesting that cases in which there are problems should not be brought and, as I have just said, many such cases succeed either wholly or substantially or, at least, lead to a reasonable settlement for the benefit of those bringing them. It would be quite wrong, in my respectful opinion, to say that a case should never be brought unless the parties and their legal advisers were satisfied that it must succeed. If that were so few cases would be brought. On the other hand I do not agree that an award of indemnity costs is to be reserved for a case where it is apparent that there was no chance of success. The more difficult question is what should happen in the case which "collapses" during the hearing. Obviously it is necessary to review it as it becomes weaker and any bargaining position of the party propounding it becomes similarly weaker. But, in many instances by that stage the prospect of a reasonable settlement has evaporated. Of course what is "reasonable" at that time must be considered in the light of the circumstances as they exist.

My present view is that in the absence of any wrongful or vexatious conduct on the part of MCE of the type which will typically attract indemnity costs by reason of the nature of the proceedings brought or the way in which they are conducted, and I am not satisfied that there was any such conduct in this case, indemnity costs should not, without more, be awarded. Any such general statement must be tempered by the requirement to consider, in the exercise of the judicial discretion, the facts and circumstances of each case.

Whilst I heard extensive submissions on the issue as to whether indemnity costs should be awarded from the beginning of the proceedings I think I have set out sufficiently the matters which are relevant to a consideration of that. When all these matters are examined I am not satisfied that an order for indemnity costs is appropriate, in the exercise of my discretion, from the commencement of the proceedings. I do not discern in the conduct of MCE such wrongdoing or misconduct, which would justify such an order.

I should add that Mr Gee also submitted that MCE had basically refused to negotiate and, in adopting this attitude, it had acted contrary to the way in which litigants in commercial litigation are expected to act, in the sense that there is an expectation by the Court that they will make every endeavour to resolve the matter on commercially acceptable terms. There is force in this submission, but when the conduct of MCE is viewed overall, in the context of all the matters to which I have referred, it does not persuade me that indemnity costs should be awarded from the commencement of the proceedings.

Nextly it was submitted that indemnity costs should be awarded from 14
September 1992, the significance of that date being that it was the day on which FAC wrote referring to two previous offers made and seeking a proposal from MCE for the settlement of the proceedings. I have referred to the correspondence thereafter. Essentially for the reasons I have given I have come to the conclusion that there is nothing as from this date that would change the view I have expressed in relation to indemnity costs after 14
September 1992 and until 17 March 1993.
 
The Effect Of The Letter Of 17 March 1993 And The Offer Of Compromise Of 28 May 1993 
I think that if the defendant perceives whatever weaknesses it may consider to be in the moving party's case, it should be able to take advantage of that by making an offer of settlement, which reflects its assessment of that case.
Presumably most offers, whenever made, will reflect the position as seen by the offering party. The offer can then be made either by way of a Calderbank letter or, perhaps more safely, by way of an Offer of Compromise if the rules permit it. (I have pointed out the difficulty facing a defendant, which is wholly successful.) In that way the party making the offer can make an assessment of the value of the moving party's case and put it on notice that in the event of the case not measuring up to the offer an order for indemnity costs will be sought. Whilst I agree that the moving party must be alert to prepare its case properly and to ensure that litigation, which has substantial problems, is considered carefully at all stages, I think there is also an entitlement, if perhaps not an obligation, on the other party to protect itself in the ways to which I have referred. The day may come, if it has not already, when those incurring costs, which will ultimately be paid by others, e.g. company shareholders, will be called on to account for why reasonable offers of settlement were not made or accepted.

The letter of 17 March 1993, as I have noted, made an offer which, in the result, was far better than the result achieved by MCE. Subsequently, on 28
May 1993, the Offer of Compromise pursuant to Part 22 of the Rules was made, although I have referred to the problems produced by the absence of a specific rule for wholly successful defendants. The offer contained therein was also better than the result MCE achieved.

It was submitted by Mr Gee that Part 17 rule 5 did not touch the Offer of
Compromise because MCE is not entitled to an order for costs, so that one looks at the Offer of Compromise in the same way as one would look at a
Calderbank letter. A similar situation was considered by Cole J in State
Authority Superannuation Board versus Property Estates (Queensland) Pty Limited (8 February 1991 - unreported). His Honour noted that engineers, which were held not to be liable, made an Offer of Compromise in accordance with Part 22 to pay a sum of money. The offer was not accepted and no sum was recovered against them. His Honour then dealt with a submission that having made the
Offer of Compromise, which involved the payment of a sum, and having been entirely successful, the engineers "should be in a better position so far as costs are concerned than if they had not made such an Offer of Compromise". He noted that if that were not so then "particularly in commercial matters, the aim of the rules dealing with compromises of fostering settlements, is thwarted". His Honour considered the exercise of discretion under s.76 or pursuant to the inherent jurisdiction and, at p.21, said:- "The Engineers did all that they could to extricate themselves from lengthy and expensive litigation. They had no liability. They made a sensible commercial offer in an endeavour to be rid of the continuing cost of litigation. That offer was not accepted. In the result, it should have been. Had it been the Engineers would not have incurred the excess solicitor and client costs otherwise irrecoverable. Whilst recognising that risk of litigation is a risk incumbent in the conduct of business, and accepting that the provisions of Part 52 rule 17 do not specifically provide for the making of such an order, in my view, having regard to the discretion conferred by s.76, and by principles analogous to those inherent in the concepts of a Calderbank letter, the cross-defendant who has made sensible and commercial endeavours to be released from the litigation, and who has succeeded entirely in its defence, should not be burdened with solicitor and client costs." 
In the circumstances his Honour made an order for indemnity costs as from the time of the making of the offer.

In AWA Limited versus Daniels & Ors (Rogers CJCommD - 17 September 1992 - unreported) his Honour, after considering the facts of that case and the decision of Cole J in the State Authorities Superannuation Board case, at p.36, said:- "In all the circumstances I would not be prepared to make a special order for costs on an indemnity basis simply on the ground that the cross-claims should have been recognised to be without merit, or that the cross-claimants failed to accept reasonable proposals for bringing the cross-claims to an end. However, taking into account the weaknesses of the cross-claimants cases and the offers of settlement produces a different picture. Particularly is that the case where the cross-claimants were confronting the cross-defendants with participation in lengthy and complex proceedings. In such circumstances, in my opinion the scales should come down in favour of full indemnity for the reasonable costs of the successful party. I say this with a lively recognition of the opposite view. It is undoubtedly a tremendous hardship on a claimant confronted with the spectre of a very large order for other parties' costs as the price of seeking to vindicate one's rights. Nonetheless the choice was that of the cross-claimants. The cross-defendants did not have such a choice." 
To some extent the opening words of the passage I have just cited reinforce the view to which I have come in relation to the period prior to 17 March 1993. It seems to me that the matter which changed the position was the offer of 17 March 1993. In effect FAC adopted the only step it could take to protect itself, or to seek to protect itself, against the very substantial cost burden to which it was exposed.

In Beregold Pty Limited versus Mitsopoulos trading as D. Mitsopoulos &
Associates (Cole J - 20 November 1992 - unreported) his Honour adopted a
Referee's report and entered judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $595,000. The reference occupied two days with a site inspection on the third day. Prior to the reference commencing the defendant's solicitor wrote to the plaintiff's solicitor offering the plaintiff "in full settlement the sum of $680,000 plus costs as agreed or taxed". The offer remained open until the commencement of the reference on 6 October 1992 in which the plaintiff was claiming $1.5m. The plaintiff recovered the amount to which I have referred and the defendant sought its costs of the reference on an indemnity basis. The plaintiff argued that as the offer was not made pursuant to and in accordance with Part 22, with the consequences prescribed by Part 52 rule 17, there should be no special order for costs and that Part 22 prescribed a code such that offers of settlement in the nature of a Calderbank letter no longer had any effectiveness to protect a party from cost consequences. His Honour rejected this submission, as he had done in State Authorities, and as
Rogers CJCommD had done in AWA, and, at p.2, he said:- "Section 76 confers a power to make the order here sought. A sensible commercial offer was made by the defendant in a sum significantly in excess of that recovered by the plaintiff. In the result, that offer should have been accepted. It would have avoided all of the costs of the reference suffered by the defendant. In my view the defendant should not be obliged in a commercial matter such as this to bear significant costs of a three day reference when he has made a sensible offer to avoid those costs. The defendant is accordingly entitled to recover the costs it occurred in partaking in the reference. In my view it is entitled to recover those costs on a solicitor and client basis because the additional solicitor and client costs were incurred in consequence of the rejection of what was established to be a generous offer." 
Once again it does not appear that his Honour took into account any element of misconduct or lack of merit on the part of the plaintiff, other than such lack of merit as led to its not recovering an amount in excess of the offer. He made clear, however, that the offer must be "sensible" thus reflecting at least some element of compromise. The extent to which the offer can be so characterised is established, largely, by the result.

In Macquarie Bank Limited versus National Mutual Life Association of Australasia
Limited & Ors (27 July 1994 - unreported) Cole J dealt with the effect of a Calderbank letter at p.3 and whether an order for indemnity costs should be made. In doing so he referred to many authorities including the decisions of Powell J in Baillieu Knight Frank Pty Limited versus Ted Manney Real
Estate Pty Limited [(1991) 30 NSWLR 359]; Sheppard
J in Colgate-Palmolive Pty Limited & Ors versus Cussons <case>; [(1993) 118 ALR 248]; the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Maitland Hospital v
Fisher (No 2) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 721] and the unreported decisions in the Court of Appeal of Crisp versus Keng (27 September ) and Fowdh versus Fowdh (4 November 1993). He also referred to his own previous decisions and AWA and, at p.3, he said:- "Three matters were put in opposition to the claim for indemnity costs by the fourth defendant. The first was that the provisions of Part 22 constitute a code so that if a party wishes to obtain a cost advantage from an Offer of Compromise it must invoke the provisions of Part 22 so as to attract the provision of Part 52 rule 17. I have previously held to the contrary ... Second, it was put that the fourth defendant was successful on a basis different to that expressed in the Calderbank letter. I do not regard that as a disqualifying feature. There is no obligation upon a party making an offer of settlement in the Calderbank letter to specify with precision the reasons why the opposing party will fail, or should accept the offer in the letter. Third, it was put that, as an exercise of general discretion conferred by s.76 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and adopting the principles enunciated by Sheppard J in Colgate-Palmolive, no order for indemnity costs should be made." 
His Honour continued, at p.4:- "In my view none of these matters in opposition should prevail. From the date of the offer in the Calderbank letter, the plaintiff was at risk as to indemnity costs for the reasons stated in Maitland Hospital." 
At p.724 of that decision the Court of Appeal said:- "It is the obvious intention of the rule to oblige a defendant, which has received an Offer of Compromise, to give serious thought to the risk which it may run of losing the proceedings and then being ordered to pay costs on an indemnity basis.
 
The objects of the rule include: . To encourage the saving of private costs and the avoidance of the inherent risks, delays and uncertainties of litigation by promoting early offers of compromise by defendants which amount to a realistic assessment of the plaintiff's real claim which can be placed before its opponent without risk that its 'bottom line' will be revealed to the Court; . To save the public costs which are necessarily incurred in litigation which events demonstrate to have been unnecessary, having regard to an earlier (and, as found, reasonable) Offer of Compromise made by a plaintiff to a defendant; and . To indemnify the plaintiff who has made the Offer of Compromise, later found to have been reasonable, against the costs thereafter incurred. This is deemed appropriate because, from the time of rejection or deemed rejection of the compromise offer, notionally the real cause and occasion of the litigation is the attitude adopted by the defendant which has rejected the compromise. In such circumstances, that party should ordinarily bear the costs of litigation." 
In the circumstances his Honour ordered the plaintiff to pay the fourth defendant's costs on an indemnity basis from a specified date.

In Wallace versus Baulkham Hills Smash Repairs Pty Limited (No 2) (21 August - unreported) Young J said, at p.5:- "Notwithstanding that I think with respect that Mr Whittle is correct when he said that there is a general policy to encourage settlement and that general policy is far better served if the general message gets through to litigants and the profession that it is more likely than not that where there has been a Calderbank letter, and where there is a falling short by more than a minimal degree of the offer that is made in the Calderbank letter, that litigants should expect that after time has expired for complying with the Calderbank letter the costs will be on an indemnity basis. If some sort of general policy like that does not underlie this type of litigation then settlements will be discouraged and there will be more and more hearings and all sorts of orders would have to be made which again takes up more time and costs everybody more money. Having considered all the factors that I have mentioned in this case it seems to me that after 11 am on 24 July 1995 the plaintiffs should the defendant's costs on an indemnity basis." 
Whether it is correct to say that there is a general policy or whether it is, perhaps, with respect, more correct to say that normally a Calderbank letter generally will be given effect according to its terms, and thus fulfil the functions of an Offer of Compromise, does not seem to me to differ in substance. However, all these authorities support the view, which in my opinion is correct, that when an Offer of Compromise is made in either of the forms to which I have referred, in circumstances where there can be no doubt that if the offeree does not accept it the making of the offer will be called in aid of an application for an award of indemnity costs if the offer is not bettered and, provided the offer reflects a compromise, the Court commences its consideration of the application from the position that such an order should be made unless the offeree can persuade the Court that it should not be. However, as I have said on several occasions the ultimate decision will depend on a consideration of the particular facts and circumstances in each case.

A Further Consideration Of Some Case Law 
I have referred to authorities in this Court in which orders for indemnity costs have been made. The emphasis in these decisions is that where an Offer of Compromise has been made, it being recognised that the Rules do not accommodate the situation of an ultimately successful defendant, there is a disposition, at least, to order indemnity costs. Each case emphasises that one must consider the particular factual circumstances, but the decisions do not show a requirement that in addition to the result not matching the Offer of
Compromise there must be some misconduct of the party against whom or which the order is made. It is unfortunate, in my opinion, that a number of these decisions have not been reported, at least so far as my researches and those of counsel have revealed, because they establish a pattern at first instance in this Court, which gives effect to the general intendment of making of
Offers of Compromise, namely to act as an inducement to the commercial resolution of litigation. As more and more time seems to be occupied with arguments about the level at which costs should be awarded, no doubt reflecting the disparity between party and party costs and a full indemnity, it is desirable that the profession should be aware of these judicial views.

In State Authorities Superannuation Board I do not see any suggestion in the reasons for judgment that there had been any element of misconduct on the part of the party from which such costs were sought: rather it had simply failed. His Honour said:- "They (the Engineers) argue, however, that having made an Offer of Compromise involving payment of a sum of money, and having been entirely successful, they should be in a better position so far as costs are concerned than if they had not made such an Offer of Compromise. Otherwise, particularly in commercial matters, the aim of the rules dealing with compromise of fostering settlement, is thwarted. There is no inducement to a confident defendant or cross-defendant to make an Offer of Compromise if, being ultimately successful, he receives only the same order for costs as he would have received had the offer not been made." 
This must be so and subsequently his Honour said, and I am repeating part of what I have previously quoted:- "The Engineers did all that they could to extricate themselves from lengthy and expensive litigation. They had no liability. They made a sensible commercial offer in an endeavour to be rid of the continuing cost of litigation. That offer was not accepted. In the result, it should have been. Had it been the Engineers would not have incurred the excess solicitor and client costs otherwise irrecoverable. Whilst recognising that risk of litigation is a risk incumbent in the conduct of business, and accepting that the provisions of [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) [rule 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s17.html) do not specifically provide for the making of such an order, in my view, having regard to the discretion conferred by s.76, and by principles analogous to those inherent in the concepts of a Calderbank letter, the cross-defendant who has made sensible and commercial endeavours to be released from the litigation, and who has succeeded entirely in its defence, should not be burdened with solicitor and client costs. ... In my view parties should carefully consider both the legal and commercial necessity or appropriateness of joining parties before they do so. Equally they should consider the legal and commercial consequences of failing to accept a sensible Offer of Compromise aimed at removing a party from extensive and expensive litigation. In my view the Builders did not give sufficient consideration to those matters after receipt of the Offer of Compromise. I accordingly propose to order the Builders pay the difference between the Engineers' solicitor and client costs and costs recoverable by the Engineers from the Plaintiff on a party and party basis from the date of the expiration of the Offer of Compromise." 
The qualification his Honour inserted, which must be an appropriate one, is that the offer should be "a sensible commercial" one.

In AWA Limited Rogers CJCommD after considering the facts of that case and the decision of Cole J in the State Authorities Superannuation Board, and quoting portion of the passages to which I have referred, said, at p.35:- "With respect, his Honour's views are completely in accord with what I believe to be the rationale and purpose of offers of settlement. Thus in Singleton & Anor versus Macquarie Broadcasting Holdings Limited .. I awarded indemnity costs to the plaintiff who had demonstrated a willingness to settle and had made a number of realistic offers outside the regime then in place for formal Offers of Compromise. The offers were close to the amount eventually obtained by the plaintiff. Conversely, the defendant had resisted attempts to compromise. This resulted in a hearing before a Referee which should have been unnecessary. For those reasons, it was appropriate to order costs on an indemnity basis." 
Singleton is reported in [(1991) 24 NSWLR 103] and, at p.108 of the report, his Honour said:- "The recent decision of Morling J in the Federal Court in Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations Inc versus Tobacco Institute of Australia Limited <case>; [(1991) 100 ALR 568] per Kirby P, Gleeson CJ concurring.
 
Until June 1989 in this Court, orders for costs on an indemnity basis could only be made in exercise of the inherent power of the Court. At that time [Rule 28A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s28a.html) was inserted in [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) which specifically recognised the Court's power to make an order for costs on such a scale." 
In Baltic Shipping Kirby P, at p.34, rejected the view of the trial Judge that indemnity costs should not be ordered because there was nothing in the evidence prior to the admission of liability to indicate that there had been, what the trial Judge referred to as:- "A lack of merit on the part of the defendant in the way in which the case was conducted." 
His Honour said:- "That appears, ultimately, to have been the test which his Honour applied to the application. In my respectful view it was too narrow a test." 
It must be borne in mind that his Honour was considering the Admiralty Rules then in force, but the present [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) [rule 28A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s28a.html) give as much power as the former Admiralty Rules did to the Court. Therefore the principle enunciated by Kirby P and agreed in by the Chief Justice is, in my opinion, applicable.

In Rouse versus Shepherd & Ors (No 2) [(1994) 35 NSWLR 277] Badgery-
Parker J was confronted with a situation in which the defendants made a late admission of liability during the hearing. His Honour referred to the decisions of Sheppard J in Colgate-Palmolive, of Woodward J in Fountain
Selected Meats (Sales) Pty Limited versus International Produce Merchants Pty
Limited <case>; [(1988) 81 ALR 397], of Powell J in Baillieu Knight Frank Pty Limited v
Ted Manney Real Estate Pty Limited, of the Court of Appeal in Wentworth v
Rogers (No 5) [(1986) 6 NSWLR 534], of Hunt J in Blackburn versus State of New South Wales (9 August 1991 - unreported), of
Davies J in Ragata Developments Pty Limited versus Westpac Banking Corporation (5 March 1993 - unreported) and of the Court of Appeal in Maitland
Hospital. He noted, in relation to the latter case, the three points set out in the judgment to which I have referred and expressed the view that these objectives would apply in any instance in which indemnity costs are sought and awarded. He continued, at p.281:- "With the above precedents and policy in mind, the circumstances of this case must then be scrutinised in order to decide whether it is one in which it would be appropriate to award indemnity costs." 
It is important to bear in mind that this was not a case in which an offer of settlement or an Offer of Compromise was being considered.

In Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Limited versus International Pools
Australia Limited [(1995) 36 NSWLR 242] at p.248
Kirby P said:- "The ordinary rule of party and party costs imposes a degree of restraint in the accumulation of costs in litigation." 
I have cited this passage as Mr Biscoe relied upon it. That was a case in which an application for indemnity costs was being considered in circumstances where very shortly before an appeal was called on for hearing the appellant notified the respondent, which then sought costs on an indemnity basis, that it would not be proceeding with the appeal. The majority of the Court of Appeal was of the view that indemnity costs should not be awarded, inter alia, because there had been a failure to warn the appellant that its prospects of success were bleak and that if the appeal was pursued costs would be sought on that basis. That is far removed from the position in this case, but there are statements in that case, which support the approach to the award of indemnity costs to which I have referred.

Kirby P stated, at p.249, his basic reasons for refusing the order for indemnity costs and said:- "The merit of the present motion is that it calls attention to the distinct possibility that, in some circumstances, a special costs order will be made, including for indemnity costs." 
Mahoney JA agreed with Kirby P that in the circumstances of that case an order for indemnity costs should not be made. In doing so he said, pp.250 and 251:- "Until recent times, costs would not, I think, have been ordered on an indemnity basis in circumstances such as the present. Costs upon an indemnity basis were ordered only in restricted circumstances: Degmam Pty Limited versus Wright (No 2) [[1983] 2 NSWLR 354] at 64. However, there has been, in my opinion, a danger in the practice of this and, I believe, other courts in this regard. Costs on an indemnity basis are becoming more frequently available: cf Singleton.
 
It is, I believe, right that such a change be made. The costs customarily awarded did not achieve what, I think are the main purposes for which costs are in principle given.
 ..................
 
For a long time, the costs ordered to be paid by one party to litigation to another have been less than the costs which the successful party ordinarily was required to pay to its own solicitors. In more recent times, at least in commercial litigation, the gap between the costs payable by one party to the other and the costs payable by a party to its own solicitor has, in ordinary cases, increased. The Court is, I think, entitled to know that this gap, ordinarily or at least often, is substantial. This, I believe, is one of the factors which has led this Court to reconsider the circumstances in which indemnity costs should be awarded.
 
This Court is aware also that the gap between costs ordinarily awarded and the costs payable by a party to its own solicitor has been used as a factor in bargaining for commercial advantage. In referring to this, I do not confine what I say to the illegitimate use of legal proceedings, steps taken in them, or the gap between costs recovered and paid. I am concerned with the use which may legitimately be made of such matters in the commercial bargaining processes which take place between parties who are or may potentially become parties to commercial litigation. It is, I think, undesirable that such a gap be available to be so used." 
Whilst in the particular circumstances of that case his Honour agreed with Kirby P that indemnity costs should not be awarded, and whilst that was not a case in which an offer was involved, I consider that what their Honours said indicates a basic agreement with the philosophy applied by this Court in the cases to which I have referred. Certainly I think it is more consistent with those views, than the approach which has been taken by several recent decisions of the Federal Court to which I shall refer.

Mr Biscoe placed reliance upon the decision of Giles CJCommD in R.T. Thomas & Family Pty Limited versus Jeffries Industries Limited & Ors (2 February - unreported). This requires a careful consideration of his Honour's reasons. He noted that the application by Mr R.T. Thomas against the defendant
Jeffries Industries Limited was founded on a Calderbank letter dated 22
November 1995, which was forwarded at about 3.30 pm on the afternoon of that day on which all parties held a without prejudice settlement conference. It was not in issue that the letter could be regarded as a Calderbank letter. His
Honour referred to the provisions of it and to the submission that the application for indemnity costs by Mr Thomas was based upon his offer being for an amount considerably less than he ultimately received and:- ".. that settlement of litigation was to be encouraged in the public interest (as was demonstrated by the regime for Offers of Compromise in the Rules), and that settlement should be particularly encouraged in commercial litigation such as the present." 
His Honour continued, at p.3:- "Each of those matters may be accepted, but it remains the case that a Calderbank letter is one factor only in the exercise of discretion, and is to be compared in that respect with the prima facie entitlement to indemnity costs if the regime for Offers of Compromise in the Rules is followed. It is well established (see, for example, WCW Pty Ltd versus Charthill Pty Ltd (Olney J, 7 July 1992, unreported) and John F. Hayes & Associates versus Kimberly-Clark Australia Pty Ltd (Hill J, 10 August 1994, unreported)) that a Calderbank letter does not automatically bring indemnity costs if the offer which it makes is not accepted. It seems to me that in the present case there are difficulties in giving effect to the letter of 22 November 1995." 
The approach taken by his Honour is the same as that to which I have referred in previous decisions of this Court and, as his Honour said, the Calderbank letter brings about "the prima facie entitlement to indemnity costs", which would follow if there could be or had been compliance with the Rules. In my view this approach does not, on proper analysis, assist MCE's case.

His Honour then approached the matter, conformably with the authorities, by considering the particular circumstances of that case and he dealt with a number of difficulties with the letter as to the nature of the offer. He proceeded on the basis that the attention of the parties should have been concentrated on the question of settlement. However he thought the time given "for mature consideration of the offer was not great". A further matter to which he had regard was the offer was "at best in rather confusing terms". His
Honour gave a number of illustrations of this.

At the foot of p.4 his Honour continued:- "Other matters, it seems to me, need to be borne in mind, one being particularly to be noted. While R.T. Thomas succeeded against Jeffries, the outcome of the proceedings depended very much on who amongst the various witnesses was accepted, and Jeffries clearly was something of a stranger to the facts. It had a particularly difficult task in working out what the likely outcome of the proceedings would be. That, it seems to me, adds to the difficulties to which I have referred.
 
In combination, and taking account of the fact that for whatever reason R.T. Thomas did not take advantage of the regime of Offers of Compromise under the Rules, I do not think that the Calderbank letter provides sufficient reasons to depart from the normal basis as to costs, and this application should be dismissed." 
When one considers all the factual matters to which his Honour had regard it is clear that in the exercise of discretion one could come to the conclusion that, notwithstanding the prima facie approach to which he referred, the offeree had established sufficient reason why the offer should not be accepted. His Honour's reference to the difficulty in determining the outcome of the proceedings because it depended on who, amongst the various witnesses, was accepted must be linked, of course, with the short time available to consider the offer, and the fact that Jeffries was "something of a stranger to the facts", such that it had "a particularly difficult task in working out what the likely outcome of the proceedings would be". These are very particular facts and merely highlight, in my opinion, why it is necessary to have regard to the particular facts of every case before determining the way in which the judicial discretion will be exercised. They are not the facts in the instant case where MCE knew what the facts were, had seen the evidence attacked with a strong measure of success, and had ample opportunity to consider the offer.

Thus there is a strong and consistent body of authority in this Court favouring the predisposition towards an order for indemnity costs if an offer of settlement has been made, rejected and not bettered in the litigation. It provides, at least, the prima facie position and, thereafter, one considers all the facts of the case to decide whether, in the proper exercise of discretion, that prima facie view should prevail.

Some Recent Decisions Of The Federal Court 
In John S. Hayes & Associates Pty Limited versus Kimberly-Clark Australia Pty
Limited [(1994) 52 FCR 201] Hill J considered a claim by a successful cross- defendant for indemnity costs on the basis, inter alia, of reliance upon
Offers of Compromise made at various times during the course of the proceedings. In so doing his Honour took as his starting point that in the ordinary case costs will follow the event and be payable on a party and party basis, which will fall short of complete indemnity: p.203. He said:- "Nevertheless the Court has an absolute and unfettered discretion in awarding costs, although that discretion must be exercised judicially. So indemnity costs may properly be awarded where there is some special or unusual feature in the case justifying the Court exercising its discretion in that way." 
His Honour set out some circumstances in which indemnity costs had been awarded and warned against seeking to circumscribe the discretion by reference to closed categories. He concluded that portion of his reasons at p.203 thus:- "In each case it will be necessary to look at the particular facts and circumstances to see whether an exercise of discretion to order costs on an indemnity basis is warranted." 
He commenced to consider the Calderbank letters at p.204. He noted that in Colgate-Palmolive Sheppard J had given by way of an example of a situation in which indemnity costs might be awarded "an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise". His Honour noted that in citing that example Sheppard J had referred to Messiter versus Hutchinson [(1987) 10 NSWLR 525]; Maitland Hospital and Crisp versus Keng and added:- "However some care must be taken if the examples referred to by his Honour are to be treated as authoritative." 
Hill J observed that Messiter was not a case concerning indemnity costs, and that Maitland Hospital was concerned with whether the Court of Appeal could order indemnity costs under Part 52 rule 17 in consequence of an Offer of Compromise made under Part 22. His Honour noted that, in his view, the issue in Maitland Hospital was not whether costs should be awarded on an indemnity or non-indemnity basis, but the applicability of Part 52 rule 17 to proceedings in the Court of Appeal, although on my reading of the decision the Court of Appeal was considering indemnity costs. He observed that in Crisp versus Keng the matter in issue was whether the trial Judge had exercised his discretion properly in refusing to order costs on an indemnity basis.

Having reviewed those cases he said, pp.205-206:- "These cases really demonstrate the correctness of the proposition asserted by Olney J (at p.4) in WCW Pty Limited versus Charthill Limited (unreported, Federal Court, Olney J, 7 July 1992) that there is no authority supporting the proposition that the mere writing of a Calderbank letter would justify an order for costs in favour of a successful party being taxed on a solicitor and client or an indemnity basis. Nothing in Donnelly versus Edelsten <case>; [(1994) 49 FCR 384], a decision of the Full Court of this Court which discussed the issue of indemnity costs and to which I shall refer shortly, suggests to the contrary.
 
The making of an offer of compromise is but one of the many factors which may be taken into account by the Court in exercising its judicial discretion. It goes too far, in my opinion, with respect, to say that the mere making of a Calderbank letter and its rejection grounds, without more, an order for costs on an indemnity basis." 
In my respectful opinion this must be correct because the exercise of the judicial discretion can never be fettered by the assumption of certain limited facts. Indeed, it may not be able to be fettered by the assumption of facts at all. However, in my opinion, the evidence of a Calderbank letter, the rejection of the offer contained therein and the failure to obtain a result better than the offer, places the offeror in the position that a Court should approach an application by that party for indemnity costs with a pre-disposition to holding that it is entitled to indemnity costs.

Hill J, in concluding that indemnity costs should not be awarded on the basis of the Offers of Compromise, noted the submission that the plaintiff's case was without merit, (and it should be noted that the plaintiff was not represented before his Honour on the hearing of this issue a matter as to which his Honour expressed regret), and said, at p.206:- "Although Hayes has ultimately been unsuccessful, the case could not be said to be one run in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established principle or to be a case in which allegations were made which ought never to have been made, or to involve some other feature from which it might be deduced that it could be said that this was a case where the applicant would have no chance of success. Ultimately the applicant's case turned upon its establishing a breach of contract by Kimberly-Clark or establishing that Kimberly-Clark had the necessary competitive purpose under s.46 or 47 of the Act. Although Hayes failed on all these matters, the case was one which depended upon findings of credit which findings could only be made after a full exploration of the evidence had been undertaken." (My emphasis.) 
In the result his Honour concluded that it was not "so unreasonable for Hayes to have brought and continued its case against Kimberly-Clark that indemnity costs should be ordered": p.207. He contrasted it with the position in Donnelly as to which he said:- "There the trustee was faced with an extremely favourable Offer of Compromise and had ample time to assess the strength of its case against the respondent."  
As I read his Honour's reasons he was of the view that before an order for indemnity costs could be made, in the circumstances of that case, it was necessary for the party, which had made the Offer of Compromise, to show that the party to which the offer had been made was guilty of pursuing a case in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established principles, or one which involved allegations which ought never to have been made, or one which had some other feature from which it could be deduced that the applicant "had no chance of success".

This reasoning is consistent with that applicable, generally speaking, if indemnity costs are being considered in the absence of an Offer of Compromise.
In the presence of such an Offer it seems to me that that fact in itself must be considered as a feature which has to be taken into account and, linked with it, is the requirement that the party to which the offer has been made and the legal advisers of that party must consider the offer in the light of all circumstances of which they are aware. I would suggest, with respect, that there are very few cases in which it can be said a party has "no chance of success". Most cases are determined by a judicial evaluation of the evidence, the application of the law once the evidence is so analysed being, generally speaking, reasonably clear. The judicial evaluation of the evidence frequently will require issues of credit to be determined. Thus the fact finding incidence of almost every case is one of primary importance. These matters are well known and I venture to suggest that parties are generally warned, and if they are not they should be, that their cases will turn, in all probability, ultimately upon the view the trial Judge takes of the evidence called and the findings of fact which are made. Of course there will be exceptions, but very few cases are won without favourable findings of fact, which support the relevant principles of law.

If a party is entitled to refuse an Offer of Compromise because the adjudication process will involve the resolution of difficult questions of fact and/or law there is no obligation on the party in very many cases to accept an Offer of Compromise prior to judgment and, conversely, a party making the Offer is not advantaged if ultimately its prognostication of the litigation proves to be correct. In my opinion this cannot be so. If it is it takes away from the utility of making an Offer and, accordingly, the general philosophy of a Court, seeking where possible and once again acting judicially to promote settlement, is defeated. All of this has to be looked at in the context of the present approach to legal proceedings where procedures are being taken such as early neutral evaluation of cases and alternative dispute resolution to seek to bring about a compromise prior to the hearing. That is the climate in which the Courts are now operating: [Part
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p7b) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). Further,
Judges frequently suggest to parties, (and I do not suggest this is a recent occurrence), that serious consideration should be given to settlement. This is often couched in terms that ultimate factual findings will depend upon the view taken of the witnesses and their evidence and, in some cases, that the law is uncertain. It is frequently pointed out by the Court that settlement will achieve certainty of result. However, it seems to me that there is little point in the Court making such remarks to the parties if a party, which has adopted a procedure to try and bring about a settlement and thereby eradicate those doubts and difficulties, derives no benefit from making a sensible commercial offer, which if accepted would have concluded the litigation, because the Court denies it that benefit.

The question, so it seems to me, when one is considering a case where an Offer of Compromise has been made and the party rejecting the offer has not achieved a better result than that provided for by it, is not whether it was reasonable for the party rejecting the offer to fight on notwithstanding that the offer had been made, but whether it was reasonable for the party rejecting the offer to do so and, in that regard, I would suggest that the onus must be on the party rejecting the offer to establish in some way the reasonableness of the course it took. In my opinion that cannot be done by saying that litigation is uncertain and it was entitled, rather than accept the offer, to have the uncertainties, whether legal or factual, resolved by judicial decision. That, of course, is an entitlement any litigant has; but what must be understood is that if that litigant has received an offer, which it does not ultimately better, its desire for a judicial determination should, generally speaking, be made subject to its paying the other party's costs on an indemnity basis from the date the offer is made. It is the very uncertainty of the legal and factual issues propounded for decision, which makes settlement an appropriate course, a matter much stressed in suggesting that settlement be considered. If there is no uncertainty, if that can ever be so, there is no reason to settle.
It also seems to me that the more difficult and complicated the legal and factual issues the greater must be the uncertainty and, accordingly, the greater must be the incentive to settle on a commercial basis. The greater the uncertainty the more that is being risked and the more the prospect of further litigation by way of appeals.

The matter was further considered by Sheppard J in The Sanko Steamship
Co Limited and Grand Slam Enterprise Corporation versus Sumitomo Australia
Limited (7 February 1996 - Federal Court of Australia - unreported). His
Honour found that the defendant was entitled to judgment against each of the plaintiffs in the sum of $8.9m together with interest, which led to a total judgment of approximately $11.9m. The defendant sought an order for indemnity costs on the basis of various Offers of Compromise which had been made. His
Honour referred to certain of the authorities to which I have referred and, at p.4, agreed that the refusal of an offer did not "automatically lead to there being made an order for indemnity costs. Each case must depend upon its own circumstances." 
His Honour referred to what he described as "the ordinary rule" namely that costs would be paid on a party and party basis and, at p.5, stated:- "It follows that each case must be looked at upon the basis of its own circumstances." 
I should note immediately that his Honour was expressly not called on to consider Order 23, which makes similar provisions to [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) [rule 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s17.html), that Order not being in force at the relevant time.

His Honour detailed the course of offers and counter offers, which had been made, and, at p.9, said:- "The fact remains, however, that the amount recovered by the defendant was $8.9m together with interest. Thus, the amount which would then have been recovered, had this judgment been obtained in August 1992, would have been less in fact than the amount which the defendant had then offered to accept.
 
In all those circumstances it seemed to me to be difficult for the defendant to maintain that this case was an appropriate one for an order for payment of costs on an indemnity basis. At the relevant time its offer was to accept more than it would have been entitled to recover if the action had been determined by a judgment entered then." 
This, if I may say so with respect, must be correct. The hypothesis upon which the law has proceeded is that the offering party achieves a result better than the offer made.

His Honour continued:- "Apart from this matter though, it seems to me that one needs to be careful about making orders based on perceived unreasonable conduct in refusing to accept offers. It is in the public interest, as well as the interests of parties to litigation, for negotiations to settle cases to take place and for settlements to be achieved if they possibly can be. It has been said that the fact that the law does not provide a full indemnity for costs may be an important spur to settlement; see the judgments of Devlin LJ in Berry versus British Transport Commission [[1962] 1 QB 306] at 318 referred to in the judgment in Cussons at 227-8." 
What his Honour has said is reflective of the view about the desirability of settlements to which I have referred. His Honour continued:- "In some cases the so called Calderbank approach may place a weapon in the hands of parties to litigation which ought not be allowed to be abused. The ordinary rule is that costs when ordered in adversary litigation are to be recovered on the party and party basis. Any attempt to disturb that situation needs to be carefully considered. It should only be departed from where the conduct of the party against whom the order is sought is plainly unreasonable." (My emphasis.) 
It seems from this passage that his Honour is adopting a similar stance towards unreasonableness as did Hill J in Hayes. In my view the two passages to which I have just referred give rise to a potential conflict. On the one hand it is being said that it is in the public interest and in the interests of the parties to negotiate for settlements. On the other hand it is being said that if the settlement negotiations fail the ordinary rule as to costs should apply save where the conduct of the party refusing an Offer of Compromise "is plainly unreasonable", i.e. plainly unreasonable in refusing the offer. In my opinion it is more consonant with attempting to achieve a settlement that if the negotiations break down or if a party wishes to press more strongly for a settlement, a party should be entitled to strengthen its position by making the offer of settlement, which will require the party to whom the offer is made to make a reasonable and sensible assessment of its position in the light of the offer and the consequence that if it is not bettered there is a real prospect that costs on an indemnity basis will be ordered. There seems to be a suggestion that the party to which the offer is made is under some greater disadvantage in assessing the position than the party making the offer. However, generally speaking, both parties must be aware of the uncertainties of the determination of legal and factual issues and the party making the offer grapples with those uncertainties because, once the offer is made, it may well be accepted. If the offering party can undertake that assessment task there seems to me to be no reason why the offeree cannot do so also. In the present case MCE formulated its own offer. The other side of that coin is that the fact that there may be difficulties in the litigation applies to both parties and does not, of itself, justify the failure to make a decision as to whether an offer should or should not be accepted.

In this context one can remove from the area of consideration so-called Offers of Compromise, which provide no element of compromise at all, although whether an offer falls into that category is relative, as was pointed out in
Maitland Hospital. However I think that usually one will be dealing with cases where each party has made a genuine compromise from the position for which it contends and, once again, it should be noted that in referring to settlement Judges frequently observe to parties, for the obvious reason that it is correct, that it will be necessary for them to compromise from the best position they assert.

At p.10 Sheppard J referred to the case being a difficult one "involving a myriad of issues both of fact and of law", and to the grave uncertainty about the applicable limitation regime, which was not resolved until a decision of the High Court: <case>; [(1995) 131 ALR 490.] His Honour noted that in the High Court the Chief Justice dissented on the limitations point, and that his own reasons for judgment reflected the difficult contractual and other issues, which he was required to consider. He continued:- "In the judgment I have also alluded to the difficulties that arose because of the need to sift and weigh evidence from a multiplicity of witnesses who gave evidence through interpreters. The case was certainly not clear cut and was hard fought. In those circumstances it seems to me very difficult to reach the conclusion that either party was acting at all unreasonably. 
It was for those reasons that I considered that the appropriate order for costs was the usual order which would involve the payment by the plaintiffs of the defendant's costs on the party and party basis.
 
Before I conclude this aspect of the matter, I should mention that so much of Order 23 of the Federal Court Rules as deals with Offers of Compromise did not come into force until 1994. The matter was mentioned during the argument but no submission based upon it was made by either party." 
The approach his Honour took reflected the approach taken by Hill J. For the reasons I have sought to give and with the greatest respect to his Honour and Hill J, I consider that this approach places the emphasis in the wrong place. As I have sought to say legal and factual difficulties are matters which should attract settlement offers rather than detract from them, particularly if the logical conclusion from the reasoning is that it is only in clear cut and "simple" cases that Offers of Compromise can have any effect. Those, from one's experience, are relatively easy to predict and determine. It is the type of case to which Sheppard J was referring, which is, in my respectful opinion, eminently suited to a commercial resolution by a sensible commercial evaluation by the parties and their legal advisers of the prospects. In litigation of the type before his Honour it is clear that the parties had access to an array of legal talent expert in the particular field, who must have been able to make an assessment of the case. The availability of that legal talent will normally appear in large scale commercial litigation and, in the case before me, it was certainly available to the parties. Each party was represented by Queen's Counsel, experienced Junior Counsel and highly experienced commercial solicitors.

If the view adopted by Hill J and Sheppard J is to prevail then there is no purpose in making an Offer of Compromise in complicated commercial litigation because it can hardly ever be said that there is no chance of success or that the rejection of the offer is plainly unreasonable. Further it can always be said, in such litigation, that the final result is clouded by uncertainty.
That seems to me to defeat, in an area which cries out for commercial resolution of disputes to avoid the vast expense of litigation and the debilitating effect of it on the parties involved, the aim of trying to resolve the litigation, and certainly it both takes away from the force of any judicial comments that the parties should seek to settle, and tends to defeat the ultimate sanction in settlement negotiations, which is the making of an offer or the taking of a step prescribed by the Rules, which will place the other party in jeopardy if the offer is not accepted. To remove that sanction, in circumstances where it is generally agreed that every reasonable effort should be made to settle a case, seems to me to be in conflict with the philosophy that settlement should be pursued.

The Approach I Endorse 
In my opinion the proper approach to take to an Offer of Compromise, whether made under the Rules or pursuant to a Calderbank letter, is that there should be a prima facie presumption in the event of the offer not being accepted and in the event of the recipient of the offer not receiving a result more favourable than the offer, that the party rejecting the offer should pay the costs of the other party on an indemnity basis from the date of the making of the offer. I proceed on the basis that the unreasonableness was the failure by the offeree to accept the offer, which unreasonableness is demonstrated, prima facie, by the ultimate result. This approach is consistent with the decisions to which I have referred, the policy evidenced by the Act and the Rules and the widely accepted philosophy that settlements should be encouraged. The relevant Rules provide that costs will be paid on the basis set out therein "unless the Court otherwise orders". My understanding is that the Court is required to proceed on the basis that it should make the order provided for by the Rules, unless the party rejecting the offer is able to establish good reason for having done so.

It seems to me anomalous that there is no provision whereby a defendant, which is totally successful, is placed in the same position as a plaintiff, which is totally successful. In my view the Rules should be reviewed. The decisions of this Court have overcome the anomaly by an application of similar reasoning in the event of an offer of compromise by way of a Calderbank letter. Cole J observed that by taking that step the defendant, which is ultimately successful, has done everything it can to extricate itself from expensive and extensive litigation, and it seems to me that if a defendant has done that and its prognostication of the case proves to be correct, in the relevant sense, it is totally unfair that it should be required to pay costs as if it had not acted in that way. In the circumstances the relevant unreasonableness of the recipient of the offer is the failure to accept what is established to be an appropriate offer. That is well illustrated in this case. FAC took, as it turned out, a very real commercial risk in making its offer on 17 March 1993.
If that offer had been accepted MCE would have been immeasurably financially better off and, conversely, FAC would have been worse off.

That is the starting point from which I propose to proceed and, in my opinion, it is not only consistent with the thrust of the Act and Rules, the general philosophy behind the desirability of settlements and the decisions of this
Court, but it is also removes from the arena questions to be considered in relation to indemnity costs, which are really only relevant to a consideration of costs on that basis absent any offer of compromise. In saying what I have I acknowledge the force and accept the applicability of the principle that each case must be determined by an exercise of the judicial discretion having regard to the particular facts of each case. Thus the prima facie position having been established the Court must be satisfied that an order for indemnity costs is not appropriate. As I have indicated if that is not done there is a failure to exercise the judicial discretion.

I would also observe that where a party wishes to have a difficult question of law resolved, perhaps because as an insurer it is one that affects it in its business on a regular basis, the other party, if minded to make an offer, should not be deprived of the benefit of that offer because, irrespective of the offer, the first mentioned party wishes to have a final determination of the matter of law. The offering party does not wish to be a party to a binding precedent. It wishes to resolve its dispute and be rid of expensive litigation. If the offeree insists on going ahead for its own particular reasons, whether they be those to which I have just referred or other reasons, in the face of an offer, which turns out to be a better offer than the judgment or order the offeree ultimately receives, no matter how important the point of law, I do not see why the offeree should not be paid its costs on an indemnity basis. This is reflected, from time to time, at an appellate level, by the grant of special leave or leave to appeal being conditional on the applicant's paying the respondent's costs in any event.

There is, in my opinion, a further reason for approaching the matter in this way. As was pointed out by Rogers CJCommD in AWA, and referred to by me in
Ampolex Limited versus Perpetual Trustee Company (Canberra) Limited & Ors (Rolfe J - 23 May 1996 - unreported), there is strong authority for the proposition that a case, even though it may appear to be weak, should not be struck out without a hearing on the merits. Accordingly, in my opinion, this provides a further reason why a party being sued should have the full benefit of an Offer of Compromise or the furnishing of an offer in a Calderbank letter.

The Present Case 
Whether, notwithstanding the Calderbank letter and the Offer of Compromise, indemnity costs should be awarded remains, none-the-less, a discretionary decision and it was submitted on behalf of MCE that the discretion should not be exercised adversely to it, because such costs are reserved for special cases, where the circumstances justify departure from the ordinary principle that party and party costs will be recovered. The question is whether, having regard to the offer, the state in which MCE's case was at 17 March 1993, and the other circumstances to which I have referred the proper exercise of discretion requires an order for indemnity costs.

Mr Biscoe submitted that Cachia versus Hanes provides support for his basic proposition that the appropriate order for costs is on a party and party basis. He referred to what Handley JA said at p.318. His Honour was dealing with the position of a litigant in person when he said:- "The existing law causes no greater injustice to the litigant in person than to represented litigants. Litigation is already very expensive. The limited indemnity provided to a successful represented litigant for expense incurred and time lost reflects a compromise between the interests of successful and unsuccessful litigants. It is also an important spur to settlement. The rule that a litigant in person can only recover out-of-pocket expenses also represents a compromise between the interests of successful and unsuccessful litigants. In my opinion if the existing law is to be changed this must be done either by the High Court or by Parliament." 
It seems to me that his Honour must have been referring to the rule relating to litigants in person, and, further, that if the injustice can be overcome by the making of an offer that should be done.

Mr Biscoe submitted, correctly in my view, that the giving of a Calderbank letter will not automatically give rise to an order for indemnity costs if the offer is not accepted and the result does not exceed the offer made. He referred to the decision of Giles CJCommD in R.T. Thomas & Family Pty
Limited versus Jeffries Industries Limited (30 January 1996 - unreported) in which, he submitted, his Honour had refused to order indemnity costs because the outcome of the proceedings depended very much on who, amongst the various witnesses, was accepted. Mr Biscoe submitted that the same type of considerations apply in the present case. In my opinion, for the reasons I have given, that decision does not support the submission and, as the chronology indicates, the letter of 17 March 1993 was written and the subsequent Offer of Compromise was made after cross-examination of the "reliance" witnesses was concluded and at a time when MCE was well able to make an assessment, and, in my view, should have made one, of the situation in which the case it was propounding then was. MCE was aware of all the relevant facts. It was not labouring under any disability as was the offeree in R.T.
Thomas. It was also suggesting that a settlement should be reached and soon after 17 March 1993 its own Offer of Compromise, which must have been based on its assessment of the case, was made.

There is also authority for the proposition that an important, if not the ultimate, question must be whether the refusal of a Calderbank offer is reasonable in all the circumstances. In my opinion when one considers all the circumstances of the present case, as they have been exposed by what transpired before the Referee and by the correspondence, which was tendered on this application, the refusal to accept that offer has been shown by the result to be unreasonable. Further, I am not satisfied that MCE could not have come to a similar conclusion of the likely result by making a realistic assessment of the position at the time, i.e. as at March 1993.

In the present case the basic submission made is that by the time the
Calderbank letter offer was made MCE and those advising it were in a position to consider the strength of its case as all MCE's evidence on reliance, from the officers of MCE, had been given. MCE was prepared to chance that FAC would go into evidence on that point and that it might obtain useful concessions in cross-examination. I do not think it can seriously be suggested that the offer was made too late, and I doubt if Mr Biscoe's submissions did so. Rather the submission was that there was still material to be considered from which a result different from that reached by the Referee could have been achieved. To some extent the Court must look at the position with the benefit of hindsight and when one considers the evidence and the way in which there had to be a substantial abandonment of the evidence of the "reliance" witnesses, if not before the Referee, then before me, it seems to me that moves away from the type of case where there are closely fought factual issues to be determined.
Further, one has to have regard to the expected length of and expense of the litigation. I think it correct to say that the more expensive and time consuming the litigation the more carefully a recipient of an offer must consider it in the light of all the information before it at the time. There is, of course, no compulsion upon the offeree to accept but at a point, and in my view that point was reached in this case by 17 March 1993, when an offer is made the rejection of the offer must, at least prima facie, carry the consequence of an additional cost impost. I am not satisfied that any reason has been shown why that prima facie position should not apply ultimately in all the circumstances of this case. Further, if it is considered to be the correct approach, I consider that MCE's conduct in refusing the offer was, in all the circumstances to which I have referred and for the reasons I have given, unreasonable. Accordingly, if I had considered that was the proper test
I would, in the exercise of my discretion, have reached the same result.

Reliance was placed upon the decision of Giles J in Hobartville Stud Pty
Limited versus Union Insurance Co Limited [(1991) 25 NSWLR 358.] At p.366 his Honour noted that the plaintiff had made two Offers of Compromise pursuant to Part 22, which was in a sum almost equivalent to the sum for which the plaintiff was suing. His Honour held that there was no sufficient Offer of
Compromise in the offers made to justify the offers, on the authorities, being characterised as Offers of Compromise.

He then considered whether indemnity costs should be ordered in the exercise of discretion and he had regard to the well known decision of Holland J in
Degmam Pty Limited (In Liquidation) versus Wright (No 2) [[1983] 2 NSWLR ], and the decision in Wentworth versus Rogers (No 5) [(1986) 6 NSWLR 534.] In the latter case an application for costs on an indemnity basis was refused, notwithstanding that it was found that the plaintiff's claim so lacked merit and it should be dismissed summarily. The point which found favour with the
Court of Appeal was that the claim had not been brought for the purpose of prolonging litigation, but rather in the misguided belief that it would be a speedy way to conclude it, and that the plaintiff had not been deliberately false with the Court or made allegations which she believed or knew to be false. I think this points up the fact that there has to be, for the exercise of the discretion under s.76 and in the absence of an Offer of Compromise, an element of vexation or wrong-doing, which, once again, is supportive of the view I have taken of the position prior to 17 March 1993.

Thereafter Giles J considered the particular factual circumstances before him and, in the end, that is what the Court must do in every case and exercise its discretion having regard to those matters.

In all the circumstances of this case, as I have sought to outline them, I am of the view that it is appropriate that an order for indemnity costs should be made as from 17 March 1993 to the conclusion of the reference.

Mr Biscoe also submitted that as costs are now assessed the potential gap between party and party and solicitor and client costs has been narrowed. If that is so there is no reason why the Court should not, in an appropriate case, award indemnity costs. It reinforces what Mr Biscoe says is the real position and, in circumstances such as the present, leaves no doubt about the matter.

The Position Thereafter 
The next problem concerns the hearing before me. No separate submission was made that if indemnity costs were awarded in relation to part of the reference, they should not also be made in respect of the adoption of the report. In any event, prior to the hearing of the adoption of the report the letter of 20 July 1995 was written in which FAC made a further offer, which would have placed MCE in a better position than it was under the orders made by the Referee. In either circumstance it seems to me that it is appropriate that the costs of the hearing of the application to adopt the Referee's report should also be paid on an indemnity basis.

The Present Notice Of Motion 
FAC also seeks the costs of the present Notice of Motion on an indemnity basis. It seems to me that MCE was entitled to oppose the ordering of costs on an indemnity basis without, at the same time, being subjected to the potential penalty of paying costs of such opposition on that basis. The award of indemnity costs is a discretionary matter and requires a consideration of all the factual circumstances. However I see no basis on which it is appropriate to award such costs on the motion for costs, although as FAC has been substantially successful on that Motion it is clearly entitled to its costs on a party and party basis. There was no suggestion that in refusing to concede that indemnity costs were the proper measure, MCE acted improperly.

Orders 
I order Multicon Engineering Pty Limited pay:- 
The costs of Federal Airports Corporation of the proceedings, including the reference, up to 31 March 1993 on a party and party basis; 
Those costs from 1 April 1993 to 21 February 1996 on an indemnity basis; and 
The costs of the Notice of Motion in respect of costs on a party and party basis.

I order that the exhibits be returned.

MULTICON ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED versus FEDERAL AIRPORTS CORPORATION /91 
THURSDAY, 20 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION CONSTRUCTION LIST 
ROLFE J 
ADDENDUM TO JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Since preparing these reasons the decision of the Court of Appeal in Ettinghausen versus Australian Consolidated Press Limited [(1995) 38 NSWLR 404] sets forth the policy underlying the relevant rules. In his dissenting judgment Kirby P refers to "a prima facie entitlement to indemnity costs": pp.410-411, which is consistent, in my view, with what I have stated.
 * * * 
