

Regina versus Donna Maria Batiste [1995] NSWSC 40 (18 September 1995) 
REGINA versus Donna Maria BATISTE /95 September 1995 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, McINERNEY J, SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Mr. Justice McInerney to give the first judgment in this matter.

McINERNEY J: This is an application pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act 1912 against a decision of Shadbolt DCJ in refusing an application by the applicant for a stay of proceedings in respect to a charge of conspiracy. The application was made before his Honour on 18 August 1995, the trial being listed for hearing on 21 August 1995.

His Honour refused the stay but stood the matter out of the list until 4
September 1995 in order for the applicant to obtain legal representation and to prepare her case for trial. On 4 September 1995 a further application for a stay of proceedings was made. His Honour refused that application and the hearing proceeded.

The trial is now in its eighth day, having commenced on 4 September 1995. It proceeded through that week, last week, and the situation is that the trial is proceeding even as we speak.

An application was made for an order staying the hearing of the proceedings until legal representation had been obtained at an adequate level of funding and with sufficient time to prepare the case. The only matter that we have to now consider is the question of whether his Honour Judge Shadbolt was in error in only allowing two weeks to prepare the case.

Section 5F has been the subject of a decision in R versus Matoveski [(1989) 15
NSWLR 720.] In this case the trial judge has not given a certificate and, thus, the leave of this court is required to enable the matter to be argued here. As the Chief Justice pointed out in Matoveski in relation to appeals brought under the provisions of the Criminal Appeal Act, it has been usual for this court to make little procedural distinction between leave to appeal and hearing full argument before making any decision in respect of the application for leave to appeal.

The Chief Justice, however, concluded that it was proper in applications under s 5F to draw a procedural distinction between applications for leave to appeal and an application as of right. Sub-section (4) provides: "An appeal under this section shall, unless the Court of Criminal Appeal gives leave to adduce fresh, additional or substituted evidence, be determined on the evidence (if any) given in the proceedings in which the appeal relates." 
Sub-section (6) provides: "If leave to appeal under this section is refused by the Court of Criminal
Appeal, the refusal does not preclude any other appeal following a conviction on the matter to which the refused application for leave to appeal related." 
This case has a long history and it is not necessary for me to set it out in detail. Initially there was a stay of proceedings granted by Acting Judge
Roden of the District Court on 2 July 1993. His Honour granted a stay until adequate legal aid was granted. An appeal was lodged against his Honour's stay and the Court of Criminal Appeal, by a majority, set aside the stay (R v
Batiste [(1994) 35 NSWLR 437)] on the basis that the exercise of the court's discretionary powers to stay proceedings until legal representation was obtained must, if there are no exceptional circumstances, show that the absence of legal representation has occurred without his or her fault. Leave to appeal against that decision was refused by the High Court.

The matter was again fixed for hearing on 21 August 1993. There is no information before us as to when this date was fixed. It was on the Friday before the hearing that the application for a stay came on for hearing before his Honour Judge Shadbolt. His Honour was informed that legal aid had been granted. We have before us the letter informing the applicant of the grant of legal aid. The grant of legal aid letter is dated 16 August 1995. There is nothing before this court to indicate when the application for legal aid was granted.

His Honour, in considering the application, noted that the applicant had had two years to make her application and chose apparently to do so on Friday, 18
August 1995 for a trial commencing on Monday, 21 August 1995. His Honour said that be that as it may the applicant had a grant and should be able to utilise it at her trial. His Honour then asked the Crown about the brief the Crown proposed to present against the applicant. His Honour was shown what was tantamount to the brief which the Crown intended to rely upon.

It appears that the conspiracy relied on will have Mr. Freeman, a former co- accused who pleaded guilty to this offence, giving evidence and two persons who invested money, it is alleged, with Freeman and the applicant to give evidence, and certain banking evidence as to the movement of certain moneys.

His Honour, an experienced trial Judge, was of the opinion that the Crown case was quite simple. He set out that moneys were secured from private investors for the purpose of a scheme involving investment in a building development which promised outrageous, it appears, interest returns per annum. It is alleged none of this money was invested and was clearly used to pay some investors as each term for which the money was said to be invested drew near.
The Crown case is that the applicant and Freeman conspired to defraud these persons.

The learned trial judge concluded that if there was no cross-examination the
Crown case would last one day and the estimate of the Crown of three weeks, he felt, was over-generous.

His Honour then considered the type of defences that may be raised. He determined the question to be determined is not what happened to the individual sums, but what explanation might be raised as to the absence of investment and the movement of moneys from one account to another and that if there was an explanation it might raise reasonable doubt.

His Honour was of the opinion that in no more than two or three days an experienced barrister could prepare himself for trial and that a delay of eight weeks was utterly unreasonable. His Honour felt that the Legal Aid
Commission grant was unduly generous. His Honour then granted the two week adjournment and it is from that order that this application is made.

One of the problems that emerged in argument before this court is that we have no explanation at all as to what the defence of the applicant would be in respect of this charge. Nothing was put before his Honour on the application for a stay and nothing has been put before us. Consequently, we are in the dark as to what approach the defence proposes to take in these proceedings.

In my view, an examination of his Honour's reasons, in the light of that absence, does not disclose any error of principle in the approach he took to this application. His Honour considered closely the complexity of the Crown case, the defences he thought may be raised, and the time that his Honour believed it would take for counsel to familiarise himself with the matters likely to be raised.

It has been said on a number of occasions, and in particular in the case of
R versus Ho that in applications such as this an appellate court should not readily interfere with what a judge does at an interlocutory stage of a matter. Mr. Justice Mahoney said in that case that it was not the intention of the legislature that orders made in the course of the exercise of interlocutory powers should be the subject of appeals, thus delaying trials.

The purpose of the interlocutory procedure is to clear away possible irregularities in advance of the trial proper, thus facilitating trials rather than allowing appeals from interlocutory orders. The Chief Justice in Ho said that the type of application before his Honour Judge Shadbolt was a routine application for an adjournment of a trial to be determined according to well understood and clearly established principles, and his Honour dealt with this in accordance with those principles.

In my view, those remarks apply to this particular application. In my view, there is no merit in this application and, for my part, I would refuse leave to appeal.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

SIMPSON J: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the court is that leave to appeal is refused.
 * * * 
