

Cantarella Bros Pty Limited versus M Schaerer Ag Matter No 50124/97 [1998]
NSWSC 473 (15 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 November 1998 
CANTARELLA BROS PTY LIMITED versus M SCHAERER AG /97 July 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: CANTARELLA BROS PTY LIMITED versus M SCHAERER AG 
Proceedings: 50124/1997 
Dates of Hearing of Motion: 26, 29 June 1998 
Date of Judgment: 15 July 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr A P Spencer 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Dunhill Madden Butler 
Counsel for Defendants: Mr M J Walsh 
Solicitors for Defendants: Musgrave Peach 
Purported Service Overseas: Whether failure to comply strictly with the rules as to overseas service or irregularity, which can be cured by [s.81(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s81.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), or a nullity: 
Held on the facts an irregularity: Williams versus Lips-Heerlen BV (Giles J - 1 November 1991 - unreported) followed. Castagna & Anor versus Conceria Pell Mec SPA (Court of Appeal - 15 March 1996 - unreported) distinguished on the facts.

Jurisdictional nexus: Held sufficient evidence of a jurisdictional nexus to satisfy [Part 10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/index.html#p10) rule 1A. 
I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
Was There Service? 9 
Should Leave To Proceed Otherwise Be Given 25 
Inappropriate Forum 33 
Orders 34 
CANTARELLA BROS PTY LIMITED versus M SCHAERER AG 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Summons issued on 28 May 1997 the plaintiff, Cantarella Bros Pty Limited, for which Mr A.P. Spencer of Counsel appeared, brought proceedings against the defendant, M. Schaerer AG, for which Mr M.J. Walsh of Counsel appeared, seeking to recover damages and consequential relief in the following circumstances. The plaintiff pleaded that it was, at all material times, a distributor of coffee machines in Australia; that the defendant was, at all material times, a manufacturer of such machines and their spare parts in
Switzerland; and that in or about March 1992 the parties entered into an agreement whereby the defendant appointed the plaintiff as its sole distributor in Australia. The agreement was pleaded as being partly express and partly implied and, to the extent that it was partly express, it was alleged to be partly oral and partly written. The oral part was pleaded as consisting "of conversations between personnel of the plaintiff and the defendant", and the written part of letters between the parties "variously dated between 7 February 1992 and 29 November 1995". The implications were alleged to have arisen from the conversations and the letters and orders, invoices, the delivery of product and payments by the plaintiff to the defendant.

It was pleaded that it was an express term of the agreement that the plaintiff would be the sole distributor, and an implied term that the parties were obliged to give reasonable notice of their intention to terminate it. The term was pleaded as being implied by law or, in the alternative, from the facts and circumstances that the plaintiff was the sole distributor; that the coffee machines and spare parts were manufactured in Switzerland; that the coffee machines and spare parts were delivered by the defendant to the plaintiff approximately eight weeks after the plaintiff's orders were received; that the plaintiff was required to and did invest significant amounts of time and money to promote the machines in Australia; and that the plaintiff was required to and did carry substantial levels of machines and spare parts in stock.

It was pleaded that in breach of the express and implied terms the defendant terminated the agreement "with immediate effect" on 3 May 1996; failed to give the plaintiff reasonable notice of its intention to do so; and appointed Mr
Fred A. Binder of Soche Pty Limited as general importer of all its coffee machine products and spare parts into Australia.

It was pleaded that in all the circumstances six months' notice "would have been reasonable notice", and that as a result of the breaches alleged the plaintiff sustained loss and damage in that it had on hand, at the date of termination, unsold stock at cost to the value of $171,136.08, and that it suffered damage to its reputation.

The address of the defendant was shown as Gewerbestrasse 15, CH-3302
Moosseedorf, Switzerland and the Summons was made returnable on 4 July 1997.
The evidence was that the defendant was domiciled and had its only offices in
Moosseedorf and, accordingly, had no office in Australia.

A notice to the defendant, which was obviously to be served outside Australia, pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/index.html#p10) rule 2A, was annexed to the Summons. It stated:- "1. The Court may, on application made by you in accordance with the rules of Court, set aside the service on you of this Summons where: service is not authorised by the rules of the Court; or this Court is an inappropriate forum for the trial of the proceedings.
 . Alternatively you may submit to the jurisdiction of the Court by filing the prescribed form of unconditional notice of appearance.
 . If you do not make an application under paragraph 1 or file a notice under paragraph 2, the Court may give leave to the Plaintiff to proceed against you." 
On 3 July 1997 the solicitors for the plaintiff wrote to the Associate to
Giles CJCommD stating that the Summons "is with the NSW Attorney-General's
Department for service through diplomatic channels on the defendant in
Switzerland", and that they had been informed by the Federal Attorney-
General's Department that service through diplomatic channels may take two to three months. In those circumstances an adjournment was sought to 3 October , which his Honour granted. On 28 November 1997 the matter came before his
Honour when there was an appearance by Mr Spencer on behalf of the plaintiff.
His Honour was informed that the plaintiff wished to amend "and accepts that it will have to re-serve". He directed that the Amended Summons be filed within two weeks and granted leave to amend the return date to 27 March 1998 "for the purpose of re-service". On 30 January 1998 an Amended Summons was filed, which was addressed to the defendant at the same address and provided for its return at 9.30 am on 27 March 1998. A notice pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/index.html#p10) rule 2A was annexed to it being in the same terms as that annexed to the
Summons.

The Amended Summons raised a claim under [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and, in relation to the agreement, alleged that it was entered into in or about
November 1992, the written portion being letters dated 7 February 1992 and 12
November 1992. Additional damages were sought being amounts invested by the plaintiff in marketing the product and training employees.

The claim under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) commenced at paragraph 9. It was alleged, in paragraph 10, that from November 1992 to May the defendant represented to the plaintiff:- "(a) That it had been granted a long term sole distributorship of Schaerer coffee machines and spare parts in Australia.

That the said distributorship would continue for a sufficient period so as to allow the plaintiff to recoup its investment in stock spare parts and employee training.

That the said distributorship would not be terminated without the defendant giving to the plaintiff reasonable notice of its intention to do so.

PARTICULARS 
The representations contained in (a) and (b) were made in facsimile transmissions sent by the defendant and received by the plaintiff at its Sydney Office in the period from November 1992 to May 1996.

The representation in (c) was implied by the conduct of the defendant and was implied in the facsimile transmissions sent by the defendant and received by the plaintiff at its Sydney office in the period from November 1992 to May 1996." 
It is to be noted that the representations pleaded in sub-paragraph (a) and were pleaded as express and implied terms respectively of the agreement.
Accordingly, if there was an agreement which contained those terms breach of them would entitle the plaintiff to damages. The representation pleaded in sub-paragraph (b) is either subsumed by the alleged implied term that the contract would not be terminated without reasonable notice, or, alternatively, it is inconsistent with that representation in the sense that if there was such a representation a different time must be being alleged.

Paragraph 11 pleaded that in reliance on the representations the plaintiff purchased a substantial inventory of the defendant's stock and spare parts, invested substantial sums in marketing its products, and paid for training its employees in the repair of the coffee machines. Paragraph 12 pleaded that the conduct of the defendant referred to in paragraph 10 was misleading and/or deceptive or likely to mislead and/or deceive within the meaning of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) in that the defendant on 3 May 1996 terminated the agreement with immediate effect; failed to give the plaintiff reasonable notice of its intention to do so; and appointed Soche Pty Limited its sole distributor in Australia. These particulars were the same as those given in paragraph 7 in relation to the breaches of contract alleged in paragraphs 5 and 6.

My view is that the allegations under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) do not carry the matter any further. It was not pleaded that by virtue of the representations, or any of them, the plaintiff was induced to enter into the agreement, nor was it pleaded that by virtue of any of the representations the plaintiff was induced to perform what it asserted to be were its contractual obligations, which it would not otherwise have performed. In other words there was no representation, save for that pleaded in paragraph 10(b), which did not find itself as a term of the agreement and, as I have noted, the representation in sub-paragraphs 10(b) and (c) are inconsistent. Put another way there was no attempt to plead a case that a representation was made that reasonable notice would equate to a period sufficient to allow the plaintiff to recoup its investment, as pleaded in paragraph 10(b), or vice versa. Mr
Spencer acknowledged that there were difficulties in relation to the way in which the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) claim was pleaded, such difficulties flowing from the various matters to which I have referred, but no application was made to amend and the Notice of Motion proceeded on the pleadings as filed.

On 27 March 1998 the matter came before Giles CJCommD. Mr Spencer appeared for the plaintiff and Mr Walsh appeared for the defendant. On 12 November 1997 the plaintiff had filed a Notice of Motion seeking leave to proceed pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p10) [rule 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s2.html), which remained on foot. On 27 March 1998 the defendant was granted leave to file in Court a Notice of Motion making applications pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p10) rule 6A and [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p11) [rule 8.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s8.html)
It did so, as it was entitled, without filing a Notice of Appearance.

His Honour gave directions aimed at exposing the true issues between the parties on these two Notices of Motion and for the filing of evidence and submissions, and stood the Motions over for hearing on 29 May 1998. On 27 May he varied those orders and re-listed the Notices of Motion for hearing on June 1998, on which date the hearing commenced. It was concluded on Monday, June 1998.

Mr Walsh stated that his appearance was solely for the purpose of arguing that "the originating process", i.e. the Summons and the Amended Summons, had not been duly served on the defendant; that they should be set aside; and that it should be declared that the Court either has no jurisdiction over the defendant in respect of the subject matter of the proceedings or, alternatively, should decline to exercise jurisdiction in the proceedings.

The parties agreed that no objection would be taken to the admissibility of the affidavit material upon which each sought to rely, and that there would be no cross-examination of the deponents. The affidavits relied upon by the plaintiff were those of Ms Leanne Gay Meyer, sworn on 26 November 1997, and Mr
Muzio Cantarella, sworn on 11 May 1998. The affidavits relied upon by the defendant were those of Mrs Carol Patricia Deigan, sworn on 17 April and 25
June 1998, and Mr Markus Ruefenacht, sworn on 11 June 1998.

Mr Spencer tendered a bundle of documents, being the exhibits to Mr
Cantarella's affidavit, which became Exhibit 1, and two bundles of documents relating to the purported service of the Summons and the Amended Summons, which became Exhibits 2 and 3 respectively.

Was There Service? 
It was not in issue that service had to be effected pursuant to the provisions of Division 2 of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p10), that Switzerland is not a convention country, and that English is not the official language of that country. One of the requirements of Division 2, which had to be met, was that the documents lodged pursuant to [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s8.html) had to be translated into an official language of Switzerland and bear a certificate, in that language, of the translator stating his qualifications and certifying that it was a translation of the document: [rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s9.html) The documents were not translated.

The other potential problem in relation to service was whether the documents returned by the Swiss authorities established that it had been effected. An inference from the evidence was that the Summons and the Amended Summons served on 22 September 1997 and 17 March 1998 respectively. This problem would have been of far more significance, in my opinion, but for the correspondence emanating from lawyers acting on behalf of the defendant. On 2 October 1997 they wrote to the solicitors for the plaintiff:- "We refer to our previous correspondence informing you that our client does not accept that the jurisdiction of an Australian Court is appropriate for the hearing of these proceedings. In fact we submit that the Supreme Court of New South Wales is clearly an inappropriate forum in all the circumstances of the matter.

Further, we put you on notice that if you continue the proceedings No 50124 of 1997 in the Commercial Division of the Supreme Court of NSW we are instructed to file a Notice of Motion, without entering an appearance, seeking orders under [Part 11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p11) Rule 8 of the Supreme Court Rules.

We request you provide a copy of this letter to the Court on any further application in these proceedings and specifically in any Motion for Leave pursuant to Part 10 Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules." 
On 28 October 1997 the lawyers wrote to the solicitors for the plaintiff referring to that letter and noting that they had not been extended the courtesy of being advised that the hearing date of 3 October 1997 had been vacated and the matter re-listed for hearing on 28 November 1997. The letter continued:- "We reiterate our client does not accept the jurisdiction of an Australian Court as being appropriate for the Hearing of these proceedings. Indeed our client has instructed us to strenuously defend any such application on your part.

Again, we request you provide a copy of this letter to the Court on the return date of these proceedings and specifically in any motion for leave pursuant to Part 10 Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules of NSW." 
On 5 November 1997 the solicitors for the plaintiff wrote to the lawyers asking for the bases for the assertion that an Australian Court did not have jurisdiction, and stating the intention to proceed with an application for leave to proceed on 28 November 1997. On 13 November 1997, they wrote stating that affidavits were currently being finalised and would be filed prior to the hearing of the motion, and asking whether it was the intention of the defendant "to have agents appear" on 28 November 1997.

Annexure "A" to the affidavit of Mrs Deigan of 17 April 1998 is a letter from the lawyers to Mrs Deigan's firm which, relevantly, stated:- "4. The official languages of the Canton of Berne are german and french, as stated in Article 6 Paragraph 1 of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of the Canton of Berne. English is not an official language in the Canton of Berne nor in Switzerland.
 . The documents were served on 17 March 1998. They were not translated, nor has M. Schaerer AG signed the `Confirmation of receipt' which was enclosed in the documents." 
It was submitted, albeit faintly, by Mr Spencer that the reference to the documents being "served" amounted to an admission of service. In my opinion the question whether the documents were "served" is ultimately a question of mixed fact and law for the Court to determine and, in any event, in the context of the letter I do not regard the statement as an admission. Its purpose was to deny that there had been effective service.

None-the-less the correspondence put various matters beyond doubt, viz, firstly, that the defendant received the documents; secondly, that both the
Summons and the Amended Summons were received prior to the return dates; thirdly, that those representing the defendant were able to converse in the
English language; and, fourthly, that the defendant and those representing it understood fully the contents of the documents. Other evidence indicated that the defendant understood and was able to communicate in the English language.
In these circumstances there cannot be, and there was not, any suggestion that the defendant was prejudiced by either of the deficiencies in complying with the rules, which I have identified.

I am further satisfied that the documents, which constitute Exhibits 2 and 3, and the other actions taken by the plaintiff amounted to bona fide attempts by it to effect service in Switzerland; that pursuant to those attempts the relevant documents came into the possession of the defendant; and that thereafter the defendant obtained legal advice.

In so far as reliance was placed upon non-compliance with the requirements of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/index.html#p10) [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s12.html), I consider that Mr Spencer's submission that that is merely a facultative provision to prove service is correct. In my opinion it is not necessary that there be compliance with it for the purpose of establishing that service was effected.

It is, of course, fundamental to the administration of justice that a party should be served conformably, or essentially conformably, with the Rules. This point was considered by Bryson J in Cook & Ors versus ANZ Banking Group
Limited & Ors (Supreme Court of New South Wales - 14 September 1994 - unreported). Whilst that case was concerned with the confirmation of service pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/index.html#p9) [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s11.html), his
Honour made the point, which in my respectful opinion is presently relevant, that:- "The object of service is to bring to the notice of the defendant not only the existence of litigation but also the terms of the claim and to point out the opportunity to defend it." 
The question then is whether there has been, in the particular circumstances of this case, an irregularity or irregularities, which can be cured by s.81 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), or whether it is not possible to treat the circumstances as being an irregularity or irregularities. Section 81(1) provides:- "Where, in beginning or purporting to begin any proceedings, or at any stage in the course of or in connection with any proceedings, there is, by reason of anything done or left undone, a failure to comply with the requirements of this Act or of the Rules whether in respect of time, place, manner, form or content or in any other respect - the failure shall be treated as an irregularity and shall not nullify the proceedings, or any step taken in the proceedings, or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings; and subject to sub-sections (2) and (3), the Court may, on terms, set aside wholly or in part the proceedings or any step taken in the proceedings or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings or exercise its powers under this Act and the Rules to allow amendments and to make orders dealing with the proceedings generally." 
Section 81(1) was applied by Giles J in Williams & Anor versus Lips-Heerlen
BV (1 November 1991 - unreported). His Honour identified various failures to comply with the Rules and considered submissions by the defendant that the purported service was ineffective because of non compliance in that a return date was specified, which had long since passed; the Summons failed to specify the date on which the proceedings were next to come before the Court; and it was served less than ten days prior to the date on which that was to occur.

His Honour tracked through the Rules dealing with service including the requirement for personal service on a corporation as set forth in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p9) [rule (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s3.html)
He noted that on 8 April 1935 Australia became a party to a convention with the Netherlands; concessions by the defendant that it was open to the plaintiffs to serve the Summons otherwise than pursuant to the convention and that they did not purport to serve it pursuant to the convention; and that service pursuant to the convention would have required service of a translation and the notice pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p10) rule 2A. It was conceded that the plaintiffs were not obliged to serve a translation, but that the rules relating to service pursuant to a convention recognised the importance to international comity of service of translations where the language of the country of the person served is not that of the documents. He said, p.11:- "It may be thought curious that in the absence of a convention, or even where there is a convention, a foreign defendant in a non-English speaking country may be served with originating process or other documents unaccompanied by a translation. I will return hereafter to whether it is of significance in the present case." 
He considered specific failures to comply with the Rules and, in particular, the failure to give notice of the return date, and decided that reliance upon s.81, which he considered should be construed widely: Australian Coastal
Shipping Commission versus Curtis Cruising Pty Limited [(1989) 17 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281989%29%2017%20NSWLR%20734 "View LawCiteRecord" ); Harknes versus Bells Asbestos and Engineering Limited [[1967] 2 QB ]; and Golden Ocean Assurance Limited versus Martin (The Goldean Mariner) [1990] 2
LLR 215, was an appropriate response. In concluding that the service of the
Summons was effective, although irregular, he noted that the defendant received the Summons and the notice required by [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p10) rule 2A, whereby it was apprised of the claim and the courses open to it. He considered the missing element, namely notice of the date appointed for hearing, could readily have been cured and "by a means not disclosed must have been cured". In these circumstances he was of the view that the proceedings were well commenced and the step of service was still "well taken, subject to being set aside".

His Honour observed that the defendant was not obliged to do anything in answer to the Summons, but had the option of ignoring "the purported service or applying to have it set aside", in which latter case an ineffective service would not be cured. However, he continued:- "... but by coming to Court on 13 September 1991 it showed that it did receive notice of that date as the date appointed for hearing. It did not suggest that it had been prejudiced by the irregularity. It was not unversed in litigation in New South Wales: ..." 
He said that although the documents were not translated, the defendant was familiar with the English language, and there was no evidence that the absence of a translation had caused any difficulty. In all these circumstances his
Honour was of the view that the service should not be set aside. He considered a number of cases to the effect that special considerations apply to an irregularity in service out of the jurisdiction, such that it should be disregarded only in exceptional cases. In one of those cases the importance of service outside the jurisdiction was recognised, although it was said that irregularities "should be cured only in exceptional cases". Whilst his Honour considered that full account had to be taken of those various matters, he was of the view that they were of less weight when there is an irregularity going to the mode of service, rather than one which has an impact on the position of the parties if the proceedings are permitted to proceed, and he observed that in The Goldean Mariner "a significant irregularity may not result in the service being set aside".

His Honour nextly considered service in the context of compliance with Dutch law, and he concluded that the validity of the service had to be judged by compliance with the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and Rules.

The width of s.81, to which his Honour referred, has been stated in various cases: Fernance versus Nominal Defendant [(1989) 17 NSWLR 710] and
Australian Coastal Shipping Commission versus Curtis Cruising Pty Limited &
Ors (1989) 17 NSWLR 735. In the latter case Priestley JA, with whom Samuels
JA agreed, adopted the wide approach which had been taken to the similar
English provision in Harkness versus Bell's Asbestos and Engineering Limited [[1967] 2 QB 729.] 
The applicability of s.81, at least in the particular circumstances of the case, was considered in relation to overseas service in Castagna & Anor v Conceria Pell Mec SPA (Court of Appeal - 15 March 1996 - unreported). The respondent, an Italian company, sued the appellant, a resident of California, and other defendants in the Commercial Division. The appellant did not enter an appearance or appear at the trial at which the plaintiff relied upon an affidavit of service and notification of the hearing date to prove service.
The affidavit of service stated that three documents were served at the appellant's office on 29 January 1992, being an Amended Summons with an expired return date of 29 November 1991; an unsigned and unsealed notice to the defendant served outside Australia; and a letter notifying the hearing date on 14 February 1992, but dated 28 February 1992.

On an application for leave to proceed, which Cole J granted, none of the inconsistencies in the evidence of service was drawn to his attention, and the appellant appealed against an ex parte judgment on the ground, inter alia, that the order granting leave to proceed under [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p10) [rule 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s2.html) was wrongly made. The appeal was allowed. It is necessary to consider the judgments with some care because reliance was placed by the respondent upon s.81.

An Amended Summons, joining, inter alios, Dr Castagna, was filed with a return date of 29 November 1991. At that stage Dr Castagna was a resident of
California and unsuccessful attempts were made to effect personal service on him at his address in that State in late November 1991 and were abandoned until late January 1992. A process server in California, Mr Tso, swore an affidavit on 29 January 1992, stating that the Amended Summons and a Notice to
Absent Defendant were left by way of service with the receptionist on duty at
Dr Castagna's address. It was common ground that the Amended Summons, as served, showed a return date of 29 November 1991. The affidavit also disclosed that the process server left a letter addressed to Dr Castagna notifying him that the proceedings would be heard on 14 February 1992. Handley JA noted that the letter:- ".. purports to be dated 28 February and to notify a hearing date on 14 February, but according to the affidavit was served on 29 January. The letter therefore contains a fundamental internal contradiction and there is a similar contradiction between it to the affidavit. The letter was neither signed nor sealed." 
Before dealing with that point his Honour referred to the fact that Dr
Castagna neither entered an appearance, nor took any part in the proceedings at which the plaintiff applied for and was granted leave to proceed against him pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p10) [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s2.html), which required proof of service and that the case fell within one or more of the paragraphs of rule 1A.

To prove service the plaintiff relied on the affidavits of Mr Tso and Mr
Krantz, whose affidavit was read to prove that such service complied with the law of California.

Exhibit G was a service report declared by Mr Tso, but neither sworn nor in the form of an affidavit. It referred to the attempts made to effect service in November 1991 and stated that Mr Tso had posted copies of the Summons and
Notice to Absent Defendant to Dr Castagna by pre-paid first class mail on 30
January 1992. There was, accordingly, a variation between the information referred to in Exhibit G and the affidavit of Mr Tso to the effect that he had left the documents at Dr Castagna's address on 29 January 1992.

Handley JA identified the difficulty of sustaining the order granting leave to proceed as being the very terms of Mr Tso's affidavit on which the plaintiff had relied. He quoted the paragraph referring to service on 29 January 1992 at
Dr Castagna's usual place of employment, and noted that by that time the date on the Amended Summons had expired and the discrepancies between the dates of service, the letter and the date referred to for the hearing in that letter.
He said these were not drawn to the attention of Cole J, were not noticed by him, and were apparently overlooked by the plaintiff's legal advisers. He continued:- "However, now that they have been drawn to the Court's attention, it is clear in my opinion that the service and the evidence of service was fundamentally irregular. Had these matters been drawn to the attention of Cole J or had his Honour noticed them, he would have been bound to refuse leave to proceed." 
His Honour then considered submissions made on behalf of the plaintiff/respondent that the defects were only irregularities, that s.81 applied, and that it was now too late for Dr Castagna to take advantage of them because of the lapse of time "between purported service on 29 January " and the commencement of the trial later.

His Honour said:- "In my opinion the purported service of the Amended Summons with its expired return date was only irregular and not a nullity. In that respect I accept the submissions of Mr Brereton. However, the deficiencies were both substantial and fundamental and did not depend upon what actually occurred when service was attempted. In cases of that kind, proof of defective service often raises disputed questions of fact which can only be determined after a hearing on that issue. In the present case one of the deficiencies was apparent on the face of the Amended Summons as served and proof of the attempted service could be expected to bring it under the notice of the plaintiff's legal advisers and the Court. The other deficiencies appear on the face of the affidavit of service.

Although I have concluded that the deficiencies in the service were only irregularities, this does not assist the respondent. The appellant challenges, as he is entitled to do in an appeal from the final judgment, the order granting leave to proceed, which he has submitted was wrongly made.

Properly understood, no question of irregularity arises. The deficiencies in service on the appellant appeared on the face of the evidence relied upon by the plaintiff. On this basis the order granting leave to proceed was erroneous and this Court is bound to correct the error on appeal. The position may well have been different if the deficiencies in service raised disputed questions of fact which could only properly be resolved on an application to set aside service." 
The passages from his Honour's reasons appear to me to mean that there was no room, at least so far as the question of service was concerned, for any question of irregularity to arise, because the evidence established that the documents could not, by virtue of the chronology to which I have referred, have been served on 29 January 1992. Accordingly, as I understand it, his
Honour was saying that there was no acceptable evidence of service, the absence of which appeared on the face of the affidavit. It may also be that his Honour was referring to the discrepancy between the terms of the affidavit and Exhibit G, which referred to a different method of service.

Mahoney P agreed with the judgment of Handley JA. His Honour agreed that the service of a document containing an expired return date was an irregularity "both generally and within s.81". He was of the opinion that for the reasons given by Handley JA the Court should allow the appeal "as far as it relates to the service issue, upon the ground that the leave of the Court given under [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p10) [rule (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s2.html) was (in the sense to which I shall refer) wrongly given and that this Court should reverse the order that was made in that regard". He continued:- "I mean by this that, had the evidence which is now before the Court been brought to the trial Judge's notice, his Honour would I think inevitably have come to a different conclusion. It has been put in argument that his Honour, had he been made aware of the relevant deficiencies in the material as it was then before him, would not have made the orders in question. This has been put upon the basis that the letter of 28 February 1992 was a false letter." 
His Honour was of the view that had the position in relation to that letter been drawn to the attention of Cole J it was likely, to the extent at least of being probable, that his Honour would not have made the order, and he said that the date 28 February 1992 was either an error or the letter was not in fact served in the manner described in the affidavit.

His Honour continued that an explanation had been sought and the solicitor called had said that he had not noticed that the letter bore that date and, therefore, had the significance to which reference had been made by Handley
JA. Accordingly, he said, he did not refer the matter to the Court's attention nor to that of counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent.

His Honour continued that it followed from that that there was no explanation as to how the letter of 28 February 1992 came to be used in the way it was and no evidence was called from the source from which it emanated. He thought that it was probable "to the appropriate degree":- ".. that the letter was attached to the affidavit following notification of the suggestion of service of Mr Tso and that it was attached to it with a consciousness that in fact the letter was not (as it could not have been) served at the time, namely 29 January 1992 when Mr Tso undertook the service of the documents as he claimed. In these circumstances, had these matters been drawn to the Judge's attention, I do not think that he would have made the order that he did." 
His Honour was of the view that the original affidavit of Mr Tso, when properly scrutinised, called for an explanation on its face, but when the attempted explanation was forthcoming "there were further discrepancies in the evidence which, had they been brought to his Honour's attention, must have influenced him against the making of an order under [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p10) [rule ".](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s2.html) 
After considering the evidence Mahoney P said:- "There really was no attempt by Mr Tso to comply with the Californian Code as far as it required an explanation of the nature of the documents or their contents. Mr Tso has indicated that in fact all he said was that the documents were `legal documents'. There is nothing I think before the Court, nor I think was there evidence before his Honour which would warrant the conclusion that that aspect of the Rules was satisfied." 
Further, his Honour was not satisfied that Mr Tso attempted service by post, and he considered that the statement in the affidavit referring to service in that way was "quite misleading".

His Honour considered s.81 in the context of a submission that Dr Castagna knew of the documents, knew that they included a Statement of Claim, and understood the effect of them but stood by and allowed the matter to proceed, thereby debarring himself from taking advantage of those matters on appeal. He rejected that submission, and continued:- "This is a case in which the plaintiff has sought to serve documents in a State of the United States of America. What is the law in that part of the world in relation to the enforcement of a judgment obtained here has not been the subject of argument in the present case; it may or may not be able to be enforced as such. But it is in my opinion proper that, when service is to be effected of an originating process of the present kind, claiming relief such as that which is here in question, the requirements of the New South Wales law in relation to service should be adhered to, if not with the utmost particularity, at least with such a degree of particularity as will ensure that the substance of the rules and the law have been complied with." 
It is my understanding that his Honour accepted that there would be work for s.81 to do if there had been compliance with the Rules to such a degree of particularity as would ensure that their substance and the law had been met.
In Ritchie's commentary to the Supreme Court Rules, Castagna is stated as authority for the proposition that:- "Proper service on an absent defendant is an essential issue in any application for leave to proceed: ..." 
If I may say so, with respect, I think this statement puts the requirement for service at too high a level. In my opinion, the authorities establish that where service has been effected, but there has not been strict compliance with each and every rule, the Court may, none-the-less, hold that service is adequate, notwithstanding a failure to comply with the requirements of the
Rules by treating that failure as an irregularity. I cannot think that
Castagna, in which the finding amounted to one of a failure of acceptable evidence of service, stands as authority for the proposition that any failure to comply with the Rules, however minor, cannot be treated as an irregularity.
Indeed Handley JA was of the view that the incorrect date could be treated as such, and Mahoney P expressly left open that there was no need to comply strictly with the Rules in every circumstance. Waddell AJA agreed with both.

It does not appear whether Williams was drawn to their Honours' attention, and they found it unnecessary to deal with any of the authorities on "irregularity". As I have said, they did not found upon "irregularity", but rather absence of proof of service.

In the present case I am minded to treat the failure to serve a translation of the pleadings and to receive the confirmation of service as irregularities. I do so because so far as the language of the documents was concerned there is not the slightest doubt that the relevant officers of the defendant and its solicitors were able to converse and communicate in the English language.
Accordingly, there can be no suggestion that by not receiving a translation they were put at any relevant disadvantage nor suffered any prejudice. Nor can there be any doubt that the defendant was aware that legal proceedings had been brought against it and that its lawyers were aware of the procedures to be followed to dispute the jurisdiction of the Court, nor that the defendant and its lawyers were aware of the relevant return date. The absence of confirmation of service has not been shown to have constituted any prejudice to the defendant.

In all these circumstances I am of the view that in so far as there was not strict compliance with each and every requirement of the Rules for service, those failures should be treated as irregularities and, accordingly, that the defendant's claim that it has not been duly served should be rejected.

Should Leave To Proceed Otherwise Be Given? 
The plaintiff must nextly establish that there is the jurisdictional nexus required by Part 10 rule 1A.

The defendant has submitted that it is entitled to orders pursuant to Part 10 rule 6A(1) and (2)(b) and Part 11 rule 8. The former provides:- "6A(1) The Court may make an order of a kind referred to in Part 11 rule 8 (which relates to setting aside etc originating process) on application by a person on whom an originating process is served outside Australia.

Without limiting sub-rule (1), the Court may make an order under this rule upon the ground: ...
 that this Court is an inappropriate forum for the trial of the proceedings." 
Part 11 rule 8 provides that the Court may, on the application of a defendant to any originating process, make various orders in relation to setting aside that process or other appropriate orders. The Notice of Motion in support of any such orders may be made without entering an appearance: Part 11 rule (2)(a).

In C.E. Heath Underwriting and Insurance (Australia) Pty Limited & Anor v Barden & Ors (Rolfe J - 19 October 1994 - unreported) and Bank of
America & Anor versus Bank of New York & Anor (Rolfe J - 27 October 1994 - unreported) (which was affirmed on appeal: Bank of America & Anor v
Bank of New York & Anor (Court of Appeal - 23 December 1994- unreported)), the principles which I consider to be relevant in a case of this type were set forth.

The first issue is whether the plaintiff has established that it has a contractual claim either because the contract was made in this State or because the contract is governed by the law of this State, or because it is one a breach of which was committed in this State: sub-rules (b) and (c)(i), and (iv). In deciding this I must form a prima facie view as to the strength of the plaintiff's case.

The plaintiff submitted that the contract was entered into in New South Wales, the basis for this submission being that after the conversation between Mr
Muzio Cantarella, which is set out in paragraph 14 of his affidavit of 11 May , and Mr Ruefenacht, on 10 November 1992, which conversation it was submitted constituted an offer, the offer was accepted by the facsimile transmission from the defendant to the plaintiff, which was received in Sydney and which bears date 12 November 1992. I have come to the conclusion that this submission should be rejected.

In my opinion, a fair reading of the conversation in paragraph 14 demonstrates that, if it be accepted, there was a concluded agreement, including an acceptance of the exclusivity provision, by Mr Ruefenacht's statement "no problem" and Mr Cantarella's response "OK ..", followed by the ordering of the machines. The facsimile transmission of 12 November 1992 did not confirm any agreement nor, on a fair reading of it, did it accept any extant offer. It confirmed the order for the four machines and set out particulars relating to their price, production, delivery, shipment and payment. The proper construction of the plaintiff's evidence leads to the conclusion that the contract for which it contends was entered into in Switzerland and, having regard to the principles governing the proper law of the contract, that it is governed by Swiss law.

In coming to this conclusion I appreciate there is a dispute between Mr
Cantarella and Mr Ruefenacht as to whether a contract was entered into at all.
In paragraph 17 of his affidavit of 11 June 1998, Mr Ruefenacht said that there was no conversation to the effect as stated by Mr Cantarella and that he did not personally or on behalf of the defendant agree to any exclusivity.

That denial by Mr Ruefenacht is supported by his contemporaneous diary note, which he sent to other officers of the defendant and which was admitted without objection. It indicated that nothing more was discussed than the possibility of the parties entering into some form of arrangement. The contractual situation was also complicated by the intervention of Schaerer
Asia Pte Limited, which is neither a subsidiary of, nor in any other relevant way related to the defendant. However, it is clearly a representative of the defendant and has close business relations with it.

I am satisfied that there was a contractual arrangement between the plaintiff and the defendant. There are four matters which lead me to that conclusion.
Firstly, after the discussion in November 1992 the parties acted as if there was a commercial arrangement between them, which was consistent with a contractual arrangement of the general type to which Mr Cantarella referred.
This included not only the acquisition by the plaintiff of machines and equipment, but also various activities promoting those products. Secondly,
Schaerer Asia Pte Limited treated the plaintiff as having a commercial relationship with the defendant. Whilst I accept that as the evidence presently stands there is no corporate relationship between the defendant and
Schaerer Asia Pte Limited, none-the-less it is clear that there is a close communication between the two companies. Thirdly, the letter from Schaerer
Asia Pte Limited dated 3 May 1996, which is the letter of termination upon which the plaintiff relies as constituting the breach of contract, recognised that there was, at the least, a business relationship between the parties and, in place of the plaintiff, appointed Soche Pty Limited "as our general importer of all our Schaerer Coffee Machines products including spare-parts".
A copy of this letter was sent to Mr Ruefenacht and the evidence is that the defendant endorsed what Schaerer Asia Pte Ltd had done. Fourthly, in paragraph of his affidavit of 11 June 1998 Mr Ruefenacht stated:- "The discussions and the formulation of the business relations between Schaerer and Cantarella, which to my knowledge and belief arose during the visits of Muzio Cantarella to Switzerland, and the agreement regarding the distributorship occurred in Switzerland." 
I consider that the contract was entered into in Switzerland, and is governed by the law of that country.

The further question is whether there was a breach of the contract by the giving of the notice of 3 May 1996. That breach was alleged to be the giving of the notice, the failure to give reasonable notice, and the appointment of
Soche Pty Limited as sole distributor. It was formulated on the specific basis that the plaintiff had an exclusive right and, in an attempt to make good the alleged breach by the termination with immediate effect, the case was pleaded and fought on the basis that the plaintiff was appointed as the exclusive agent in Australia. It was not submitted that the same consequences would flow if the agreement was non-exclusive. I have pointed to the conflict in the evidence between Mr Cantarella and Mr Ruefenacht and to the corroboration of
Mr Ruefenacht's version in his diary note. In that Mr Ruefenacht wrote:- "Till now, there is no declaration of co-operation. Muzio Cantarella has ordered for the time being 4 Test Eurocas + the spare parts. MSAG sends the necessary technical documents to Australia. There, the machines will be looked at and the technology will be studied. Afterwards Cantarella will send one or two engineers/technicians to CH(= Switzerland) to do a training. Australia has quite strict regulations concerning boiler certificates and machine construction. 
He will find out whether alterations are necessary for the Australin market." 
On 20 November 1992 Mr Muzio Cantarella wrote to Mr Ruefenacht stating:- "Just a short note to tell you that I have arrived back in Australia and am preparing a summary of important points as discussed and also a plan of action to test and launch the Euroca on the Australian market. 
I also want to thank you sincerely for your time and courteous assistance during my visit to Berne. I have learnt many things about the Company Schaerer and its products and I am certain that our companies will obtain the objectives we set." 
Mr Ruefenacht's note is inconsistent with any concluded agreement, although paragraph 32 of his affidavit of 11 June 1992 is consistent with one. Mr
Cantarella's note is not necessarily inconsistent with a concluded agreement, although there is, on one view, a significant omission, namely the reference to an exclusive distributorship. There is no subsequent document, to which I have been referred, which specifies that there was to be an exclusive distributorship, but, in paragraph 16 of his affidavit, Mr Cantarella deposed that he only entered into the distribution agreement on the basis that the plaintiff would be the exclusive distributor in Australia. This evidence was not challenged.

On 4 June 1996 the solicitors for the plaintiff wrote to Schaerer Asia Pte
Limited referring to the fact that the plaintiff was appointed "the sole distributor in Australia". The reply from the defendant did not deny that there was a sole distributorship. It was stated that in March 1992 the plaintiff announced that it would accept terms of co-operation and wanted to commence business relations with the defendant, and in November 1992 there was a visit, which resulted in the placing of orders.

The matters to which I have referred establish, at a prima facie level, the existence of an agreement in the terms for which the plaintiff contended, including the term as to exclusivity. The letter of 3 May 1996 stated that
Soche Pty Limited would seek to co-operate with any interested parties on a sub-distributor or wholesale basis, without any sole distributor commitment to each party, and:- "We like to thank you for your support of Schaerer products till now and we hope that you will be able to get by streamlining your equipment range together with the Soche's support even a better bottom line for your company.

Mr Fred A. Binder will approach you during the next week to discuss the possibility of a future co-operation between you and him." 
The reference to the absence of "any sole distributor commitment" lends some support to the view that previously, i.e. with the plaintiff, there was such a provision.

In the letter of 18 June 1996 the defendant, through its president, Mr Huber, stated:- "According to the above points it should be obvious, that Schaerer can neither be liable for any damages, nor loss of sales or loss of opportunity to a return on investment. The cause is the inactivity of marketing and sales activities by Cantarella itself.

In addition, there is also no point why Cantarella can no-more sell machines from their (sic) stock, according to the above situation." 
Once again, although too much store cannot be put on any one point, the alleged inactivity of the plaintiff is consistent with an exclusive agreement.

As I have said the submission as to breach was put on the basis that there had been a termination of an exclusive agreement with damages flowing therefrom.
For the reasons I have stated I am satisfied that the agreement contained an exclusivity provision and, therefore, at least prima facie, damages flowed from the breach alleged. In the result I am satisfied that the receipt of the letter of 3 May 1996 constituted the breach alleged and, it having been received in Australia, there is a jurisdictional nexus in relation to the contract as demanded by Part 10 rule 1A.

As the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) claim is pleaded the representations are alleged to have been made by communications received in Australia, where, so it was pleaded, the plaintiff was induced to act to its detriment. Further the misrepresentations were alleged to flow from the giving of notice, which was received in Australia. In my opinion, as I have stated, the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) claim does not carry the matter any further and I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has a reasonably arguable cause of action based on it and I have noted Mr
Spencer's concession in relation to it. In these circumstances I am not disposed to give leave to proceed on that claim. Accordingly, although it may be arguable that there is the necessary jurisdictional nexus I do not propose to grant leave to proceed for the reasons I have given. No question of "tacking" arises: C.E. Heath and the cases therein cited.

Inappropriate Forum 
The test as to whether a forum is inappropriate was laid down by the High
Court in Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538.] It is necessary for the defendant to establish that New South
Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum. In any litigation involving companies in two different countries there will be an element of inconvenience in witnesses having to travel from one country to the other for the purpose of giving evidence. In the present case whether the proceedings are heard in this
Court or in a Swiss Court there will have to be some travelling and I do not overlook the evidence that at least in the courts in the Canton of Berne there are no video link facilities. That does not preclude the existence of such facilities elsewhere in the Canton of Berne. I also have regard to the fact that the applicable law of the contract is Swiss law. However, as I said in
C.E. Heath, business people are used to travelling on business and, clearly in this industry, they do travel extensively on business. In those circumstances I do not see that the inconvenience of travel would cause any difficulty and, so far as the evidence disclosed, the principal witness for the defendant is fluent in the English language. In all the circumstances, I do not consider that the New South Wales Supreme Court would be a clearly inappropriate forum.

Orders 
I order that:-
The plaintiff be granted leave to proceed against the defendant pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p10) rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules on its contractual claim only.
The defendant's Notice of Motion be dismissed with costs.
The defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the plaintiff's Notice of
Motion.
The exhibits be returned.
The matter be listed on Friday, 24 July 1998 for directions.
 * * * 
