

Spooner versus Simmonds [1996] NSWSC 513 (24 October 1996) 
SPOONER versus SIMMONDS /96 CL 12860/86 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, HANDLEY JA, SANTOW AJA 
CATCHWORDS:COSTS - offer of compromise rejected by plaintiff and less favourable judgment obtained - court to depart from general rule in Supreme Court Rules Pt 52 r 17(5) only in exceptional cases - rule does not apply where court has already "otherwise ordered" in respect of costs of earlier proceedings 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:DISMISSED 
The opponent was injured in a motor vehicle accident in 1984, and in 1986 he brought a claim in the Supreme Court to recover damages. On 22 May 1990 the claimant offered to settle the claim in the sum of $170,000. The opponent rejected the offer. The hearing proceeded before McInerney J, who directed entry of judgment in the sum of $20,000 and ordered the claimant to pay the opponent's costs. The opponent appealed on the ground that the damages were inadequate. The Court allowed the appeal and ordered a retrial. The costs order of McInerney was confirmed and the claimant was ordered to pay the costs of the appeal.

On the retrial of the matter, Dunford J directed entry of judgment for the opponent in the sum of $22,400. Despite an application that the opponent pay the claimant's costs from the date of the offer of compromise, his Honour declined to make any special order as to costs. The claimant sought leave to appeal on the ground that his Honour erred in the exercise of his discretion in that he failed to identify any proper basis for departing from the general rule laid down in SCR Pt 52 r 17(5).

Held: 
Because the court had otherwise ordered in respect of the costs of the first proceedings, it was not open to Dunford J to make an order that the opponent pay the claimant's costs from May 1990. His Honour's discretion was not fettered by the general rule in Pt 52 r 17(5): Hillier versus Sheather [(1995) 36 NSWLR 414] referred to; Ettinghausen versus Australian Consolidated Press
Limited [(1995) 38 NSWLR 404] dist.

Orders 
Leave to appeal granted; 
Appeal dismissed; 
The claimant to pay the opponent's costs of the application for leave to appeal and of the appeal.
 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: On 13 June 1996 Dunford J directed entry of judgment for the opponent in the sum of $22,400.00. Following the delivery of his reasons for judgment his Honour entertained argument on the question of costs. During the course of that argument the claimant sought an order that the opponent pay his costs from 22 May 1990 following the making by the claimant of an offer to compromise the opponent's claim in the sum of $170,000.00. For his part the opponent made an application pursuant to Pt 52 r 24(4) for an order that he be allowed the whole of his costs notwithstanding the provisions of sub-r (3)(d) of that rule. 
The reasons given by his Honour for the order that he made were concise and I will set them out: "The amount recovered by the plaintiff is small. It would be unfortunate if the whole of this amount was eaten up in paying the costs of the defendant. On the other hand, in my view, it is a case which, if properly assessed by the plaintiff, and I emphasise the plaintiff rather than his legal advisers, would not have been brought in this court but in the District Court. Accordingly I decline to make any special orders as to costs and the only order I make is, the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings." 
Shortly thereafter the claimant filed a notice of appeal. That notice contained a number of grounds but in essence the claimant alleged that his
Honour erred in the exercise of his discretion insofar as he failed to identify any proper basis for departing from the general rule laid down in SCR
Pt 52 r17(5). Upon the Registrar drawing to the claimant's attention the fact that the appeal could only be brought with leave, and that the notice of appeal was therefore incompetent, the claimant filed an application for an extension of time in which to file an application for leave to appeal and an application for leave to appeal. During the hearing of the application the parties invited the court to determine the appeal if it came to the conclusion that leave to appeal should be granted. This was a convenient course as it was clear that no further argument would be necessary in the hearing of the appeal and the court acceded to that application.

The first matter to consider is the application for an extension of time.
There was no reason given for the failure of the claimant's legal advisers to check the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and to follow proper practice. On the other hand the opponent does not suggest that he has been prejudiced in any way and, on balance, I have concluded that the extension of time should be granted.

The resolution of the substantive application for leave is more difficult. The case has had a tortured history and it is necessary to refer shortly to the path that it has followed through the courts.

The opponent was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 17 June 1984 and, in , he brought a claim in this Court to recover damages in respect of those injuries. Liability was admitted by the claimant but there was a very serious issue between the parties as to the amount of damages to which the opponent was entitled. On 22 May 1990 the claimant offered to settle the claim in the sum of $170,000.00. The opponent rejected that offer. The hearing proceeded before McInerney J in October 1990 and on 26 October his Honour directed the entry of judgment in the sum of $20,000.00 and ordered the claimant to pay the opponent's costs.

The opponent appealed on the grounds that the damages were inadequate. At the time his Honour delivered judgment the solicitor for the claimant sought a variation of the costs order and directed the trial judge's attention to SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) r17. His Honour, however, said that he would not entertain the application at that time as there was no representation for the opponent. It would appear that unsuccessful attempts were made to secure an appearance of the opponent's solicitor before the court and the matter was ultimately left upon the basis that another date would be fixed for the hearing of the argument. In explanation of the fact that no date was fixed there was tendered to this
Court a file note of the claimant's solicitor, dated 6/11/90, in which the following appears: "Mr Marsden has informed me that he is going to appeal consequently the question of costs must be put to one side until the appeal is heard." 
The appeal was duly instituted and no further attempts were made by the claimant's solicitors to argue the question of costs. In allowing the appeal the Court made a number of orders including - "(4) Confirm the costs order at trial; and 
Order that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal." 
It does not appear that the making of the compromise offer was drawn to the attention of this Court nor that the claimant's legal representatives sought that this Court vary the order that it then made. It follows, so it seems to me, that this Court has ordered that the claimant pay the opponent's costs of the first trial and of the appeal.

Notwithstanding this history the claimant submits that the provisions of SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) r17(5) apply and that there are no circumstances justifying a departure from the general rule laid down there. SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) r17(5) is in the following terms: "Where an offer is made by a defendant and not accepted by the plaintiff, and the plaintiff obtains an order or judgment on the claim to which the offer relates not more favourable to him than the terms of the offer, then, unless the Court otherwise orders, the plaintiff shall, subject to [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s24.html), be entitled to an order against the defendant for his costs in respect of the claim up to an including the day the offer was made, taxed on a party and party basis, and the defendant shall be entitled to an order against the plaintiff for his costs in respect of the claim thereafter, taxed on a party and party basis." 
In Hillier versus Sheather, [(1995) 36 NSWLR 414], Kirby P, who was in the majority on this point, said, at 422, that the rule lays down the general principle to be applied and a Court may only otherwise order in an exceptional case. Cole JA, the other judge in the majority, said there must be some judicial reason for the making of a contrary order. What is perhaps more to the point is that the learned President made it clear that the considerations which moved Dunford J in this case did not constitute grounds for "otherwise ordering".

Not surprisingly, counsel for the claimant embraced the approach expressed by
Kirby P. Further, in answer to the suggestion that the rule did not apply in circumstances where the first verdict had been set aside on appeal and a new trial ordered, counsel for the claimant referred to the decision of this Court in Ettingshausen versus Australian Consolidated Press Limited [(1995) 38 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2038%20NSWLR%20404 "View LawCiteRecord" ) In the course of their joint judgment, Gleeson CJ and Priestley JA said (at ): "There is nothing in that (the relevant rule) which either requires or justifies the conclusion that the consequences of an offer are `exhausted' once the trial, prior to which the offer was made, comes to an end. As was noted, the offer is made, not in respect of a trial, but in respect of a claim. Depending upon the circumstances of a case, a claim may not be finally heard and determined until after there have been a number of appeals, and, perhaps, a number of trials. ... In our view, there is no justification for concluding that, once the claim to which it relates has been the subject of a complete trial, an offer of compromise made before the trial has no further significance for any appeal, or subsequent retrial." 
Thus, the claimant submitted, the fact that there had been an appeal and retrial were of no moment. The rule operated in accordance with its terms and, subject to the judge otherwise ordering, entitled the claimant to the costs of the proceedings from May 1990 when the offer of compromise became effective.

The argument is an attractive one but in my opinion the response of the opponent should be accepted. That was that the rule could not apply according to its terms in the circumstances of this case and Justice Dunford was exercising an unfettered judicial discretion in making his costs order.

The reason why the opponent's submission must be accepted is relatively straightforward. SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) r17(5) provides that where the plaintiff secures a judgment which is not more favourable to him than the terms of the offer then, unless the court otherwise orders, the plaintiff is entitled to an order against the defendant for his costs in respect of the claim up to the date of the offer, taxed on a party and party basis, and the defendant is entitled to an order against the plaintiff for his costs in respect of the claim thereafter, also taxed on a party and party basis. It followed that the claimant is, according to his argument, entitled to his costs of the proceedings from May 1990. The problem is that the court has made other orders in respect of the costs of the proceedings relating to periods after May 1990. McInerney J ordered that the claimant pay the opponent's costs of the trial. Although an application to vary that order was foreshadowed, it was not proceeded with either before
McInerney J or the Court of Appeal. Nor was any appeal brought from that order and when the matter was before this Court it solemnly confirmed McInerney J's order. It must follow that, according to the terms of the rule, the court has otherwise ordered in respect of the first proceedings with the consequence that the rule cannot operate according to its terms. That is clear because it was not open to Dunford J to make an order that the opponent pay the claimant's costs of the proceedings from May 1990 in the light of the earlier orders of the court. Obviously enough he could not set aside the order made by the Court of Appeal regulating the costs of the first trial and in those circumstances his discretion was not fettered by SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) r17(5).

No doubt the claimant could have appealed to his Honour's general discretion to make a special order in view of the offer of compromise made in May 1990 but, as I have sought to point out, that exercise of discretion would not have been fettered by the rule under discussion. In the circumstances, the claimant's argument fails and, there being no other ground for disturbing the exercise by his Honour of his discretion, the consequence is that the decision of his Honour must stand.

Ettingshausen is distinguishable. In that case the plaintiff, in December , offered to compromise his claim for $85,000 plus costs. The offer was not accepted. In 1993 the jury awarded him damages in the amount of $350,000.00. The trial judge made an order for indemnity costs in favour of the appellant (in conformity with SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) r17(4)). There was an appeal to this Court which ordered a new trial limited to damages and declined to set aside the costs order of the trial judge. At the new trial the jury awarded the appellant damages in the sum of $100,000, which was $15,000 more than the original offer. The trial judge declined to make an order that the defendant pay the plaintiff indemnity costs. That decision was reversed by this Court upon the grounds that the factors relied upon by the trial judge in reaching that conclusion were not sufficient to enable him otherwise to order in accordance with the terms of sub-r(4). It will be seen that the original order which was made involved a direct application of r17(4). In other words the first trial judge did not otherwise order. In these circumstances the court, having held that the second trial judge had erred, saw no reason why the rule did not continue to operate. No court (other than the second trial judge) had "otherwise ordered" within the terms of the rule.

In these circumstances I would be disposed to grant leave to appeal but would dismiss the appeal. The claimant should pay the opponent's costs of the application for leave to appeal and of the appeal.
 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Clarke JA.
 
SANTOW AJA: I agree with Clarke JA.
 * * * 
