

Magnum Engineering P/L versus Ian Wallace Hay [1996] NSWSC 313 (31 July 1996) 
MAGNUM ENGINEERING PTY LTD versus IAN WALLACE HAY /96 
Wednesday 12 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this case the plaintiff seeks an injunction in substance in terms of paragraph 15 of the written contract for employment dated 10 December 1993. Clause 15 of that contract provides: "On the termination of this agreement, howsoever occasioned, the employee shall not for the period of three (3) years next after termination solicit any of the persons who were customers of the employer immediately preceding the date of termination and shall not for a like period engage or be concerned or interested in any capacity in any business, firm or company managing, selling or deal in goods similar to those dealt with by the employer".

The word "deal" should obviously be "dealing". There then follows a proviso which is not presently relevant.

The case was listed for hearing today on an urgent basis. The affidavit evidence was completed by the end of March.

During the course of the cross-examination of Mr Birchall - who in a practical sense seems to control the plaintiff company - it emerged that the defendant wished to adduce further evidence of the matter arising in this way.

Mr Birchall swore an affidavit dated 13 February 1996 in support of the summons in which he said in quite general terms that the defendant was now working for a company which conducted business in opposition to the plaintiff.
In that capacity the defendant was dealing with companies who were customers of the plaintiff immediately preceding the date of termination of the employment, which seems to have been 6 November 1995.

The defendant then filed an affidavit dated 13 March 1996 in which he said in paragraph 37 in quite general terms that his then employer operated in the same industry as the plaintiff but "in an entirely different segment of that industry". He spoke in general terms of his then employer operating at the upper end of the market and the plaintiff at the lower end, and quoted some figures. He said that his then employer sold machines for prices ranging from $70,000 to $500,000, but that the plaintiff sold only one model priced at $250,000, being an automatic model, and manual machines for prices ranging between $12,000 and $18,000.

Mr Birchall then swore an affidavit in reply dated 20 March 1996. In paragraph he set out some detailed figures. He referred to five models of machine sold by the plaintiff and compared them with five models of machine sold by the defendant's present employer, and set out the approximate sale price of each of those 10 models. That evidence contrasts quite sharply with the evidence of the defendant.

The matter was allowed to stand there until this morning. The defendant now wishes to challenge in some detail the material contained in paragraph 20 of
Mr Birchall's affidavit of 20 March 1996.

The judgment of the Court of Appeal in Cohen versus McWilliam of 14 November 1995, not reported, establishes in my view that the defendant is entitled to call that further evidence, provided any detriment to the plaintiff can be ameliorated. The difficulty about ameliorating any detriment arises because there is a trade fair, or exhibition, scheduled to commence on 3 July, some 3 weeks hence. The plaintiff fears that the defendant will attend at that exhibition as an employee of his present employer, and that he will then breach clause 15 of the contract of employment.

On the evidence before me so far that fear seems to be a reasonable one. I do not intend to express any final opinion about the merits, I say only that on the evidence so far the fears seem to be reasonably well founded. If the case were before me today on an application for an interlocutary injunction then within the language of the cases on that subject the plaintiff has established a serious question to be determined. In line with what the Court of Appeal said in Cohen versus McWilliam it seems to me I should adjourn the case if it is possible to protect the plaintiff.

The defendant proffers an undertaking to the Court not to deal with or solicit sales of post forming equipment at the trade fair or exhibition in question.

The plaintiff seeks an injunction in terms of paragraph 15 of the contract of employment. The plaintiff also seeks an order for the costs thrown away by the adjournment, and that, I gather, is not opposed; it is hardly possible to imagine that it could be. In my view given all the circumstances of the case the plaintiff's terms are to be preferred.

The case was fixed for today as long ago as 4 April. I was then told, so far as I recall, that the evidence was complete. In any event prior directions required the evidence to be completed prior to that date. The parties knew then that the trade fair was coming on on 3 July.

It is the trade fair which is the particular trigger for urgency now, but I should observe in deference to some submissions made on behalf of the defendant that the plaintiff obviously thought the matter was of some urgency earlier on. According to Mr Birchall's affidavit of 13 February it was on 10
February, a Saturday, that he first received a business card showing that the defendant was acting in a particular way. He had some information in December , which the defendant had confirmed.

In any event, it seems clear enough that whatever it was that happened on 10
February led to Mr Birchall, on behalf of the plaintiff, contacting his lawyers promptly. His affidavit was sworn on 13 February, the summons was filed on 14 February and it was served on 15 February. The matter proceeded quite expeditiously after that.

The net result, it seems to me, is I should grant the adjournment but on the basis the defendant pay the costs thrown away by the adjournment, and that there be an interlocutary injunction in terms of paragraph 15 of the contract of employment, omitting the proviso simply because it is irrelevant. That injunction should remain in force during the adjournment.

I make the following orders: 
I adjourn the further hearing of the proceedings until 31 July 1996 before myself.

I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs thrown away by reason of the adjournment today.

I note the usual undertakings as to damages given by the plaintiff through its counsel.

I order that until and including 1 August 1996 the defendant shall not solicit any of the persons who were customers of the plaintiff immediately before 6
November 1995 and also that the defendant not engage in or be concerned or interested in any capacity in any business, firm or company managing, selling or dealing in goods similar to those dealt in by the plaintiff.

I direct the defendant file and serve all further affidavits proposed to be relied upon on or before 3 July 1996.

I direct the plaintiff to file and serve all affidavits proposed to be relied upon on or before 17 July 1996.

I direct the defendant to file and serve all affidavits in response to those further affidavits of the plaintiff on or before 24 July 1996.
 * * * 
