

Buiscex Limited and Anor versus Panfida Foods Limited (In Liquidation) Matter
No 5463/92 [1998] NSWSC 516 (30 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 November 1998 
BUISCEX LIMITED & ANOR V PANFIDA FOODS LIMITED (IN LIQUIDATION) /92 June 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
FILE NO: 5463 of 1992 
DELIVERED: 30 June 1998 (Reserved) 
HEARING DATE: 3 June and 19 June 1998 
PARTIES: Buiscex Limited & Anor versus Panfida Foods Limited (In Liquidation) 
JUDGMENT OF: Hodgson CJ in Eq 
COUNSEL: 
Applicant: Mr Conti QC with Mr M Walton nd and 12th Respondents: Mr R Angyal th Respondent: Mr B Walker SC with Mr I Jackman 
SOLICITORS: 
Applicant: Truman Hoyle, Sydney nd and 12th Respondents: Mallesons Stephen Jaques, Sydney th Respondent: Mr Charlton, Corrs Chambers Westgarth, Sydney th Respondent: Speed & Stracey, Sydney 
Plaintiff: Mr Townsend, Allen Allen & Hemsley 
CATCHWORDS: 
Corporations - Winding Up - Agreement to Fund Liquidator's Investigations 
Company ordered to be wound up in December 1992, at which time $14.5 million was owing by interests associated with a 71% shareholder and was irrecoverable - Proposed agreement in 1998, whereby a funder would fund investigations and litigation concerning this debt in return for 75% of any nett proceeds of litigation, opposed by all outside unsecured creditors - Liquidator seeks court approval - Held in particular circumstances approval should be given.

Re Spedley Securities [(1992) 9 ACSR 83] at 85.

Re Movetor [(1996) 64 FCR 380.] 
Corporations Law s.477(2B).

BUISCEX LIMITED & ANOR V PANFIDA FOODS LIMITED (IN LIQUIDATION) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 11th December 1992, Panfida Foods Limited ("the company") was ordered to be wound up, and Christopher John Palmer was appointed liquidator. 
On 16th January 1998, a meeting of creditors was convened for the purpose of considering a resolution authorising the liquidator entering into an agreement with a third party funder which would, in return for 75% of the proceeds of any causes of action undertaken for the benefit of the company, fund investigations and the pursuit of such causes of action. That meeting unanimously carried a resolution rejecting the proposal.

The agreement contemplated could enure for more than three months, so under s.477(2B) of the Corporations Law, the liquidator cannot enter into any such agreement without the approval of the creditors or the Court. I am dealing with the liquidator's application for approval by the Court of his entering into this agreement.

BACKGROUND 
As at 30th June 1991, the paid up capital of the company was in excess of $20 million, and there were about 4,700 shareholders. However, 71% of the shares were owned by just one company, Panfida Limited, while the remaining 29% were held by about 4,700 shareholders. During the year ended 30th June 1989, the company had lent $18.5 million to Panfida Limited and/or its parent company
Panfida Group PLC. According to the company's accounts, this loan had been reduced to about $14 million as at 30th June 1990 and 30th June 1991.

At the date of winding up of the company, about $14.5 million was owing to the company by Panfida Limited or its parent company Panfida Group PLC. Unsecured debts of the company amounted to about $771,00.00 to external creditors and about $13.9 million to associated companies (the latter perhaps being balanced by set offs for greater amounts). The debt of $14.5 million was not recoverable, there were no assets to meet the unsecured debts, and the liquidator had insufficient funds to investigate the affairs of the company.

Prior to the winding up, the Australian Securities Commission had carried out an investigation of the affairs of the company, particularly in relation to the loan to Panfida Limited, involving production of books and examination of a director Samuel Gazal over two days in February and March 1992. On 14th July , the Australian Securities Commission wrote to Mr. Gazal advising that it had completed its enquiries and did not propose to take further action.

On 18th December 1997, the liquidator wrote to creditors advising that he had been approached by a party interested in funding enquiries into whether the company had any causes of action. On 23rd December 1997, a meeting of creditors was held, and the creditors indicated that they required more information about the proposal.

On 8th January 1998, the liquidator wrote to the creditors who had attended the 23rd December meeting and some others, advising that the proposed funder was a wholly owned subsidiary of Australian Litigation Fund Pty. Limited ("ALF"), that no specific causes of action were known to ALF, and that initially ALF intended to fund the liquidator to investigate the circumstances of the loan to Panfida Group PLC and to determine whether there were any causes of action arising out of that loan. The letter enclosed a copy of the agreement proposed to be entered into.

In substance, by the proposed agreement the funder would fund investigations by the liquidator into the company's affairs for six months or such extended period as may be agreed to by the funder, subject to the funder's right to terminate the agreement on 14 days' notice. For two years, the funder would have an option to acquire a 75% interest in the net amounts recovered on behalf of the company in any cause of action brought on behalf of the company.
If such an option was exercised, the funder was to fund the proceedings, indemnify the liquidator against liability for costs in the proceedings, and provide any necessary security for costs (or terminate the agreement). The liquidator was given control of the proceedings, but this was subject in various ways to terms of the agreement.

The meeting of creditors held on 16th January 1998 was attended by about 88% in value of the outside creditors. The main creditors who attended (and their claimed debts) were accountants Ernst & Young (about $160,000.00), Coopers & Lybrand (about $30,000.00), and Duesburys (about $33,000.00); solicitors
Mallesons Stephen Jaques (about $272,500.00) and Gadens (about $5,700.00); EFG
Australia Limited, formerly Elders Finance Group Limited (about $145,000.00, apparently being money lent to pay legal fees); and R Securities Pty. Limited (about $10,000.00, being money lent to pay legal fees). One of the directors of R Securities is Samuel Gazal, who had been a director of the company.

As noted earlier, this meeting unanimously carried a resolution rejecting the proposal.

This Notice of Motion was filed on 20th March 1998. It was served on the plaintiffs in the winding up proceedings and the unsecured creditors, including those mentioned above. R Securities, Ernst & Young, Mallesons
Stephen Jaques, and EFG have appeared and opposed the application.

SUBMISSIONS 
All parties have provided written submissions, which I will leave with the papers.

Written Submissions on behalf of R Securities 
On behalf of R Securities, Mr. Walker SC submitted first that the transaction had been opposed unanimously by creditors for sound commercial reasons. The
Court recognises that creditors are better judges than courts of their own commercial interests: see Re English Scottish & Australia Chartered Bank [(1893) 3 Ch. 385] at 409; Re Spedley Securities [(1992) 9 ACSR 83] at 85; Re
Movitor [(1996) 64 FCR 380] at 384; and Re Aslor (1997) 24 ACSR 612 at 613-4. The liquidator originally took the view himself that he needed creditors' approval, and he agreed that the creditors' concerns were reasonable.

Next, Mr. Walker submitted that the liquidator was not acting in good faith: in acting contrary to the wishes of the creditors, he was favouring the interests of the funder over those of the creditors; his actions were calculated to advance his own interests in the recovery of and earning of fees; and he had sought to derive support from particular secured creditors although he knew they had no valid claim. On the last matter, Mr. Walker pointed out that the secured creditor had accepted $250.00 in full settlement of the secured debt, but later submitted a proof of debt for about $555,000.00. In the liquidator's affidavit in support of his application, he swore he was supported by creditors "who have now proved in the winding up for $554,895.49 and comprise almost 50% of external creditors".

Thirdly, Mr. Walker submitted that the return to the funder under the agreement would be excessive, and was not the subject of genuine negotiation.
There was no record of any negotiation, and none was disclosed to creditors.
In Movitor, Drummond, J. approved a 12% return for 50% of costs, and commented that lack of evidence of reasonableness was overcome by the support of the creditors. Mr. Walker referred also to Re Tosich Constructions [(1997) 143 ALR 18.] 
Fourthly, Mr. Walker submitted that under the agreement any litigation would be controlled by the private commercial interests of the funder. There were terms of the agreement giving control to the funder over matters concerning any settlement, and requiring the retention of the funder's solicitors Piper
Alderman. These terms confirmed the champertous nature of the arrangement:
Glegg v. Bromley [(1912) 3 KB 474] at 484, 490;
Tosich at 33-4.

Finally, Mr. Walker submitted that the public interest did not favour such a champertous transaction, particularly concerning a matter investigated at length by the relevant public regulatory authority, who had decided it should not be pursued, which occurred a decade ago, and in respect of which any cause of action was speculative. Limitation periods are expressions of public interest: Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v. Taylor <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541] at 553. Even if a claim in equity not subject to a limitation period could be found, the prejudice to the defendants by witnesses' loss of memory since 1989 would mean that any such cause of action would very likely be defeated by laches: Orr v. Ford <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 316] at 330.

Written Submissions on behalf of Ernst & Young and Mallesons Stephen Jaques 
Mr. Angyal on behalf of these respondents made a number of submissions similar to those made on behalf of R Securities. He also submitted that the enquiries were likely to be futile: only one former director was resident in Australia, and the Court may well not summons outsiders for examination in the circumstances.

Furthermore, any such investigation would impose unreasonable time and cost burdens on creditors, for which they would not be compensated. The large amounts owing to Ernst & Young and Mallesons Stephen Jaques showed that they had performed a large amount of work for the company, and no doubt much more work was performed for fees which have been paid. The liquidator had already made sweeping requirements that they retain documents. It could be expected that investigations would involve burdensome requests in relation to documents, and possibly compulsory examinations of personnel, perhaps requiring legal representation, for which the creditors could not expect to be adequately compensated.

Similar submissions were made on behalf of EFG.

Written Submissions for Liquidator 
Mr. Conti QC submitted that the creditors had led no evidence on the application, to show the present basis of their opposition. Certainly, no evidence was led to suggest they would support a similar arrangement on better terms.

The rules concerning champerty and maintenance were overcome by the statutory authority given to the liquidator to sell assets, including causes of action and the proceeds thereof: see Movitor, Tosich, Re Moage [(1997) 25 ACSR ] at -6; Re Feastys Family Restaurant [(1996) 14 ACLC 1058]; and Re
G.A. Listing and Maintenance [(1994) 15 ACSR 308.] 
The company was at no risk as to costs, so that, in their capacity as creditors of the company, none of the creditors had anything to lose by the arrangement. The approval of creditors was not necessary: see U.T.S.A. v.
Ultra Tune Australia [(1996) 21 ACSR 251] at 289.
Furthermore, the interests of shareholders were relevant, and the liquidator was seeking to uphold those interests.

In so far as it was suggested that the liquidator changed his position to seek approval of the Court only when the proposal was rejected by creditors, Mr.
Conti pointed to a letter of 18th December 1997 sent by the liquidator to the creditors indicating that he intended to enter into the agreements subject to the approval of the creditors or the Court.

Oral Submissions for R Securities 
In oral submissions, Mr. Jackman submitted that the creditors had indicated their grounds of opposition at the creditors' meetings, and those grounds were set out in the minutes of those meetings. Those creditors who had not appeared in these proceedings were justified in taking the view that there was little point in incurring costs when four creditors were opposing the application.
There was no serious contest as to the reasonableness of the objections raised by the creditors at the meetings: it was reasonable that they seek a lump sum, that they should seek better details of the transaction, and that they should require to be satisfied that the liquidator had negotiated the best deal. The liquidator had led no evidence of negotiations, and under the Jones v.
Dunkel principle, it could be inferred that there were no serious negotiations.

Although it was not strictly necessary for creditors to approve such an arrangement, they were the best judge of their commercial interests, and the approval of creditors was a powerful discretionary factor. The liquidator told the creditors he required their approval, and the original agreement was conditional on approval by the creditors. This showed that the liquidator's original professional judgment was that he should have the creditors' approval, and the circumstance that, whereas he had told the creditors that it was a matter for them, he was now seeking court approval against the wishes of creditors, went to the issue of good faith.

The interests of contributories was less weighty than those of creditors. In any event, the court was only given the view of one contributory.

There was a public interest that people not be excessively troubled by investigation of events in the remote past, which had already been examined by the relevant regulatory authority.

Oral Submissions for Ernst & Young and Mallesons Stephen Jaques 
Mr. Angyal submitted that it was not necessary for creditors to give evidence as to how much inconvenience they would be put to: that could be inferred from the amount of unpaid fees, and the extraordinarily broad demands already made by the liquidator. No evidence had been led for the funder that this was the best deal that the funder would offer.

Mr. Angyal pointed to evidence suggesting that the liquidator had sought to canvas proxies to support the proposal, indicating that he had not sought in a disinterested way to obtain the views of creditors.

Oral Submissions for Applicant 
Mr. Conti submitted that it had not been put the liquidator in cross- examination that he had not been genuinely interested in obtaining the approval of creditors. He submitted that the matter of inconvenience to creditors had not been raised at the creditors' meeting: the mere circumstance that creditors would be required to produce documents, in return for a proper tender of their expenses, is not a matter which should weigh against the application. Indeed, it was irrelevant, a collateral interest which should be disregarded by the liquidator and the Court. No creditors have given evidence to the Court exactly what their position is, what they require, and what they object to.

As regards the investigation by the regulatory authority, the Australian
Securities Commission had not provided any report or any reasons for its decision.

If proceedings were brought which recovered something like the amount of the loan plus interest, then the company's share of 25% of this would pay unsecured creditors in full and leave a much larger amount for the shareholders; so that the interests of the shareholders were important in this case.

Finally, Mr. Conti referred me to the recent decision of the Federal Court in
Re Addstone, Mansfield, J., 9/6/98.

DECISION 
In relation to an application under s.377(1) of the Corporations Law, in Re
Spedley Securities [(1992) 9 ACSR 83] at 85-6,
Giles, J. noted that "the Court is necessarily confined in attempting to second-guess the liquidator in the exercise of his powers, and generally will not interfere unless there can be seen to be some lack of good faith, some error of law or principle, or real and substantial grounds for doubting the prudence of the liquidator's conduct". His Honour went on to note the importance of the attitudes of creditors, and to quote with approval the following passage from Re English Scottish and Australian Chartered Bank [(1893) 3 Ch. 385] at 409, per Lindley, L.J.: 
If the creditors are acting on sufficient information and with time to consider what they are about, and are acting honestly, I apprehend, much better judges of what is to their commercial advantage than the Court can be.

The difficulty in the case before me is that the judgment of the liquidator and the attitude of creditors are apparently opposed.

It has been put that I should find some lack of good faith on the part of the liquidator. In so far as that submission depends upon the liquidator initially taking the view that he needed the support of creditors and subsequently seeking to go ahead notwithstanding the opposition of creditors, my opinion is that it gives very little support to a finding of lack of good faith: the liquidator recognised the alternative of approval of the Court before the meetings of creditors were held, and conveyed that alternative to the creditors by his letter of 18th December 1997; and, as I indicate later in the judgment, the liquidator does have reasonable grounds to seek to proceed notwithstanding the opposition of creditors. In so far as the submission depends upon the liquidator seeking to advance his own interests in the recovery and earning of fees, this too in my opinion carries little weight: any substantial enquiries by any liquidator will involve that prospect. In so far as the submission depends upon the liquidator calling in aid the proof of debt by the secured creditor, I accept that the liquidator had good reason to believe that the secured creditor had no valid claim, and thus had no reasonable ground to assert that his application was supported by nearly half the outside creditors. But I note that the relevant part of the affidavit was not read in support of the application, and I do not believe that the liquidator was being dishonest in including that material in his affidavit: it was a mistake, I think, to put that material in the affidavit but not I think a dishonest one, and it was not persisted in.

On the matter of control of proceedings pursuing any cause of action on behalf of the company, I do not see those provisions of the agreement as being unreasonable. It is reasonable that the funder have some say and control in relation to settlement; and although a solicitor is nominated by the agreement, I note that the liquidator can replace that solicitor with the consent of the funder, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. In my opinion, having regard to cases such as Movitor, the public policy considerations underlying the rules concerning champerty and maintenance do not carry significant weight in this case.

Apart from those considerations, I see the broad situation in this case in the following way.

Interests associated with a 71% shareholder had the benefit of $14.5 million of the company's money, at the expense of the remaining 29% of shareholders.
Prima facie, it would seem not to have been in the interests of all the shareholders to make a loan of that magnitude for the benefit of some of the shareholders, unless the circumstances were such as to ensure that the loan was recoverable. The circumstance that the loan ultimately proved not to be recoverable suggests that there may possibly have been breaches of fiduciary duty by the directors. If there were such breaches, then it is very much in the public interest, as well as in the interest of the 29% shareholders, that something be done, if at all possible.

There has been an Australian Securities Commission enquiry into the matter, and no action was taken. That to some extent counts against the likelihood that there were breaches of duty and/or that something can be done; but the enquiry was before liquidation, and it may be that the Commission believed that the money was still recoverable. The Commission made no report and gave no reasons for its action, and in the circumstances the enquiry is by no means conclusive against there having been breaches of duty.

The lapse of time since the loan and since the winding up order means that actions other than for fraud, or to recover property which can be treated as trust property, would probably be statute-barred or defeated by laches; but again this is not conclusive against the possibility that there may still be a remedy.

It seems that the chances of substantial recovery are accordingly not very high; but if they can be pursued without risk of loss to the creditors or the shareholders, then prima facie this should be done. The proposed agreement would give only 25% of the net return of any proceedings to the company; and in the general run of cases, one might think this far too low. However, in this particular case, in view of the modest chances of recovery, and substantial costs of investigation, I do not believe a 25% return to the company is obviously unreasonable. The liquidator has said that he negotiated, and that he judges the deal reasonable; and I do not believe I should reject this evidence. Unless some such agreement can be made with an outside party, there is no chance of further investigation or recovery for the benefit of creditors and shareholders.

Then there is the opposition of creditors. In the absence of evidence from them, I am not satisfied either that there is any significant chance that a better deal could be done, or that their opposition is based to any major extent on a judgment by them that a better deal could be done. I believe that the substantial basis of their opposition is a concern that an investigation would put them to trouble and expense to no good purpose; and in the case of R
Securities, that any investigation or legal proceedings could be directed at a person who is also a director of R Securities. In my opinion, the latter concern should not be given weight. I do not accept the submission for the liquidator that the former concern is irrelevant: it is the outside creditors who would be the first, and the most likely, to benefit from any recovery; and their wishes and interests would normally be given significantly greater weight than the wishes and interests of shareholders. If it is the judgment of creditors that the possibility of any benefit to them from an investigation would be outweighed by trouble and expense to which they are put, then I think this should be given weight. I accept that this is particularly so when the trouble and expense may be partly for the benefit of an outside party who hopes to make a substantial profit.

But the law does make provision to some extent for the payment of the expenses of compliance with the requirements of an investigation; and in all the circumstances, I do not think these wishes of the creditors outweigh the interests of the 29% of shareholders who may possibly benefit from the investigation and proceedings, or the judgment of the liquidator. And, as noted earlier, in general terms I think it is in the public interest that possible breaches of duty involving losses of this magnitude be investigated.

The need for Court approval stems essentially from the length of time for which the agreement may be in place; and that requires a judgment that the liquidator is justified in delaying the finalisation of the liquidation to whatever extent may be required by the agreement. Having regard to the considerations I have discussed, I think it is appropriate for the Court to give the approval sought.

As regards costs, it seems clear that the creditors who opposed the Notice of
Motion will have to bear their own costs. The liquidator had to apply to the
Court in any event, so it would appear inappropriate to order the creditors to pay all of the liquidator's costs. The question on which I may need to hear submissions is whether the creditors should be ordered to pay some part, and if so what part, of the liquidator's costs.
 * * * 
