

Franklin House Ltd versus Ani Corp Ltd and Ors Matter No 14270/92 [1998] NSWSC (19 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 June 1998 
FRANKLIN HOUSE LTD versus ANI CORP LTD & ORS /92 May 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
The plaintiff, Franklin House Limited, was formerly known as BT Insurance
Limited (BTI). On 3 February 1989, under that name, it entered into an agreement with the first defendant, ANI Corporation Limited (ANI), to purchase roughly 2.8 million shares which ANI held in Spedley Holdings Limited . The purchase price was $14 million, subject to an adjustment to be made according to the net tangible assets of SHL disclosed by its audited consolidated accounts to be provided for the period ending 31 October 1988.
Greater Pacific Investments Pty Limited (GPI) also held shares in SHL and on the same day, 3 February 1989, it executed a deed of warranty in which it made certain representations to the plaintiff about the financial stability of SHL.
Among other things it warranted that, except as previously disclosed to the plaintiff, the assets and liabilities of SHL were those set out in the October accounts.

At that time the second defendant, Mr John Maher, and the third defendant, Mr
Neil Jones, were directors both of ANI and SHL. Mr Maher signed the purchase agreement on behalf of ANI. Mr Brian Yuill, who is not a party to these proceedings, was a director of the plaintiff (BTI), GPI and SHL. Counsel for the plaintiff outlined to me the course of events which led to the share purchase agreement. It is fairly complex but, for the purpose of this judgment, it need not be recounted. It is sufficient to say that SHL had significant liabilities at the time, including substantial loans made by ANI to its principal trading subsidiary, Spedley Securities Limited (SSL). Part of a plan for reconstruction of the Spedley group of companies was the disposal by ANI of its shareholding in SHL.

The SHL accounts were produced on 16 March 1989. The adjusted purchase price for the shares, calculated according to the formula set out in the purchase agreement, was (in round figures) $14.5 million. On 6 April 1989 the plaintiff provided bills of exchange to ANI in that amount, due for payment on 10 April.
However, when presented on that day they were dishonoured. By a letter to the plaintiff of 20 April 1989, ANI's solicitors demanded payment of the amounts due.

It is the plaintiff's case that the accounts misrepresented the financial position of SHL which, in fact, was in dire straits. The company went into liquidation on 11 April 1989. In correspondence in April and May of that year between the then solicitors for the plaintiff and the solicitors for ANI, the plaintiff asserted that the net tangible assets of SHL were not as disclosed by the accounts and, for that reason among others, claimed to be entitled to rescission of the purchase agreement.

On 12 July 1989 ANI issued a summons against the plaintiff in the Commercial
Division of this court for recovery of the purchase price of the shares plus interest. On 16 August the plaintiff filed a defence and cross claim which, among other things, asserted the right to rescind the purchase agreement.
Shortly stated, the plaintiff alleged: 
It had been induced to enter into the purchase agreement by Mr Yuill (then a director both of the plaintiff and of SHL) in breach of his fiduciary duty to the plaintiff.

Yuill knew that the financial position of SHL was such that its shares were virtually worthless, and that the purchase would be of no benefit to the plaintiff.

ANI had notice that Yuill induced the plaintiff to enter into the agreement in breach of his fiduciary duty and acted in concert with Yuill to further its own interests and those of SHL, contrary to the interests of the plaintiff.

Through Mr Maher and Mr Jones (and another named director) ANI knew, or had reason to believe, that the financial position of SHL was insecure and that its shares might not be of the value suggested by the accounts.

The proceedings were settled in that same month. On 21 August 1989 the parties entered into a deed of release whereby it was agreed as follows: 
The plaintiff would pay to ANI forthwith the sum of $4,200,000.

Terms of settlement would be filed providing that, by consent and without admissions, the summons and cross claim should be dismissed.

Each party should pay its own costs of the proceedings.

The parties released each other for ever in relation to all rights, claims, duties and obligations arising from the summons, the defence, the cross claim, the dishonoured bills of exchange and the purchase agreement.

On 25 August the court made the consent orders foreshadowed in the deed.

The Statement of Claim 
In the present proceedings, the subject of applications before me, the plaintiff sues ANI, Mr Maher and Mr Jones in various causes of action arising from the purchase agreement and the settlement of the 1989 proceedings. The auditors who prepared the accounts are also joined but, as they did not pursue any application before me, nothing more need be said about them. The proceedings have had a long history which it is also unnecessary to recount.

Before me are applications by ANI, Mr Maher and Mr Jones that the claims against them should be struck out or summarily dismissed. Argument was directed to the statement of claim in a substantially amended form. In argument all three defendants relied upon the deed of release referred to earlier. For Mr Maher and Mr Jones it was submitted that the release was a complete answer to actions against them for deceit, on the basis that they were alleged to be joint tortfeasors with ANI in that deceit, and I was referred to authority on that point. Since the hearing that matter has been the subject of a decision of the High Court in Thompson versus Australian Capital
Television Pty Limited & Ors <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 574], dealing with an Australian Capital Territory provision identical to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/), and it is now clear that that submission cannot be sustained.

For ANI, apart from the release, it was submitted that the consent orders disposing of the 1989 proceedings meant that any claim in respect of the purchase agreement was res judicata, or that the plaintiff was estopped from pursuing the present claims in accordance with the principles in Port of
Melbourne Authority versus Anshun Pty Limited <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 589.] However, after the hearing and in the light of subsequent developments, it was agreed between the plaintiff and ANI that I should not decide any question arising from the deed of release or the disposition of the proceedings. It was also agreed that, as between those two parties, I should not decide the fate of part of the statement of claim, and I shall refer to that matter shortly.

The distinction between the summary dismissal of a claim (Pt 13 r 5) and the striking out of a pleading (Pt 15 r 26) was explained by Cross J in Brimson v
Rocla Concrete Pipes Limited [[1982] 2 NSWLR 937] at 941-4.
The principles governing an application for summary dismissal were summarised by Rolfe J in Ampolex Limited versus Perpetual Trustee Company (Canberra) Limited & Ors (Rolfe J, unreported, 23 May 1996) at pp 5-8, where his Honour noted that the restricted nature of the power described by Barwick CJ in
General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways & Ors <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] at 128-9 has been reaffirmed in recent years by the High Court in Webster & Anor v
Lampard <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 598], in the joint judgment at pp 602-3. For such an application to succeed in respect of the proceedings as a whole, or any claim for relief in them, it must be apparent that the plaintiff's case could not succeed. This must be established upon the assumption that every allegation in the statement of claim is true: Penthouse Publications Limited & Ors versus McWilliam &
Ors (C of A, unreported, 19 October 1990) per Priestley JA at p 12.

The Application by ANI 
It is convenient to deal separately with claims arising from the purchase agreement, on the one hand, and from the settlement of the 1989 proceedings, on the other. In the statement of claim, the causes of action pleaded against
ANI arising from the purchase agreement are as follows: breach of contract (paras 9 and 13); deceit (paras 10, 10A, 11, 12 and 13: see also paras 12AA and 12AB relating to Maher and paras 12AC and 12AD relating to Jones); misleading or deceptive conduct contrary to <case> of the Trade Practices
Act (paras 10, 14, 15, 16 and 18); in relation to the deed of warranty executed by GPI, involvement in misleading or deceptive conduct by GPI contrary to <case> of the Trade
Practices Act (paras 7, 8, 14, 15, 16, 17(a) and 18).

Arising from the settlement, the causes of action are: deceit (paras 10B, 11A, 12C, 13: see also para 12AB relating to Maher and para 12AD relating to Jones); misleading or deceptive conduct contrary to <case> of the Trade Practices
Act (paras 26 to 32).

The damage alleged from the various claims (paras 13, 18 and 32) is the plaintiff's assumption of an obligation to pay the price for the shares in accordance with the purchase agreement, and its satisfaction of that obligation by the payment of $4.2 million in accordance with the settlement.

The plaintiff and ANI later agreed that I should not rule upon arguments addressed to the claim for deceit arising from the settlement, and I shall say no more about that claim. However, it will be necessary to refer to one of those paragraphs in the statement of claim in considering the related claim under the Trade Practices Act.

Shortly put, the claim in contract is that, by the purchase agreement, ANI impliedly warranted to the plaintiff that the accounts of SHL, when prepared, would be accurate. The claims for deceit and misleading or deceptive conduct arising from the purchase agreement are founded upon implied representations by ANI that, as far as it was aware, those accounts would accurately record the net tangible assets of SHL, and that it knew of no fact or matter which would render them materially inaccurate. The claim of complicity in misleading and deceptive conduct by GPI is founded upon the express representations by
GPI in the deed of warranty referred to earlier, in particular, those relating to the accounts. The claim under the Trade Practices Act arising from the settlement is also based upon implied representations by ANI as to the accuracy of the accounts, together with a further implied representation that it believed in the validity of its claim against the plaintiff in the 1989 proceedings.

Also shortly put, the implication of that warranty and those representations is said to arise from the fact that the purchase agreement provided for the adjustment of the purchase price according to the financial position of SHL disclosed in those accounts, and from ANI's pursuit of its rights under the agreement up to, and including, the proceedings for recovery of the purchase price. It is alleged that, prior to entering into the purchase agreement, ANI knew, through Mr Maher and Mr Jones among others, that certain liabilities of
SHL would not be disclosed in the accounts so that they would be materially inaccurate. I shall examine these matters in more detail shortly.

Contract: As observed, the claim in contract (para 9) is that it was an implied term of the purchase agreement that the accounts, when prepared, would be accurate, that implication being derived from the terms of the agreement itself and, in particular, the formula for calculation of the adjusted purchase price. However, clause 6 of the agreement sets out certain representations and warranties by ANI as the vendor to the plaintiff as the purchaser, none of which bears on the accuracy of the accounts, and concludes: "The Purchaser acknowledges that in entering into this Agreement it has not relied on any representations or warranties from the Vendor or any of its officers or agents." 
For ANI it was argued that the implied term contended for could not stand with the concluding words of clause 6. Clearly, no term could be implied in a contract which is inconsistent with its expressed terms: Codelfa
Constructions Pty Limited versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] at 347, citing the statements of principle of the majority of the Privy Council in BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Limited versus Shire of
Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266. It might be argued that the concluding words of clause 6 are directed to matters which might have induced the plaintiff to enter into the purchase agreement, and are not necessarily inconsistent with an implied warranty that the material upon which the purchase price was to be adjusted would in fact be reliable.

However that may be, the primary submission of counsel for ANI was that there is no basis on which it could be said that the implication of such a term was necessary to give business efficacy to the contract: BP Refinery (supra). This submission is sound and, indeed, counsel for the plaintiff put nothing in answer to it in his submissions in reply. Paragraph 9 should be struck out.

Purchase Agreement - Deceit and Trade Practices Act: The claims for deceit and under <case> of the Trade Practices Act in respect of the purchase agreement are also founded upon implied representations as to the accuracy of the accounts said to arise from the purchase agreement itself, and from ANI's knowledge that the accounts, when produced, would be, or were likely to be, materially inaccurate.

Paragraph 10 of the statement of claim alleges a representation that the accounts, when prepared, would be accurate, relying on the terms of the purchase agreement. It is that representation, together with the implied warranty alleged in paragraph 9, and the express representations in the GPI deed of warranty which are said to constitute the misleading or deceptive conduct for the purposes of the Trade Practices Act claim (paragraph 16).

Paragraph 10A alleges implied representations that: the accounts would accurately record, as far as ANI was aware, the net tangible assets of SHL, and 
ANI knew of no fact or matter which would render those accounts materially inaccurate, and the accounts, when prepared, would to ANI's knowledge accurately record the assets and liabilities of SHL so as to enable its net tangible assets to be ascertained.
 (I have paraphrased those subparagraphs somewhat. I have also omitted reference to the Spedley Group and SSL in those subparagraphs and elsewhere in the statement of claim because, for present purposes, nothing turns upon their inclusion.) 
These representations are said to be implied from the terms of the purchase agreement, and from the fact that ANI knew that the accounts of SSL had been audited by 31 January 1989 and that any error in those accounts would be reflected in the accounts upon which the purchase price for the shares was to be adjusted.

Paragraph 12 alleges that, at the time the purchase agreement was entered into, ANI knew through Mr Maher and Mr Jones that SSL's accounts did not record significant liabilities of that company and were misleading in other respects as to its financial position: and that it was likely that those inaccuracies would be reflected in the SHL accounts so as to render them materially inaccurate. (See also paragraphs 12AA and 12AC, to which I shall refer later). The alleged falsity of the representations in the GPI deed of warranty, the implied warranty in paragraph 9, and the implied representations in paragraphs 10 and 10A, together with ANI's knowlege of that falsity or its reckless indifference to it, are the foundation of the action in deceit.

The question whether such representations might be implied raises different considerations from those governing the implication of a term in the purchase agreement itself. Counsel for the plaintiff relied upon authority to the effect that a party who enters into an ordinary business transaction, without revealing matters which would be abnormal in such a transaction, impliedly represents that there is no such matter. In Bodger versus Nicholls [(1873) 25 LT ]
the defendant sold a cow at a public market which, it was alleged, he knew to be suffering from foot and mouth disease. Blackburn J said (at p 445): "I entertain no doubt, but it is not necessary to decide the point, that the defendant, by taking the cow to a public market to be sold, though he does not warrant her to be sound, yet thereby furnishes evidence of a representation that, so far as his knowledge goes, the animal is not suffering from an infectious disease. To say otherwise would be to run counter to the common sense of mankind. The case might be different where the sale takes place privately." 
In the earlier case of Lee versus Jones (1864) 144 ER 194, on the question whether a creditor had induced the defendant to give a guarantee by a fraudulent misrepresentation, Blackburn J said (at p 203): "But I think, both on authority and on principle, that, when the creditor describes to the proposed sureties the transaction proposed to be guaranteed (as in general a creditor does), that description amounts to a representation, or at least is evidence of a representation, that there is nothing in the transaction that might not naturally be expected to take place between the parties to a transaction such as that described. And, if a representation to this effect is made to the intended surety by one who knows that there is something not naturally to be expected to take place between the parties to the transaction, and that this is unknown to the person to whom he makes the representation, and that, if it were known to him, he would not enter into the contract of suretyship, I think it is evidence of fraudulent representation on his part." 
Blackburn J added (at p 204): "I think that it must in every case depend upon the nature of the transaction, whether the fact not disclosed is such that it is impliedly represented not to exist ...

It is not essential, to constitute fraud, that there should be any misleading by express words; it is sufficient if it appears that the plaintiffs knowingly assisted in inducing the defendant to enter into the contract, by leading him to believe that which the plaintiffs knew to be false, the plaintiffs knowing that, if he had not been thus misled, he would not have entered into the contract." 
In Cavendish Bentinck versus Fenn [(1887) 12 App Cas 652] at 671, Lord
MacNaghten observed that a company director who purchased a property for his company without disclosing that he, himself, had an interest in it would be guilty of fraud, saying: "I think it would have been a fraud to have concealed his interest and so to have represented, in fact, that he was not interested in the property ..." 
Counsel for the plaintiff argued that the disclaimer in clause 6 of the purchase agreement, referred to above, does not prevent the implication of the representations alleged, given their fraudulent nature.

In Pearson & Son Ltd versus Lord Mayor of Dublin [[1907] AC 351], the Dublin
Corporation had engaged the appellants to perform certain sewage outfall works and had provided plans, drawings and specifications for that purpose. Clauses of the contract provided that the appellants were not to rely on any representation made in the plans or elsewhere, but must ascertain for themselves all matters relevant to the performance of the work. There was evidence that the appellants were induced to enter into the contract by misrepresentations by corporation engineers (apparently in the plans, etc) which were said to be fraudulent. As a result, the work was more extensive and costly than they had bargained for. The House of Lords held that the clauses in the contract referred to were no answer to fraudulent misrepresentations.
Lord Loreburn LC said, at pp 353-4: 
Now it seems clear that no-one can escape liability for his own fraudulent statements by inserting in a contract a clause that the other party shall not rely upon them. I will not say that a man himself innocent may not under any circumstances, however peculiar, guard himself by apt and express clauses from liability for the fraud of his own agents. It suffices to say that in my opinion the clauses before us do not admit of such a construction. They contemplate honesty on both sides and protect only against honest mistakes." 
The Earl of Halsbury said (at p 356) that "no subtilty of language, no craft or machinery in the form of contract" could prevent the consideration of an allegation of fraud. Lord Ashbourne observed (at p 360) that clauses such as those under consideration "might in some cases be part of a fraud, and might advance and disguise a fraud ..." His Lordship considered them appropriate only "to errors, inaccuracies and mistakes ..." Lord James of Hereford held (at p 362) that the appellants were entitled to assume that they were dealing with "honest and honourable men" and continued: "The protecting clause might be inserted fraudulently, with the hope and purpose that, notwithstanding its terms, no test would take place. When the fraud succeeds, surely those who designed the fraudulent protection cannot take advantage of it. Such a clause would be a good protection against any mistake or miscalculation, but fraud vitiates every contract and every clause in it." 
Counsel for ANI submitted that each of these cases could be distinguished from the case at hand. What Blackburn J said in Bodger versus Nicholls was strictly obiter and was confined to the sale of an animal at a public market, his
Lordship acknowledging that no such representation might be implied in a private sale. Further, Blackburn J's statement of principle received a lukewarm reception in the speech of Earl Cairns LC in Ward versus Hobbs [(1878) 4
App Cas 13](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281878%29%204%20AC%2013 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at p 22, the Lord Chancellor expressing his desire to hold himself "unpledged if such a case had to be considered". The observations of Blackburn
J in Lee versus Jones should be read in the light of the special relationship between creditor and guarantor, and those of Lord MacNaghten in Cavendish
Bentinck versus Fenn in the light of the fiduciary duty of a director to his company. Pearson & Son Ltd versus Lord Mayor of Dublin involved express representations made prior to entry into the contract, not representations said to be implied from the contract itself.

More important is the decision in Ward versus Hobbs itself, another case of diseased livestock. The appellant had bought a number of pigs at auction, but on this occasion there were conditions of sale which included the following clauses: "4. The lots, with all faults and errors of description (if any), to be paid for and removed at the buyer's expense immediately after the sale.
 ...
No warranty will be given by the auctioneer with any lot, and, as all lots are open for inspection previous to the commencement of the sale, no compensation shall be made in respect of any fault, or error of description, of any lot in the catalogue." 
The pigs proved to be diseased but their Lordships held that no action would lie based on an implied representation by the respondent that they were sound.
Earl Cairns LC said (at pp 20-21): "Now, my Lords, there can, I apprehend, be no doubt of this proposition, that if a man expressly states upon a sale, that he gives no warranty, and that the goods sold must be taken with all their faults, but if he goes on expressly to say, in addition to that, that so far as he knows, or believes, or has reason to believe, the goods are free from any particular fault, and that the animals (if it be animals that are sold) are free from any disease ... and if it can afterwards be proved that to his knowledge the animals were tainted with the disease to which he referred, then there can be no doubt that, notwithstanding the negation of warranty, an action would lie for deceit for the false representation. ...

Now, my Lords, any representation in words there clearly was not in this case.
The statement, and the only statement, actually made was the one contained in the two conditions of sale which I have read." 
The Lord Chancellor went on (at p 22): "Your Lordships have here to consider an actual, clear, unqualified statement, in writing, on the one hand, and no statement whatever, even in mere words upon the other hand, but an attempt to raise a conclusion as to an implied statement from conduct. The words of the statement on the one side are perfectly clear; they are that the vendor will not warrant the goods - that they are open to inspection, that the purchaser might inspect them, and that the purchaser must take them with all their faults. Now, my Lords, I hold that in order to countervail or qualify that, and to cut it down, there must be something as clear in statement in an opposite direction." 
Lord O'Hagan said (at p 26): "The argument for the Appellant rests upon implication and inference arising from conduct; and, no doubt, conduct may amount to representation as clearly as any form of words. But the express declaration made in the conditions of sale, in my opinion, forbade the implication and repelled the inference." 
Lord Selborne (at p 29) agreed, although "with some reluctance", and continued: "The argument which, for some time, most weighed with me was, that for a man to sell to another, without disclosing the fact, an article which he knows to be positively noxious, and which the other man does not know to be so (even though he expressly negatives warranty, and says that the purchaser must take his bargain with all faults) is an actionable wrong. I confess I should not be sorry if the law were so; but I know of no authority for the proposition that such is the law ..." 
Their Lordships also held that no implied representation as to the health of the pigs could arise from the fact that an Act of Parliament forbade sending an animal with an infectious or contagious disease to a public place: Lord
Cairns LC at pp 21-2, Lord O'Hagan at pp 27-8, Lord Selborne at p 29. It is in this context that Ward versus Hobbs was relied upon by Wilcox J in Rhone-Poulenc v UIM Chemical Services [(1986) 10 FCR 567] at 589-90, a decision which was affirmed on appeal: <case>; [(1993) 115 ALR 411] at 582-3, von Doussa J recognised Ward versus Hobbs as the authority governing "an arm's length transaction", but added: "But even in that type of case there may be circumstances in which an action for deceit will lie against a party even though no statement is made and there is no special relationship between the parties which would create a duty to disclose information. The fact that a party is prepared to, and does, enter into the transaction in question amounts to an implied representation that that party has a present intention to carry out the promises made." 
Those observations do not assist the plaintiff in the present case. It is not an implied representation that ANI would carry out its part of the agreement which is suggested here and, in any event, the representations which are alleged are inconsistent with the disclaimer at the end of clause 6 of the agreement.

Accordingly, Ward versus Hobbs has stood as authority for over one hundred years and has been accepted as such by courts of this country in recent times. The decision appears to me to be determinative of this matter. Clearly, this was an arm's length transaction. The plaintiff does not allege any representation prior to, or separate from, the purchase agreement. Whatever might have been
ANI's knowledge or belief as to the accuracy of the accounts, the asserted representations are said to arise from the terms of the agreement itself.
However, the agreement could not support any such implication, particularly in the light of the disclaimer. Paragraphs 10 and 10A should be struck out.

The implied representations in paragraphs 10 and 10A (and the implied warranty in paragraph 9) are basal to the claims in deceit and under the Trade
Practices Act arising from the purchase agreement. As those paragraphs have been struck out, it follows that those claims as pleaded must also be struck out.

I should add that the Trade Practices Act claim is not founded upon the proposition that, in the circumstances, ANI ought to have disclosed its knowledge or belief about the accounts, so that its silence amounted to misleading or deceptive conduct: Rhone-Poulenc (supra) [12 FCR 477], per Bowen CJ at 490,
Lockhart J at 504 and Jackson J at 508; Henjo Investments Pty Limited v
Collins Marrickville Pty Limited <case>; [(1988) 79 ALR 83], per Lockhart J at 94-5; Demagogue Pty Limited versus Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31], per Black
CJ at 32, and Gummow J at 40-1. Other arguments were addressed to the pleading of the claim for deceit but, as it does not appear to me that the defect in that claim could be cured by amendment, I find it unnecessary to consider those matters.

GPI Deed of Warranty - s75B Trade Practices Act: Paragraph 7 of the statement of claim sets out the effect for present purposes of the deed of warranty: that GPI warranted to the plaintiff that the accounts of SHL when produced would disclose accurately that company's financial position.
Paragraph 8 alleges that ANI procured GPI to provide the warranties in the deed so as to induce Franklin House to enter into the purchase agreement. That allegation is founded upon the recitals to the deed itself. Those recitals are as follows: "(A) The ANI Corporation Ltd ("ANI") is negotiating with BT Insurance for the sale by ANI to BT Insurance of 2,812,500 ordinary shares of $1 each ("the
Shares") in Spedly Holdings Ltd ("the Company").

GPI is a shareholder in the Company and has agreed to provide certain warranties to BT Insurance in order to induce BT Insurance to purchase the shares from ANI." 
Counsel for ANI submitted that the procurement alleged could not be inferred from those recitals, the effect of which is to the contrary. That argument appears to me to be sound. However, counsel for the plaintiff argued that the inference was available from the fact that there was no corporate benefit to
GPI in giving the warranties, the only benefit being to ANI to enable it to sell its shares. As counsel for ANI rightly pointed out, this is an important new fact not alleged in the pleadings.

Paragraph 8 as it stands should be struck out and, unless leave is granted to amend it, so should the <case> claim based upon it. I shall turn to the question of leave to amend in due course.

Settlement - Trade Practices Act Claim: I have referred earlier to the proceedings in 1989 taken by ANI against the plaintiff for recovery of the purchase price of the shares, the defence and cross claim filed in those proceedings by the plaintiff, and the subsequent settlement and deed of release. This claim under the Trade Practices Act alleges that the plaintiff was induced to settle those proceedings by misleading or deceptive conduct on the part of ANI.

At this stage it is necessary to refer to paragraph 10B of the statement of claim (although I have been asked not to rule upon it). Briefly summarised, that paragraph alleges that, by presenting for payment the bills of exchange drawn by the plaintiff, by demanding payment when those bills were dishonoured, and by instituting the 1989 proceedings, ANI impliedly represented that, to its knowledge, the accounts were accurate. It is also alleged that, for the same reasons, ANI impliedly represented that it believed it had a valid claim against the plaintiff for the adjusted purchase price, maintaining that representation at least until the date of execution of the deed of release.

The misleading and deceptive conduct is said to arise in this way: 
ANI impliedly asserted to the plaintiff that the matters raised by the plaintiff in defence of the 1989 proceedings were denied; 
ANI knew that, in its defence, the plaintiff was proceeding upon the assumption that the GPI warranties in paragraph 8, the implied warranty in paragraph 9 and the implied representation in paragraph 10 were not given or made fraudulently; at relevant times ANI knew that those warranties and that representation, together with the implied representations in paragraphs 10A and 10B, were fraudulently given or made; accordingly, prior to the execution of the deed of release, ANI had a duty to reveal to the plaintiff that it knew those various warranties and representations to be untrue at the time they were given or made.

In respect of this claim I acknowledge receipt of further written submissions on behalf of ANI of 30 September 1997, on behalf of the plaintiff of 2 October , and again on behalf of ANI of 8 April 1998.

To the extent that this claim is founded upon the implied warranty in paragraph 9 and the implied representations in paragraphs 10 and 10A, it cannot stand and, as it is currently pleaded, it must be struck out. However, against the possibility of leave to amend, it is necessary to consider the other submissions about it.

Counsel for ANI submitted that the conduct alleged could not be said to have arisen "in trade or commerce" within the meaning of <case> (1) of the Trade
Practices Act. Reliance was placed on Little versus Law Institute of Victoria <case>; [[1990] VR 247] in which it was held that a statement made to a judge in the course of legal proceedings was not made in "trade or commerce" for the purpose of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/fta1985117/) (Vic.).

Kaye and Beach JJ said at p 273: "In our opinion, statements made during the course of litigation cannot be categorised as statements made in trade or commerce nor can they be categorised as representations.

As BowenC.J. said in Kuringai Co-operative Building Society (No.12) Ltd.
 <case>; [(1978) 22 A.L.R. 621], at pp.
-5; <case>; [36 F.L.R. 134], at p.139: `The terms `trade' and `commerce' are ordinary terms which describe all the mutual communings, the negotiations verbal and by correspondence, the bargain, the transport and delivery which comprise commercial arrangements... The word `trade' is used with its accepted English meaning: traffic by way of sale of (sic) exchange or commercial dealing.

A statement made to a court during the course of litigation is not a statement made in connection with or as part of a commercial arrangement." (See also the judgment of Ormiston J at p292.) 
Reference was also made to the decision of Parker J of the Supreme Court of
Western Australia in W J Green & Co (1984) Pty. Ltd.v Wilden Pty. Ltd.
(unreported, 24 April 1997) in which his Honour held that a statement made in the course of a court sponsored mediation was not made in "trade or commerce" for the purposes of the Trade Practices Act. His Honour had determined that a claim under that Act did not lie for other reasons, but continued (at p32): "It is necessary that the conduct alleged occurred `in trade or commerce'. It is clear that the words `trade or commerce' are to be given a wide meaning:
Kuringai Co-operative Building Society (No.12) Ltd. <case>; [(1978) 22 A.L.R. 621] at 648-9 per Deane J; Concrete Constructions Pty Ltd v
Nelson <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 594.] It is the case, however, that the conduct complained of must occur in trade or commerce. It has been decided that the phrase `in trade or commerce' means the conduct itself must be trading or commercial in character:
Concrete Constructions Pty Ltd versus Nelson. Conduct that is merely incidental to trade or commerce is not in trade or commerce. Here the evidence suggests that the defendant companies as well as the plaintiff companies, normally engage in trade or commerce in one form or another, however, I am unable to conclude that conduct which occurred in the course of this mediation conference is conduct in trade or commerce. This mediation was conducted pursuant to an Order and was part of the court process. The mediation was a step taken under the auspices of the Court in resolution of the legal dispute between parties. In those circumstances the parties to the litigation should not properly be seen to be acting in trade or commerce in the course of the mediation for the purposes of the TPA." 
The argument was that those statements of principle are decisive of the present claim, which relates not to the negotiation and execution of the purchase agreement but to legal proceedings arising from it. On the other hand, counsel for the plaintiff submitted that those cases dealt only with statements made in the course of litigation, whereas the present claim embraces the conduct of ANI, including correspondence between solicitors, before the proceedings were instituted. Whether the claim as pleaded does embrace that conduct is debatable (and is the subject of ANI's latest written submission), but I shall proceed upon the assumption that it does. Certainly, it is a matter which could be cured by amendment if leave were granted.

Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the letter of demand from the solicitors for ANI to the plaintiff of 20 April 1989 conveyed a representation that ANI believed it was entitled to the adjusted purchase price. Particular reliance was placed on a letter from those solicitors of 19th May 1989 which conveyed that, if the accounts were inaccurate, it was the result of errors by the auditors for which ANI was not responsible, thereby implying that ANI had not been aware of any inaccuracy. That letter was described as part of a chain of events, including the conduct of the 1989 proceedings, by which the false representation conveyed by the letter of demand that ANI believed it had a valid claim was perpetuated. At the very least, it was submitted, ANI's conduct prior to the institution of the proceedings was in trade or commerce in the relevant sense. However, as I understand it, it was also contended that the conduct of the proceedings themselves, viewed against that background, was also in trade and commerce.

Of course, I express no concluded view about these competing submissions. It is sufficient to say that I consider the plaintiff's position to be arguable.
Accordingly, I would not strike out the claim on this basis.

It will be seen that, unlike the Trade Practices Act claim in respect of the purchase agreement, this claim does allege that ANI was under a duty to reveal its knowledge or belief about the state of the accounts, its failure to do so amounting to misleading or deceptive conduct. The statements of principle in
Rhone-Poulenc, and the other cases referred to above, recognise that failure to reveal a relevant matter might amount to such conduct, even though the circumstances would not create a duty of disclosure at common law.
Nevertheless, argued counsel for ANI, to suggest that a party to litigation is under an obligation to assist the other party by providing it with information which could lead to that other party's success is a surprising, if not alarming, proposition. When confined to the conduct of the parties after the institution of the litigation, that submission would appear to have considerable force, but ultimately the question is one of fact in the particular case. The argument has less force in this case if, as I have been prepared to assume, the claim embraces the conduct of ANI before the institution of the 1989 proceedings. Particularly in the light of the letter from ANI's solicitors of 19 May 1989, referred to above, I consider it arguable that the circumstances gave rise to a "reasonable expectation" that
ANI would reveal its understanding of the state of the accounts: Demagogue , per Gummow J at 41. I would not strike out the claim on this basis either.

Finally, counsel for ANI relied upon the plaintiff's defence and cross claim in the 1989 proceedings, the effect of which is set out earlier in this judgment. How, he asked, could the plaintiff claim to have been in ignorance of ANI's knowledge or belief that the accounts were inaccurate, when that was the very knowledge or belief alleged by the plaintiff in those pleadings? On the face of it, this argument also has considerable force. However, this is also a question of fact to be determined in the light of the whole of the evidence, particularly the evidence of the plaintiff's state of awareness at relevant times. I do not consider it to be a matter which would justify striking out the claim.

The Application by Mr Maher 
The only claim against Mr Maher is in deceit arising both from the purchase agreement and the settlement (paras 12AA, 12AB, 12B and 13 of the statement of claim). It is alleged that Mr Maher negotiated the purchase agreement with Mr
Yuill on behalf of the plaintiff, and it will be remembered that it was he who signed the agreement on behalf of ANI. He is alleged to have permitted ANI to demand payment of the adjusted purchase price without revealing to the plaintiff the falsity of that figure. He is said to have been aware at material times that the accounts were, or were likely to be, inaccurate. He is alleged to have "approved and adopted" the implied representations by ANI in paras 10 and 10A of the statement of claim (relating to the purchase agreement), and para 10B (relating to the settlement). Accordingly, it is claimed that he was a party to the deceit of ANI and himself made the representations alleged in those three paragraphs: Bradford Third Equitable
Benefit Building Society versus Borders [[1941] 2 All E R 205], per
Viscount Maugham at p 211.

Like the claim for deceit against ANI, the implied representations in paras 10 and 10A are basal to this claim. For the same reasons, the claim cannot stand as it is pleaded. Here, also, other arguments were addressed to the pleading of the claim but, again, I do not consider it necessary to determine those matters. I express no view about whether the plaintiff could fashion a claim against Mr Maher arising only from the settlement, which would be substantially different from that which is currently pleaded. The viability of such a claim would need to be examined if leave were granted to plead it.

The Application by Mr Jones 
The claims pleaded against Mr Jones are: deceit arising from the purchase agreement and the settlement (paras 12AC,
AD, 12B and 13 of the statement of claim); aiding and abetting the contravention of <case> of the Trade Practices Act by GPI (paras 7, 12AC, 14, 15, 16, 17(b) and 18).

The claim in deceit is relevantly similar to that against Mr Maher. Mr Jones is alleged to have accepted, on behalf of ANI, the terms of the plaintiff's purchase of the shares by signing a letter written by Mr Yuill shortly before the purchase agreement was executed. He is said to have authorised the negotiation and execution of the agreement, and the demand for payment pursuant to it, with the requisite knowledge or belief (as the case may be) about the accuracy of the accounts. He also is said to have approved and adopted the implied representations by ANI in paras 10, 10A and 10B, so as to become a party to ANI's deceit and to have made those representations himself.

This claim also cannot stand as it is pleaded, given its reliance upon paras and 10A. Again, I find it unnecessary to consider other arguments addressed to the pleading and I express no view about the possibility of a claim arising only from the settlement.

The claim under the Trade Practices Act alleges Mr Jones' complicity in the misleading or deceptive conduct of GPI by its execution of the deed of warranty previously referred to. The only submission pressed by counsel for Mr
Jones is that the claim is out of time, not having been brought within three years after the date on which the cause of action accrued: <case> of the Act.
The question of when the cause of action accrued turns on when it was the plaintiff is alleged to have suffered loss or damage as a result of the proscribed conduct: <case>.

The original statement of claim, containing a claim to the effect of that now under consideration, was filed on 20 August 1992. Counsel for Mr Jones submitted that the cause of action accrued on 3 February 1989, when the purchase agreement was entered into. This was his preferred position, although he was prepared to deal with the possibility that it accrued: on 20 April, when the demand for payment under the agreement was made; on 12 July, when ANI instituted proceedings for recovery; or on 16 August, when the plaintiff filed its defence and cross claim in those proceedings.

On any of those bases the claim is out of time.

Counsel for the plaintiff argued that the cause of action accrued only on 21
August 1989, when the plaintiff abandoned its defence in those proceedings, entered into the deed of release, and paid the sum of $4,200,000. If this be so, the claim is within time (albeit by a hair's breadth). Reliance was placed on the decision of the High Court in Wardley Australia Limited versus Western
Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514], and the decision of Young J, applying the principles enunciated by the High Court, in Intag Microelectronics Pty Limited versus AWA
Limited [(1995) 18 ACSR 284] at 288.

I do not propose to dwell on this issue. It is sufficient to say that, here again, the plaintiff's position is arguable. I am mindful of the admonition in the joint judgment in Wardley at p 533, that it is undesirable that limitation questions of this kind should be decided in interlocutory proceedings, "except in the clearest of cases". Whilst acknowledging the force of the arguments mounted by counsel for Mr Jones, this is not a case of that clarity. The claim should not be struck out on this basis.

Conclusion 
It will be seen then that, of the various claims in the amended statement of claim which I have been asked to consider, the only one to survive as it is currently pleaded is the claim under <case> of the Trade Practices Act against
Mr Jones. While I have expressed my view that it does not appear that any claim based upon implied representations arising from the purchase agreement could be resuscitated, I am prepared to entertain an application for leave to amend generally. Since I reserved judgment the plaintiff has filed yet another amended statement of claim, and the parties have agreed that its fate should be determined after I have given judgment on the present application.

I invite the parties to consider how the matter should now proceed, and I shall hear submissions on costs at the appropriate time.
 * * * 
