

Regina versus Roy Kairouz; Regina versus Rafic Kairouz [1996] NSWSC 225 (24 June )

R versus ROY KAIROUZ R versus RAFIC KAIROUZ /95 60017/96 
Monday 24 June 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
REVISED 
MEAGHER JA, SULLY J, DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY JA: On 21 August 1995 in the Parramatta District Court the present appellant Mr Rafic Kairouz was presented for trial upon an indictment containing two counts. It is necessary for present purposes to have regard to only the first of the two counts. It was in the following terms: "For that he on 22 July 1993 at Chullora in the State of New South Wales then being armed with an offensive weapon, namely a handgun, did rob Dean Mulcahy of certain property, namely, a quantity of cigarettes and certain moneys the property of William Mulcahy".

The appellant's trial proceeded, upon his plea of not guilty, before the learned District Court Judge sitting without a jury and pursuant to the provisions of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/index.html#p9) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/). In due course the learned primary Judge found the appellant guilty as charged upon the first count in the indictment and imposed a sentence of periodic detention.

The relevant facts are stated succinctly but sufficiently for present purposes in the following extract from the Remarks on Sentence of the learned primary
Judge: "About 7.55 pm on Thursday 22 July 1993 Dean Glen Mulcahy was working behind the counter of his family service station when two men entered the premises.
One of the men produced a small handgun, ordering Mulcahy to open up the store's till. He was also ordered to take a green plastic bag and fill it with cigarettes from the cigarette display.

After complying with this order Mulcahy was ordered to fill a second bag with cigarettes. As Mulcahy was filling the second bag he observed a second offender crouched down behind the counter, filling more cigarettes into another bag.

The first offender had positioned himself behind and to the right of Mulcahy, holding the gun down by his right side. The second offender, who was still crouched down on the floor was heard to say, "Don't point the fucking gun at me, it's loaded.

After achieving their aims both offenders left the store.

Following this a fingerprint expert made an examination of the scene and a fingerprint was developed on the front of a plastic tray taken from the cigarette display. This fingerprint was later identified as the prisoner's.

On 6 January 1994 Detective Khalief, in company with other police, executed a search warrant on the prisoner's premises. The prisoner was questioned about his possession of handguns but none were found at his premises.

He was then conveyed to Bankstown police station where he was interviewed and charged.

On the way to the police station the prisoner was taken to Mulcahy's service station. There he was asked if he had ever been to the service station. His response was to deny ever being there.

At his trial the prisoner made an unsworn statement, denying the offence claiming he had lied to the police out of fear when he denied being at the service station. He also claimed he now remembered being at the service station on a number of occasions to purchase chips and drinks and that he may have touched a tray of cigarettes." 
Various grounds of appeal have been notified but it is, in my view, unnecessary to deal with any of them other than Ground 5 which is to the effect that the verdict of the learned primary judge was, in all the circumstances, unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The Crown case against the appellant was a circumstantial case. Put simply, it had three elements.

First, and most importantly, a right thumb print identifiable, and identified by evidence, as that of the appellant was found on the external surface of a particular tray in which, at the relevant time, various packets of cigarettes had been stored for display and sale in the service station.

Secondly, Mr Dean Mulcahy who was the service station attendant on duty at the relevant time, gave the investigating police a broad general description of the person who actually carried out the robbery, while his co-offender stood beside Mr Mulcahy with a loaded firearm. It can be allowed at once that the identification, in its broad terms, was broadly apt to describe the then appearance of the present appellant.

Thirdly, was the fact that the appellant, when first approached by the investigating police, lied to them, and that repeatedly, by asserting, falsely, that he had never been to the service station in question.

I appreciate that it is the combined effect of those strands of circumstantial evidence with which ultimately the learned primary Judge was concerned; but in order to discuss them intelligibly it is necessary to look at them individually.

There was only the single thumb print of which I have spoken, discovered on the plastic tray in question or indeed anywhere else in the immediate vicinity of the site of the robbery. The available expert evidence was to the effect that it was not possible to date the print. There was no evidence, or at least no clear, distinct, and manifestly reliable evidence, as to whether or not the relevant one of the two robbers had or had not been wearing gloves at the time. Had the robber not been wearing gloves, I would have thought that the hand actions, and the pressure upon fingers and thumb, necessary to leave the one print, might well have been expected to have left more than one. Had the robber been wearing gloves, it strikes me as odd that all his fingers and his left thumb would have been protected, but that for some unexplained reason, the relevant part of his right thumb had been left unprotected. I do not say that there are not, in the realm of abstract theory, possibilities that can be urged in explanation of those matters, but in terms relevant to a criminal trial where the standard of proof is proof beyond reasonable doubt, those matters strike me as odd features about this one single print.

As I have said, the very broad description given by Mr Mulcahy might be thought, in its very broad and imprecise terms, to have been apt to describe the appellant. The difficulty in that regard is that the description was, through no fault of course of Mr Mulcahy's own, so broad and so imprecise that it could equally well have fitted any number of other people of Lebanese or indeed Greek or similar ethnic extraction.

As to the lies told by the appellant, it can be acknowledged at once that they were clumsy and stupid and that he persisted in them on a number of occasions.
He gave, admittedly in an unsworn statement at trial, an explanation for his having told those lies. It was to the effect that he had been scared that the police might be intending "to load him up" with something that he had not done. I think it is sufficient, for present purposes, to say that it is no longer possible to dismiss, as readily as one might once have done, the existence and the genuineness of such an apprehension on the part of an -year-old who had been woken up from his sleep, taken peremptorily from his bed, and then not to a police station or before a Magistrate but to the service station here in question, and that in a context in which the initial declarations of the arresting police were that they were hunting for firearms.

The learned primary Judge, it must be said, expressed in his Remarks on
Sentence the view that "on this aspect", - by which I take his Honour to have meant the broad explanation for his lies and for the presence of his fingerprint as given in the unsworn statement, - he, the learned Judge, "found the prisoner to be lacking in credit". I accept that his Honour had, as this
Court has not had, the opportunity of seeing and hearing the appellant as he, the appellant, made his unsworn statement; and I accept that proper weight is to be given in the present scheme of things to that expression by the learned primary Judge. Nonetheless, the ultimate question for this Court is whether the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory, a question which did not concern the learned primary Judge. There is no need to rehearse at length the relevant authorities, which are well-established and well-known. The Court must make its own assessment of the available material and come to the best view it can on the question whether, overall, the primary tribunal of fact ought to have had a reasonable doubt.

I think that this is one of those cases in which it is important to keep steadily in mind the difference between a strong and rational suspicion, and an ultimate inference drawn beyond reasonable doubt of guilt as charged. I have no difficulty in seeing why the course of events, as I have summarised them, would have raised in the mind of the investigating police a lively and entirely reasonable suspicion about the present appellant. Where I part company with the learned primary Judge is in the taking of the next step in the relevant chain of reasoning; for, as it seems to me, on a fair view overall of such evidence as there was to support the Crown case, there are so many imponderables and so many imprecisions that in my view it can properly be said, conformably with the relevant principles as established by decisions in the High Court, that the primary tribunal of fact ought to have had a reasonable doubt about the ultimate guilt, as charged, of the present appellant.

In those circumstances, I am of the opinion that the appeal should be allowed.
I would quash the conviction, set aside the penalty imposed consequent upon it and in lieu substitute a directed verdict and judgment of acquittal. In those circumstances it is not necessary to consider the merits of the Crown appeal against sentence, and for the sake of completeness that should be formally dismissed. I propose those orders.

MEAGHER JA: I disagree. In my view the conviction should stand. The evidence against the accused, although circumstantial, is very strong. His thumb print was found on the very tray from which the cigarettes had been stolen. It was not disputed that the print was his. There was no evidence from him as to how it got there. On the contrary, he initially claimed that he had never visited the shop in his life. This was a lie; a lie he deliberately made and frequently repeated. The prosecution evidence seems to me to have negatived any possibility of the print being there innocently. In addition, Mr Mulcahy was able to provide a roughly accurate description of the accused at the time. For those reasons in my view the conviction should be sustained.

DUNFORD J: In my view the appeal should be allowed and the conviction and sentence quashed for the reasons given by Sully J. I agree with the orders which his Honour has proposed.

MEAGHER: The orders of the court, therefore, will be the orders proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
