

Regina versus Roberts Matter No Cca 60304/96 [1997] NSWSC 624 (8 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
Regina versus Peter Roberts /96 December 1997 
Grove J, James J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus PETER ROBERTS 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: Peter Roberts has applied for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him in the District Court by his Honour Judge Craigie on 22 May 1996. 
The applicant had pleaded guilty to three charges of supplying a prohibited drug in contravention of [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/). The prohibited drug was amphetamine or methylamphetamine. On each charge the Crown case rested on deemed supply by virtue of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) of the Act or perhaps on the extended definition of supply in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s3.html) of the Act. The applicant asked the sentencing judge to take into account and his
Honour took into account in sentencing the applicant the offences contained in two separate forms under section 21 of the Criminal Procedure Act (form 2).

On the first charge his Honour imposed a sentence of a fixed term of imprisonment for twelve months commencing on 21 November 1995, which was the date on which the applicant had been taken into custody after committing the offence the subject of the third charge. On the second charge his Honour imposed a sentence of a fixed term of imprisonment for 18 months, also commencing from 21 November 1995. On the third charge his Honour imposed a sentence of imprisonment for six years consisting of a minimum term of four and a half years, also commencing on 21 November 1995, and an additional term of one and a half years. It is apparent that the fixed terms of imprisonment imposed on the first two charges would be subsumed in the minimum term of the sentence imposed on the third charge. Under the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) the maximum penalty for each offence is imprisonment for fifteen years and/or a fine of $200,000.

It is appropriate to set out in chronological order and with some particularity some of the events which were relevant to the sentencing of the applicant.

On 14 August 1993 police executed a search warrant at the applicant's home and found two bags contained powder which, on analysis, was found to contain amphetamine. The applicant returned to his home during the search and was arrested. While the applicant was in custody, two further bags of powder containing amphetamine were found by the police in a hidden compartment in a belt the applicant had been wearing. The total amount of powder in the four bags was 25.28 grams and the total amount of pure amphetamine was 12.6 grams.
These events gave rise to the first charge against the applicant of supplying a prohibited drug. The applicant was granted bail and released on bail.

On 1 September 1993 the applicant was convicted in the Local Court of possession of .9 of a gram of amphetamine in June 1993 and was sentenced to three months imprisonment. He appealed against the severity of the sentence and was granted bail pending the hearing of his appeal. The appeal was heard on 4 February 1994 by his Honour Judge Holt who upheld the appeal and deferred passing sentence upon the applicant entering into a recognisance to be of good behaviour for two years.

On 20 June 1994 the applicant was convicted in the Local Court of possessing .25 grams of amphetamine on 24 September 1993, that is while he had been on bail on the first charge and also on bail pending the hearing of his appeal from his conviction on 1 September 1993. In the Local Court the applicant was sentenced to imprisonment for six months. An all grounds appeal was lodged and the applicant was granted bail pending the hearing of the appeal.

On 30 October 1994 the applicant committed the offence which is the subject of the second charge. The applicant was seen driving a motor vehicle by police who were themselves in a police vehicle. The applicant was known to be a disqualified driver and the police endeavoured to stop his vehicle. The applicant drove away from the police and a chase ensued. The applicant drove into a driveway and was seen to drop an object under his vehicle. The object was found to be a hollowed-out battery in which there were two plastic bags containing 5.99 grams of powder which, in turn, contained an unquantified but clearly fairly small amount of methylamphetamine. After being arrested and charged the applicant was released on bail.

On 13 June 1995 the applicant's appeal from his conviction and sentence in the
Local Court on 20 June 1994 was heard by his Honour Judge Saunders. The applicant's appeal against conviction was dismissed. Judge Saunders upheld the appeal against sentence and deferred passing sentence upon the applicant entering into a recognisance to be of good behaviour for four years.

On 21 November 1995 the offence which is the subject of the third charge was committed. Once again, the applicant was seen by police whilst driving a motor vehicle. A high speed police chase ensued. The applicant was eventually stopped and searched. During the search police found a purse in which there were a number of bags containing powder weighing a total of six grams, which in turn contained .21 of a gram of methylamphetamine. The applicant was refused bail and has remained in custody since 21 November 1995.

On 6 December 1995 the applicant pleaded guilty to all three offences charged.
He had not previously pleaded guilty to any of the charges.

It will be apparent from the history of events that the offence the subject of the second charge was committed while the applicant was on bail for the offence the subject of the first charge, was on bail pending the hearing of his appeal from his conviction and sentence in the Local Court on 20 June 1994 and was on the recognisance he had entered into in February 1994 under Judge
Holt's order and that the offence the subject of the third charge was committed while the applicant was on bail for both the previous offences and was subject to the recognisances he had entered under both Judge Holt's order of 4 February 1994 and Judge Saunders' order of 13 June 1995.

The three offences on the first Form 2 were all committed on 9 February 1994 and consisted of possessing 1.4 grams of amphetamine, having goods in custody and driving while an unlicensed driver. These offences were committed just five days after the applicant had entered into the recognisance under Judge
Holt's order.

The offences on the second Form 2 were:
Possession of cannabis on 14 August 1993 when his house was searched by police.
Driving while disqualified and driving under the influence of a drug, amphetamine, on 30 October 1994, being offences committed on the same occasion as the offences the subject of the second charge.
Offences committed on 21 November 1995 being driving while disqualified, driving an unregistered and uninsured motor vehicle, refusing a breath test, driving under the influence of a drug, dangerous driving and negligent driving. All of these offences were committed on the same occasion as the offence the subject of the third charge.

The applicant was born in March 1951 and was, accordingly, aged in his forties when all of these offences were committed. He had a conviction in the
Children's Court in 1969 which was, properly, disregarded by the sentencing judge.

Up to 1989 the applicant had some convictions for driving offences and minor drug offences. However, from 1989 onwards his criminal history dramatically worsened and, apart from the matters I have already mentioned, he has been sentenced to terms of imprisonment for breaking entering and stealing, supplying prohibited drugs, possession of an unlicensed pistol and goods in custody. In March 1990 he was sentenced in the District Court to a term of imprisonment of two years eight months for supplying a prohibited drug. In
January 1996 he was sentenced to a fixed term of imprisonment for four months for driving whilst disqualified.

In his remarks on sentence, the sentencing judge noted that the applicant had a long history of drug abuse. The applicant had started using marihuana heavily when he was seventeen years old. He started using heroin when he was twenty-one and quickly became addicted. He started using amphetamine in 1988 and quickly became a regular heavy user.

His Honour found that the applicant was a serious and chronic offender. His
Honour noted the warnings about re-offending which had been given to the applicant by both Judge Holt and Judge Saunders when each of them had extended leniency to the applicant.

His Honour did not accept that while in his present custody the applicant had "turned the corner", so far as drugs are concerned. Promises by the applicant to reform had, his Honour concluded, a hollow ring, particularly when account was taken of similar things said by the applicant to Judge Holt and Judge
Saunders.

His Honour considered that not much weight should be given to the applicant's pleas of guilty because in each case the Crown case against him was very strong. His Honour considered that not much weight could be given to the pre- sentence report because the author of the pre-sentence report had not been put in possession of many of the relevant facts.

His Honour correctly noted that the criminality in the commission of the offences the subject of the second and third charges was seriously aggravated by the applicant's having been on bail and subject to a recognisance or recognisances at the time the offences were committed. His Honour decided, appropriately, to select one charge, the third charge, and to reflect in the sentence on that charge the total criminality involved in all the offences charged and all the Form 2 offences.

The principal submission made in support of the application for leave to appeal was that the sentence imposed on the third charge was manifestly excessive. Reference was made to the cases of R versus Fathers unreported,
Court of Criminal Appeal 31 August 1994, R versus Simpson unreported, Court of
Criminal Appeal 30 November 1994 and R versus Muggeridge unreported, Court of
Criminal Appeal 8 October 1993. It was submitted that in Muggeridge a sentence of the same length had been imposed, when the applicant was sentenced as a principal in a major criminal enterprise for the supply of amphetamine.
Reference was also made to statistics of sentences prepared by the Judicial
Commission. In regard to these statistics, I should say that only thirteen cases are recorded and these would not appear to include a number of cases decided within the period allegedly covered by the statistics to which we were referred by the Crown.

I do not agree that the sentence imposed by Judge Craigie on the third charge was manifestly excessive. As I have already stated, the sentencing judge decided, quite appropriately, to reflect in the sentence imposed on one of the charges, in this case the third charge, the total criminality in all the charges and all the Form 2 offences. The criminality in the three charges was serious. The criminality in the second and third charges was aggravated by the circumstances in which they were committed, while the applicant was on bail and on a recognisance or recognisances. The third charge was in fact committed while the applicant was on two separate grants of bail and subject to two separate recognisances. The criminality involved in the Form 2 offences was not minor. On 21 November 1995 the applicant, while a disqualified driver, drove a motor vehicle under the influence of a drug and engaged in dangerous driving during a high speed police chase in which he attempted to avoid apprehension. The sentencing judge was entitled to find, as he did, that the applicant was a serious, chronic offender and to assess the criminality in the offences charged and the Form 2 offences in the light of that finding.

The sentencing judge was also entitled to find, as he did, that the applicant's assurances that he had reformed or would reform were worthless.

I have considered the cases of Fathers, Simpson and Muggeridge and have concluded that these cases do not show that the sentences imposed on the applicant were manifestly excessive.

I would propose that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal against sentence be dismissed.

GROVE J: I agree. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree. 
GROVE J: The orders of the Court therefore will be as proposed by James J. * * * 
