

Regina versus Dung Quang Nguyen [1996] NSWSC 141 (20 May 1996) 
REGINA versus DUNG QUANG NGUYEN /95 
Monday 20 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, ABADEE J, SPERLING J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL EVIDENCE - ADMISSIONS - ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS CONTAINING HEARSAY.

CRIMINAL LAW - JURY - JUDGE'S VIEWS ON QUESTIONS OF FACT - WHETHER JURY
OVERAWED.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
In the early hours of 26 September 1993, Abboud Abboud, a bouncer at a Sydney nightclub, was fatally stabbed after trying to escort one of a group of which the appellant was a part, from the premises. The Crown case included evidence from friends of the appellant stating that he had admitted the killing as well as damaging admissions by him in his record of interview. The appellant contended that he was "drunk and stoned" and that he had found the knife upon the footpath near the nightclub. He was convicted of murder and sentenced a minimum term of 10 years and an additional term of 5 years. He appealed against the conviction on four grounds, three referring to directions given by the trial judge, and a fourth concerning the admissibility of part of the record of interview.
 
HELD - dismissing the appeal: (1) The judge is entitled to express opinions on the facts so long as the jury is not overawed or left under the impression that there is really nothing for them to decide: Cunningham versus Ryan <case>; [(1919) 27 CLR 294] applied.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: The appellant stood trial before Allen J and a jury on a charge of murdering Abboud Abboud on 26 September 1993. He was convicted and sentenced to 15 years imprisonment, comprising a minimum term of 10 years and an additional term of 5 years. He has appealed against his conviction raising four grounds.

The appellant went with a group of Indonesian and Vietnamese friends to Cheers nightclub in George Street, Sydney in the early hours of the day in question.
Some time later when the deceased, a bouncer at the nightclub, attempted to escort one of the group, Huy Hoang Dinh, from the premises the appellant approached but was pushed away by the deceased. The jury's verdict established that the appellant then drew a knife and stabbed the deceased twice in quick succession. One blow inflicted superficial injuries on his arm but the other penetrated his chest and proved fatal. The deceased received another stab wound in the shoulder which must have been inflicted by someone else.

The Crown case included evidence from friends of the appellant that he had admitted stabbing the deceased twice and the video-taped record of interview in which he made damaging admissions.

The principal issue at the trial concerned the appellant's state of mind at the relevant time. The fatal blow was struck with an upward motion and penetrated some 18 cms to the heart. A medical witness said that it had been struck with moderate force on a scale of mild, moderate or severe. The defence "case" on intent was based on evidence that the appellant had that night consumed alcohol, taken four Rohypnol tablets, and smoked marijuana so that when he arrived at the nightclub he was, as he claimed, "drunk and stoned".

Three of the grounds of appeal relied upon were directed to the trial Judge's summing-up and the other to a ruling on evidence. It will be convenient to consider them separately: 
Ground 4 - (inference of intent) "The trial judge misdirected the jury as to inferences relevant to intent which may be drawn having regard to the appellant's acts which caused the death of the deceased. Specifically the trial judge misdirected the jury that `in ordinary circumstances the inference of the (appellant's) intent from this wound would be inevitable'".

The defence did not argue that the fatal blow was not deliberate (s/u 22). The judge directed the jury that a conviction for murder depended on their finding that when the deceased struck the fatal blow he intended to inflict really serious harm on the deceased (9, 10, 83, 110), and that they had to work out what was in his mind (11, 14, 23). At 56 he said: "Well, then, his intention. That comes back to this matter of inferring the intention from what happened, including what has been said. You may think that it would be ludicrous to suggest in ordinary circumstances where a man said he lost his temper so he stabbed another person in the chest, that the man did not intend to cause really serious injury to his victim. But it is not necessarily so in every case. And here Mr Hidden vigorously contends there are circumstances which make that conclusion unsafe. If it is unsafe, you cannot be satisfied of the correctness of the conclusion beyond reasonable doubt".

The Judge then reviewed the evidence about the alcohol and drugs consumed by the appellant, and said (80-1): "So ultimately the question remains: does this material in relation to drugs raise in your mind a reasonable doubt that when he stabbed fatally Mr Abboud he had the intention, at that time, in the anger he speaks of in the record of interview at being pushed, the intention to cause really serious bodily harm to Mr Abboud. You may think that unless it does, and although this remains entirely a matter for you, it would be pretty difficult to resist a conclusion that as he stabbed a man in the chest with a knife that went in 18 cms or close thereto, he would have realised that doing that he was going to cause injury and would have intended indeed to cause really serious injury to Mr
Abboud".

On the second day of the summing-up the Judge gave a further direction that was the subject of particular challenge at the trial and before this Court. He said (91): "As to intent, you may well think that in ordinary circumstances the inference that you intend to cause somebody really serious bodily harm is inevitable if you take a knife out of your coat, stab him in the chest with a wound which penetrates so deeply it enters the heart itself." 
Immediately afterwards the Judge distinguished the case of the accused by saying "what is put here however", and reminded the jury of the approach which "had been central to the defence", "no matter what normally would be the inference you would draw from such stabbing". He later referred, at the request of senior counsel for the accused, to the fact that the attack had occurred very suddenly. He continued: "Now the point here is the timing. It happened very quickly and you will have to consider the combination of drugs for such effect, if any, as they had - and also the shortness of the time ... No matter how short a time it took, you might well think normally the inference he intended to cause serious bodily harm is inevitable ... but do these circumstances raise a reasonable doubt in this particular case?".

The direction that was the subject of particular challenge followed the statement "you may well think that ...". It is clear therefore that the Judge was not directing the jury that a person is presumed to intend the natural consequences of his or her acts. He correctly directed them more than once that they were the judges of the facts. He indicated a view of the facts that they might well think was the normal inference, but fairly left to the jury the question whether the suddenness of the attack, and the influence of alcohol and drugs, raised in their minds a reasonable doubt "in this particular case". In my opinion this ground of challenge fails.

Ground 3 - (character) "The trial judge failed to adequately and properly direct the jury as to the issue of `character' and its relevance to the issue of the `guilt' of the appellant of murder and manslaughter".

The Judge gave a general direction on character early in his summing-up (16-9). At the end of the first day of the summing-up, senior counsel for the accused said to the Judge, in the absence of the jury (82): "I would ask your Honour to direct the jury that the evidence of character is also relevant to the question of whether the verdict should be murder or manslaughter, that is, the question of specific intent. I suppose it was implicit in your Honour's general direction that it is, but I would ask your
Honour to give that further direction".

The following day the Judge gave this further direction (91): "On the issue of intention you will bear in mind the evidence given as to the character of the accused, and I am not going to go over that again. You may think it helps, you may not. But if you think it helps it can help in only two respects, one as to his credibility ... and the other is is he the sort of man who is likely to have committed this murder, if murder it was, and as part of the proof of murder obviously of necessity there is proof beyond reasonable doubt of this intention to kill. You will bear in mind whether the character evidence which you have demonstrates that the accused is less likely to have formed that intention and acted pursuant to it than he otherwise would have been - having regard to the character and disposition which has been put before you in evidence".

In my opinion this further direction was sufficient and error has not been established.

Ground 1 - (Admissibility of Record of Interview) "The trial Judge erred in failing to exclude questions 254 and 255 and the answers (or part answers) thereto ...".

Counsel for the accused objected to these questions and to part of these answers but the objection was overruled. The relevant parts of the record of interview were as follows: "Q.254 I've been told that after the stabbing you showed this knife to a number of people. What can you tell me about that? 
A. (suspect) I showing the knife? 
Q.255 Yes.

A. (suspect) No. I didn't show no - I just pulled a knife like I stop and then
I - I was - they - they - they - was scared and I go `well, I was scared too' and then - yeah, he goes, `let's go'. So then I go, `I'm going to throw this knife away before I get caught', so --- ".

The basis of the objection was that the accused had not admitted the truth of question 254, which contained hearsay, and there was no other evidence in the trial to support the truth of the question.

The relevant principle is that stated in the joint judgment in Barca versus The
Queen <case>; [(1975) 133 CLR 82] at 107: "It is trite law that a statement made in the presence of a party is only evidence against him of the truth of the matter asserted if he has in some way admitted its truth. If an accused person denies the truth of a statement when it is made and there is nothing in his conduct and demeanour from which the jury, notwithstanding his denial, could infer that he acknowledged its truth in whole or in part, it would accord with accepted practice to exclude the statement altogether".

Although the appellant did not admit that he "showed" the knife in the sense of displaying it or showing it off, he did admit that he had it in his possession and that others could see it. Mr Hidden limited his objection to question 254, the answer, question 255, and the start of the answer "no, I didn't show no".

The Judge ruled that the whole of this material should be before the jury and in my judgment his ruling was correct. The accused did make admissions in answer to these questions, and the jury could only properly assess those admissions if they had the questions before them.

Ground 2 (directions on fact) "The trial miscarried by reason of comments made by the trial judge concerning the evidence and conclusions that might be drawn from the evidence during the summing-up and further his Honour erred in declining to discharge the jury on application of counsel for the appellant at trial".

Senior counsel for the appellant submitted that there were several occasions in the summing-up when the Judge became an advocate for the Crown on matters which had not been argued for the Crown, or otherwise made comments which were not appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

The matters principally relied on in support of this ground, apart from the directions on intent previously referred to, were as follows. The Judge said :
 "... either way it is a lot of Rohypnol. Was he shooting off his mouth? Was it a bit of bravado? `Look at me. I'm a tough little fellow. I am not out of it: and look how many I have taken'".

As the close of his review of the evidence on the consumption of alcohol and drugs by the appellant, the Judge asked rhetorically (80): "Is he loading it on and has he loaded it on, this drug taking, to a point where its credibility goes?".

Then in relation to the accused's possession of the knife the Judge said (96): "He says he picks up a knife lying on the street, on the footpath. He finds it in the middle of the footpath just shortly before he goes down to Cheers. This is the city of Sydney, the main business area. Does it strike you as credible that he had the great fortune, or as it transpires misfortune, to see the knife lying conveniently on the footpath just before he completes that short walk to go down to Cheers? You may regard that as you will".

On the state of mind of the accused when he went to the nightclub, the Judge referred (97) to the following question and answer in his record of interview: "Q. What happened then? 
A. We went to Cheers. At first I thought there was nothing ...".

The Judge continued: "No buzz, no fight, no excitement. Disappointment? His very next words are: `we wanted to go home'. Nothing happened it was a flop. But then `the security man, he got into a fight with my friends'. And then it starts. There was excitement then".

The Judge continued (97-8): "But here, on this account, this accused was thinking about a fight before he went to Cheers, even if he did not intend to be directly physically involved.
He went there you may think because of the buzz of a fight he thought might occur. And he took a knife just before he goes down into the place where it is to happen. So in his mind you might well think, although it is entirely a matter for you, he might be thinking about knives and if you think about knives and fights for every long you do not need much prompting to be aware what a knife is for in a fight. So if his mind was, in effect, principally tuned to there going to be, or the risk of there being, a fight involving a knife, even if used only by him in self defence, then you may think that it makes more difficult the acceptance by you of a conclusion that it happened so quickly his mind just did not click to what happens or may happen with a knife when used as a weapon".

Following the conclusion of the summing-up, senior counsel for the accused applied for the jury to be discharged on the ground that the directions on intent and the expressions of opinion on the facts by the Judge had gone "too far" and made known the Judge's view "so clearly" that the jury were likely to be improperly influenced. The Judge declined to discharge the jury, but gave a further direction to the jury on their duty to make up their own mind on the facts (110-1): "Now I remind you that you alone are the judges of facts. You alone. I cannot take the burden of deciding the facts from you, nor have I sought to do so. I have given you food for thought. It carries no special authority, anything I have said as to facts - nothing at all - no more authority than the arguments of counsel. It is purely food for thought: and you do not know how I would decide this case if that was my task. So do not confuse food for thought with any hint from me as to what your verdict ought to be".

A Judge presiding at a criminal trial is entitled within limits to express his opinion on the facts of the case. See Cunningham versus Ryan <case>; [(1919) 27 CLR 294] at 298-9. The nature of those limits is well established, and the principles were recently summarised in B versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599] by Brennan J at 605-6 as follows: "A trial judge has a broad discretion in commenting on the facts and in choosing the strength of the language employed in commenting on the facts, but the comment must stop short of overawing the jury. It must exhibit a judicial balance so that the jury is not deprived `of an adequate opportunity of understanding and giving effect to the defence and the matters relied upon in support of the defence'. I agree with the observations of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia in Reg versus Hulse [(1971) 1 SASR ]
at 335: `To use the words of the Privy Council in Broadhurst's Case there is a danger of the jury being overawed by the Judge's views, where, even though the jury are told that the decision on the facts is for them, the language of the
Judge is so forceful that they may be under the impression that there is really nothing for them to decide or that they would be fatuous or disrespectful if they disagreed with the Judge's views'".

In my judgment his Honour's summing-up did not exceed the accepted limits. The jury were left in no doubt that the decision on the facts was for them. The parts of the summing-up which were challenged reminded the jury of some of the evidence and raised aspects of that evidence for their consideration. Except for the directions on the inference of intent that would ordinarily be drawn from the use of the knife, and the nature of the fatal blow, the Judge posed questions rather than answers for the jury. He did not otherwise express a concluded view of the facts, let alone forcefully, and in my judgment he did not indicate to the jury that there was really nothing for them to decide, or that they would be foolish to accept the defence case.

The question for this Court is not whether the Judge erred in refusing to discharge the jury, but whether there was in all the circumstances a miscarriage of justice. See Webb versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 41] at 90. This was a strong Crown case. In my judgment there was no miscarriage of justice arising from the summing-up as a whole. In my opinion the following orders should be made:
Appeal dismissed;
Time served to count.
 
ABADEE J: I agree with the reasons of Handley JA and with the orders that he proposes.

SPERLING J: I agree with the reasons of Handley JA and with the orders that he proposes.
 * * * 
