

Regina versus Dawson Matter No Cca 60323/96 [1998] NSWSC 222 (19 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
REGINA versus KENNETH JAMES DAWSON /96 May 1998 
Newman J, Studdert J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The appellant, Kenneth James Dawson, stood trial in the District Court at Lismore upon an indictment containing three counts: a count charging assault occasioning actual bodily harm; a count of sexual intercourse without the complainant's consent, knowing she was not consenting and in circumstances of aggravation; a further count of sexual intercourse without consent but without the element of aggravation.

The jury found the appellant guilty on all three counts and the appellant was sentenced on the second count to six years eight months penal servitude with a minimum term of five years. On the third count he was sentenced to penal servitude for four years with a minimum term of three years and on the first count he was sentenced to two years eight months penal servitude with a minimum term of two years. The appellant appeals against his conviction and, alternatively, seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed.

The appellant has not been legally represented on his appeal and indeed he has not, at his own request, presented himself to advance any oral submissions before this Court today. However, he has presented handwritten submissions addressing the grounds of his appeal and he has also presented lengthy typed submissions. There is a deal of repetition in the submissions presented and to which I will presently refer. It would be quite impracticable to go through those submissions line by line in the course of this judgment, but I have considered the submissions that the appellant has presented, in written form before this Court today in their entirety.

Before considering the various grounds raised by the appellant, it is necessary to review the evidence at the trial.

The complainant and the appellant commenced a sexual relationship early in but in May of that year, according to the complainant, she decided she did not want that relationship to continue and she advised the appellant. She said, however, that a relationship of friendship continued.

The complainant was a taxi driver and on 21 June 1995 she started to drive the taxi in the late afternoon but became ill and went home early. The complainant lived with her twelve year old son in an isolated residence in a rural setting. It was her evidence that she was woken up during the night by the pressure of somebody's hands around her neck and a voice saying "Prepare yourself to be bashed and raped tonight." What followed, on the complainant's version of events, was a period of violence in which she was subjected to two acts of sexual intercourse by way of penile penetration of her vagina and a further act of assault. One of the acts of sexual intercourse occurred after the appellant had threatened her, pressing a knife against her chest and saying, "Don't bloody scream or I'm going to kill you..." 
I do not propose to record here the full detail of the events about which the complainant gave evidence, but it appears to be common ground that the complainant did sustain a number of physical injuries on the morning of 22
June: what is in dispute is the precise circumstances in which those injuries were received. The complainant was later that morning examined by a doctor and injuries noted included a red mark at the back of the skull, bruising, swelling and abrasion to the inside surface of the upper lip, a loosened tooth, bruising and swelling of the right trapezius muscle, bruising of the right arm, bruising of the left buttock, the right lateral thigh, the left lateral thigh, the left hip and of the breast. There was also bruising of the right leg and certain metatarsal bones in the right foot.

According to the complainant, after the offences were committed the appellant left and she then telephoned the police. Sergeant Powell, who took the telephone call, recorded no complaint that the complainant had been raped but only that the appellant had broken into her house and beaten her up. However, a friend by the name of Ms Tweedie gave evidence of ringing the complainant at about 7.20 am on 22 June and the complainant complained to her that she had been raped and attacked by the appellant. She called upon the complainant and noticed that the complainant's face was puffed up and that she was emotionally disturbed. She took the complainant to Dr Miles and later to the Byron Bay
Hospital.

Dr Miles gave evidence of the signs of injury and complaints of tenderness made by the complainant at the time of examination. Dr Miles also said that the complainant declined to have a genital examination.

Constable King gave evidence of an interview of the appellant. When interviewed, the appellant admitted to having had a relationship with the complainant, but he said he did not recall being in her bedroom early on the morning of 22 June 1995. The appellant declined to be interviewed further and that, of course, could not be regarded as being in any way incriminating.

The appellant gave sworn evidence in which he admitted visiting the complainant early on the morning of 22 June. He admitted entering her bedroom whilst she lay in bed in darkness and placing his hands loosely around her shoulders with his thumbs lightly on her throat. He said, and I quote, "in a very sinisterly voice", "I'm going to bash and rape you." Further, the appellant told the jury he did this in a joking manner and he was only intending what he did to be a joke. He denied at any time that morning having intercourse with the complainant or attempting to do so. He described the complainant as having a heroin craving, something which the complainant denied. The appellant described the complainant as hanging out for heroin this morning and, according to his evidence, this explained her behaviour which, as he described it, could only have been summarised as being erratic. The complainant did sustain injury whilst he was at her house, but the injuries sustained were, on the appellant's version, either sustained whilst he was defending himself from an attack made by her or by her falling over the ironing board or by her colliding with a tree after she ran from the house.

The appellant was cross-examined about a letter that he wrote to the complainant on 22 August 1995 in which, inter alia, he apologised for not writing before and said: "I have never had an opportunity to apologise to you and Rama." Later in the same letter he wrote: "The thought of spending ten to twenty years in gaol really depresses me but apparently we all get what we deserve and eventually I'll get used to the idea. Once again, my heartfelt apologies...".

The appellant, when asked about that letter, said that to apologise was a strategy to get the complainant to drop the charges.

The case was one which presented the jury with a strenuously contested issue on all of the facts central to the elements of each of the offences charged.
After a summing-up about which counsel representing the appellant sought no redirection or further direction, the jury retired and it is apparent from the verdicts on each count that the jury was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt by the evidence of the complainant that the appellant had committed each of the offences charged in the indictment.

I now turn to consider, against that background, the matters raised by the appellant on this appeal.
 . The Evidence of Ms Tweedie 
The appellant complains that the witness Ms Tweedie was not cross-examined to good effect and that there were inconsistencies between her evidence and the statement she made to the police and the evidence of the complainant. Counsel appearing for the appellant did elicit from Ms Tweedie in cross-examination the version of the complaint which the complainant had made to her, which included the assertion: "I woke up in my bedroom with him standing over me, he had a knife, he raped me and bashed me...". That would appear to be inconsistent with the evidence given by the complainant, if it is taken that what the complainant was conveying to Ms Tweedie was that the knife was being held by the appellant when she first saw him, but it is open to the interpretation that the appellant had the knife at some time later during the course of the commission of these offences. In any event, it seems to me that the evidence of Ms Tweedie was before the jury for its evaluation and in summing-up the trial judge reminded the jury of one of the submissions made by counsel for the appellant concerning the evidence of Ms Tweedie. The jury was reminded that counsel had put to the jury that the complainant did not say in her evidence that the accused held a knife to her throat, as Ms Tweedie had told the jury the complainant told her.

The appellant complains Ms Tweedie's testimony was vital to his defence and he wanted to cross-examine her upon inconsistencies between her version of what the complainant told her and the complainant's evidence. Plainly, Ms Tweedie was called and was available to counsel for the appellant to cross-examine her, as the transcript of the evidence and the reference I have already made to the transcript makes clear. What counsel for the appellant chose to ask Ms
Tweedie in cross-examination was a matter to be determined by counsel inter alia relying upon his assessment of that witness as she gave her evidence. I see no reason to consider that there has been any possible miscarriage by reason of what counsel for the appellant asked Ms Tweedie or what he declined to ask her.

The appellant complains that counsel retained for him did not call Ms Tweedie as a witness, but the Crown called Ms Tweedie and this gave counsel for the appellant the advantage that he was able to cross-examine that witness rather than be restricted in the questions asked by the rules which govern the manner of examination-in-chief. It is not a cause for complaint that the Crown called a witness who the appellant wanted to have called.
 . Failure to Call the Complainant's Son 
The appellant has complained that the complainant's son Rama should have been called and that his Honour was wrong to rule that the evidence of the child would not be relevant. The transcript does not record the detail of what occurred, which resulted in the notation on the transcript: "His Honour advised Mr Bruce evidence of Rama would not be relevant to proceedings."
However, what is significant is that whatever exchange took place on 6
February took place not only after the case for the prosecution had closed but after the case for the defence had closed.

The appellant submits that the commotion must have been such, according to the complainant's evidence, that the child must have heard part of what occurred on the complainant's version. On the other hand, on the appellant's version what occurred must have been very noisy because, according to him, the complainant screamed at him, hit him, broke the telephone against the wall, fell over the ironing board and attacked him with a knife. Whichever version the jury was to evaluate involved much noise, and it does not seem to me that the appellant's case would have been advanced by calling the son of the complainant. It was not suggested by either the complainant or the appellant that the child saw what took place between them.
 . The Withholding of Medication 
The appellant has expressed as a ground of appeal that during the course of the trial he was deprived of his daily dose of Methadone and a second drug called Aropac. He has submitted that this adversely affected his health. The appellant drew this problem to counsel's attention on day five of the trial.
The transcript records that the trial judge requested that the appellant be attended by the Government Medical Officer and that subsequently in the absence of the jury he made enquiry as to the appellant's condition. The Crown
Prosecutor acknowledged that the appellant should not be shown in an adverse light because of any absence of medication and the matter was stood in the list, but later, so the transcript records, the trial judge indicated the matter was ready to proceed. There is nothing to indicate on the transcript that the appellant's counsel was concerned about the appellant's condition during the earlier days of the trial and there is nothing to indicate that the appellant's counsel had any concern about his client's condition when eventually the trial did proceed, but only as late as 3.00 pm, on 5 February .
 . Mistreatment by Corrective Services Officers 
In his written submissions the appellant has complained that he was refused access, for court, to a pair of trousers purchased for him by his counsel.
This happened on day six. According to the appellant, what happened at the start of proceedings on that day was that counsel insisted he be taken downstairs to be changed. It is not clear from the transcript whether in fact his trousers were changed, although he left the court for the purpose of having his change of clothing. Presumably the opportunity was availed of appropriately because the transcript records nothing to the contrary. Had counsel been concerned that the appellant's case would be prejudiced by the way he was attired when his cross-examination resumed on 6 February 1996 it is to be expected that that would have been drawn to the judge's attention. There is only the one limited reference to counsel having informed the judge that his client had to change into appropriate clothing before he resumed his evidence, and I would infer that this is what occurred.
 . Inadequate Legal Representation 
The appellant complains that he was inadequately represented by counsel and has complained of the failure of counsel to call Ms Tweedie, an issue I have already considered, and his failure to call other witnesses, including a next door neighbour. He complains that counsel did not discuss court procedures with him sufficiently.

The circumstances in which conduct of a trial by counsel may be determined to have led to a miscarriage of justice were considered by this court in R v
Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR 677.] The relevant principles were expressed by Gleeson CJ at 685: "1. A Court of Criminal Appeal has a power and a duty to intervene in the case of a miscarriage of justice, but what amounts to a miscarriage of justice is something that has to be considered in the light of the way in which the system of criminal justice operates.
As a general rule an accused person is bound by the way the trial is conducted by counsel, regardless of whether that was in accordance with the wishes of the client, and it is not a ground for setting aside a conviction that decisions made by counsel were made without, or contrary to, instructions, or involve errors of judgment or even negligence.
However, there may arise cases where something has occurred in the running of a trial, perhaps as the result of 'flagrant incompetence' of counsel, or perhaps from some other cause, which will be recognised as involving, or causing, a miscarriage of justice. It is impossible, and undesirable, to attempt to define such cases with precision. When they arise they will attract appellate intervention." 
It seems to me that the general rule expressed in principle 2 above must be given effect to in the present case. There is nothing, in my opinion, to suggest anything approaching flagrant incompetence of counsel in this case. I have read the transcript in its entirety and I find no circumstances calling for the application of the third of the principles defined in Birks. No doubt in this case, as in any case, counsel appearing had to make decisions, not only as to how he should cross-examine any particular witness but as to who he should or should not call. That the appellant, with the benefit of hindsight, does not agree with decisions his trial counsel made does not bespeak of flagrant incompetence by counsel. It commonly occurs that counsel in his or her wisdom and experience declines to do something at a trial which the client would wish him or her to do, but it is a very broad step to take from such a disagreement to infer that the decision reached by counsel about which there is disagreement reflected incompetence and resulted in a miscarriage of justice. The appellant has failed to persuade me in this case that there is any substance in this complaint whatsoever.
 . The Letters Written by the Appellant 
The appellant complains that not all of the letter of 22 August 1995 which he wrote to the complainant from prison was placed before the Court. This appears to be the case, as the transcript of 6 February 1996 reveals. However, it is also apparent from the transcript that counsel for the appellant reached an agreement with the Crown as to what parts should be read to the jury and it would seem that those parts excluded were excluded for the reason that they would have conveyed to the jury that the appellant was in prison when he wrote to the complainant. There can be no complaint about the jury being alerted to such part of the letter as was the subject of evidence, even if there was scope for an alternative construction of the document to that which the Crown invited the jury to draw. How the jury evaluated the evidence of the letter was a matter for the jury equipped with the competing submissions of counsel, and I see no error in the jury having been told what it was of the letter or in the appellant having been cross-examined about it.

There was a second letter sent to the complainant and received on 14 August , the envelope of which bore the endorsement: "Ken Dawson, c/- Grafton
Gaol, Grafton". In that document there was a comment: "I still love and care for you and sincerely apologise for any and all wrongs
I may have caused and I would like to make restitution in any way I can but please drop these charges, I'll make it up to you, you don't need to take ten years off my life for revenge." 
The appellant's case could hardly have been improved if the jury had been alerted to that communication.
 . Inconsistencies in the Complainant's Evidence 
The appellant complains that there were inconsistencies in the evidence of the complainant. He has addressed many of these in his written submissions. The complainant was cross-examined extensively and the evaluation of any inconsistencies was a matter for the jury. No doubt it took them into account.
It is hardly surprising, as the Crown has pointed out, that there may have been inconsistencies between what the complainant said at her trial and what she said to police, to Ms Tweedie, and to her doctor in the immediate aftermath of the events of 22 August 1995.

Having considered the transcript of the complainant's evidence, I do not detect inconsistencies of such a nature as ought to have given the jury reason to entertain a doubt as to her credibility. I observe that the jury had the benefit of seeing the complainant rather than just reading what she had to say. It seems to me, looking at the evidence and looking at the summing-up, that the issue of the credibility of the complainant was a matter about which the jury would have been alert and shortly before the jury was sent out to consider its verdict the trial judge reminded the jury of the need "to carefully scrutinise [the complainant's] evidence". The jury was also reminded that the Crown case depended on the evidence of the complainant and "without her evidence there is no case". No doubt the jury heeded those directions.

I would say, generally, that on my reading of the evidence and the summing-up
I find no cause to consider that the jury's verdicts were unsafe or unsatisfactory. Plainly, the jury had to accept the complainant's evidence beyond reasonable doubt in order to convict, but viewing such evidence in the setting of all the evidence I do not regard this as being a case in which the jury ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt. Jones versus The Queen (1997) ALJR 78 makes it plain that the test for an unsafe or unsatisfactory verdict is that laid down in M [(1994) 181 CLR 487:] "whether the Court thought that, upon the whole of the evidence, it was 'open to the jury' to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty".

See Jones at 85. That question, in my opinion, in this case is to be answered in the affirmative.

In reaching this conclusion I have borne in mind the detailed submissions which the appellant has made as to the aggravated sexual assault charge and whether a knife was employed by the appellant as the complainant had contended. The various inconsistencies in the prosecution case, as alleged by the appellant, were very much matters for the jury's evaluation in deciding whether or not they should accept the evidence the complainant gave. In my opinion, for the reasons I have indicated, the appeal against conviction fails.

Application for Leave to Appeal Against Sentence 
The offences charged are offences under ss 61J, 61I and 59 of the Crimes
Act. The maximum penalty for the offence of aggravated sexual assault under s
J is twenty years penal servitude. The offence of sexual assault without any aggravating feature attracts a maximum penalty under <case> of fourteen years penal servitude, and the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm attracts a maximum penalty under <case> of penal servitude for five years.

Following a careful review of the facts as he found them, and those findings were plainly available to the learned judge as a consequence of the jury's verdict, the learned sentencing judge said this: "The prisoner during the course of the episode treated the complainant in a cruel and callous manner. He used her without any consideration for her feelings or her well-being as a sexual object to satisfy his own sexual and psychological needs. The victim was completely powerless to fight back having regard to the difference in their physical make-ups. The event took place at an isolated home which was situated in a rural setting.

This community will not tolerate assaults of this nature. The sentence I impose today is to have not only a deterrent effect on the prisoner but a deterrent effect to the community at large." 
His Honour went on to review subjective matters, noting that the appellant was forty-one years of age. He had no record for any offence involving violence; indeed, the only offences were driving offences, although there was an offence of resisting arrest associated with one of those driving offences. The judge noted that the appellant came from a dysfunctional home where he had been subjected to physical and psychological abuse from a mentally disturbed parent. There was placed before the sentencing judge a report from a psychologist, Mr Gasiewski, and it is plain from the sentencing remarks that his Honour heeded the psychologist's report. The judge recorded that the appellant may be suffering, in that expert's opinion, from a borderline personality disorder. The judge took into account that the appellant was addicted to heroin and that he was on a Methadone programme at Grafton
Correctional Centre.

The judge considered whether there were special circumstances for the purposes of [s 5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) and found none.
Having read the sentencing remarks, I detect no error of approach by the learned judge.

Nor am I persuaded by any argument addressed to this Court that the sentences imposed were manifestly excessive. His Honour rightly recognised the need for a penalty which addressed the aspect of deterrence. This complainant was living in an isolated locality and was thus more than usually vulnerable. His
Honour was correct to perceive that those features had to be addressed in arriving at a sentence. Moreover, the appellant invaded the complainant's home in hours of darkness and resorted, for the more serious sexual offence, to the use of a knife. This Court has repeatedly stated that offenders who use knives in sexual crimes can expect to be sternly punished.

Each of the sentences was backdated to commence on the date of the appellant's arrest, namely 10 July 1995. Having regard to the totality of the appellant's criminality, I regard the sentences as being appropriate. Because of their duration, I would grant leave to appeal against sentence but would propose that the appeal be dismissed.

NEWMAN J: I agree. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree. 
NEWMAN J: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Studdert J. * * * 
