

Prisoners A-Xx Inclusive versus State of New South Wales Nos. Ca 40614/94; Ald /93 Public Law [1995] NSWSC 109 (30 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
MEAGHER(1), SHELLER(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 29 June 1995 #DATE 8:8:1995 #ADD 30:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellants:    B J Gross QC with
R W White and P Wines 
Solicitors for the Appellants:  Aboriginal Legal Service Limited 
Counsel for the Respondent:    K Mason
QC and D Cowan 
Solicitor for the Respondent:   H K Roberts - State Crown
Solicitor
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
MEAGHER JA I agree with Sheller JA.
JUDGE2
SHELLER JA Fifty persons who are inmates of New
South Wales prisons and described as "Prisoners A-XX Inclusive", by leave of the Court, appeal from a decision of Dunford J of 5
October 1994. The appellants began the proceedings by a statement of claim which was, at first instance, amended in some minor respects.
In summary the appellants sought relief designed to ensure they would have access to condoms while in gaol. The respondent, the State of New
South Wales, applied under Pt 13 r 5 and Pt 15 r 26 of the Supreme Court Rules for orders for summary dismissal or striking out of the proceedings on the ground that they disclosed no reasonable cause of action, were embarrassing and an abuse of the process of the Court.
 
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM
Dunford J dealt with the application under three heads, Public Law, Habeas
Corpus and
Negligence. I shall summarise his Honour's conclusions under those heads.
 
Public Law
In para 12 of the statement of claim the appellants alleged that "the decision of the Commissioner of Corrective Services and the New South Wales
Department of Corrective
Services not to supply or permit the possession or use of condoms by male prisoners was an improper exercise of power in that it was so unreasonable that no reasonable person could have so exercised the power and was exercised taking into account irrelevant considerations and without taking into account or giving no weight to relevant considerations."
Particulars followed. In para 13 the appellants alleged that they apprehended that they might contract HIV or hepatitis while in prison which illness might be caused or contributed to by, inter alia, "the decisions of the Commissioner of Corrective Services and the Director General of the Department of
Corrective Services referred to in paragraph 12." By paragraph re-numbered 14 the appellants sought (d) a declaration that the decision "by the (respondent) through" the officers referred to was an improper exercise of power, (e) certiorari to quash the decision "to adopt as the policy of the Department, that condoms not be supplied to or be permitted to be in the possession of or be used by prisoners in New South Wales prisons" including the appellants and mandamus to require the respondent "to perform its duty to exercise reasonable care towards the (appellants) by supplying condoms to, and permitting the possession and use of condoms by, the (appellants) and other prisoners in New South Wales prisons (and particularly Bathurst Gaol and Long
Bay Gaol)."
The statement of claim did not specify the power alleged to have been exercised improperly and unreasonably but for the purposes of the application,
Dunford J inferred the power was that which flowed from the vesting in the
Commissioner of Corrective Services of the care, direction, control and management of all prisons by s6(3) of the Prisons Act 1952. After discussing the principles which Lord Greene MR described in Associated Provincial Picture
Houses Limited versus Wednesbury Corporation <case>; [(1948) 1 KB 223], and their application, in Australia, to policy decisions about the management of prisons, his Honour held that the policy decisions of the Commissioner and/or the Department made with a concurrence of the Minister relating to the administration of prisons, including the decision not to allow or supply condoms, were not reviewable by the courts within the Wednesbury principles or otherwise. Accordingly he ordered that para 12, the particulars that followed it, the words I have quoted from para 13 and sub-paras (d), (e) and (f) of para 14 should be struck out, as disclosing no possible cause of action.
 
Habeas Corpus
The appellants applied to Dunford J to amend the statement of claim to include a claim for habeas corpus ad subjiciendum. Essential to this claim was the correctness of the appellants' submission that the writ was available to bring up for the Courts consideration not only the fact of imprisonment but the conditions of imprisonment said to be affecting their health and endangering their lives. Dunford J gave reasons for concluding that the appellants could not rely on the writ to challenge conditions of confinement applicable to all inmates of New South Wales prisons and refused leave to amend.
 
Negligence
In paragraphs 2 to 11 of the statement of claim the appellants alleged a breach of the duty the Department of Corrective Services owed to take reasonable care for the safety of prisoners in its care. In para 14 and the appellants asked for quia timet injunctions, both prohibitory and mandatory.
Dunford J distinguished between relief sought on the basis of the published policy of the Department not to allow condoms and relief sought based on the refusal to give individual prisoners access to condoms. His
Honour accepted that if the failure to take a certain action constituted a breach of duty to an individual to take reasonable care, the defendant could not excuse itself by claiming a policy decision had been made that such action would not be taken; Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424] He held that, if the appellants amended their particulars to allege the refusal of requests made by individual prisoners for access to condoms, the statement of claim would not be objectionable.
His Honour saw no reason why in an appropriate case the Court would not grant an injunction to restrain the tort of negligence, even without proof of damage. Accordingly, if the appellants were able to establish by evidence that the failure by the Department to permit their use of condoms constituted a breach of the duty of care it owed to them, they might be entitled to injunctive relief. However his Honour pointed out that claims to mandatory injunctions by individual prisoners to restrain operational breaches of the duty of care must depend, in part; on the circumstances of the individual plaintiffs and the perceived need of such individual plaintiffs for access to condoms. The case of each would have to be considered separately. His Honour took the view that it would be difficult for the court to manage the proceedings, and unnecessary delay would be caused if the proceedings continued with fifty separate plaintiffs. He exercised the power under Pt 8 r of the Supreme Court
Rules to limit the number of plaintiffs joined to four selected by them. This should give rise to a variation of factual issues and could be expected to set guidelines which might make it unlikely that other plaintiffs would wish or need to bring separate proceedings.
In summary Dunford J concluded that it was not open to the appellants to challenge in the Courts policy decisions the
Commissioner made with the concurrence of the Minister; and habeas corpus could not be used to question the conditions of internment which applied generally to all prisoners in New South Wales gaols.
However, depending on the evidence adduced at the final hearing of the proceedings, individual prisoners might be entitled to injunctive or other relief if they could show that the refusal of the Department to permit them to use condoms constituted a breach of the duty of care it owed to them. Such proceedings taken by fifty plaintiffs in the one action would be unwieldy and unmanageable. Not more than four of the appellants should continue with the proceedings.
No doubt due to oversight the formal order did not include an order striking words from para 13. In addition to striking out those parts of the statement of claim to which I have referred, his Honour struck out the words "and other male prisoners" wherever occurring in paras 3, 11 and 14 (a) and of the statement of claim. His Honour made other orders consequential upon those to which I have referred and to permit minor amendments of the statement of claim.
 
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
Mr Gross QC, who appeared for the appellants, asked for leave to file an amended statement of claim adding new paras I IA - I ID. The appellants now wish to allege breach of a duty of care, owed to them by the Department, the Commissioner of Corrective Services and the Superintendents of Bathurst and Long Bay Gaols to take all reasonable steps to protect them from the consequences of acts by other inmates, in failing and refusing to supply to or permit the possession and use of condoms by the appellants and other prisoners in New South Wales prisons; that s6 of the Prisons Act 1952 conferred on the Commissioner of
Corrective Services the power to direct, control and manage prisons in New
South Wales; and that the failure and refusal of the Commissioner and the Departrnent to supply to or permit the possession and use of condoms by the plaintiffs and each of them and other male prisoners in New South Wales prisons "was in contravention or threatened contravention of chapter 29 of Magna Carta."
The proposed amended statement of claim did not reduce the number of plaintiffs to four and included a claim for habeas corpus.
The Solicitor General, who appeared for the respondent, objected in particular to the amendments seeking to rely on Magna Carta. The respondent accepted that the appellants having linked their claim to administrative law relief with a power or duty said to arise under s6(3) of the Prisons Act, their contention based on Wednesbury principles was not unarguable. In the upshot the issues on the appeal were whether - the appellants should be allowed to amend the statement of claim by adding a claim for habeas corpus; the appellants should be allowed to amend the statement of claim to rely on Magna Carta; and his Honour erred in directing the appellants to elect which of not more than four of them should continue with the proceedings.
It was not clear why his Honour struck out the words "and other male prisoners" in the various places they appeared in the statement of claim. His
Honour may have misunderstood the Solicitor General's submissions.
The parties agree that the words should remain in the statement of claim.
 
HABEAS CORPUS
In a broad sense, and absent some statutory provision, the writ of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum is available to secure the liberty of a person improperly detained;
Halsbury Laws of England, 4th ed, vol 11, para 1452. The process the writ initiates enables the Court at the instance of a person aggrieved to command the production of the person detained and inquire into the cause of imprisonment. A legal justification for detention is that the person is held under an actual order or sentence of a superior court; Ex parte
Williams <case>; [(1934) 51 CLR 545] at 549-550. The production of the person detained with the order or sentence of the superior court sufficiently answers the writ of habeas corpus; Young versus Registrar, Court of Appeal [(1993) 32 NSWLR 262] at .
The appellants argue that the writ will run where the conditions of detention of a prisoner are so harsh or "intolerable" as to be unlawful.
Principally they rely upon Canadian and United States case law. Two sorts of situation have been considered and, in some of the cases, distinguished. The first involves an allegedly unlawful physical restraint within the confines of a particular part of the prison, is explained by the phrase "prison within a prison" and depends upon recognition of the prisoner's "residual liberty". The second involves the subjection of the prisoner to treatment or conditions of imprisonment which may adversely affect the prisoner's health or threaten the prisoner's life. The appellants' allegations fall into the second class. They allege that, in consequence of the Department's refusal to permit them and other male prisoners to possess and use condoms, they are at risk of contracting HIV or hepatitis affecting their health and endangering their lives. Such conditions make the imprisonment unlawful.
The writ of habeas corpus is a remedy.
In the conjoined appeals R versus Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison; Ex parte Hague; Weldon v Home Office (1992) 1 AC 58, the House of Lords rejected the propositions that a prisoner enjoyed a form of residual liberty vis-a-vis the Secretary of State or governor of the prison or that conditions of detention, however intolerable, made the detention itself unlawful. However in
Miller versus The Queen [(1985) 24 DLR (4th) 9], the Supreme Court of Canada accepted that infringement of a prisoner's residual liberty would support the writ of habeas corpus.
The members of the House of Lords, although referred at 151 to
Miller versus The Queen, did not cite it in their reasons in Hague. The
Supreme
Court of Canada did not go so far as to say that habeas corpus would lie to challenge any and all conditions of confinement in a prison. Some United
States cases of high authority support the proposition that habeas corpus is an available remedy to deal with the infliction on prisoners of various intolerable and unlawful conditions of imprisonment although in other cases the Courts have reserved the question. However the development in the United
States of habeas corpus as an instrument of constitutional change and to impose upon State Courts compliance with Federal law, particularly about civil rights, lessens the authority in Australia of United States decisions.
In Ex parte Hague at 162-3 Lord Bridge of Harwich began his consideration of residual liberty by setting out <case> of the Prison Act 1952 (UK) whereunder a prisoner, whether sentenced to imprisonment or committed to prison on remand or pending trial or otherwise, may be lawfully confined in any prison and said: "This provides lawful authority for the restraint of the prisoner within the defined bounds of the prison by the governor of the prison, who has the legal custody of the prisoner under section 13, or by any prison officer acting with the governor's authority. Can the prisoner then complain that his legal rights are infringed by a restraint which confines him at any particular time within a particular part of the prison? It seems to me that the reality of prison life demands a negative answer to this question. Certainly in the ordinary closed prison the ordinary prisoner will at any time of day or night be in a particular part of the prison, not because that is where he chooses to be, but because that is where the prison regime requires him to be. He will be in his cell, in the part of the prison where he is required to work, in the exercise yard, eating meals, attending education classes or enjoying whatever recreation is permitted, all in the appointed place and at the appointed time and all in accordance with a more or less rigid regime to which he must conform. Thus the concept of the prisoner's 'residual liberty' as a species of freedom of movement within the prison enjoyed as a legal right which the prison authorities cannot lawfully restrain seems to me quite illusory. The prisoner is at all times lawfully restrained within closely defined bounds and if he is kept in a segregated cell, at a time when, if the rules had not been misapplied, he would be in the company of other prisoners in the workshop, at the dinner table or elsewhere, this is not the deprivation of his liberty of movement, which is the essence of the tort of false imprisonment, it is the substitution of one form of restraint for another.

Mr Harris seeks to surmount these difficulties by submitted that whenever there is a breach of the rules which is sufficiently 'fundamental' this converts an otherwise lawful imprisonment into an unlawful imprisonment. This, as I understand it, is quite a different concept from that of an infringement of residual liberty."
In 1985 Ackner LJ giving the judgment of the English Court of Appeal in
Middleweek versus Chief Constable of Merseyside, reported as a note [(1992) 1 AC ], at 186 said that it must be possible to conceive hypothetical cases in which the conditions of detentions are so intolerable as to render the detention unlawful and thereby provide a remedy to the prisoner in damages for false imprisonment. In Ex parte Hague at 165-6 Lord Bridge said: "I sympathise entirely with the view that the person lawfully held in custody who is subjected to intolerable conditions ought not to be left without a remedy against his custodian, but the proposition that le conditions of detention may render the detention itself unlawful raises formidable difficulties.
If the proposition be sound, the corollary must be that when the conditions of detention deteriorate to the point of intolerability, the detainee is entitled immediately to go free. It is impossible, I think, to define with any precision what would amount to intolerable conditions for this purpose.
McCullough J understandably and perhaps wisely abstained from any attempt at definition in Ex parte Nahar. The examples given by Ackner LJ of a flooded or gas-filled cell are so extreme that they do not, with respect, offer much guidance as to where the line should be drawn. The law is certainly left in a very unsatisfactory state if the legality or otherwise of detaining a person who in law is and remains liable to detention depends on such an imprecise criterion and may vary from time to time as the conditions of his detention change.
 
The logical solution to the problem, I believe, is that if the conditions of an otherwise lawful detention are truly intolerable, the law ought to be capable of providing a remedy directly related to those condition without characterising the fact of the detention itself as unlawful. I see no real difficulty in saying that the law can provide such a remedy.
Whenever one person is lawfully in the custody of another, the custodian owes a duty of care to the detainee. If the custodian negligently allows, or a fortiori, if he deliberately causes, the detainee to suffer in any way in his health he will be in breach of that duty. But short of anything that could properly be described as a physical injury or an impairment of health, if a person lawfully detained is kept in conditions which cause him for the time being physical pain or a degree of discomfort which can properly be described as intolerable,
I believe that could and should be treated as a breach of the custodian's duty of care for which the law should award damages.
For this purpose it is quite unnecessary to attempt any definition of the criterion of intolerability. It would be a question of fact and degree in any case which came before the court to determine whether the conditions to which a detainee had been subjected were such as to warrant an award of damages for the discomfort he had suffered. In principle I believe it is acceptable for the law to provide a remedy on this basis, but that the remedy suggested in the cases of Nahar, The Times, 28 May and Middleweek, post, p 179 is not. In practice the problem is perhaps not very likely to arise."
At 166-7 Lord
Ackner said that his dictum in the Middleweek case was erroneous. But he was not prepared to accept that as a matter of general principle a person who was lawfully deprived of part only of his liberty, could not sue in tort for false imprisonment, if unlawfully deprived of the residue or balance of that liberty. "While a prisoner has no residual liberty vis-a-vis the governor, I would not accept that he had no remedy against a fellow prisoner who locked him in some confined space."
At 167 Lord Goff of Chieveley agreed that no action for damages for false imprisonment lay against the Secretary of State or the governor of a prison either on the ground of unlawful deprivation of residual liberty, or on the ground of subjection to intolerable conditions though he accepted that, in the latter circumstances, an action for damages for negligence might be available to the prisoner.
At 176 Lord Jauncey of
Tullichettle did not consider that a prisoner lawfully confined in prison had, vis-a-vis the governor, a residual liberty which could be protected by private law remedies. At 177 his Lordship dealt with "intolerable conditions", cited the passage in the judgment of Ackner LJ in Middleweek and said: "My Lords, there is no doubt that in the conditions predicated by Ackner LJ the prisoner would have a public law remedy and, if he sustained injury to health, a private law remedy as well, but the latter remedy would lie in negligence rather than in false imprisonment. To say that detention becomes unlawful when the conditions thereof become intolerable is to confuse conditions of confinement with nature of confinement and to add a qualification to section (1). If, as I believe to be the case, a prisoner at any time has no liberty to be in any place other than where the regime permits, he has no liberty capable of deprivation so as to constitute the tort of false imprisonment. An alteration of conditions therefore deprives him of no liberty because he has none already. I am therefore of the opinion that the above quoted dictum of Ackner LJ in
Middleweek is an incorrect statement of the law."
The House of Lords decision precludes the use of habeas corpus to review conditions of imprisonment either on the basis that a prisoner enjoys against the State or a governor of a prison a legal right to "residual liberty", meaning a species of freedom of movement within a prison, or on the basis that "intolerable" conditions of detention make the imprisonment unlawful.
Miller versus The Queen is an important decision, not only because of its authority, but also because it is unanimous and takes account of United States case law. The appellants rely on it. An inmate of a Federal penitentiary complained that a decision of a federal tribunal confining him in a special handling unit with the loss or denial of several privileges or amenities was unauthorised and unlawful or arrived at in a manner that denied him procedural fairness.
By law the Federal Court had exclusive original jurisdiction to issue certiorari against any federal tribunal. One question was whether a
provincial superior court, which retained jurisdiction by way of habeas corpus to review the validity of a detention imposed by federal authority, could issue certiorari in aid of habeas corpus to review the validity of a detention imposed by a federal authority.
The Ontario Court of Appeal allowed the applicant's appeal from a judgment dismissing his application for habeas corpus with certiorari in aid. The Court decided that habeas corpus would lie to determine the validity of confinement in a special handling unit, and if such confinement was found to be unlawful, to secure the release of the inmate into the general population of the institution; 14.
The Supreme Court upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal and dismissed the appeal. Le Dain J gave the Supreme Court's judgment.
At 24 he turned to the question whether habeas corpus would lie and at 25 said: "This issue turns on the view that one takes of the proper role of habeas corpus and the extent to which it should be adapted to the reality of the various forms of confinement or detention within penal institutions. An important policy consideration in the context of the exclusive review jurisdiction of the
Federal Court, is the extent to which the use of habeas corpus to determine the validity of a particular form of detention amounts to an indirect assumption of the Federal Court's review jurisdiction with respect to the administrative decisions of federal correctional authorities.

Those who oppose the resort to habeas corpus to challenge the validity of a particular form of confinement or detention in a penal institution contend that it fails to meet two essential conditions of the traditional availability of this remedy: that there be a deprivation of liberty, and (b) that what is sought is the complete liberty of the applicant and not merely his or her transfer to another form of detention or restraint of liberty. This view of the traditional role of habeas corpus is reflected in the decisions in Ex parte Rogers , 7 Jur 992 and R versus Governor of
Wandsworth Prison, Ex parte Silverman (1952), 96 Sol J 853."
Le Dain J reviewed an impressive body of authority in Canada and, in particular at 28, Canadian cases which illustrated the use of habeas corpus to release a person from a particular form of detention even though that person would lawfully remain under some other restraint of liberty, as for example to recover the custody of children, to release a person on parole where the parole had been unlawfully revoked and to transfer an inmate from an institution in which he had been unlawfully confined to another institution, and referred to the enlarged approach to the concept of custody for the purposes of habeas corpus reflected in American case law. At 30-31 Le Dain J said: "After giving consideration to the two approaches to this issue, I am of the opinion that the better view is that habeas corpus should lie to determine the validity of a particular form of confinement in a penitentiary notwithstanding that the same issue may be deter-mined upon certiorari in the Federal
Court. The proper scope of the availability of habeas corpus must be considered first on its own merits, apart from possible problems arising from concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction.
The general importance of this remedy as the traditional means of challenging deprivations of liberty is such that its proper development and adaptation to the modem realities of confinement in a prison setting should not be compromised by concerns about conflicting jurisdiction.
As I have said in connection with the question of jurisdiction to issue certiorari in aid of habeas corpus, these concerns have their origin in the legislative judgment to leave the habeas corpus jurisdiction against federal authorities with the provincial superior courts. There cannot be one definition of the reach of habeas corpus in relation to federal authorities and a different one for other authorities. Confinement in a special handling unit, or in administrative segregation as in
Cardinal and Oswald versus Director of Kent Institution [(1985) 24 DLR (4th) 44] is a form of detention that is distinct and separate from that imposed on the general inmate population. It involves a significant reduction in the residual liberty of the inmate. It is in fact a new detention of the inmate, purporting to rest on its own foundation of legal authority. It is that particular form of detention or deprivation of liberty which is the object of the challenge by habeas corpus. It is release from that form of detention that is sought. For the reasons indicated above,
I can see no sound reason in principle, having to do with the nature and role of habeas corpus, why habeas corpus should not be available for that purpose. I do not say that habeas corpus should lie to challenge any and all conditions of confinement in a penitentiary or prison, including the loss of any privilege enjoyed by the general inmate population. But it should lie in my opinion to challenge the validity of a distinct form of confinement or detention in which the actual physical constraint or deprivation of liberty, as distinct from the mere loss of certain privileges, is more restrictive or severe than the normal one in an institution."
The appellants also relied on United States decisions. One must approach those decisions bearing in mind the guarantee contained in Article 1, s9(2) of the United States [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) against suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, the right enshrined in the Fifth Amendment not to be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law, the prohibition in the
Eighth Amendment against the infliction of cruel and unusual punishments and the growth of Federal civil rights legislation. The right to habeas corpus as understood at common law and by the framers of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) was essentially a right to judicial protection against unlawful executive detention. Custody was an essential if implicit feature of the procedure and object of the writ. In 1885 the Supreme Court affirmed that physical restraint was a sine qua non of habeas corpus; Wales versus Whitney <case>; [114 US 564] (1885).
However, it remained to determine what manner of custody or degree of confinement could be subjected to review. See Duker,
A Constitutional History of Habeas Corpus, 1980, 287 and following.
In the 1950s and 1960s innovative judicial decisions effectively transformed federal habeas corpus into a general appellate jurisdiction of the lower Federal Courts over State criminal judgments.
The conventional limitations on the scope and availability of habeas corpus review were eliminated and the federal rights of State defendants expanded; see generally
Report to the Attorney General of Federal Habeas Corpus Review of State
Judgments, Truth in Criminal
Justice Report No 7, Office of Legal Policy 27
May 1988, particularly at ii and iii. In Brown versus Allen <case>; [344 US 443] (1953) at Frankfurter J said: "The State Court cannot have the last say when it though on fair consideration and what procedurally may be deemed fairness, may have misconceived a Federal constitutional right." In the opinion of the majority in Estelle, Corrections
Director versus Gamble <case>; [(1976) 429 US 97] at 104 deliberate indifference to serious medical needs of prisoners constituted the "unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain" proscribed by the Eighth
Amendment. In Bell, Attorney General versus Wolfish <case>; [441 US 520] (1979) inmates challenged the constitutionality of numerous conditions of confinement in a federally operated short term custodial facility in New York City. In a footnote to the majority opinion of the court at 526-7 it was observed that the petitioners apparently never contested the propriety of respondent's use of a writ of habeas corpus to challenge the condition of their confinement and that question was not raised in the Supreme Court. The footnote continued: "Thus, we leave to another day the question of the propriety of using a writ of habeas corpus to obtain review of the conditions of confinement, as distinct from the fact or length of the confinement itself." Apparently the
Supreme Court has still directly to decide the question; compare Gomez v
United States <case>;  <case>; [411 US 475] (1973): "When a prisoner is put under additional and unconstitutional restraints during his lawful custody, it is arguable that habeas corpus will lie to remove the restraints making the custody illegal. See Note, Developments in the Law - Habeas Corpus, [83 Harv L
Rev 1038], 1084 (1970)." Part of that note was: "Most courts ... believe that habeas jurisdiction is lacking when the petitioner is not asking for the invalidation of a custody imposed by sentence, on the theory that the petitioner is not seeking a present or future release. But this fails to recognize that the lawfulness of a custody depends, not merely upon the legal basis for some kind of custody, but upon the lawfulness of the specific type and manner of confinement in question. Where the specific detention abridges federally protected interests - by placing petitioner in the wrong prison, denying him treatment, imposing cruel and unusual punishment, impeding his access to the courts, and so on - it is an unlawful detention and habeas lies to release the petitioner therefrom. It is immaterial that the petitioner might then be placed in a different, lawful custody or that his being sentenced to a term of confinement might itself be lawful.
The custody requirement, and the corresponding insistence on discharge from custody, do not prevent habeas corpus from being an appropriate remedy for the review of unlawful prison administration"
At 30 Le Dain J said that since the note was written the point of view expressed in it had been adopted by federal courts of appeal and referred to cases "recognising the availability of habeas corpus to challenge the validity of various forms of segregated confinement in a prison on the ground of a violation of due process".
United States case law has been largely driven by the need to secure a federal remedy for the breach, in some cases by State courts or instrumentalities, of the constitutional or other federal rights of prisoners.
The writ of habeas corpus has become the means to remedy such breaches.
This has been achieved by extending the application of habeas corpus beyond its common law role. In Jones versus Cunningham <case>; [(1963) 371 US 236] at 243 the court said that habeas corpus is "not now and never has been a static, narrow, formalistic remedy; its scope has grown to achieve its grand purpose - the protection of individuals against erosion of their right to be free from wrongful restraints upon their liberty"; see also Wilwording versus Swenson, Warden <case>; [(1971) 404 US 249.]
In the present case it is unnecessary to consider whether a prisoner enjoys a right of "residual liberty" vis-a-vis the State and whether the writ of habeas corpus runs where a person is illegally held in a prison within a prison. The Supreme Court of Canada provides powerful authority in support of that proposition. There is no such compelling authority to support the "intolerable conditions" submission. Le Dain J did not go so far and the question remains open in the United States. The difficulties of the proposition, to which Lord Bridge and Lord Jauncey refer, are indeed formidable and as their Lordships pointed out there are elsewhere remedies by an action for negligence or for administrative review. In Australia authority dictates that this Court cannot go so far. In my opinion the availability of other remedies makes it unnecessary to do so.
 
MAGNA CARTA
The appellants apply to amend the statement of claim to allege that the failure or refusal of the Commissioner of Corrective Services and the
Department to supply to or permit the possession and use of condoms by the plaintiffs and each of them and other male prisoners in New South Wales' prisons, particularly
Bathurst Gaol and Long Bay Gaol, was in contravention or threatened contravention of Chapter 29 of Magna Carta. The respondent opposes this amendment. Chapter 29 in the form confirmed in 25 Edw. 1 (1297) is translated as follows: "No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold, or liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any other wise destroyed; nor will we not pass upon him, nor (condemn him) but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land.
We will sell to no man, we will not deny or defer to any man either justice or right."
The appellants claim to be entitled to rely upon the first sentence of this chapter (Chapter 39 in the 1215 version; McKechnie, Magna Carta, 2nd ed, at 375) in support of all aspects of their proceedings. According to McKechnie at 376-7 the object of the chapter was to prohibit King John from resorting to what was sometimes whimsically known in Scotland as "Jeddart Justice": "How in the morn they hang and draw,
And sit in judgment after."
The chapter forbade execution before judgment and insisted that every judgment must be delivered by the accused man's "equals" and that no free man should be punished except "in accordance with the law of the land." Both 17th century English lawyers, led by Sir Edward Coke, and American lawyers reinstated and increased the importance of Magna Carta as a declaration of supposed fundamental principles of common law; see generally Jago versus Judges of
District Court of New South Wales [(1988) 12 NSWLR 558]; [(1989) 168 CLR ] at 62 and following per Toohey J. The appellants seek to support their submission by reliance upon [s3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s3.html) of the Petition of Right 1627 which recites that "by the statute called the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, it is declared and enacted, that no free man may be taken or imprisoned or be disseised of his freehold or liberties or his free customes to be outlawed or exiled or in any manner destroyed, but by the lawfull judgment of his peeres or by the law of the land." Both 25 Edw.1
Chapter 29 and the Petition of Right are mentioned in [Pt 1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/index.html#p1) of the Second Schedule to the [Imperial Acts Application
Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/iaaa1969240/) and are in force in New South Wales.
The appellants referred us to the judgment of Isaacs J in Ex parte Walsh and Johnson;
In re Yates <case>; [(1925) 37 CLR 36] at 79 where his Honour said that the
Chapter recognises three basic principles namely, "(1) primarily every free man has an inherent individual right to his life, liberty, property and citizenship; (2) his individual rights must always yield to the necessities of the general welfare at the will of the State; (3) the law of the land is the only mode by which the State can so declare its will."
This led to two corollaries, an initial presumption in favour of liberty so that whoever claims to imprison has cast upon him the obligation of justifying his claim by reference to the law and second that the courts see that this obligation is strictly and completely fulfilled before they hold that liberty is lawfully restrained. No one would doubt these propositions as part of the common law and there seems little point in seeking to invoke an event which occurred in to support them. In Jago versus District Court of New South
Wales at 66,
Toohey J discussing the second sentence of chapter 29 (chapter 40 in the 1215 version) quoted from McKechnie at 395 where the author observed that that sentence had had much read into it that would have astonished its framers and that the application of modern standards to ancient practice has resulted in complete misapprehension. Whatever may have been intended by the drafters of
Magna Carta in 1215 or on the occasions when it was subsequently confirmed, it has influenced the development of current common law. It does not however, in my opinion, provide a statutory basis for saying that the denial by prison authorities of access by prisoners to condoms is unlawful. I would apply to this case what was said in Jago at 67 by Toohey J: "... the appellant's case is not assisted by the argument that the effect of the [Imperial Acts Application Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/iaaa1969240/) is to re-enact
Magna Carta as if it were a piece of contemporary legislation.
Even if that be so (as to which it is unnecessary to express an opinion), the language of Magna Carta remains the same and the difficulty remains of finding in that language the principle for which the appellant contends."
In that sense neither Magna Carta nor the Petition of Right assist the appellants. Their application to amend the statement of claim to invoke contravention of Magna Carta should be refused.
 
LIMITATION
OF NUMBER OF PLAINTIFFS
Dunford J limited the number of plaintiffs in a way intended to ensure than an appropriate variety of factual issues be litigated and guidelines set for such of the other plaintiffs as would wish or need to bring separate proceedings.
This was done to facilitate management of the proceedings and avoid unnecessary delay. It was clearly a matter for his Honour's discretion.
The appellants did not challenge this or the validity of the reasons which led to his Honour's decision. They appealed against it on the grounds that they wished by numbers to express solidarity and were in fear of repercussions. As the Solicitor General pointed out there was no evidence of a threat of repercussions. Any repercussion or threatened repercussion to a prisoner arising out of the bringing of these proceedings would involve a serious contempt of court and, if established, should be so dealt with. These are not matters which go to undermine the propriety of Dunford J's exercise of discretion. This ground of appeal fails.
 
CONCLUSIONS
In my opinion the appeal fails. What remains to be done is for the appellants to apply in the Common Law Division to amend their statement of claim in a way which accords with Dunford J's orders and the conclusions I have reached. The amendments will include those necessary to raise their contention based on Wednesbury principles.
I propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I agree with Sheller JA.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/109.html  
