

Judith Collison versus Dr. John Ewan Macdonald Gill and Ors [1996] NSWSC 655 (24 December 1996) 
JUDITH COLLISON v. DR. JOHN EWAN MACDONALD GILL & ORS /93 
TUESDAY 24 DECEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By statement of claim filed on 23 August 1993 (No. 13249 of 1993), Judith Collison asserted a claim for damages against each of six defendants. Four motions filed in the proceedings (three by the plaintiff, one by the defendant) were heard on 21, 22 and 23 November 1995. Judgment was reserved. On 28 November 1995, I made orders as follows:- "1. As to the plaintiff's motion filed on 24 August 1993 seeking an extension of the limitation period for each of the causes of action pleaded by her against the defendant Dr. Gill - the motion is dismissed. I stand over the balance of the motion to 13 February 1996.
As to the plaintiff's further motion filed on 29 September 1995, insofar as it seeks extension of the limitation period against Dr. Gill - the motion is dismissed. I stand over the balance of the motion to 13 February 1996.
As to the plaintiff's motion filed on 18 October 1995 for leave to file an amended statement of claim incorporating an amended pleading against Dr. Gill - the motion is dismissed.
The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs of those three motions.
As to the defendant's motion filed on 26 October 1995 for orders:- that the statement of claim be struck out; further and/or in the alternative, that the proceedings should be dismissed as an abuse of process; further and/or in the alternative, that certain Specified paragraphs in the statement of claim be struck out, 
I have already made order (a). I refuse to make order (b). Order (c) does not arise.
I order that each party pay his or her own costs of that motion.
I order that the time within which either party may apply to me or the
Court of Appeal for leave to appeal (so far as leave is necessary), or may appeal, against any of the foregoing orders, shall not commence to run until the date upon which I deliver my reasons for those orders." 
On 14 December 1995, I heard submissions about the question of the apportionment of the hearing time in order to facilitate the implementation of the costs orders which I had made. On 15 December 1995, I delivered a judgment setting out my reasons for the orders that I had made. Referring to the argument on the preceding day I directed:- "That costs of all four motions be assessed on the basis that 85% of the time occupied by the proceedings on 21, 22 and 23 November related to the three motions upon which the plaintiff has failed and only 15% of that time is to be regarded as having been occupied in dealing with the defendant's motion." 
By notice of motion filed on 5 November 1996 which eventually came on for hearing on 3 December 1996, the fourth defendant sought orders:- "1. That the plaintiff pay the fourth defendant's costs in these proceedings.
The costs order (or orders) in favour of the fourth defendant in these proceedings by ordered to be paid forthwith pursuant to Part 52A Rule 9(2).
Such further order as the court thinks fit." 
In oral submissions, Mr. Geddes, solicitor for the fourth defendant, indicated that he was not at that stage seeking any further costs order other than order made on 28 November 1995, so that there was no occasion for me to deal with paragraph one of the notice of motion. Part 52A Rule 9, referred to in paragraph two of the notice of motion, provides as follows:- "9(1) Where before the conclusion of any proceedings, other than proceedings:- in the Commercial Division; or entered in the Construction List, the court makes an order for the payment of costs or a motion is refused with costs, the costs shall not, unless the court otherwise orders, be payable until the conclusion of the proceedings.

Where, in any proceedings, it appears to a registrar, on application, that there is no likelihood of any further order being made in the proceedings, the registrar may order that any costs ordered to be paid shall be payable forthwith." 
It seems to me that the form of order sought is not that which the defendant really needs. Rather it seems to me he needs an order under Rule 9(1) that the costs be payable notwithstanding that the proceedings are not concluded. That may be only a matter of form and should make no difference to the outcome of this application.

It is necessary to say a little more about the history of the proceedings in order to determine whether they may be regarded as already concluded, so that
Rule 9(1) is applicable, or whether "there is no likelihood of any further order being made in the proceedings" so that Rule 9(2) may apply.

On 15 December 1995, having made the orders set out above, I then made the following observations:- "The future of the proceedings "Although I have held that the prosecution of the proceedings is not as such an abuse of process, I have little doubt that the future prosecution of them would be so, unless in the context of a very extensive amendment of the statement of claim so as properly to plead a cause of action available as a matter of fact and of law, accompanied by a properly presented application to extend the limitation period in respect of the particular cause of action or those causes of action pleaded in any such new amended statement of claim. The matter cannot be allowed to drag on.

I propose to list the matter for mention on 6 February 1996. I grant leave to the defendant to file and serve a motion, returnable on that day, for an order for summary dismissal under Part 13 of the Rules and/or for dismissal of the proceedings as an abuse of process. That application will be heard on that date or such later date as I may then direct. If the plaintiff seeks leave further to amend the statement of claim to plead any other cause of action than those which have previously been attempted to be pleaded, and to extend the limitation period in respect of any such cause of action, the plaintiff's motions to that effect:-
Are to be made returnable before me on 6 February 1996.
Are to be filed and served, together with all of the evidence upon which the plaintiff seeks to rely in respect of either such motion on or before 24
January 1996.

I indicate for the benefit of all parties that my present view is that the plaintiff should not be permitted any extension of time beyond that date to file affidavits in support of any such motion, and it is my present view that if the plaintiff does file any such motion, it should be dealt with by me on 6
February on the basis only of such material on behalf of the plaintiff as has been filed and served in accordance with this direction. Should the plaintiff file and serve any such motion, and evidence in support thereof, the defendant is directed to file and serve any material relied upon in response thereto by .00 am on 6 February 1996." 
On 1 February 1996, Mr. Bates, counsel for the plaintiff, sought an extension of the times thus fixed. That application was refused, there being nothing before the court to indicate that any extension of the times would make any material difference to the outcome, in the sense that the plaintiff's advisers still did not appear to be in any better position to formulate what they conceived to be their client's cause of action than they had been at any earlier time. (It is to be observed that in the course of proceedings, there had come to be discussed as many as five proposed draft statements of claim).

The matter was mentioned again on 16 February when Mr. Bates on behalf of the plaintiff (and Mr. Everingham on behalf of other plaintiffs who had filed similarly defective statements of claim against Dr. Gill) pressed me to allow further time to the plaintiff Collison (and to those other plaintiffs) within which to make yet another attempt to plead a viable cause of action. Mr.
Geddes on behalf of Dr. Gill pressed me to make final orders in the present matter on that day so as to dispose of it entirely (regardless of what indulgence I might be disposed to give to any other plaintiff).

I was conscious of the fact that the present matter was but one of a large number of matters affected by similar considerations and had been selected in effect as a test case (see later) and that it was desirable that the parties have every opportunity to explore the question whether there might be a resolution of all cases against Dr. Gill; and I was also concerned that should it be the case that plaintiffs treated at Chelmsford in circumstances similar to Mrs. Collison are in a position to plead a viable cause of action against
Dr. Gill, Mrs. Collison should have the opportunity of doing so in the present action if that was at all possible. In particular, given that the question of amendment of the pleadings was under consideration in respect of all of the other plaintiffs and, indeed, one plaintiff (Susan Tweedale) had made an application for leave to amend her statement of claim which was to be heard during May 1996, I saw no utility in putting an end to the Collison proceedings at that stage.

At the conclusion of the argument on that day I made the following orders in a number of matters including this:- "As between the plaintiff and Dr. Gill:-
Any motion presently on foot for extension of the limitation period against Dr. Gill is dismissed.
Any application presently on foot for leave to amend the statement of claim against Dr. Gill is dismissed.
The statement of claim as a pleading is struck out." (In the present case, orders to that effect of course had already been made on the occasion when judgment was delivered on 15 December 1995.) "4. I stand the matter over (including the defendant's motion to dismiss the proceedings) to 22 March 1996.
I grant leave to the plaintiff to file and serve by 18 March 1996 any application for leave to amend the pleading, returnable before me on 22 March .
I reserve to 22 March 1996 the question of costs." 
All further questions of costs were reserved. Those orders were made on the basis of an undertaking by the plaintiff, through her counsel, that should the plaintiff on 22 March 1996 not succeed in an application to amend the statement of claim, she would consent to an order for dismissal of the proceedings.

No further application was made to file an amended statement of claim. The matter was listed before me on 22 March 1996 but I was not then asked to and I did not in fact make any order dismissing the proceedings as was contemplated to be the outcome in the event that no further application was made. No such order having been sought on that day, there was no occasion for the plaintiff through her counsel to consent thereto as she had undertaken to do.

The matter was mentioned before me again on 21 June 1996. The plaintiff was represented by Mr. Everingham and Dr. Gill was represented by Mr. Geddes.
Unfortunately no transcript was made of the proceedings on that date. The associate's note on the court file is that "the issue raised by Mr. Everingham as to the status of orders made on 16 February 1996 to be resolved when
Tweedale judgment handed down". That is a reference to the matter of
Tweedale v. Gill & Ors (No. 13212 of 1993), referred to above, an action brought by a former Chelmsford patient, in which I had heard similar motions for dismissal of the proceedings and, on the other hand, for leave to amend the statement of claim, and in those proceedings judgment had been reserved on 21 May 1996 and has still not been delivered. At the commencement of the second day of the hearing in Tweedale, counsel for the plaintiff in that matter foreshadowed an application to set aside the orders made in that case and in the Dr. Gill matters generally on 16 February and filed in court an affidavit of his instructing solicitor, Roland Everingham, sworn on 21 May setting out his understanding of the purpose and effect of the orders made in all matters including the Collison matter on 16 February and indicating that if the orders had any other effect, they were consented to under a misapprehension as to their effect. The issue thus raised remains to be determined.

The affidavit filed in support of the defendant's motion does not suggest that any order was made either on 22 March or on 21 June dismissing the proceedings.

No order having been made which brings the proceedings to an end (as distinct from the order striking out the statement of claim as a pleading), the defendant requires the leave of the court pursuant to Rule 9A(1) before he may apply to proceed with the taxation of the costs. The onus rests clearly upon the defendant to show why the discretion conferred by the Rule should be exercised in his favour. It is obviously relevant to the exercise of that discretion to consider whether there is any likelihood of any further order being made in the proceedings, the situation contemplated in subrule (2). I am unable to say that there is no likelihood of any further order being made in the proceedings, because of the possibility that an order may be made setting aside or varying the orders made on 16 February. That would conclude, adversely to the defendant, any application under Rule 9A(2), which is the application in fact made in the motion; but it is, I think, appropriate and in the interests of justice that I should deal with the motion as though the defendant had sought, in the alternative, leave pursuant to subrule (1) to proceed with the taxation of the costs notwithstanding that the proceedings have not been concluded. Relevant to that consideration, obviously, is the circumstance that the defendant has succeeded in the motions in respect of which judgment was given on 15 December and prima facie entitled to his costs.
He is presumably out of pocket by reason of his having paid his own lawyers; or they are unpaid for work for which they are entitled to be paid. There is, however, another very relevant and, in my view, overwhelming consideration and that is referred to on p.2 of my judgment on the four motions. I repeat what I then said:- "The action is one of a group of more than 100 cases in this court relating to treatments given at Chelmsford Private Hospital between about 1970 and about , and is one of almost 50 such cases in which Dr. Gill is named as a defendant. The whole group of cases has been the subject of case management, and particular cases have been selected (with the consent of the parties in those and in all other affected cases in the group) as vehicles for the determination of selected issues relating to possible extensions of the relevant limitation period, possible grants of leave to sue the Medical
Defence Union as the insurer of Dr. Bailey and of some of the other doctors involved, and as to the extent to which any treatment at Chelmsford may have contributed to the present plight of any of the plaintiffs (for which purpose, in 15 cases court experts have been appointed).

The present case was selected as a vehicle particularly for the determination of the question whether there was such a relationship between the defendant
Dr. Gill (to whom I shall hereafter refer as "the defendant") and any of the plaintiffs, as to give rise to a duty of care on his part for breach of which he might be held liable in damages. An earlier case was selected in the hope that it would prove an appropriate vehicle for the determination of the same issue, in a way which would assist in the resolution of at least the bulk of the claims against the defendant, but unfortunately proved to be unsatisfactory for that purpose, the pleadings being in such a sorry state that the matter went off on technical grounds providing no opportunity for resolution of the substantive issue: Michael Brian Malouf v. John Ewan
MacDonald Gill (Sully, J., unreported 31 August 1995)." 
It seems to me the fact that the matter was in that fashion selected in effect as a test case requires that the final resolution of any question of the costs of the matter be considered in the overall context of the whole group of cases. In Tweedale, mentioned above, a plaintiff in substantially similar circumstances is endeavouring to obtain leave to proceed on an amended statement of claim designed to cure the defects apparent in the pleading in the present matter. Although the Tweedale case was not in terms designated as a further test case on the issue, it will obviously have that effect. If she is successful in formulating a viable cause of action against Dr. Gill, it may be anticipated that all other plaintiffs who have proceedings on foot against that defendant will similarly seek leave to amend into a similar form; and it may be anticipated that Mrs. Collison would be advised to commence fresh proceedings or to re-agitate the question of amendment in the present proceedings, in order to proceed on a statement of claim similarly formulated.

While all of those matters remain outstanding, it appears to me that the correct exercise of my discretion is to refuse leave to the defendant to tax the costs of the motions at this stage. The order which I make is that the defendant's motion filed on 5 November 1996 stand over generally with liberty to the defendant to restore it to the list following the delivery of judgment in the matter of Tweedale v. Gill.
 * * * 
