

Currabubula Holdings Pty Ltd versus D R E Downtown Real Estate Pty Ltd and Ors
Matter No 4592/94 [1998] NSWSC 517 (23 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 November 1998 
CURRABUBULA HOLDINGS PTY LTD versus D R E DOWNTOWN REAL ESTATE PTY LTD & ORS /94 June 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
FILE NO: 4592 of 1994 
DELIVERED: 23 June 1998 (Reserved) 
HEARING DATES: 9, 10, 11 and 12 June 1998 
PARTIES: Currabubula Holdings Pty Ltd versus D R E Downtown Real Estate Pty Ltd & Ors 
JUDGMENT OF: Hodgson CJ in Eq 
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff: Mr B Coles QC 
Defendant: Mr H Nicholas QC with Mr R Sheldon 
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff: Gadens, Sydney 
Defendant: Murray Stewart & Fogarty, Sydney 
CATCHWORDS: 
Equity - Fiduciary Duties 
Principal and Agent - Real Estate Agent 
Real estate agent acting for vendor of rural property, under pressure from mortgagee to sell, negotiate consensus as to price for sale of property for $3.5 million - Vendor's solicitor prepares contract excluding crops being grown by sharefarmers - Purchaser's solicitor prepares contract including crops - Estate agent without notice to vendor arrange meeting between sharefarmers and purchaser at which sharefarmers surrender their agreement conditionally on an exchange of contracts - Contracts exchanged excluding crops - Held that arranging of meeting tended to prejudice vendor's position that the crops should be excluded; that but for the agent's action there would have been a 5% chance of the vendor securing a contract excluding the crops, so that the loss to the vendor was worth no more than about $10,000.00; that the agent was not entitled to retain its commission of $61,000.00; and that the vendor could not recover damages in addition.

Andrews versus Ramsay [(1903) 2 KB 635] applied.

Georieff versus Athans (1981) 26 SAR 412 doubted.

CURRABUBULA HOLDINGS PTY LTD V D R E DOWNTOWN REAL ESTATE PTY LTD & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff Currabubula was in early 1991 the owner of the property Gabo, near Gunnedah, New South Wales. The first defendant ( which I will call "DRE") was a real estate agent trading as L.J. Hooker Tamworth; and the second defendant Mr. Thornton and the third defendant Mr. Collier were licensed real estate agents who controlled DRE. 
In mid-1991, the plaintiff engaged DRE to act as its agent for the sale of
Gabo. By a contract dated 30th August 1991, the plaintiff agreed to sell Gabo to Baiada Properties Pty. Limited (which I will call "Baiada") for $3.5 million. Under the contract, crops growing on Gabo and certain chattels were to pass to Baiada. The plaintiff claims that these terms disadvantageous to the plaintiff were included in the contract by reason of breaches by the defendants of their duties.

In these proceedings, the plaintiff seeks damages or compensation, recovery of commission paid to DRE of $71,700.00, and interest.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
In early 1991, the plaintiff was under some pressure from its bank (the State
Bank of New South Wales) to repay certain loans amounting to about $3 million, and to that end to sell one or more of its properties. It had Gabo listed with
Dalgety Winchcombe for sale by auction, to take place on 28th February 1991.
The contract for the auction was drawn up by Blake Dawson Waldron, Solicitors.
Special Condition 35 of this contract provided that any standing crops on the property were excluded from the sale.

On 13th February 1991, Tony Paola, the principal of the plaintiff, took a telephone call from John Camilleri, the principal of Baiada, in which Mr.
Camilleri expressed interest in purchasing Gabo, and arranged for an inspection. This inspection took place at 4.00pm on the same day.

The auction took place on 28th February 1991, and the property was passed in.
No representative of Baiada attended at the auction.

Thereafter, the plaintiff entered into two sharefarming agreements concerning
Gabo. First, there was an agreement dated 22nd March 1991 with Keith White,
Graeme White and Alan Delve affecting 980 hectares, for a period ending 30th
June 1994. The agreement provided that grain produced should be apportioned so that the owner was entitled to one-third and the sharefarmers two-thirds. The second agreement was dated 1st May 1991, was made with Peter Hubbard affecting hectares, and was for a period ending 30th June 1994. This agreement had a similar provision concerning apportionment of grain.

On 17th June 1991, Mr. Collier telephoned Mr. Paola, told him that he had "a solid enquiry for Gabo", and requested a listing. It turned out that this enquiry was from Baiada.

On 20th June 1991, Mr. Collier went to Currabubula Station and there saw Mr.
Paola, who then signed a non-exclusive agency agreement with DRE. According to this agreement, the property was to be offered for $4.7 million. It noted that no livestock or other items were included in the sale. Under the entry for
Vendor's Terms, it was noted "as per attached": however, the evidence does not disclose any attachment.

Shortly afterwards, DRE sent a fax to Mr. Paola to the effect that Baiada was prepared to offer $4.5 million for the property, subject to finance, and conditional on acceptance within one week. This offer lapsed.

On 28th June 1991, Mr. Thornton sent a fax to Mr. Camilleri of Baiada reporting an offer by the plaintiff to sell for $4.7 million, $3.2 million "up front" plus $1.5 million payable over three years. The fax included the words "you keep crop". Mr. Camilleri responded to this to the effect that the offer was acceptable subject to advice re taxation matters and finance approval.

Shortly afterwards, there was a fax from Mr. Camilleri to Mr. Thornton with alternative proposals for the purchase of Gabo: first, $4 million plus trading losses giving first crop to the vendor; and second, if trading losses not practical, $3.8 million plus first crop to vendor.

On 1st July 1991, Baiada sent a fax to the plaintiff offering $4 million for the properties "plus plant and equipment", conditional on finance approval. On rd July 1991, Mr. Camilleri went to inspect Gabo. Mr. Paola spoke to him there, and advised him that he had another offer for part of the property, or perhaps advised him to the effect that he had sold part of the property. By a letter dated the same day, Baiada withdrew its offer of 1st July.

On 12th July 1991, Mr. Paola was contacted by Mr. Yeo, a valuer for the State
Bank, to make arrangements to value the property for the Bank. Mr. Yeo said that he believed there were a couple of people interested in buying the property, and that he would wait a couple of weeks before valuing it.

On 15th July 1991, Mr. Collier telephoned Mr. Paola, and indicated Baiada was still interested in the property, and requested that negotiations be resumed.
Mr. Paola said no to this.

Between 21st and 27th July, it seems that Mr. Paola had a number of calls from both Mr. Collier and Mr. Yeo concerning Gabo. On 27th July, Mr. Paola telephoned Mr. Collier and said words to the effect that he was prepared to reconsider John Camilleri's offer of $4 million if he had his finances fixed.

Later the same day, Mr. Collier took to Mr. Paola a letter from Baiada containing what was called an "unconditional offer" for Gabo of $3.5 million.
The letter made no mention of crops. The letter concluded: "This letter supersedes all previous correspondence and discussions in this matter".

On the same day, Mr. Paola signed an agency agreement with Mr. Hammersley of
Elders Real Estate authorising Gabo to be offered at $4.5 million together with growing crops. This was in connection with an interested purchaser then being introduced by Elders.

By letter dated 31st July 1991, from Mr. Paola to Mr. Thornton, the plaintiff rejected Baiada's offer of 27th July 1991.

Also on 31st July 1991, a letter was sent by Mr. Egan, Baiada's solicitor, to
Lyons Barnett Kennedy, the plaintiff's solicitors, referring to the $3.5 million offer and to "a draft copy of the Contract". (It is apparent that Mr.
Egan had obtained a copy of the contract prepared for the auction.) The letter went on to the effect that Baiada required certain amendments to the contract, including the deletion of cl.35, the clause providing that standing crops were to be excluded from the sale.

By letter dated 31st July, Mr. Thornton wrote to Mr. Paola regretting that they had not been able to obtain a satisfactory price, "the problem being the availability of finance and not the purchaser's willingness to proceed at the higher price of $4 million".

During August, it seems that Mr. Collier telephoned Mr. Paola on a number of occasions to enquire if Mr. Paola would negotiate further with Baiada. There were also some calls to Mr. Paola from Mr. Yeo. Mr. Yeo in fact inspected Gabo to value it on 7th August 1991.

On 19th August 1991, the solicitor acting for the State Bank wrote to the plaintiff's former solicitors to the effect that, unless outstanding amounts were paid forthwith, direct action would be taken including enforcement of securities. It seems clear that Mr. Paola took this as an indication that, unless he could very quickly obtain a contract in respect of Gabo, the Bank would enforce its securities.

On 21st August 1991, Mr. Paola telephoned Mr. Collier and said that he was prepared to accept Baiada's offer as per their letter of 29th July. The next day, Mr. Collier telephoned Mr. Paola, and told him that the buyer was prepared to go ahead on those terms, so that a new contract should be sent to the buyer's solicitors.

On 22nd August, Mr. Collier drafted a Sales Advice, which recorded a sale of
Gabo for $3.5 million. According to the Sales Advice, inclusions were to be "as per contract" and special conditions were to be "as per contract". This
Sales Advice was sent to the plaintiff's solicitor, Mr. Lyons. On the same day, Mr. Paola gave instructions to Mr. Lyons to draft the contract, and sent him copies of the sharefarming agreements.

On 23rd August 1991, Mr. Lyons sent a draft contract to Mr. Egan. Special
Condition 34 of this contract excluded growing crops from the sale; and
Special Condition 42 acknowledged the two sharefarming agreements, and provided that the purchaser took subject to them.

On 26th August 1991, Mr. Collier sent a letter to Mr. Paola confirming the agreement to sell Gabo for $3.5 million. The letter indicated that special condition of the sale was to be "as per contract". On the same day, Mr.
Thornton sent a fax to Mr. Egan, with advice as to house inclusions.

On that day also, there was a telephone conversation between Mr. Thornton and
Mr. Lyons, to the following effect: 
Thornton: "The contract you sent over says that the crops stay with Tony".

Lyons: "That's right".

Thornton: "The crops are included in the sale".

Lyons: "That's not what I've been instructed. Anyway, as I see it we are not in a position to be dealing with the crops. They belong to the sharefarmers. They have an agreement with Tony. You would have to deal with the sharefarmers before Tony would be able to deal with the crops. At this stage, my instructions are that Tony keeps the crops. They are not ours to give away".

On 27th August 1991, Mr. Egan submitted a different set of special conditions to Mr. Camilleri, including a term that the growing crops were included in the sale, and a term including certain diesel tanks and syphoning hoses in the sale. These terms were approved by Mr. Camilleri. On the same day, Mr.
Camilleri also signed an authority authorising his uncle George Camilleri to act on his behalf in relation to the exchange of contracts.

Also on 27th August 1991, Mr. Thornton sent a fax to Brian Thompson, a solicitor with Lyons Barnett & Kennedy who was acting in the matter in the absence of Mr. Lyons and 27th and 28th August, in the following terms: 
Gabo - Paola to Camilleri 
The contract issued on the above property was contrary to what was agreed. I have spoken to Tony Paola and he wants the contract signed but realises that there are problems with the contract. I have advised him that John Camilleri will sign a revised contract. To facilitate this the contract will be amended, signed and deposit paid to ourselves. Tony Paola will need to be informed of the content of the signed contract with which he can accept or reject the contract. Please contact me with regards same.

It appears that Mr. Thornton did in fact have a conversation with Mr. Paola along the lines indicated in this fax.

Also on the same day, there was hand-delivered to Messrs. Lyons Barnett
Kennedy a letter from Mr. Egan, in the following terms: 
We refer to our recent conversations concerning this matter and now enclose a Contract duly executed by our client company which contains various amendments to that submitted by your Mr. Lyons.

On the basis that the Contract will be acceptable to your client, we enclose a fresh set of special conditions and annexure "C".

If the Contract is acceptable to your client you might let us have an identical copy of the Contract duly executed by way of exchange within the next 24 hours otherwise our clients' offer to purchase is withdrawn and we request that your return the Contract and the enclosed cheque representing the deposit to us.

In the event that you forward to us within the said 24 hours an exchanged Contract, you may invest the deposit with Westpac in accordance with special condition 30.

This letter enclosed a form of contract, substantially in the terms approved by Mr. Camilleri, and signed by George Camilleri on behalf of Baiada. There is some question whether the document enclosed with this letter included a continuation of cl.41 concerning the sharefarmers: the page in question was not found in Mr. Lyons' file and was not initialled by George Camilleri, so in my opinion it is clear that it was not included.

It seems that Mr. Thompson contacted Mr. Paola when he received this letter and the contract. Mr. Paola said in evidence he believed that he then took it that Mr. Camilleri was trying to change the agreement, and that he conveyed his intention to try to get the buyer to stick with the terms of the offer.
However, it is fair to say that Mr. Paola's recollection of this conversation was very unclear. Mr. Thompson was not called to give evidence.

I should record here that, whereas that evidence from Mr. Paola suggested that he believed Baiada's offer was $3.5 million for the property excluding the crops, Mr. Camilleri and Mr. Thornton gave evidence that their view was that
Baiada's offer was for the property including the crops; while Mr. Collier seemed wholly confident that the agreement was that the crops be included.

On 28th August 1991, Mr. Collier contacted the sharefarmers to arrange a meeting the next morning between them and Mr. Camilleri at Baiada's premises in Tamworth, for the purpose of Baiada reaching an agreement with the sharefarmers that they should release their sharefarming agreements if the purchase were to go ahead. Mr. Paola was not advised about this meeting.

On 29th August 1991, the meeting went ahead. It was scheduled at 8.00am but did not start until about 9.40am because Mr. Camilleri was delayed by fog at
Tamworth airport. The meeting was attended by Mr. Thornton, Mr. Collier, John and George Camilleri, the sharefarmers, and two other persons associated with
Baiada. At the meeting, the sharefarmers signed release documents. The documents signed by the Messrs. White and Mr. Delve was in the following terms: 
We the undersigned hereby release Currabubula Holdings Pty. Ltd. from all present and future obligations embodied in a sharefarming agreement dated 22nd March, 1991 between Currabubula Holdings Pty. Ltd. and Keith Robert White, Graeme Arthur Charles White and Alan Raymond Delve.

The above mentioned release is subject to and conditional upon the exchange of contract and settlement taking place of the property known as "GABO" (a property consisting of approximately 7330 acres located at Breeza) between Currabubula Holdings Pty. Ltd. and Baiada Properties Pty. Limited. Upon the latter event occuring (sic) we hereby relinquish all present and future rights under the sharefarming agreement and declare that no future recourse action shall be taken against Currabubula Holdings Pty. Ltd. or yourself personally from any matter whatsoever arising in respect of the cancellation of the subject agreement.

Mr. Hubbard signed a document in similar terms. Copies of these documents were faxed to Mr. Lyons shortly before 3pm that day, together with a message from
Mr. Thornton in the following terms: 
Re Paola to Camilleri (Baiada) 
Herewith agreements signed by sharefarmers for the above property as discussed. Please advise urgently if you see any problem with same. On the basis of these the sharefarm agreements are to be taken out of the contract together with the conditions relating to them.

There is a conflict in the evidence as to what was said at the meeting.
According to the Messrs. White and Mr. Delve, there were statements during the meeting, particularly by Mr. Collier, indicating that the plaintiff was in considerable financial difficulty. All three of them gave evidence of a conversation substantially in the following terms. Mr. Collier, apparently coming from a telephone in another room, said words to the effect: "Paola is not keen to accept $3.5 million for the property". Mr. Camilleri responded to the effect: "We are not going to go any higher than $3.5 million". Mr.
Thornton said words to the effect: "Don't worry, the bank's got a gun to his head. He has got to sell the property in two days, if he doesn't sell it the bank will". Mr. Collier then said to Mr. Camilleri words to the effect: "You should go for the crop without paying any extra money for it, John". Mr.
Camilleri then said to Mr. Thornton words to the effect: "Go and tell Paola's solicitors the deal has now changed, it's $3.5 million plus the crops". Two of these witnesses also gave evidence of a discussion involving Mr. Hubbard concerning the inclusion in the sale of fuel tanks and syphon equipment for
Mr. Hubbard's benefit.

All of these statements and conversations were denied by Mr. Collier, Mr.
Thornton, John and George Camilleri, Mr. Hubbard, and one of the other Baiada representatives, Mr. Hollis.

On 30th August 1991, contracts were exchanged substantially as submitted by
Baiada. According to Mr. Paola, he accepted this because he believed that, if the property was not sold by the end of August, the Bank would appoint a receiver to all his companies and sell the property, so that he had no other commercial choice. Mr. Paola also said that, until he was told the sharefarmers had released their agreements, he had resisted the purchaser's requirement that the crops should pass, on the basis that they were owned jointly by the plaintiff and the sharefarmers. Mr. Lyons also said in evidence that his recollection was that the release by the sharefarmers took away the basis on which he was arguing for the crops to be excluded.

Meanwhile, on 29th August 1991, an advertisement had appeared in The Land newspaper, apparently pursuant to an arrangement made by Mr. Paola about a week earlier. This advertised Gabo for sale at $3.7 million, noting that $4.5 million had previously been asked. The advertisement referred to "drastic price reduction" and "must sell".

The contract was completed on 25th October 1991. DRE was paid $71,700.00 commission.

In November and December 1991, the crops on the property were harvested. The plaintiff claims that the total proceeds amounted to $449,500.00, of which the plaintiff's share would have been $149,833.00. The plaintiff also claims that the fuel tanks and irrigation equipment, included in the sale, were worth $67,500.00. However, any issue as to the correct value of these matters, if it arises, will need to be determined at another hearing.

ISSUES 
Paragraphs 6-12 inclusive of the Amended Statement of Claim, all of which have been put in issue by the defendants, are in the following terms: . It was the duty of L.J. Hooker and of Richard Thornton and John Collier themselves: 
To perform the agency agreement with all due care and skill to attempt to procure the best possible offer for the property.

To act in the interests of Currabubula Holdings and not adversely to it.

To disclose any conflict between the performance of the agency agreement and the interests of themselves or either of them.

To endeavour to obtain the best price reasonably obtainable for the property and for any other assets of the vendor able to be sold in connection with the property.
 . In or about August 1991 the plaintiff and Baiada Properties had by oral agreement and through correspondence between their respective solicitors agreed to a sale of the property to Baiada Properties on, inter alia, the following terms: 
Purchase Price of $3,500,000.00.

Completion on or before 30 days from exchange.

Any growing crops on the property as at the date of the contract or as at the date of completion shall be excluded from the sale and the purchaser licenses the vendor to go onto the property with machines and workmen or contractors for the purpose of maintaining, spraying, cultivation and harvesting the crops and removing the same. Such clause not to merge on completion. 
Th purchaser acknowledges that it was aware of the existence of sharefarm agreements between the plaintiff and Keith Robert White, Graeme Arthur Charles White and Alan Raymond Delve current to 30 June 1994 dated 22 March 1991 and a further sharefarm agreement dated 1 May 1991 between the vendor and Peter Hubbard.

The crops presently growing in the subject of the agreement, are to be shared between the vendor and the sharefarmer in accordance with the terms of the sharefarm agreement.
 . Shortly prior to the exchange of contracts to evidence the agreement set forth in paragraph 7 above, in or about late August 1991, the defendants: disclosed the following matters to Baiada Properties Pty. Limited: that Anthony Paola, the principal of Currabubula Holdings was under severe pressure from his bankers to sell the property within two days or the bank would sell it itself; if Baiada Properties were to insist upon the inclusion for no additional consideration, of the benefit of the crops under cultivation on the property (and certain chattels) as a term of the sale, or to require the plaintiff to surrender its rights under the sharefarm agreements, then the plaintiff would not be able to resist the inclusion of such terms; cause or procured, or alternatively assisted Baiada Properties to cause or procure the said sharefarmers to agree to give up their rights under the sharefarming agreements and to sign releases of those agreements, for the benefit of Baiada Properties.
 . Thereupon, Baiada Properties stipulated that it required the contract of sale of Gabo then proposed to be exchanged should contain the following additional conditions: 
Clause 34 - the vendor's right, title and interest in and to any growing crop and grain stocks on the property as at the date hereof or as at the date of completion are included in this sale.

Items 14 and 15 in Annexure "C" inventory of plant, furnishings and chattels in the agreement be included in the sale namely: All the vendor's right, title and interest (if any) in and to all diesel tanks currently situated upon the subject property.
 Trailer and plastic syphoning hoses situated on Bombargo.

Deletion of clause 41 from the agreement which acknowledged the existence of the sharefarming agreements and the insertion of a statement that: "It acknowledged that from the date of exchange the management and supervision of the property under cropping shall be the right but not the obligation of the purchaser".
 . On 30 August 1991, Currabubula Holdings exchanged contracts for sale with Baiada Properties upon terms which included the terms set out in paragraph 9 above whereby the interest of the plaintiff in the existing crops and the chattels and the loss of the sharefarm agreements, became included in the sale of the property without any allowance for their value. . The contract for sale made between the plaintiff and Baiada contained the terms it did by reason of the breaches by the defendants of the duties set out in paragraph 6 above.
 . By reasons of the breaches of duty, Currabubula Holdings has suffered loss and damage.

Particulars: 
The opportunity of negotiating a more favourable contract for sale of the property.

The value of its interest in the existing crops growing on the property at settlement on 25 October 1991.

The value of its interest in the chattels on the property at settlement on 25 October 1991 specified in Items 14 and 15 in Schedule C to the contract for sale.

The value of its interest in the sharefarm agreements.

Commission paid to the defendants on the sale of $71,000.00.

The main factual dispute in the case concerned what was said at the meeting of th August 1991.

The main legal issue was whether the defendants had been guilty of any breach of duty, either in what was said at the meeting or in organising the meeting for the purpose of having the sharefarmers release their agreements.

If a breach of duty were found, that would give rise to the issue of whether it has been shown that loss was caused to the plaintiff by any such breach of duty. If so, then it may be necessary to have a further hearing to quantify compensation or damages. There is also the question whether any such breach of duty meant that DRE should refund its commission.

SUBMISSIONS 
For Plaintiff 
Mr. Coles QC for the plaintiff submitted that I should accept the evidence of the three sharefarmers as to what was said at the meeting of 29th August. He submitted that I would be impressed by their demeanour, their sincerity, and the accuracy of their evidence. They drew on reasons for their recollection, and their evidence was corroborated by the circumstances. Unlike other witnesses, they were there the whole time, from about 8.00am to 2.40pm when the release documents were faxed to the solicitors. They had good reason to notice and remember what was said. They were impressed by the novelty of the occasion: Mr. Delve commented that it was not every day that he sat in on a multi-million dollar transaction, while Keith White was struck by what he considered to be the strange behaviour of the agents. They were most closely involved in the transaction, in contrast to persons like George Camilleri and
Mr. Hollis. What they heard corresponded with factual reality: for example, that Mr. Paola was not keen to take $3.5 million. There were incidental corroborative details, such as the recollection by one of them that George
Camilleri was interested in a holiday he was about to take, and totally disinterested in what was then happening. The evidence of two of them was consistent with Mr. Hubbard's interest in irrigation matters.

Their evidence should not be discounted because the inclusion of the crops was not a new idea on the day. It was perfectly consistent with this that Mr.
Paola's solicitors should be informed at that time that they and Mr. Paola should accept that the deal had changed. Objectively, it was a change of the deal, since the offer of 29th July should be construed as being an offer excluding the crops: the only existing contract excluded the crops, and the previous offer dealing expressly with crops indicated that the plaintiff was to have at least the first crop. Furthermore, the facsimile sent by Mr.
Thornton to Mr. Lyons, enclosing the releases of the sharefarm agreements, stated that the contract was to be changed by taking out the reference to the sharefarm agreements.

It was clear on the evidence, and having regard to the surrounding circumstances, that the agents were acting in the interests of the purchaser, and adversely to their client, in connection with this meeting. It deprived the plaintiff of any opportunity to negotiate a better deal with the purchaser. The general picture presented by their conduct at the meeting was that of the agents showing a manifest lack of concern for their client, and very pleased with themselves for doing a deal favourable to Mr. Camilleri, for whom they had previously arranged purchases.

Objectively, it was entirely reasonable that the vendor should retain the standing crops. The contract was not to be completed until the end of October, and the crops were to be harvested in about November. For most of the time when the crops had been growing, the vendor was entitled to possession, and any apportionment in the nature of apportionment of income would very substantially favour the vendor.

Mr. Camilleri had been a consistently keen purchaser since February 1991; and had shown willingness at various times to allow the vendor to retain the crops. When he dropped to $3.5 million, it was reasonable to take this as an offer excluding the crops. Nowhere in Mr. Camilleri's evidence is it asserted that, if the vendor had insisted on retaining the crops, he would have rejected it. He did say that, after rejection of one of his offers, he decided to take a hard line. It is difficult to identify the particular offer referred to; but it is clear that, at a stage shortly before the $3.5 million, Mr.
Camilleri was prepared for the vendor to retain the crops or at least some of them. The agent's assertion that, but for finance constraints, the purchaser would be prepared to pay $4 million, was further confirmation that Mr.
Camilleri was in truth willing to agree that the vendor retain the crops.

Mr. Thornton agreed in evidence that it was his suggestion to the purchaser that the purchaser sign a contract contrary to the conditions sought by the vendor, and submit it for exchange. In substance, Mr. Camilleri had been a good client of the agents, and the purpose of entering into the agency agreement with Mr. Paola was to ensure commission if Mr. Camilleri purchased the property. The agent did nothing to promote the property otherwise: at best, there was a faint suggestion by Mr. Thornton that he persuaded Mr.
Camilleri not to make an offer of $3 million, but to adhere to the previous offer of $3.5 million. Mr. Camilleri's willingness as a purchaser was demonstrated by Mr. Collier's repeated approaches to Mr. Paola, and Mr.
Camilleri's continuing to have his bank evaluate the property after rejection of his earlier offers.

Mr. Coles referred me to Greenwood v. Harvey [(1965) 66 SR 496] at -500; Finn on Fiduciary Relations, p.192; and Blackman v. Thompson,
N.S.W. Court of Appeal, 16/12/93.

For Defendants 
Mr. Nicholas QC for the defendants submitted first that, clearly, the evidence did not make out paragraphs 7 or 9 of the Amended Statement of Claim. It had not been shown that, prior to exchange, there was an agreement between the parties excluding the growing crops. Furthermore, in negotiations prior to th August, Baiada had consistently been asserting that it required the benefit of the crops to be transferred to it; so it was not the case that this stipulation occurred after the meeting of 29th August.

Mr. Nicholas then submitted that I should not find as a fact that the conversations and statements asserted by the three sharefarmers took place.
Extraneous objective evidence showed that Baiada had previously asserted that the crops should pass with the contract, and that chattels including irrigation equipment should be included; and indeed had submitted an executed contract to that effect, with an ultimatum requiring exchange. The sharefarmers' evidence to the effect that, at the meeting, Mr. Collier suggested that Mr. Camilleri required that the crops be included, and that Mr.
Camilleri then instructed Mr. Thornton to contact the solicitors to tell them that the deal had changed so that the crops were included, was entirely inconsistent with the established facts. Mr. Camilleri was not cross-examined on his denial of the sharefarmers' account; nor on his assertion that the crops were always to be included in the sale. The communication actually made to the vendor's solicitor was not one of pressure being put on the vendor, but rather an invitation to advise if the solicitor saw any problem with the releases. Had there been any other communication to Mr. Lyons, Mr. Lyons could have given evidence of it, and he did not.

The plaintiff's case as to causation was plainly defective in the gap in the evidence between 27th August and the exchange of contracts. It is clear that
Mr. Paola was speaking to Mr. Thompson, yet Mr. Paola had little recollection of these conversations and Mr. Thompson was not called to give evidence. Mr.
Lyons could not recall the circumstances in which Mr. Paola came to sign the contract.

The offer of 27th July superseded all previous offers. From 31st July, it had been made clear to the vendor's solicitors, and probably to the vendor, that the crops were to go to the purchaser. The contract proposed for the alternative purchaser through Elders included the crops. Once the contract drafted by Mr. Lyons had been sent to Mr. Egan, Mr. Thornton quickly pointed out to Mr. Paola that it was not in accordance with the offer that had been made, whereupon Mr. Paola had discussions with Mr. Thompson. In circumstances where Mr. Paola has little recollection of these discussions, and Mr. Thompson was not called, the clear inference is that, on this occasion, Mr. Paola accepted the purchaser's proposal and gave instructions to go ahead with it.

The calling of the sharefarmers' meeting was in fact substantially in the interests of the vendor, because it cleared the way for the sale to go ahead, a matter which was plainly in the interests of the vendor.

DECISION 
There is considerable force in Mr. Coles' submissions about the merits of the evidence given by the three sharefarmers, but, as submitted by Mr. Nicholas, it is difficult to accept that the evidence is accurate in its details: the thrust of their evidence is that, at the meeting of 29th August, Mr. Collier suggested to Mr. Camilleri that the deal should be changed so that the crops be included, and Mr. Camilleri instructed Mr. Thornton to advise Mr. Lyons that the deal was changed in this way. That sequence, as submitted by Mr.
Nicholas, seems inconsistent with clearly established facts. The absence of evidence from Mr. Lyons that he received any such advice also counts heavily against it. In those circumstances, I need to consider the background to the meeting in some detail before attempting to arrive at a conclusion as to what was said.

The offer and acceptance on 21st and 22nd August 1991 did not amount to a contract, but did amount to a consensus as to price. The first question which
I look at is whether there was a consensus at that time as to whether or not the crops were to be included. There was nothing express about this in the communications.

Against the proposition that crops were included were the following matters.
First, the purchaser knew that there were in existence sharefarming agreements, under which the sharefarmers were entitled to two-thirds of existing crops and the vendor one-third. Furthermore, looking at the production of crops as something arising out of entitlement to possession of the land, it was fair that the vendor should get something from these crops.
Next, the purchaser knew that the vendor's auction contract excluded the crops. Finally, there were the previous offers: one expressly provided that the crops were to go to the purchaser, while another expressly gave the vendor only the first crop.

In favour of the view that crops were included were the following circumstances. First, the crops were part of the land which was subject of the sale. Second, the purchaser's solicitor had objected to the auction contract in various respects, including the term which excluded the crops from the sale. Third, in dealing with an alternative purchaser, albeit at a higher price, the vendor had provided for crops to be included.

Ultimately, no legal consequence flows from whether or not there was a consensus on this point, because there was no legally binding contract.
However, it does bear on the understanding of the parties, which in turn bears on the agent's responsibilities and the probabilities as to what happened. In my opinion, it follows from this discussion that it was unclear whether or not the consensus was objectively such that the crops were included or excluded.

Mr. Paola says in effect that he believed crops were excluded from the sale, and that he saw the changed contract conditions submitted on behalf of Mr.
Camilleri as an attempt to change the deal which had been made. I accept that this was Mr. Paola's view of the matter.

On the other hand, Mr. Camilleri says that he believed that the crops were included in the deal that was made, and I accept this evidence also.

Mr. Thornton and Mr. Collier assert in effect that they believed the offer was for the land including the crops. I accept that this was their belief, at least until the conversation between Mr. Thornton and Mr. Lyons. That they should have this belief was consistent with the fact that, in their dealings, they had more to do with Mr. Camilleri than Mr. Paola. Perhaps, however, the agents should have realised that this point was unclear, and should have clarified it. As it was, to put in the Sales Advice that inclusions and special conditions were "as per contract" was singularly uninformative.

Then, we have the circumstance that the contract submitted by the vendor's solicitors contained a term that the crops were excluded. It was understandable that, at least initially, the agents should have seen that as a mistake, and that Mr. Thornton should have said to Mr. Lyons that the crops were included in the sale. However, once Mr. Thornton was told by Mr. Lyons that his instructions were that the crops were not included, this should have brought home to Mr. Thornton that there was no consensus on this point.
Certainly, in my opinion, there was no sufficient basis in fact for Mr.
Thornton to continue to assert that an agreement had been reached to include the crops: as I have already said, there was no legally binding agreement in any event, the exchanges which produced the consensus were silent on the matter, and there were other considerations pointing both ways.

The agent's obligation was to act in the interest of its principal, namely the vendor. What Mr. Thornton in fact did then was to arrange with the purchaser's solicitor for the purchaser to sign a contract on the purchaser's terms, and submit this to the vendor's solicitor; and to advise Mr. Paola that the contract submitted on his behalf was not as agreed and that the purchaser would execute a different contract which Mr. Paola could accept or reject.

Mr. Thornton in effect claimed that all this was in the purchaser's interest, because it was in the purchaser's interest to sell; and that therefore it was in the purchaser's interest to procure a signed contract which the purchaser could then accept or reject.

However, although this is not an issue in the case on the pleadings, it seems to me that, having been told of the vendor's instructions, the agent should have conveyed the vendor's instructions to the purchaser, and invited the purchaser to contract on those terms. In effect, Mr. Thornton contended that this would have been pointless, because Mr. Camilleri's position was so clear: however, there was no evidence of any conversation in which Mr. Camilleri made his position clear in this sense, and the circumstances pointed to by Mr.
Coles in his submissions indicate that there may have been room to negotiate a better offer from Mr. Camilleri. By not taking this course, it seems to me that the agent was taking sides with the purchaser in suggesting to the purchaser that there was no justification in the vendor's stand, and that the vendor was just trying to change the deal; and therefore making it more difficult for the vendor's instructions to take effect.

Thereafter, the agent arranged for the meeting of sharefarmers without reference to Mr. Paola, and helped the purchaser make an arrangement with them. It is true that this arrangement was conditional on an exchange being made, but it seems to me that this affected the vendor because it took away a basis on which the vendor could contend that the crops were not included in the deal. Furthermore, the fact that this was arranged by the vendor's agent could itself signal to the purchaser that the agent's principal would be likely to go along with the purchaser's terms.

With this background, I consider what was said at the meeting of 29th August.

In so far as the evidence of the three sharefarmers suggested that Mr. Collier said to Mr. Camilleri words to the effect that he should "go for the crop" or "screw Paola for the crop", I am not satisfied that words to that effect were said. Mr. Camilleri had taken the stand through his solicitor some days earlier that the crop was to be included, and this was known to Mr. Collier.
Similarly, in so far as the evidence of the three sharefarmers suggests that
Mr. Camilleri said to Mr. Thornton that he should convey to the vendor's solicitors that "the deal has changed to include the crops", I am not satisfied that words to that effect were said. From the point of view of Mr.
Camilleri, this was not a change in the deal. It may be that words were said by Mr. Camilleri or by someone else that the solicitors were to be told that the contract was to be changed to exclude the terms concerning the sharefarming agreement and the sharefarmers: that would have been consistent with the facsimile that was in fact sent.

In so far as the three sharefarmers suggest that Mr. Thornton said words to the effect that the Bank had a gun at Mr. Paola's head, and that he had to sell the property in two days or the Bank would sell it, I am not satisfied that words to that effect were said. Having regard to the previous finding, I cannot be completely confident as to the details of the evidence of the three sharefarmers. Mr. Hubbard gave evidence that at about this time Mr. Paola said to him words to the effect that he had no choice about selling the property because the Bank was holding a gun at his head; and it is possible that Mr.
Paola said something similar to the other sharefarmers. However, I do think it probable that Mr. Collier or Mr. Thornton did say words during that meeting indicating that there was pressure on Mr. Paola to sell and that he was in financial difficulty. This seems to have been quite widely known in any event.
Certainly there were rumours to that effect, and it was made very clear by the advertisement which appeared in The Land newspaper on that very day.

Next, there was evidence from two of the three sharefarmers that Mr. Collier said words to the effect that Mr. Paola was not keen to accept $3.5 million, to which Mr. Camilleri replied to the effect that he was not prepared to pay any more. The context in which that evidence was given suggested that Mr.
Collier was reporting from a telephone conversation which he had had with Mr.
Paola. It seems clear that there was no telephone conversation to that effect on that day, and also that the price of $3.5 million had been agreed well prior to that day. It may be that there was some mention of the price of $3.5 million, but I cannot be satisfied as to the precise terms as to any statement about that matter.

Finally, there was evidence from two of the three sharefarmers that there was discussion with Mr. Hubbard concerning the inclusion in the deal of fuel tanks and syphons. There was also a suggestion that this discussion was in terms suggesting that the inclusion of these items was being requested and pressed on that day. It is clear in fact that the contract submitted for the purchasers some days before provided for the inclusion of those items. There may have been some discussion on that day about them, but I cannot be satisfied what the terms of that discussion were.

Consistently with what I said earlier, I did consider the three sharefarmers to be impressive witnesses, and I believe they gave their evidence honestly; but I think they were mistaken as to the details. I think they were struck at the time by statements made by the agent disparaging of the vendor's financial position, and by some discussion about inclusion of the crops and the other chattels. However, they swore their affidavits about five years after the event, and, for reasons I have given, I cannot be satisfied that their recollection is accurate as to the details. The evidence in opposition to them is mainly from interested witnesses, or at least, less disinterested witnesses than the three sharefarmers, but I do give weight to their denials; although I think it is fair to say that George Camilleri and Mr. Hollis had very little recollection of the matter.

Turning to the question of whether a breach of duty by the agent is shown, I find myself unable to be satisfied that such disparaging statements as were made concerning the financial position of the vendor were sufficient of themselves to amount to a breach of duty. I am unable to find with any precision what was said, and I am unable to be satisfied that what was said was any more than what was in any event fairly common knowledge. Accordingly,
I am not satisfied that there was a breach of duty in terms of paragraph 8(a) of the Amended Statement of Claim, considered in isolation from the circumstances which are referred to in paragraph 8(b).

Turning to paragraph 8(b), it seems to me that arranging the meeting with the sharefarmers, without disclosing this to the vendor, did tend to prejudice the vendor's position, by removing one possible basis for the vendor's claim that the crops should not pass, and (particularly when coupled with the remarks about the vendor's financial position) signalling to the purchaser that the agent's principal would be likely to go along with the purchaser's terms. In my opinion, this should have been apparent to the agent; and in any event, the substance of it was pointed out to Mr. Thornton by Mr. Lyons in their conversation of 26th August. In my opinion, such action in the interests of the purchaser and potentially against the interests of the vendor should not have been undertaken by the agent, without at least having the informed consent of the vendor.

Against this, it could be said that there was by 28th August no real chance of the vendor getting any better terms, and it was really in the vendor's interests to have the availability of a binding contract on the best terms reasonably available. If there had been a previous attempt by the agent to give effect to the vendor's instructions, and this attempt had failed, then I would have seen considerable force in that submission. However, there was no such previous attempt, and it cannot be said, in my opinion, that there was no chance whatsoever of getting better terms for the vendor. There is also the further matter that the inclusion of the chattels in the sale could not possibly have been part of the original consensus, and could have been a bargaining point. On the whole then, in my opinion, a breach of duty by the agent in terms of paragraph 8(b) of the Amended Statement of Claim is made out.

The question then is, is that a sufficient breach of duty to entitle the vendor to a return of the commission; or alternatively, has it been shown that some damages were caused by the breach of duty? 
I consider first whether it has been shown that any loss was caused by this breach of duty. This in turn raises the question, what was the chance of getting a contract other than on the purchaser's terms? If, after his conversation with Mr. Lyons, Mr. Thornton had put to Mr. Camilleri that Mr.
Paola had understood the offer to exclude the crops, and that, so far as Mr.
Paola was concerned, that was the deal; and had reminded Mr. Camilleri that, as shown by Mr. Thornton's letter of 31st July, Mr. Camilleri had been prepared to pay $4 million but for limitations of finance, there may have been a reasonable chance of having Mr. Camilleri agree to the exclusion of the crops. Not only did Mr. Thornton not do this, but rather he suggested that the purchaser sign the contract on Mr. Camilleri's terms and submit it. However, no breach of duty is alleged in relation to these matters; and in my opinion, these matters meant that, by 28th August, the chance of the vendor getting a contract other than on the purchaser's terms were very slim. Of course, this was not put to the test because of the agent's breach of duty, and I should not let the lack of such a test redound to the advantage of the agent. Doing the best I can, I would estimate the chance of obtaining a contract on the vendor's terms rather than the purchaser's terms, but for the agent's breach of duty on 28th and 29th August, at 5%. On that basis, the loss caused to the vendor could be no more than about $10,000.00.

The remedies available to a principal in the case of breaches by an estate agent of the agent's duties to the principal include the following: accounting for any secret commission or profit or discount (Andrews v. Ramsay [(1903) 2
KB 635],
Hippisley v. Knee Brothers [(1905) 1 KB 1)], damages for resulting loss (Georgieff v. Athans (1981) 26 SAR 412), and loss of commission (Andrews v. Ramsay, Moiler v. Forge <case>; [(1927) 27 SR 69], Greenwood v. Harvey [(1965) 66 SR 496],
Georgieff v. Athans).

The remedies of accounting for any secret commission or profit or discount, and loss of commission, may be cumulative: Andrews v. Ramsay. This seems clearly correct, as a matter of principle, particularly where, in the words of
Lord Alverstone in Andrews v. Ramsay, at p.637, "it is impossible to say what the result might have been if the agent had acted honestly". In such circumstances, it is reasonable that the agent both forfeit to the vendor the secret commission received from the purchaser and also lose the right to commission.

The case of Georgieff v. Athans is authority for the view that the same is true in relation to damages or compensation and loss of commission. However, I would question whether this is in accordance with principle. Damages or compensation are assessed by putting the hypothesis that the agent did not breach its duty, and considering what position the principal would have been in, in those circumstances. That hypothesis assumes a situation where the agent is entitled to commission. Thus, if, but for the agent's breach of duty, a property would have achieved a price $100,000.00 higher than was in fact achieved, and the agent's commission was $50,000.00, it seems to me that the vendor can recover $100,000.00 in all, not $150,000.00. The judgment at first instance in Georgieff v. Athans did not discuss this problem, and the judgment of the Full Court of the South Australian Supreme Court on appeal simply adopted the reasoning of the first instance judge.

In the present case, there is no evidence that the agent received any secret profit or benefit from the purchaser, and as I have found above, the vendor's damages would at best be around $10,000.00. So there are two questions: is the breach in this case sufficient to deny commission to the agent, and if so, should damages be in addition? 
On the first question, although the loss caused by the breach of duty was small, neither the loss nor the breach was de minimis, so that in my opinion the breach of duty falls within the principle stated by Lord Alverstone in
Andrews v. Ramsay at p.638: 
If an agent directly or indirectly colludes with the other side, and so acts in opposition to the interests of his principal, he is not entitled to any commission.

On the second question, even though this may be contrary to Georgieff v.
Athans, my opinion is that the plaintiff is not entitled to damages or compensation in addition. The question was not the subject of any consideration in that case, and I am wholly unable to reconcile recovery of damages in addition to the commission with my understanding of the basis on which damages are awarded.

It follows that the plaintiff is entitled to recover from DRE the commission of $71,700.00. There have been no submissions directed to the question whether
Mr. Thornton or Mr. Collier would be liable in these circumstances. Normally, the servants of a contracting party are not liable for the tort of inducing breach of contract where their actions have brought about such a breach. It may be that the principles are a little different where it is not just a matter of breach of contract, but fiduciary obligations are involved. If it becomes necessary for me to reach a conclusion on this, I will need to hear submissions. However, it may be that there is no practical necessity for a decision on this point.

I will need to hear submissions on interest and costs. It seems there was no complaint made about the agent's conduct for about three years after the transaction, and these proceedings were commenced in November 1994. It may be that, in those circumstances, interest should run from the commencement of these proceedings. As regards costs, the plaintiff's success has been on the basis of an amendment made at the hearing, and the amount recovered is much lower than what was sought. However, the substance of the plaintiff's complaint was contained in affidavits served well before the hearing, and there is no suggestion that, if the original pleading had been in the same form as the amended pleading, the progress of the case would have been any different. My tentative view is that costs should just follow the event.
 * * * 
