

Wykes and Ors versus Samilk Pty Ltd and Ors Matter No Ca 40736/95 [1998] NSWSC (19 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
WYKES & ORS versus SAMILK PTY LTD & ORS 
CA 40736/95; DC 5/93 May 1998 
Sheller JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: District Court - Sidis DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40736/95; DC 5/93 
DELIVERED: 19 May 1998 
HEARING DATE: 31 March 1998 
PARTIES: WYKES & ORS versus SAMILK PTY LTD & ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: SHELLER, BEAZLEY, STEIN JJA 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: A J Phillpot * First Respondent: M S Willmott * Second Respondent: A M Colefax 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: Michael G Britten * First Respondent: David Nagle * Second Respondent: Colin Biggers & Paisley 
CATCHWORDS: 
LEASES - common law lease 
ESTOPPEL - equitable estoppel - jurisdiction of District Court - estopped by representation 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 35 
WYKES & ORS versus SAMILK PTY LIMITED & ORS 
Summary of Facts 
The first respondents were owners of land upon which factory units were constructed. The appellants carried on the business of suppliers of electrical goods and entered into negotiations with the first respondents for leasing one factory unit and a portion of another. The first respondents retained the second respondents, the partners of a law firm, to act in the preparation of the lease and to advise thereto.

A consensus was reached between the appellants and the first respondents that the lease would be for three years with options for renewal. On 1 February the appellants took possession of two units and commenced paying rent in accordance with the agreed terms of the lease document. By letter dated 12
March 1991 the second respondents forwarded a third draft lease to the appellants. This lease document was never executed. Although signed copies of the lease were never returned to the first or second respondents, the appellants paid the second respondents the costs of stamping and registration of the lease.

On 15 July 1992, in breach of the agreed terms of lease, the appellants gave written notice to the first respondent of their intention to vacate the premises on 22 September 1992 and to pay rent to that date.

The Trial Judge found that the first respondents were entitled to relief through an application of the principles in Walton Stores versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387]. The appellants' main challenge to this decision was that the Trial Judge had granted equitable relief which the District Court had, at the relevant time, no jurisdiction to grant. The first respondents countered by arguing that their primary claim was not based upon equitable estoppel but on common law estoppel by representation.

Held:
Given the lease agreement was unsigned, at common law, as modified by statute, upon first payment of rent by the appellants they became lessees under a lease at will terminable by a month's notice expiring at any time:
Dockrill versus Cavanagh <case>; [(1944) 45 SR 78],
Moore versus Dimond <case>; [(1929) 43 CLR 105.]
Equitable estoppel gives rise to an enforceable equity rather than an evidentiary constraint which removes an obstacle to common law relief: Walton
Stores (Interstate) Limited versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] per Brennan J at 416.
By deciding the case on the basis of equitable estoppel the Trial Judge sought to enforce an equity which was created by estoppel and arose out of the circumstances of the case. This form of equitable relief was not within the jurisdiction of the District Court.
The requirements for estoppel by representation were not satisfied because there was no evidence that the appellants ever directly represented to the first respondents that they had signed the lease agreement or that the first respondents ever acted in reliance upon any such representation: Thompson v
Palmer <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 507.]
The effect of upholding the appeal is that the first respondents' proceedings failed against the appellants and second respondents. Therefore, the first respondents should pay the costs of both the defendants, that is to say the appellants and the second respondents.

Bullock versus London General Omnibus Co  <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1929) 43 CLR 105] 
Pavey & Mathews Pty Limited versus Paul <case>; <case>; Ad & E 369; <case>; <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] 
ORDERS 
Appeal and cross-appeal allowed;
Set aside the orders made by Sidis DCJ on 25 October 1995 other than the verdict for the second defendants against the plaintiffs;
In lieu thereof order that the proceedings against the appellants be dismissed;
The first respondents to pay the costs of the appellants and of the second respondents of the proceedings and of this appeal and the cross-appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) if so qualified.

JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION: 
The appellants, who carried on business as the suppliers of electrical goods, were the first defendants in proceedings in the District Court which the first respondents began by an ordinary statement of claim on 23 June 1993. By those proceedings the first respondents claimed against the appellants damages for breach of an agreement for lease and,M against the second respondents, the members of a firm of solicitors, damages for negligence. The first respondents were three corporations each registered as to a one-third share as tenants in common of land located at Sir William McKell Drive, Pambula. The first respondents alleged that on or about 12 March 1991 they and the appellants had agreed to enter into a lease of factory premises situated on part of this land. The term of the demise was said to be for three years commencing on 1
February 1991 and terminating on 31 January 1994 with options for renewal at an annual rent of $18,616 payable by monthly instalments of $1,551.33 from 1
February 1991 to 31 January 1992 and at an increased rent plus CPI adjustments thereafter. It was alleged that the appellants agreed to pay a proportion of the rates, taxes and outgoings in respect of the leased premises.

On 12 March 1991 the first respondents caused to be forwarded to the appellants the lease document, incorporating the terms referred to other than one for the payment of rates, taxes and outgoings. The appellants did not execute the lease. However, they occupied the leased premises from 1 February and paid rent, in accordance with the terms referred to, from 1 February until 22 September 1992, at which date rent payments stopped, the appellants having vacated the premises. The appellants paid no proportion of the rates, taxes and outgoings in respect of the leased premises but, it was alleged, until 7 September 1992, did not deny the existence of a binding and enforceable lease or inform the first respondents that the lease document had not been executed.

The first respondents claimed relief against the appellants on two bases.
First, they said that the appellants had encouraged them to believe that (i) a lease existed, (ii) it was not necessary to issue a replacement copy or seek specific performance and (iii) the lease document had been executed and that the appellants and each of them were bound by the terms of the lease document.
The first respondents claimed that in relying upon the conduct of the appellants they had suffered detriment. Secondly and in the alternative, the first respondents relied upon what were said to be acts of part performance.

The first respondents had retained Mr Freestone, a partner of the second respondents, as their solicitor to act in the preparation of the lease of the premises and to advise in respect thereto. The first respondents alleged that
Mr Freestone had acted negligently in the conduct of his retainer.

In their amended notice of grounds of defence the appellants said (i) no final agreement had been reached with the first respondents, (ii) the appellants occupied the premises on a monthly rental basis and, (iii) in reliance upon [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), there was no signed agreement or memorandum between the parties upon which the first respondents were entitled to bring proceedings.

TRIAL 
Her Honour Judge Sidis heard the proceedings and delivered judgment on 25
October 1995 giving a verdict and judgment for the first respondents against the appellants in the sum of $31,213.69 and for the second respondents against the first respondents. On 16 November 1995 her Honour gave separate reasons dealing with costs. She made orders that the appellants were to pay the first respondents' costs of the proceedings against them on a party/party basis up to and including 22 August 1995 and on an indemnity basis thereafter and the second respondents were to pay the first respondents' costs of the proceedings against them.

Her Honour made a number of findings of fact which, with one minor exception, are not challenged. The sequence of events began with a proposal by the first respondents to build four factory units on the land. Development consent was granted by the Council on 27 August 1990 approving the use of unit 1 for electrical supplies and unit 2 for the purpose of a bread disposal depot. The first step in the project was to demolish existing buildings on the land and build units 1 and 2. Just before the development consent was received, Mr
Graeme Wykes, on behalf of the appellants, approached Mr Richard Klimas, one of the first respondents, who was responsible for the administration of their assets including the negotiation of lease arrangements. Negotiations began for the appellants to take a lease of unit 1 and an unspecified part of unit 2.
Ultimately, just before Christmas 1990, the parties agreed that the appellants would take a three year lease with a three year option of both units 1 and 2 at a rental of $1 per metre per week and that, if at the end of the first year the appellants wished to reduce the area of the space leased by relinquishing part or all of the area in unit 2, they might do so upon paying $1.20 per metre per week for the reduced area occupied.

The appellants required that construction work be completed to enable them to take possession by 1 February 1991. To achieve this Mr Joseph Klimas, one of the first respondents, who was a builder and responsible for the construction work on the project, provided extra resources in the form of his own labour and that of an apprentice to ensure that the construction work was finished.
In addition, after discussion with the appellants, Mr Joseph Klimas undertook extra work to provide partition office space within the factory units and security bars on the windows. He estimated this work to cost $5,000. Before 15
January 1991 Mr Richard Klimas spoke with Mr Freestone about the preparation of the lease. He went to see Mr Freestone and took with him notes which he had prepared concerning its terms. On 22 January 1991 Mr Freestone, under cover of a letter, provided a first draft which was discussed between 22 January 1991 and 1 February 1991 at a meeting between Mr Richard Klimas and Mr Wykes. They agreed upon some amendments which led to Mr Freestone re-drafting the lease and issuing a second draft under cover of a letter dated 1 February 1991.

On 1 February 1991 the appellants took possession of units 1 and 2 and made the first rental payment in March 1991. Thereafter rent was paid by bank draft at monthly intervals. The last such payment was made on 19 August 1992. In
February or March 1991 Mr Richard Klimas, on behalf of the first respondents, applied to the Council to modify the development consent to allow units 1 and to be amalgamated into one unit and used for the purpose of electrical supplies. By letter dated 12 March 1991 Mr Freestone issued a further draft of the lease. On or about that date the lease document was hand-delivered to the appellants at the factory units by Mr Freestone's secretary. The description of the land included only part of the folio identifier and the part of the land leased was not described. The term was stated to be for three years commencing on " /2/1991" and terminating on " / /1994". Clause 13 of the lease document was in the following terms: "Upon the signing hereof the Lessee shall pay the Lessor's legal costs and disbursements for the preparation and completion of this Lease and the stamp duty payable hereon and the costs of obtaining Mortgagee's consents (if any)." 
The lease was never executed.

On 1 February 1991 Mr Freestone sent the appellants an account for $911.50 for professional costs, stamp duty, registration fees and other disbursements with a letter asking the appellants to forward a cheque for $911.50 when returning the signed leases, "so that we may attend to stamping and registration of the lease documentation." A receipt dated 2 September 1991 from the second respondents acknowledged receipt of a cheque from the appellants for the amount claimed broken up between costs $536 and disbursements $375.50.

Signed copies of the lease were never returned to Mr Freestone or to the first respondents. Mr Freestone acknowledged he had no system in place to follow up the appellants to secure the return of the executed lease. On 30 June 1992 Mr
Wykes told Mr Richard Klimas that the appellants wanted to "get out of the lease". On 15 July 1992 the appellants gave written notice to the first respondents of their intention to vacate the premises on 22 September 1992 and to pay rent to that date. Various options were canvassed by the first respondents including that of seeking specific performance of "the oral agreement for lease". Mr Freestone would not embark on this litigation at no cost but advised Mr Richard Klimas that the first respondents were entitled to seek the advice of an independent solicitor concerning a potential claim in negligence against the second respondents. On 22 September 1992 the appellants vacated the premises. On 20 October 1992 the third draft of the lease was returned to Mr Freestone under cover of a with compliments slip signed by one of the appellants.

The trial Judge found there was "consensus" between the first respondents and the appellants on the terms of the lease and that the appellants occupied the premises pursuant to an agreement for lease. The only challenge the appellants made to this finding was to say that they would not accept any obligation to pay anything on account of rates and taxes which were to be included in the rent. Since the form of lease submitted to the appellants contained no provision for them to do so and so far as the evidence goes they paid only the rent without receiving any complaint from the first respondents, this does not seem to me to detract from her Honour's conclusion that there was consensus.

In relation to various arguments which her Honour considered based upon [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) , part performance, estoppel and unjust enrichment, her Honour found that the basis upon which the appellants entered into possession of the premises was that: there was consensus between the first respondents and the appellants on the terms of an agreement for lease reached no later than 12 March 1991; as at 1 February 1991 the appellants entered into possession of the premises on the basis that their occupation would be three years; and by 12 March 1991, when the third draft lease was delivered, the appellants understood the terms upon which they would have rights and obligations in respect of occupation of the premises until 31 January 1994.

Her Honour rejected the first respondents' claim in so far as it rested on specific performance, on the basis that the court had no equitable jurisdiction to make orders giving effect to specific performance. She said that the first respondents relied on the High Court's decision in Waltons
Stores (Interstate) Limited versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] to support an argument in estoppel. Her Honour quoted from the judgment of Brennan J and said that to succeed in this claim the first respondents had to establish that the appellants knowingly or intentionally induced them to assume or expect that they would abide by the agreement for lease for its full term and in so doing caused the first respondents to suffer detriment. Under the heading "Unjust enrichment" her Honour referred to Pavey & Mathews Pty Limited versus Paul <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 221.] 
Before coming to deal with the amount the first respondents were entitled to recover her Honour said: "7.4 The [appellants] sought to take advantage of statutory requirements designed for their protection in order to avoid the obligations they knowingly accepted when they remained in occupation after receiving the third draft of the lease on 12 March 1991. In so doing: 
The [appellants] themselves failed to comply with the statutory requirements by not signing and returning the lease documents.

As a result, the [appellants] at the expense of the [first respondents] were able to secure a financial advantage as set out in 7.6.

The [first respondents] in reliance on agreement for a 3 year term undertook additional work; expedited their construction programme and permitted the [appellants] to take possession of the premises prior to the completion and execution of lease documents.

The [appellants] negotiated their right of occupation only on the basis of a 3 year term.

The [appellants] said nothing to the [first respondents] from 12 March to 30 June 1992 about a monthly tenancy or shorter term nor did they inform them that the lease documents remained unsigned.
 .5 This conduct of the [appellants] is sufficient to constitute `unconscionable conduct' in: inducing in the [first respondents] assumption or expectation that they would occupy and pay rent for the premises until 31 January 1994; knowing that this assumption or expectation would and had been relied upon by the [first respondents]; and causing the [first respondents] to suffer detriment when the premises were left untenanted for most of the period between 22 September 1992 and 31
January 1994.

As a consequence, there exists in the [first respondents] an equity created by estoppel which is independent of the unenforceable agreement for lease and pursuant to which the [first respondents] are entitled to recover damages.
 .6 Further, it is apparent from the evidence that in failing to sign the lease, the [appellants] secured for themselves the benefit of a 3 year term and the financial advantage of moving to alternative freehold premises. These benefits were secured at the expense of the [first respondents].

On this basis the [first respondents] are entitled to recover reasonable compensation as restitution for the benefit obtained by the [appellants] at their expense." 
The appellants challenged none of the findings set out in this quoted passage.

On these findings her Honour held that the first respondents were entitled to relief on the basis of what she said the decision in Waltons Stores stood for and, having so held, concluded that the first respondents were entitled to restitution in the amount of the verdict she entered.

APPEAL AND CROSS-APEAL 
The appellants appealed from this decision. In the forefront of their challenge to the judgment was the contention that her Honour had granted relief of a sort which the District Court had, at the relevant time, no jurisdiction to grant and further that, since it was relief of an equitable nature, equitable defences such as laches were available. The first respondents countered by saying that their primary claim was not based upon what was described as equitable estoppel but on common law estoppel by representation. The Court required the first respondents to file a notice of contention, which the first respondents did after argument on the appeal had been completed. The grounds for this notice were stated as follows: "Her Honour should alternatively have found that by reason of the conduct of the appellants viz: the fact on a date or before 2 September 1991 the appellants paid the account submitted by the second respondents for costs, stamp duty; the fact the respondents [sic - appellants] remained in possession of the subject premises continuing paying rent from and after 2 September, 1991 the appellants thereby represented and accordingly created the assumption in the minds of the first respondents that the appellants had in truth and in fact executed the lease submitted to them by the second respondents on or about 12 March 1991 which assumption the first respondents had acted on to their detriment, such that the appellants could not in conscience rely upon, and were so estopped from pleading, the provisions of [s54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) in answer to the first respondents' statement of claim." 
The appellants accept that the first respondents put their argument in the way
I have stated though her Honour does not seem to have dealt with it. No claim was made, certainly initially, based on restitution.

The second respondents cross-appealed against the order that they pay the first respondents' costs of the proceedings against them.

COMMON LAW LEASE 
If the terms set out in the form of lease Mr Freestone sent to the appellants were the agreed terms of a future lease no action or proceeding could be brought upon it by the first respondents because it had not been signed by or on behalf of the appellants; [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) which the
Conveyancing (Amendment) Act 1930 introduced to replace the equivalent part of s4 of the Statute of Frauds which it repealed. The effect of what Jordan CJ described in Dockrill versus Cavanagh <case>; [(1944) 45 SR 78] at 81 as encroachments made upon the provisions of the Statute of Frauds by a process of judicial legislation was that if the lessee under a lease not in writing signed by the parties entered into possession and paid rent, not only did the lease have the force and effect of a lease from year to year but all the terms of any agreement between the parties applicable to such a lease were treated as incorporated into it: Moore versus Dimond <case>; [(1929) 43 CLR 105] at 116 and 123. The position so described was that at common law. In Dockrill versus Cavanagh at 82-3, Jordan CJ said: "In equity, the position was quite different. By use of the doctrine of part performance (which is expressly saved .......in New South Wales by s23E inserted in the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) ) a court of equity would, in a proper case, decree the execution of a formal lease where no lease had been made and notwithstanding that the only agreement for a lease might be oral. When it was enacted that all leases for periods above three years should be by deed, it treated a written lease not under seal as evidencing an agreement for a lease, and would, in a proper case, decree specific performance of this agreement by the execution of a proper lease under seal. In the meantime, it would by injunction restrain the landowner from acting on the footing that the other party was merely a tenant at will or a tenant from year to year: Parker versus Taswell <case>; [[1858] 2 DeG & J 559]; [(1858) 44 ER 1106.] After the passing in England of the Judicature Acts, which invested the superior courts with jurisdiction in both equity and common law, it was held that in a court which possessed the combined jurisdictions (although not in a court which had only a common law jurisdiction: Foster v
Reeves [[1892] 2 QB 255)], a party to an agreement for a lease, if the lease was specifically enforceable (but not if it was not: Coatsworth versus Johnson [(1886) 54 LT 520]; Inland Revenue Commissioners versus Derby [[1914] 3 KB )], could obtain against the other all the remedies which would be available to him if a proper lease had actually been executed: Walsh versus Lonsdale [(1882) ChD 9](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281882%29%2021%20ChD%209 "View LawCiteRecord" ), although the agreement was not thereby converted into an actual lease:
Borman versus Griffith [[1930] 1 Ch 493] at 497-8." [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s127.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) provides: "No tenancy from year to year shall, after the commencement of this Act, be implied by payment of rent; if there is a tenancy, and no agreement as to its duration, then such tenancy shall be deemed to be a tenancy determinable at the will of either of the parties by one month's notice in writing expiring at any time." 
Of this section, Jordan CJ said at 83-4: "Prior to the introduction of s127 [by the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/)], if there was a lease but no agreement between the parties operative at common law to incorporate as part of it a provision that it was to continue for a term of years, or to be at will or for a periodic tenancy, then, in the contemplation of a court with jurisdiction to enforce only common law rights, although upon entry by the lessee the lease became a lease at will, upon payment of rent it ceased to be a lease at will and became a lease for the periodic tenancy of from year to year. It was to this that [s127](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s127.html) was addressed, and what it provides is that where this state of things exists, the conditions which would previously have brought into existence a lease from year to year shall instead bring into existence a lease at will terminable by a month's notice expiring at any time. The phrase `and no agreement as to its duration' means no agreement as to its duration which, at common law, is incorporated in the lease for all purposes: Larke Hoskins & Co Limited v
Icher (1929) 29 SR 142; Burnham versus Carroll Musgrove Theatres Limited (1927) SR 169 at 179-80. But there is nothing to indicate that it was intended to alter in any other respect the rules of the common law applicable in courts administering only that law. Hence, where the common law would previously have incorporated into the lease such of the terms of an agreement dehors the lease as were applicable to a lease from year to year, it will not incorporate such as are applicable to a lease at will terminable by a month's notice, and where the agreement dehors the lease provides for a term of years, then, if when the period of that term comes to an end, the lease at will has not already been terminated by a month's notice, it is now that lease which becomes automatically terminated without notice." 
Thus at common law, as modified by statute, upon the first payment of rent by the appellants they became lessees under a lease at will terminable by a month's notice expiring at any time. The lease incorporated such of the terms of the agreement whereunder the appellants went into possession as were applicable to such a lease including, perhaps illogically, its automatic termination without notice at the end of the agreed period; Chan versus Cresdon
Pty Limited <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 242] at 248-9.

The first respondents do not press a claim for specific performance and accordingly it is unnecessary to consider part performance.

ESTOPPEL BY REPRESENTATION 
Mr Willmott, who appeared for the first respondents, told us that his preferred argument at the hearing was based on estoppel by representation, meaning thereby, to adapt the language of Jordan CJ in Franklin v
Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Limited <case>; [(1935) 36 SR 76] at 82, the type of estoppel definitely established in the common law by the case of Pickard versus Sears <case>; [(1837) 6 Ad & E 469]; [(1837) 112 ER 179.] For this estoppel to apply it is necessary that by word or conduct reasonably likely to be understood as a representation of fact, a representation of fact as contrasted with a mere expression of intention, should be made to another person, either innocently or fraudulently, in such circumstances that a reasonable person would regard him or herself as invited to act upon it in a particular way and that the representation should have been material in inducing the person to whom it was made to act on it in that way so that that person's position would be altered to his or her detriment if the fact were otherwise than as represented. The first respondents argued that the appellants represented that the lease had been signed by them and accordingly, was effective and enforceable and they could not be heard to say that they had not signed it.

Judge Sidis did not directly deal with this form of estoppel. Her Honour said that the first respondents' arguments based on estoppel relied on the High
Court's decision in Waltons Stores. One consequence of this was that the appellants' arguments were directed to equitable estoppel and amongst other things the jurisdiction of the District Court, when the proceedings were heard, to entertain a claim based on equitable estoppel. Mr Wilmott did not draw back from defending her Honour's reasons for judgment but recognised that it presented jurisdictional difficulties.

EQUITABLE ESTOPPEL 
Accordingly, it is necessary to examine how equitable estoppel may operate in the present proceedings. In Thompson versus Palmer <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 507] the plaintiff had brought a suit in the Supreme Court in its equitable jurisdiction for a declaration that the defendant held certain mortgages and certificates of title in trust for the plaintiff. Part of the defence was that as the result of a representation by the plaintiff's predecessor in title the plaintiff was estopped from disputing the validity of the transfer of the mortgages. The defendant appealed. At 546 Dixon J said that the appellant could not succeed except upon the ground that by their conduct the trustees were estopped from denying that the consideration money for the transfer of the mortgages was actually paid over or accounted for to them by the solicitor who had completed the transfer. In this context Dixon J said at 547: "The object of estoppel in pais is to prevent an unjust departure by one person from an assumption adopted by another as the basis of some act or omission which, unless the assumption be adhered to, would operate to that other's detriment." 
One case where a person might be required to abide by the assumption was that where such person directly made representations upon which the other party founded the assumption. His Honour added: "But, in each case, he is not bound to adhere to the assumption unless, as a result of adopting it as the basis of action or inaction, the other party will have placed himself in a position of material disadvantage if departure from the assumption be permitted." 
In Grundt versus Great Boulder Proprietary Gold Mines Limited <case>; [(1937) 59 CLR 641], a case involving a claim that a party, entitled by agreement to mine certain areas, had mined outside those areas and removed ore therefrom and, therefore, questions of trespass and conversion arose, Dixon J said at :
 "One condition appears always to be indispensable. That other must have so acted or abstained from acting upon the footing of the state of affairs assumed that he would suffer a detriment if the opposite party were afterwards allowed to set up rights against him inconsistent with the assumption. In stating this essential condition, particularly where the estoppel flows from representation, it is often said simply that the party asserting the estoppel must have been induced to act to his detriment. Although substantially such a statement is correct and leads to no misunderstanding, it does not bring out clearly the basal purpose of the doctrine. That purpose is to avoid or prevent a detriment to the party asserting the estoppel by compelling the opposite party to adhere to the assumption upon which the former acted or abstained from acting. This means that the real detriment or harm from which the law seeks to give protection is that which would flow from the change of position if the assumption were deserted that led to it." 
These decisions have substantially influenced more recent decisions in the
High Court notably in Waltons Stores. In that case the appellant had entered into negotiations with a view to leasing the respondents' property. The respondents proposed to demolish existing buildings on the site and erect a new one suitable for the appellant's purposes. Although a form of lease was agreed, there was no exchange. However, on the basis of an assurance that the form of the lease was acceptable to the appellant, the respondents began to demolish the new brick part of a building which, they had told the appellant, they did not want to demolish until it was clear there were no problems with the lease. Although aware that the demolition had commenced and although having second thoughts about proceeding with the lease, the appellant delayed for some time before telling the respondents that it did not intend to proceed with the lease. The respondents brought proceedings in the Supreme Court for a declaration that there was in existence a valid and enforceable agreement for a lease, an order for specific performance and alternatively, damages in lieu thereof. Kearney J gave judgment for the respondents for damages in lieu of specific performance. This Court dismissed an appeal.

The issue in the appeal to the High Court was whether the appellant was estopped from denying the existence of a binding contract that it would take a lease of the respondents' premises and, if so, whether the respondents could support the order made for damages in lieu of specific performance. At 395
Mason CJ and Wilson J said that it was impossible to sustain the finding that the respondents were labouring under a misapprehension that contracts had been exchanged when they began demolition of the new brick portion of the building.
At 397 their Honours said the estoppel set up by the respondents and found by the primary Judge was a common law estoppel in the form of a representation by the appellant constituted by its silence in circumstances where it should have spoken. Similarly, the Court of Appeal thought that the case was an instance of the third class of estoppel in pais enumerated by Dixon J in Thompson, ie where a party was required to abide by an assumption made by the other "because knowing the mistake the other laboured under, he refrained from correcting him when it was his duty to do so." At 398 Mason CJ and Wilson J said: "Our conclusion that the respondents assumed that exchange of contracts would take place as a matter of course, not that exchange had in fact taken place, undermines the factual foundation for the common law estoppel by representation found by Kearney J and the common law estoppel based on omission to correct a mistake favoured by the Court of Appeal. There is, as
Mason and Deane JJ pointed out in Legione versus Hateley <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 406] at 432, a long line of authority to support the proposition that, to make out a case of common law estoppel by representation, the representation must be as to an existing fact, a promise or representation as to future conduct being insufficient." 
Thus, in their Honours' view, the argument based on estoppel by representation, which the first respondents put as their preferred argument in the present case, failed. That brought their Honours to consider the doctrine of promissory estoppel which, as they said at 399, clearly extended to representations (or promises) as to future conduct. What the respondents submitted was that promissory estoppel allowed the enforcement directly, in the absence of a pre-existing relationship of any kind, of a non contractual promise on which the representee had relied to his detriment; 400. This led their Honours back to the judgments of Dixon J . At 404-5 they said: "One may therefore discern in the cases a common thread which links them together, namely, the principle that equity will come to the relief of a plaintiff who has acted to his detriment on the basis of a basic assumption in relation to which the other party to the transaction has `played such a part in the adoption of the assumption that it would be unfair or unjust if he were left free to ignore it': per Dixon J in Grundt; see also Thompson. Equity comes to the relief of such a plaintiff on the footing that it would be unconscionable conduct on the part of the other party to ignore the assumption.
 ............

Because equitable estoppel has its basis in unconscionable conduct, rather than the making good of representations, the objection, grounded in Maddison v Alderson [[1883] 8 AppCas 467], that promissory estoppel outflanks the doctrine of part performance loses much of its sting. Equitable estoppel is not a doctrine associated with part performance whose principal purpose is to overcome non-compliance with the formal requirements of the making of contracts. Equitable estoppel, though it may lead to the plaintiff acquiring an estate or interest in land, depends on considerations of a different kind from those on which part performance depends. Holding the representor to his representation is merely one way of doing justice between the parties." 
At 406 their Honours pointed out: "As failure to fulfil a promise does not of itself amount to unconscionable conduct, mere reliance on an executory promise to do something, resulting in the promisee changing his position or suffering detriment, does not bring promissory estoppel into play. Something more would be required. Attorney
General (Hong Kong) versus Humphreys Estate Limited [[1987] 1 AC 114] suggests that this may be found, if at all, in the creation or encouragement by the party estopped in the other party of an assumption that a contract will come into existence or a promise will be performed and that the other party relied on that assumption to his detriment to the knowledge of the first party.
Humphreys Estate referred in terms to an assumption that the plaintiff would not exercise an existing legal right or liberty, the right or liberty to withdraw from the negotiations, but as a matter of substance such an assumption is indistinguishable from an assumption that a binding contract would eventuate. On the other hand the United States experience, distilled in the Restatement (2d,90), suggests that the principle is to be expressed in terms of a reasonable expectation on the part of the promisor that his promise will induce action or forbearance by the promisee, the promise inducing such action or forbearance in circumstances where injustice arising from unconscionable conduct can only be avoided by holding the promisor to his promise." 
At 415 Brennan J said that the scope of estoppel in pais does not extend to compel adherence to representations of intention and continued: "It has been said that estoppel in pais is merely a rule of evidence and not a cause of action (Seton versus Lafone [(1887) 19 QBD 68]; Low v
Bouverie [[1891] 3 Ch 82]; In re Ottos Kopje Diamond Mines Ltd [[1893] 1 Ch )] but that proposition needs some explanation. If the estoppel relates to the existence of a contract between the parties, the legal relationship between the parties is ascertained by reference to the terms of the contract which has been assumed to exist. If, in the assumed state of affairs, the contract confers a cause of action on the party raising the estoppel, the cause of action may be enforced. The source of legal obligation in that event is the assumed contract; the estoppel is not a source of legal obligation except in the sense that the estoppel compels the party bound to adhere to the assumption that the contract exists." 
By contrast Brennan J said at 416 equitable estoppel does not operate by establishing an assumed state of affairs. Unlike an estoppel in pais, an equitable estoppel is a source of legal obligation: "An equitable estoppel is binding in conscience on the party estopped, and it is to be satisfied by that party doing or abstaining from doing something in order to prevent detriment to the party raising the estoppel which that party would otherwise suffer by having acted or abstained from acting in reliance on the assumption or expectation which he has been induced to adopt. Perhaps equitable estoppel is more accurately described as an equity created by estoppel." 
Turning to the facts of the particular case, at 430, his Honour said that having elected to allow the respondents to continue to build, it was too late for the appellant to reclaim the initial freedom to withdraw which it had previously. As the respondents would suffer loss if the appellant failed to execute and deliver the original deed, an equity was raised against it. That equity was to be satisfied by treating the appellant as though it had done what it induced the respondents to expect that it would do, namely, by treating the appellant as though it had executed and delivered the original deed. His Honour rejected the claim that the respondents' belief that an exchange of contracts had taken place or that there was an existing agreement which gave rise to an estoppel in pais (430-1). At 432 his Honour observed that [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) did not prevent any obstacle to the grant of relief on either of the bases on which the respondents were otherwise entitled to relief. At 432-3 his Honour said: "If the true inference to be drawn from the facts is that Waltons induced the
Mahers to assume that a binding contract had come into existence, the assumed contract was a written contract: one which was `being registered by the
Waltons people'. If the subject of the estoppel which binds Waltons is that a binding contract had come into existence, the estoppel extends to the existence not only of the facts which are essential to the existence of a binding contract but also to the existence of a contract which is binding in law. An estoppel in pais may relate, as we have seen, not merely to facts but to the legal complexion of facts - `to the validity and subsistence of relations' , to use the phrase of Spencer Bower and Turner, Estoppel by
Representation, 3rd ed (1977), p240.

If the true inference to be drawn from the facts is that Waltons induced the
Mahers to assume that it would exchange the original deed, there is an equity in the Mahers which is to be satisfied by treating Waltons as if it had executed and delivered the original deed. That equity does not arise out of the induced assumption alone. If it did, it would be impossible to distinguish the equity from a contractual right arising out of an oral promise. As [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) makes an oral agreement to make a written agreement for the disposition of an interest in land ineffective (Daulia Ltd versus Four Millbank Nominees Ltd [1978]
Ch 231), an equity which gave the assumption the same force as a promise would be ineffective. But, as we have seen, the equity is to be satisfied by avoiding a detriment suffered in reliance on an induced assumption, not by the direct enforcement of the assumption. Equitable estoppel does not create a contract to which [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) might apply, even in cases (and this is one of them) in which the equity is satisfied by treating the defendant as though the contract had been made. The
Statute of Frauds and similar provisions prescribing formalities affecting proof of contracts have never stood in the way of a decree to enforce a proprietary estoppel (see Crook versus Corporation of Seaford [(1870) LR 10 Eq )] and, in principle, there is no reason why such provisions should apply when any other equity is created by estoppel. The action to enforce an equity created by estoppel is not brought `upon any contract', for the equity arises out of the circumstances. This is not to say that there is an equity which precludes the application of the statute. It is to say that the statute has no application to the equity. If a decree was moulded (as it could be) to compel Waltons to execute and exchange the original deed, [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) would apply to and be satisfied by the contract thus brought into existence.
But it is unnecessary to make so circuitous a decree. It is sufficient that the decree be made in the form in which Kearney J made it." 
I emphasise his Honour's statement that the equity created by the promissory estoppel does not arise out of the induced assumption alone which would be indistinguishable from a contractual right arising out of an oral promise and hence perforce of [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) ineffective. The equity is satisfied by avoiding a detriment suffered in reliance on an induced assumption. It does not create a contract and the action to enforce it is not brought "upon any contract", "for the equity arises out of the circumstances".

Deane J would have dismissed the appeal on the basis of findings of fact open on the evidence that the respondents believed there was a binding agreement and that that belief had been effectively caused by the conduct of the appellant. So far as the law was concerned the decision in favour of the respondents was justified on the basis of those and other findings of fact; -4. At 443 his Honour said that these facts called into play the operation of "perhaps the clearest emanation of estoppel by conduct, namely, the principle which precludes departure from a representation or an induced assumption (a `representation .... by silence' .......) of existing fact in circumstances where the party estopped has knowingly and silently stood by and watched the other party act to his detriment." 
Having disposed of the appeal substantially on the basis that the reasons for decision in the courts below were correct his Honour went on to mention some other matters and said at 449 that as a matter of underlying rationale, the prima facie exclusion of representations or assumptions about future conduct from the reach of estoppel by conduct could be justified, both at law and in equity, only by deference to the primacy of the doctrine of consideration.
 "Indeed, were it not for the use of the phrase `assumption of fact' on one occasion in Grundt, the exposition of principle by Dixon J in Thompson v
Palmer and in Grundt, with its references to a representation or an assumption of a `state of affairs', could readily be applied, without expansion or qualification of underlying rationale, to a representation or assumption about future action or inaction." 
At 458 Gaudron J remarked that the common law or evidentiary estoppel compels adherence to an assumption of fact by denying the person estopping the right to assert a contrary matter of fact whereas equitable estoppel operates so as to compel adherence to an assumption as to rights. "Sometimes that adherence can only be compelled by the recognition of an equitable entitlement to a positive right in the person claiming the benefit of estoppel and the enforcement of correlative duties on the part of the person against whom the estoppel is successfully raised." Her Honour concluded at 464: "By reason that the appellant is estopped from denying that exchange had taken place, the rights and liabilities of the parties are to be determined on the basis that it had in fact taken place. An assumption that exchange had taken place necessarily also involves an assumption that the agreement was duly executed by the appellant, and the question of compliance with [s54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) [NSW] becomes irrelevant." 
In The Commonwealth of Australia versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394, Mason CJ at spoke of one doctrine of estoppel which provides that a court of common law or equity may do what is required, but not more, to prevent a person who has relied upon an assumption as to a present, past or future state of affairs (including a legal state of affairs), which assumption the party estopped has induced him to hold, from suffering detriment in reliance upon the assumption as a result of the denial of its correctness. Deane J at 439 spoke of "the basic proposition that estoppel does not of itself provide a cause of action either in law or in equity" in aid of his conclusion at 440 that promissory estoppel was but an emanation of the general doctrine of estoppel by conduct.
By contrast, Brennan J said at 428-9 that the judgments of a majority of the
Court in Waltons Stores held that equitable estoppel yielded a remedy in order to prevent unconscionable conduct on the part of the party who, having made a promise to another who acts on it to his detriment, seeks to resile from the promise. "The remedy is not designed to enforce the promise although, in some situations (of which Waltons Stores versus Maher affords an example), the minimum equity will not be satisfied by anything short of enforcing the promise." Dawson J at 454 said that estoppel at common law and in equity may have had common origins, but there the similarity stops. Toohey J's conclusions as to the disposal of the appeal made it unnecessary to deal with the argument based on estoppel though his Honour observed, at 475, that the consequence of any promissory estoppel was that the Court should enforce the promise only as a means of avoiding detriment and to the extent necessary to achieve that end. At 487 Gaudron J said that it was not necessary for her to deal with the argument that the object of an estoppel is to avoid detriment and not to make good the assumption on which it is founded but noted her agreement with Mason CJ that the substantive doctrine of estoppel permits a
Court to do what is required to avoid detriment and does not, in every case, require the making good of the assumption. At 500 McHugh J said: "Equity, like the common law, also will not permit an unjust departure from an assumption of fact which one person has caused another to adopt or accept for the purpose of their legal relations: Thompson versus Palmer. But the equitable doctrines of estoppel create rights. They give rise to equities which are enforceable against the party estopped. The equitable doctrines result in new rights between the parties when it is unconscionable for a party to insist on his or her strict legal rights." 
At 501 his Honour quoted what Priestley JA said in Silovi Pty Limited v
Barbaro [(1988) 13 NSWLR 466] at 472: "The remedy granted to satisfy the equity .... will be what is necessary to prevent detriment resulting from the unconscionable conduct." 
Although the judgments in Verwayen indicate division of opinion in the High
Court about whether equitable estoppel gives rise to an equity which is enforceable rather than to an evidentiary constraint which removes an obstacle to common law relief, in my opinion, the law remains as stated by Brennan J in the passage which I have quoted. Hence arises the question, what jurisdiction did the District Court have to entertain an action to enforce such an equity? 
DISTRICT COURT'S JURISDICTION IN EQUITY 
In 1995 [s134](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s134.html) of the [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) gave the
Court the same jurisdiction as the Supreme Court and enabled it to exercise all the powers and authorities of the Supreme Court in proceedings for the types of relief which were set out in paras (a) to (f) of the sub-section. In each case the jurisdiction was limited by reference to an upper amount of $20,000. Outside the proceedings described in [s134](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s134.html) the Court had no jurisdiction in equity proceedings. In particular, the
Court had no jurisdiction to enforce an equity said to entitle the first respondents to damages in excess of $30,000.

After referring to Waltons Stores, Judge Sidis said: "To succeed in this claim, the plaintiffs must therefore establish that the [appellants] knowingly or intentionally induced them to assume or to expect that they would abide by the agreement for lease for its full term and in so doing caused the plaintiffs to suffer detriment." 
As I have said this was not the preferred way in which the first respondents put their case. It immediately runs into the difficulty, adverted to by
Brennan and Gaudron JJ at 433 and 458, that it makes the first respondents' claim one, not to enforce the contract, but to enforce an equity created by estoppel and arising out of the circumstances. This was not within the jurisdiction of the District Court. The first respondents accept this. Thus, the appellants' challenge to the basis upon which her Honour made orders succeeds. The equity operates not to enforce the contract but so as to compensate for the detriment, as her Honour recognised.

THE FIRST RESPONDENTS PREFERRED ARGUMENT 
Thus, the first respondents fall back upon their preferred argument that the appellants should not be permitted to rely upon the fact that the lease was not executed by the appellants. In the forefront of this argument was the appellants' payment of the account for $911.50 for professional costs, stamp duty, registration fees and other disbursements submitted by the second respondents, the first respondents' solicitors. These amounts were only payable according to cl 13 of the form of lease "upon the signing hereof".
This conduct, combined with the entering into possession and the payment of rent in accordance with the terms agreed, were said, in the circumstances, to amount to a representation that the appellants had signed the lease and were bound by its terms.

Her Honour found that there was consensus between the first respondents and the appellants on the terms of an agreement for lease, reached not later than March 1991, and that the appellants entered into possession on the basis that their term of occupation would be for three years. Her Honour found that the first respondents in reliance on an agreement for a three year term undertook additional work, expedited their construction programme and permitted the appellants to take possession of the premises before completion and execution of lease documents. Her Honour found that the appellants induced in the first respondents an assumption or expectation that they would occupy and pay rent for the premises until 31 January 1994 and knew that this assumption and expectation would be and had been relied upon by the first respondents.

In the words of Dixon J in Thompson versus Palmer at 547, did the appellants directly make representations upon which the first respondents founded the assumption that the lease had been signed? This required evidence that the first respondents believed that the lease had been signed and took a course, either of action or inaction, which would inure to their detriment. Her
Honour's findings do not deal with these questions. A reading of the evidence reveals nowhere that the appellants ever directly represented to the first respondents that they had signed the lease agreement or that the first respondents ever acted in reliance upon any such representation. Indeed the entry into possession and payment of rent is explained by the oral agreement about the enforceability of which the parties themselves apparently had no doubt. But this did not depend upon representations by one to the other. The payment before 2 September 1991 of the solicitor's account is consistent with a signing of the lease but even if it amounted to a representation there is no evidence that the first respondents acted upon it. Accordingly, they were not entitled to the relief claimed.

In my opinion, the appeal should be allowed.

CROSS-APPEAL 
Sidis DCJ gave the following reasons in her judgment of 16 November 1995 for ordering the second respondents to pay the first respondents' costs of the proceedings against the second respondents: "In this case, I have decided that the discretion should be exercised against the second defendants, not as a punishment of the second defendants but because I thought it was fair to do so in the circumstances of this case, and my reasons are as follows. Firstly, the plaintiffs did successfully pursue their claims against them. The reason that there is a verdict for the second defendants is that the plaintiffs also successfully pursued their case against the first defendant. Secondly, I found that the second defendants were negligent. The fact is that were it not for that negligence, the plaintiffs would not have had to bring the proceedings against either of the defendants.
And thirdly, it was reasonable for proceedings to have involved each of the defendants so that the court could canvass the respective obligations of those defendants." 
The second respondents cross-appealed against this order on the grounds that special circumstances were required to displace the statutory presumption under [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/index.html#p39), r1A of the District Court Rules that costs should follow the event and no special circumstances existed to justify such displacement and further that her Honour had failed to give any adequate consideration to making a Bullock order (Bullock versus London General Omnibus Co [[1907] 1 KB 264)] in favour of the first respondents against the appellants in relation to the costs of the second respondents. The first respondents did not appeal against the verdict in favour of the second respondents and the second respondents did not challenge her Honour's findings of negligence. This is the context in which her Honour's order must now be looked at.

Effectively the result of upholding the appeal is that the first respondents' proceedings failed against the appellants and the second respondents. In my opinion, and with due respect to what her Honour said in the different context of her conclusion as to the fate of the proceedings, the total failure of the proceedings must lead to an order that the first respondents pay the costs of both defendants, that is to say the appellants and the second respondents, of the proceedings below.

Accordingly, in my opinion, the cross-appeal should be allowed.

CONCLUSION 
I propose the following orders:
Appeal and cross-appeal allowed;
Set aside the orders made by Sidis DCJ on 25 October 1995 other than the verdict for the second defendants against the plaintiffs;
In lieu thereof order that the proceedings against the appellants be dismissed;
The first respondents to pay the costs of the appellants and of the second respondents of the proceedings and of this appeal and the cross-appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) if so qualified.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA. 
STEIN JA: I agree with Sheller JA. * * * 
