

Sellers Fabrics Pty Limited and Anor versus Hapag-Lloyd Ag Matter No 12/96 [1998] NSWSC 646 (29 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG /96 October 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Admiralty List 
Name of Case: SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
Proceedings: 12/1996 
Dates of Hearing: 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 October 1998 
Date of Judgment: 29 October 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr P E King 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Withnell & Hetherington 
Counsel for Defendant: Dr M White QC/Ms A J Silink 
Solicitors for Defendant: Norton Smith & Co 
Carriage of Goods by Sea 
Goods found to be damaged in consequence of negligence in the stowage of containers: The Shipping Corporation of India Limited versus Gamlen Chemical Co (A'asia) Pty Limited <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 142] followed.

Damage found not to have been caused by unseaworthiness amounting to inability to carry the cargo: The Aquacharm [1982] 1 LLR 7.

Slot charterer: 
Servants and agents of the owner of the vessel, having regard to the terms of the slot charter, not servants and agents of the slot charterer.

Australian United Steam Navigation Company Limited versus The Shipping Control Board & Anor <case>; [(1945) 71 CLR 508] applied.

Effect of Clause 4 providing indemnity: 
Broken Hill Proprietary Co Limited versus Hapag-Lloyd AG & Ors [[1980] 2 NSWLR 572] 
Held that if the carrier had not been able to limit its liability it would have been liable for the full damages as there had been recklessness which gave rise to the damage: SS Pharmaceutical Co Limited & Anor versus Qantas Airways Limited [1991] 1 LLR 288 followed.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
A Review Of The Rules 11 
The Contractual Arrangements 13 
The Configuration Of The Relevant Containers And 
The Collapse 22 
The Evidence Of Mr David Rex Lewis 24 
A Peril Of The Sea 27 
The Method Of Lashing 35 
The Evidence Of Captain John Milward 42 
My Conclusions On The Evidence 57 
Unseaworthiness 57 
My Present Conclusions 61 
Recklessness 68 
Conclusions 73 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The "Encounter Bay" is a gearless cellular container ship, which was commissioned in February 1969. She has been owned and her crew has been provided, at all material times, by P & O Containers Pty Limited, ("P & O"). She is fitted with a long, raised forecastle, six holds and after accommodation/engine room. The containers are stowed in 20 by 20 feet and/or by 40 feet bays and run fore and aft. Bays 37, 38 and 39 are situated on the upper deck, aft of the hatch coaming for No 6 hold and forward of the deckhouse over the fore end of the engine room. The method of securing containers stowed on deck is by a combination of twist-locks, studs/pins and cross diagonal rods set up with turnbuckles.

P & O had entered into a Slot Charter with the defendant, Hapag-Lloyd AG, pursuant to which cargo was loaded at various European and Mediterranean ports in February 1995 for transhipment to Australia and New Zealand, the vessel's usual area of operation being between Europe and Australia and New Zealand. On February 1995, there was shipped on board at Fos Sur Mer, France, a consignment of eighteen parcels of textile weaving machines stowed in a forty foot container HCLU437140-7 in apparent good order and condition under Bill of
Lading number 73551028, which was issued for or on behalf of the defendant at
Lyon, France, on or about 23 February 1995: Exhibit A. The Bill was signed by
Worm Services Maritimes on behalf of the Master for the defendant "as carrier". It was the subsequent damage to this container and the goods in it, which has given rise to the present claim.

Whilst the question of title was raised on the pleadings, it is not necessary to consider it further. After certain unchallenged evidence was given, from which the proper inference was that the plaintiffs, for which Mr P.E. King of
Counsel appeared, had, at all material times, title to the goods which entitled them to sue, Dr M. White of Queen's Counsel, who appeared with Ms
A.J. Silink of Counsel for the defendant, conceded expressly that the plaintiffs' title to the goods and hence to sue was no longer in issue.

The vessel arrived in the Port of Melbourne, apparently without incident, on or about 23 March 1995, and, relevantly for present purposes, discharged cargo from Bays 37, 38 and 39 between 1955 and 2115 hours on that day. After that discharge extra lashings were required to be put in place, and to a certain extent this was done on the morning of 24 March 1995. However, the full lashing, which the Chief Officer, Mr Lewis, would have desired, could not be used for reasons to which I shall refer. The vessel left Melbourne at 1350 hours on that day en route for Botany Bay. The pilot left her at approximately hours and, at approximately 1924 hours, a stack of four containers placed one on top of the other in cell 01 fell as one unit towards the port side and across cells 00 and 02, which were empty following their discharge at
Melbourne, onto the four container high stack of forty foot containers in cell , which was then forced onto a stack of three forty foot containers in cell of which the top one was container HCLU 437140-7. That container was thereby forced onto the bulwark causing damage to the plaintiffs' goods in it.
It was not in issue that the plaintiffs' goods were damaged in this way, and it was conceded by Dr White that, subject to the positive defences raised, including the right to limit the amount of damages, the quantum of such damages is $209,808.46. It was conceded by Mr King that if the defendant was entitled to rely on the limitation of damages provision, the amount to which the plaintiffs are entitled is $33,127.65.

By their Statement of Claim the plaintiffs pleaded that the defendant was under a duty as carrier by sea and bailee for reward or, alternatively, it contracted by the Bill of Lading to deliver the cargo in the same good order and condition as when accepted. They put the case on the bases of negligence, bailment for reward and contract. The defendant submitted that the extent of its obligations was to be found in the contract comprised in the Bill of
Lading or, alternatively, that any obligations in relation to negligence and/or bailment were defined and regulated by the terms of that contract.

The plaintiffs pleaded that the contract comprised in the Bill of Lading was subject to the Hague-Visby Rules, which was not in issue, whereby the defendant was bound:- before and at the beginning of the voyage to exercise due diligence to make the vessel seaworthy; properly to man, equip and supply her; and to make the holds and all other parts of her in which cargo was carried fit and safe for its reception, carriage and preservation: (Article 3 paragraph 1); and properly and carefully to load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for, discharge and deliver the cargo: (Article 3 paragraph 2).

The plaintiffs asserted that the defendant was in breach of these obligations.
The obligations under Article 3 paragraph 2 are, of course, prefaced by the words "Subject to the provisions of Article 4".

The defendant responded by admitting that the Bill of Lading incorporated the
Hague-Visby Rules, by craving leave to refer to them, and by denying that it was in breach of the Rules to which I have just referred. Although it does not appear on the face of the pleadings Dr White expressly stated that it was not in issue that the defendant was the "carrier" within the meaning of the Rules.

The further issues raised for determination were propounded in paragraphs 13 to 18 of the defendant's Defence thus:- "13. In further answer to the Statement of Claim the defendant says that under Article IV Rule 2 of the Hague-Visby Rules the carrier shall not be responsible for loss or damage arising or resulting from perils of the sea or other cause arising without the actual fault or privity of the carrier.
 . The defendant says that if the plaintiff suffered any loss or damage, which is not admitted, the loss or damage arose or resulted from perils of the sea and/or other cause arising without the actual fault or privity of the carrier.
 . In further answer to the Statement of Claim, the defendant says that under Article IV Rule 1 of the Hague-Visby Rules neither the carrier nor the ship shall be liable for loss or damage arising or resulting from unseaworthiness unless caused by want of due diligence on the part of the carrier to make the ship seaworthy.
 . The defendant says that if the plaintiff suffered any loss or damage, which is not admitted, arising or resulting from unseaworthiness, which is denied, there is no want of due diligence on the part of the carrier to make the ship seaworthy, and in the premises the defendant is not liable.
 . In further answer to the Statement of Claim, the defendant says that under Article IV Rule 5 of the Hague-Visby Rules the defendant shall not in any event be or become liable for any loss or damage to or in connection with goods in an amount exceeding two units of account per kilogram.
 . The defendant says that if liable to the plaintiff for any loss or damage, which is denied, any liability is limited to the amount of two units of account per kilogram of the gross weight of the goods actually lost or damaged." 
By their Reply the plaintiffs joined issue with these assertions and, in paragraphs 4 and 5, asserted:- "4. In further and alternative answer to paragraph 18 of the Defence, the plaintiffs say that under Article IV paragraph 5(e) of the Hague-Visby Rules neither the carrier nor the ship shall be entitled to the benefit of the limitation of liability provided for in that paragraph if it is proved that the damage resulted from an act or omission of the carrier done with intent to cause damage, or recklessly and with knowledge that damage would result.
 . The plaintiffs say that the damage resulted from an act or omission of the defendant as carrier by its servants and agents, done recklessly and with knowledge that damage would probably result.

PARTICULARS 
The plaintiffs repeat paragraph 9(i), (ii), (iii), (vii), (viii) and (ix) of the Statement of Claim.

Stowing container number OCLU1104003 four high in slot 01 in Bay 38 between void slots 00 and 03 knowing that the four high stack would be unsupported by other containers whereby it would sway when the vessel was under way and would probably collapse.

Stowing container number OCLU1104003 weighing 14 tonnes four high and container ICSU1836678 weighing 24 tonnes three high above containers ITAU4118118 weighing 10 tonnes and TRLU4352282 weighing 12 tonnes knowing that such weight over-stowage would cause the stack to sway when the vessel was under way and would probably collapse.

Failing to re-stow the containers in Bay 38 whilst at the last port of call prior to Sydney to ensure that they were on the same level." 
The sub-paragraphs incorporated in the Reply asserted the following acts of negligence:- "(i) Failing to lash and secure container OCLU1104003 in stack 01 in Bay 38D on board the `Encounter Bay', adequately or at all.

Using defective and/or worn lashings and securing devices on container OCLU1104003.

Causing or allowing container OCLU1104003 in stack 01 in Bay 38D to fall onto container HCLU4371407 in which the cargo was stowed in stack 4, thereby dislodging container HCLU4371407 from its stack and causing it to fall to the vessel's deck.
 ...

Failing to have any or any adequate system for securing containers on board the vessel.

Failing to have any or any adequate container lashing plan.

Failing to have any or any adequate system for checking container securing gear." 
It will be noted that the words of Article 4 paragraph 5(e) conclude "that damage would probably result", as is pleaded in paragraph 5 of the Reply.

The issues are capable of some further refinement. The defendant kept in issue defences of perils of the sea, and "any other cause arising without the actual fault or privity of the carrier", on both of which it accepted that it carried the onus of proof. The "peril of the sea" for which it contended was the alleged existence of a particular wave disturbance known as a "hot spot" immediately prior to the collapse, which caused a violent rolling of the vessel to port. This issue was barely argued by Dr White but, as it remained in issue, I have concluded that the defendant has not satisfied me that the vessel encountered one. In deference to the fact that the matter was left in issue and that my failure to be satisfied reflects on the credibility of Mr
Lewis, I shall give my reasons in more detail.

On the second aspect of this defence Dr White submitted, but fleetingly, that the "other causes" were the possibilities that cargo in one of the containers shifted, or that there was an inherent defect in the lashings. There was not a shred of evidence to support either submission, save that an expert called by the plaintiffs agreed that either of these causes was a "possibility", which was in no way a concession, but a recognition that such matters were "possibilities". In my view it is wholly undesirable to put in issue and seek to litigate such matters when the party carrying the onus must know that it has no evidence to support them. As Dr White virtually conceded that the defendant had not discharged the onus of proof and advanced no submission save the assent to a "possibility", (and most things within the realm of reason are no doubt "possible"), I do not propose to say more than that the defendant has not discharged the onus of satisfying me that either matter was a cause of the collapse.

The issues of unseaworthiness and the limitation of liability were, accordingly, the major ones fought. Mr King submitted that the obligation, relevantly for present purposes, to make the vessel seaworthy before and at the beginning of the voyage was cast upon the carrier, (the Article 3(1) obligation), and that if the carrier did not meet it the provisions of Article did not avail it. He acknowledged that if the plaintiffs were forced to rely on the Article 3(2) obligations, the defendant was entitled to call in aid the exclusions in Article 4, in so far as any were applicable. His submission was that none were.

Mr King accepted, as I understood it, that the plaintiffs bore the onus of establishing that the vessel was seaworthy in the sense that, relevantly for present purposes, she was fit to carry the cargo safely on the voyage:
Scrutton on Charterparties (Eighteenth Edition), p.83; or that she was fit "to receive and carry the cargo specified in the contract and deliver it to the specified destination": Davies & Dickey "Shipping Law" (Second
Edition), p.269. The obligation of the carrier is to exercise due diligence to make the ship seaworthy before and at the beginning of the voyage. Mr King submitted, at one stage, that the obligation applied in Melbourne in respect of the voyage from there to Botany Bay. That was the position under the common law, but since the introduction of the Hague Rules it has been accepted that the obligation is one that commences at least with the beginning of the loading of the goods and ceases upon the commencement of the contracted voyage, being the voyage from the port of loading to the port of discharge. Of course, if there has been a breach of the obligation to make the vessel seaworthy before or at the commencement of the voyage, such that damage may be caused at any part of the contracted voyage, the carrier may be liable for that damage. But once the carrier has fulfilled the obligation before or at the commencement of the voyage to make the vessel seaworthy, a fresh obligation in that regard is not imposed thereafter, for example at each intermediate port of call.

Unless unseaworthiness is established, which would exclude the operation of the exemptions in Article 4, a breach of Article 3(2) will entitle the carrier to rely on the provisions of Article 4, and, relevantly for present purposes paragraph 5 thereof to limit the amount of the liability. Whilst Dr White conceded that the defendant was the carrier under the Bill of Lading he submitted, firstly, that for the exception contained in Article 4 paragraph (e) to apply the relevant acts or omissions stated therein had to be those of the carrier, i.e. the defendant, in the sense that it was the product of its governing mind, and could not be an act of its servants or agents. He submitted that the evidence did not establish that. Nextly, and of course predicated on the non-acceptance of his first submission, he submitted that in so far as any people were responsible for the damage in the circumstances pleaded in the Reply, they were not servants or agents of the defendant, but servants or agents of P & O, for whose acts and omissions the defendant was not responsible. This submission was linked with the further submission that P & O was not, in any event, an agent of the defendant. Thirdly, if those submissions were rejected, he submitted that the plaintiffs had not established that the conduct which led to the damage was done "recklessly" and "with knowledge that damage would probably result".

A Review Of The Rules 
Article 1 defines "carrier" as including "the owner or the charterer who enters into a contract of carriage with a shipper"; and Article 2, subject to the provisions of Article 6, imposes on the carrier, in relation to the loading, handling, stowage, carriage, custody, care and discharge of the goods, the responsibilities and liabilities created by the Rules, and furnishes it with the rights and immunities they create. I have referred to
Articles 3(1) and (2), which impose liabilities on the carrier. Thereafter in
Article 3 reference is made to "the carrier" and "the master or agent of the carrier".

Rule 8 provides:- "Any clause, covenant, or agreement in a contract of carriage relieving the carrier or the ship from liability for loss or damage to, or in connexion with, goods arising from negligence, fault or failure in the duties and obligations provided in this article or lessening such liability otherwise than as provided in this convention, shall be null and void and of no effect ...." 
Article 4(1) initially exculpates the carrier from liability for failure to comply with Article 3(1) if the loss or damage arose from unseaworthiness "unless caused by want of due diligence to make the ship seaworthy", and imposes on the carrier the burden of proving the exercise of due diligence.

Paragraph (2) exculpates the carrier from responsibility for loss or damage in the specified circumstances, (subject to its not being liable for a concurrent cause), and in sub-paragraphs (a) and (q) respectively there is reference to "the master, mariner, pilot, or the servants of the carrier", and to "without the fault or neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier". Thus, where it is desired to draw a distinction between "the carrier", on the one hand, and "the carrier, his servants and agents", on the other, the draftsman has done so.

In The Shipping Corporation of India Limited versus Gamlen Chemical Co (A/Asia)
Pty Limited <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 142] goods were damaged when the vessel encountered heavy weather.
The trial Judge found that the heavy weather was unusual but not unforeseeable; that the goods could have been stowed to withstand the conditions encountered; that they were inadequately stowed whereas if they had been properly stowed they would not have been damaged; and that the heavy weather and the improper stowage were concurrent causes of the loss. On this basis his Honour held that there was a peril of the sea, which excluded liability. The Court of Appeal reversed this decision on the basis that the
Hague Rules did not alter the common law principle that an exception in the
Bill of Lading as to perils of the sea did not avail the carrier if negligence by it was established. The High Court dismissed the appeal.

The central question was the meaning to be attributed to the words "Subject to the provisions of Article 4 ..". The appellant's contention was that the obligation to stow properly was made subject to the exclusions in that Article so that even if there was negligent stowage, the encountering of perils of the sea exculpated the carrier. The High Court rejected this submission on the basis that the effective cause of the loss was the inadequate stowage and that on a strict construction the damage could not be said to have resulted from a peril of the sea. Relevantly for present purposes Stephen J said, at p.154:- "To reject the appellant's contention is not to treat the opening words of Article III r.2 as nugatory. As was pointed out on behalf of the respondents, the opening words of Article III r.2 do have useful work to do quite apart from the role that the appellant's argument would assign them: their proper field of operation may be seen from an examination of the terms of r.2(a) and (b) and rr.4, 5 and 6 of Article IV." 
Similarly, at p.165, Mason and Wilson JJ, with whom Gibbs CJ and Aicken J agreed, said:- "Ample justification for the preface is to be found in the presence in Article IV of r.2(a) and (b) and rr.4, 5 and 6. Each of these provisions adds a significant qualification to either the scope of the obligation or the consequences of a breach." 
These statements made clear that in so far as a shipper seeks to rely on
Article 3(2), its opening words will affect the entitlement to recover, in so far as that entitlement is modified and restricted by e.g. Article 4(5).

The Contractual Arrangements 
The Bill of Lading was for combined transport shipment or port to port shipment. It acknowledged receipt of the goods by the carrier from the shipper in apparent good order and condition:- ".. for Carriage subject to all the terms hereof (INCLUDING THE TERMS ON THE REVERSE HEREOF AND THE TERMS OF THE CARRIER'S APPLICABLE TARIFF) from the Place of Receipt or the Port of Loading, whichever is applicable, to the Port of Discharge or the Place of Delivery, whichever is applicable. In accepting this Bill of Lading the Merchant expressly accepts and agrees to all its terms and conditions whether printed, stamped or written or otherwise incorporated, notwithstanding the non-signing of this Bill of Lading by the Merchant." 
The terms and conditions defined the "Carrier" as "the party named on the face of this Bill of Lading as being the Carrier". As I have said it was not in issue that that was the defendant.
 "Combined transport" is stated to arise if "the Place of Receipt" and/or "the
Place of Delivery" are indicated on the face of the Bill of Lading in the relevant spaces. That was done.

Clause 4, which is headed "Sub-contracting and Indemnity" provides:- "(1) The Carrier shall be entitled to sub-contract on any terms the whole or any part of the Carriage.

The Merchant undertakes that no claim or allegation shall be made against any person whomsoever by whom the Carriage or any part of the Carriage is performed or undertaken (other than the Carrier) which imposes or attempts to impose upon any such person, or any vessel owned by any such person, any liability whatsoever in connection with the Goods or the Carriage of the Goods whether or not arising out of negligence on the part of such person and, if any such claim or allegation should nevertheless be made to indemnify the Carrier against all consequences thereof. Without prejudice to the foregoing every such person shall have the benefit of every exemption, limitation, condition and liberty herein contained and of every right, exemption from liability, defence and immunity of whatsoever nature applicable to the Carrier as if such provisions were expressly for his benefit; and in entering into this contract, the Carrier, to the extent of these provisions does so not only on his own behalf but also as agent and trustee for such persons.

The provisions of sub-clause 4(2), including but not limited to the undertakings of the Merchant contained therein, shall extend to claims or allegations of whatsoever nature against other persons chartering space on the carrying vessel.

The Merchant further undertakes that no claim or allegation in respect of the Goods shall be made against the Carrier by any person other than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Bill of Lading which imposes or attempts to impose upon the Carrier any liability whatsoever in connection with the Goods or the Carriage of the Goods, whether or not arising out of negligence on the part of the Carrier and, if any such claim or allegation should nevertheless be made, to indemnify the Carrier against all consequences thereof." 
Clause 6 provides for the "Carrier's Responsibility" in a Combined Transport situation in the following terms:- "(1) If the Carriage called for by this Bill of Lading is Combined Transport, the Carrier undertakes to perform and/or in his own name to procure performance of the Carriage from the Place of Receipt or the Port of Loading, whichever is applicable, to the Port of Discharge or the Place of Delivery, whichever is applicable and save as is otherwise provided in this Bill of Lading, the Carrier shall be liable for loss or damage occurring during Carriage to the extent set out below.
 ...

If the stage of the Carriage where the loss or damage occurred is known.

Notwithstanding anything provided for in sub-clause 6(1) and subject to Clauses 15 and 16, if it is known during which stage of Carriage the loss or damage occurred, the liability of the Carrier in respect of such loss or damage shall be determined: by the provisions contained in any international convention or national law which provisions:- cannot be departed from by private contract to the detriment of the Merchant; and would have applied if the Merchant had made a separate and direct contract with the Carrier in respect of the particular stage of Carriage where the loss or damage occurred and received as evidence thereof any particular document which must be issued in order to make such international convention or national law applicable; or if no international convention or national law would apply by virtue of sub-clause 6(2)(a), by the Hague Rules if the loss or damage is known to have occurred at sea or inland waterways; or by the provisions of sub-clause 6(1) if the provisions of sub-clause 6(2)(a)(b) do not apply.

For the purposes of sub-clause 6(2), references in the Hague Rules to carriage by sea shall be deemed to include reference to carriage by inland waterways and the Hague Rules shall be construed accordingly." 
It was not in issue that the Hague-Visby Rules governed the carriage.

Exhibit H contains the Slot Charter Party. Although the names of the parties are not stated it was not in issue that the "owners" was P & O, and the "charterers" was the defendant.
 "Slot" is defined as meaning "the space required to accommodate 1 ISO 20 foot container (1TEU)". Although forty foot containers were also loaded, Mr King took no point in this regard.

Clause 2 provides:- "Owners let and Charterers hire for the carriage of Goods in Containers ... Slots (or more or less as may be agreed for each Voyage) until terminated by either party ..." 
Clause 3.1 provides how the slots shall be employed, and clause 3.2 provides that if the provisions of clause 3.1 have not been complied with, or if in the opinion of owners the goods and/or containers are or are likely to become of a dangerous, inflammable or damaging nature, they may refuse to ship them and have certain other similar rights.

Clause 4 provides that owners shall be remunerated in accordance with the provisions from time to time to be separately agreed or, in default of agreement, shall receive such remuneration as shall be fair and reasonable; and clause 5 provides that the owners shall pay all wages, insurance premiums, charges, dues, taxes, agencies, commissions, fees and all other expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the provision and operation of the vessel.

Clause 10 is headed "Charterers' Obligations", sub-clause 1 requiring that charterers provide such information in relation to any goods and containers as owners may reasonably require and warrant such information to be complete and accurate. Clause 10.2 provides:- "Charterers and their servants, agents and sub-contractors shall comply with the directions of the Master or other persons responsible for the stowage on behalf of Owners as to how, when and where Goods and Containers are to be stowed. If Charterers and their servants, agents and sub-contractors fail to comply with such directions, Charterers shall indemnify Owners against all consequences thereof. Charterers shall in their capacity as such be under no liability in respect of the consequence of complying with such directions, and Owners shall indemnify Charterers against the same." 
Clause 11 provides an indemnity by the charterers to the owners, or any servant of the owners or any person(s) or bodies whomever by whom the carriage or any part of it is performed or undertaken, against any claim by any person, other than the charterers, seeking to impose upon the beneficiaries of the indemnity any liability whatsoever in connection with the goods and containers or their carriage, and:- "Charterers further undertake that no Bills of Lading which they issue to their customers in respect of Goods and Containers, being the subject of this Charterparty, will contain any demise/indemnity of carrier clause, which purports to place Owners in a direct contractual relationship with the customers or Charterers." 
Clause 11.6 provides:- "The intended effect of this clause is that Charterers shall always deal with claims from third parties relating to loss, damage, delay or expense to Goods in respect of which they are Principal Carrier under a Bill of Lading, Waybill or other contract of carriage. Should, nevertheless, actions be taken against Owners, their servants, agents and/or sub-contractors, Charterers agree to take over the handling and settlement (if any) of such claims at their own expense (without prejudice to their subsequent rights of recourse as provided elsewhere in this Charterparty) obtaining releases in joint names of all defendants entitled to the benefit of this clause." 
Clauses 12.1 and 12.2 provide:- "12. Without prejudice to the provisions of Clauses 3, 10 and 11 hereof, as between Owners and Charterers, the responsibilities arising out of and in connection with this Charterparty shall be borne and divided as follows: .1 Owners shall be responsible for the seaworthiness of the Vessel in accordance with the Hague Rules and for all purposes in connection with this Charterparty shall be entitled to the rights and immunities set out in the said Rules.
 .2 Subject to Clause 12.1 Owners will be responsible for the proper and careful carriage, custody and care of the Containers and Goods whilst on board the Vessel and for discharging, handling and storing Containers and Goods discharged solely in order to be reloaded or in order to load or discharge other Containers and Goods and for reloading and restowing the same." 
Clause 12.4 provides that the liability of Owners under clauses 12.1 to .3 "shall in every case be subject to Article III Rule 6Bis of the Hague-Visby
Rules", and clause 12.5 provides that the liability of Owners for any loss or damage shall be subject to Article IV Rule 5 of the Hague Rules.

The only contract into which the plaintiffs entered was that contained in the
Bill of Lading and it was a "Combined Transport" situation, thus bringing into operation clause 6. As the stage of the carriage where the loss or damage occurred is known the applicable clause is 6(2).

The Slot Charter was, accordingly, one by which the defendant chartered container space on P & O's vessel. The control of the vessel, in the sense of her manning and day to day operation, remained with P & O, which remained liable to pay not only wages, but all other amounts required to be expended in connection with the provision and operation of the vessel. The defendant was bound, in relation to cargo, to provide information to P &
O, to warrant the completeness and accuracy of that information, and to comply with the Master's directions in relation to stowage and, provided the defendant did, it was entitled to an indemnity from P & O. Clause 12 imposed, as between the defendant and P & O, the responsibility in relation to the ship and the loading, stowing and handling of the cargo on P & O. In these circumstances, whilst as between the defendant and the plaintiffs, the defendant was the carrier and, accordingly, subject to the obligations and entitled to the rights and immunities imposed on the carrier, the crew of the ship remained, in my opinion, servants and agents of P &
O. In Australian United Steam Navigation Company Limited versus The Shipping
Control Board & Anor <case>; [(1945) 71 CLR 508], at p.521, Latham CJ said:- "All charterers of ships, by virtue of the charter party, have some control over the ship. Such control may relate only to a particular voyage; it may operate during a specified period. If the charter party is by way of demise, property in the ship temporarily passes to the charterer - for the duration of the charter. If possession, as well as some degree of control, passes to the charterer, then the property passes to the charterer and he is pro tempore the owner. But no property in the ship passes if possession is not given to the charterer by virtue of the terms of the charter. If the control of master and crew in the navigation of the ship passes to the charterer he has possession. If, on the other hand, he acquires only a right to the use of the ship - a right to use her carrying capacity (Carver, Carriage by Sea, 8th ed. (1938), p.244, par.153) there is no demise, but only a contract for services - locatio operis vehendarum mercium (Schuster versus McKellar (1857) 7 El.&B.704 [[119 ER 1407]], at p.17, where Lord Herschell LC said that the registered owner of a ship may have `so dealt with the vessel as to have given all the rights of ownership for a limited time to some other person, who, during that time, may equally properly be spoken of as the owner. When there is such a person, and that person appoints the master, officers, and crew of the ship, pays them, employs them and gives them the orders, and deals with the vessel in the adventure, during that time all those rights which are spoken of as resting upon the owner of the vessel, rest upon that person who is, for those purposes during that time, in point of law to be regarded as the owner'." 
In the instant case the defendant only had a right to use the carrying capacity of the vessel. The crew remained by virtue of the terms of the Slot
Charter, the servants and agents of P & O, or, more accurately, they did not become, in my opinion, the servants and agents of the defendant, at least for any purpose relevant to the present proceedings.

Mr King complained that this led to a most unjust result because the effect of clause 4 was that the plaintiffs could not sue P & O or its crew: Broken
Hill Proprietary Co Limited versus Hapag-Lloyd AG & Ors [[1980] 2 NSWLR ]
and Sidney Cooke Limited versus Hapag-Lloyd AG & Anor [[1980] 2 NSWLR .]
He did not seek to distinguish these decisions or ask me to reconsider them.
However, the duty of the Court is to determine and give effect to the terms of the contract into which the parties have entered. He submitted, in this context, that clause 4 of the Bill of Lading and the Rules should be construed, in the circumstances, so that "carrier" means the "carrier's servants or agents". An argument to this effect was rejected in Nissho Iwai
Australia Limited versus Malaysian International Shipping Corporation, Berhard <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 219.] Even if one were disposed to take that step it would be necessary to hold that the vessel's crew had become the servants or agents of the defendant.

Mr King also submitted that as the defendant and P & O were part of a consortium, which shared the use of vessels on this trade and other matters going to their operation, the Court should be quick to infer that there were arrangements giving rise to an agency. I am not satisfied that the evidence established that and, as I have said, the relevant contractual arrangements are those which have been proved.

The Configuration Of The Relevant Containers And The Collapse 
The configuration of Bay 38 provides for eleven cells numbered from port to starboard 10, 08, 06, 04, 02, 00, 01, 03, 05, 07 and 09. When the vessel left
Melbourne Cells 03 to 09 were stacked with 20 foot containers, each cell taking two stacks one behind the other. Cells 01 to 10 i.e. running from the centre of the vessel to the port side provided for 40 foot containers. The forward faces of the stacks aligned across the vessel, but the aft faces of the rear stacks of 20 foot containers were further aft, and therefore did not align with, the aft faces of the 40 foot containers. This meant that whilst it was possible to lash the forward face of the stacks in Bay 38 away from the container both to port and starboard, the aft face of Cell 01 was forward of the line of 20 foot containers and could only be lashed to port.

There were no containers in Cells 00 and 02, i.e. the two cells to the immediate port side of Cell 01. There was a stack of containers in Cell 04.
The plaintiffs' goods were in the container on the top of the stack in Cell
At the time of the collapse the vessel encountered what Mr Lewis referred to as a "hot spot". In paragraphs 21 and 22 of his statement, Exhibit 3, he said:- "21. At the time of the collapse, the `Encounter Bay' had encountered unpredicted heavy weather. The swell was coming from the south west when the `Encounter Bay' encountered a climatically induced phenomenon sometimes known as a `hot spot'. This created an additional localised swell which exacerbated the effect of the south westerly swell and caused the vessel to lift and roll in a corkscrew motion. This corkscrew motion produces significantly higher stress than usual on deck cargo, even greater than usually encountered in heavy conditions.
 . As a `hot spot' is climatically induced, it is entirely unpredictable. A vessel cannot anticipate it, nor the impact or strength of it if it is encountered. The fact that the lashings held the stack secure until the `hot spot' was encountered tends in my opinion to show this exceptional circumstance was in fact the cause of the collapse." 
In consequence the collapse occurred with the results to which I have referred.

The Evidence Of Mr David Rex Lewis 
Mr Lewis holds a Class 1 Master Mariner's Certificate and a Bachelor of
Science Degree. He has had twenty six years' experience on commercial cargo vessels and, for the past twenty three years, he has been serving on "Encounter Bay" class vessels. He is obviously a highly experienced and qualified officer. In paragraph 8 he gave evidence of the stowage system which was in place in March 1995 and, in paragraph 9, he said that cargo lashing is checked as the cargo is loaded and the Duty Officer signs a form that he has performed that task. In paragraph 10 he described the voyage and the extent to which the vessel was loaded and, in paragraph 11, the discharging operations at Melbourne.

In paragraph 12 he said that the general procedure was to lash away from the container, so that lashings ran from the outside corner of a container to a point a distance away from the base corner in preference to lashing across the width of the container, the reason being to cause the vertical forces to run downwards to a point of strength, which is the reinforced point on the vessel's deck or hatch cover where the lashing attachments are positioned. He continued:- "Lashing across the containers tends to centre the vertical downward pressures to a point at the centre of the container which is its weakest unenforced point." 
In paragraph 13 he set out a diagram of the stowage in the relevant bays and, in paragraph 15, he described, for reasons to which I have referred, the capacity to lash from the forward and aft faces of the containers. He continued:- "Due to the split 20 ft and 40 ft stow on the starboard side, two rods were positioned at Cell 01, one on the second tier, the other on the third tier, going to starboard." 
In paragraph 16 he said that all stacks were secured vertically with the use of twist locks in accordance with the Lashing Manual and, in paragraph 18, he expressed the opinion that the four high stack was adequately lashed "and in fact the stack remained lashed together and fell as one unit", which, on the evidence, I am satisfied is correct.

In paragraph 19 he said:- "In my experience, the maximum stress to the securing of deck stowed cargo likely to be experienced during the voyage to Sydney was to be expected at the time the Melbourne pilot was discharged from the vessel. This is because, to allow for the pilot to leave the vessel, it is necessary for the vessel to turn beam on to the swell. The pilot was dropped off from the vessel approximately three hours prior to the collapse of the stack without incident. As a result of the lashings remaining secure at this time, I considered it reasonable to expect that the lashings would remain secure throughout the coastal voyage." 
Even a prima facie reading of this paragraph indicated some difficulties. On one view Mr Lewis was saying that the stress imposed when the pilot was leaving the vessel could, in the circumstances of the stow undertaken, have led to the stack not remaining secure.

At Tp.55 Mr Lewis gave the following evidence:- "Q. You were obviously concerned about the security of this stow when the vessel left Melbourne? 
A. Yes. 
Q. You thought if it was going to come down it would come down when you let the pilot off, is that how I am to read the second last and last sentences of paragraph 19 of your statement? 
A. That is correct.

Q. So it was going to be a bit of a test that you would have to position the vessel when you let the pilot off? 
A. That would be the worst position it would be in in normal circumstances, yes.

Q. You appreciated, when you left Melbourne, that could be a circumstance which would bring this stack down? 
A. If the stack was going to collapse that would probably be the most likely time it would have collapsed.

Q. Putting it my way, you appreciated, when you left Melbourne, as the stack was secured it could come down when you let the pilot off? 
A. Yes." 
In paragraph 20 Mr Lewis described the vessel's condition on departure from
Melbourne. He said she was slightly stiff with a GM of 1.512 "however it was not excessively stiff". He expressed the opinion that the ideal range of GM for the vessel was between .8 and 1.2, and that whilst 1.512 "is slightly outside the ideal range, it is neither excessive nor does it make the vessel unsafe for the carriage of cargo".

He nextly dealt with the collapse of the stow and I have set forth paragraphs and 22 and, in paragraph 23, he said what his concerns were.

A Peril Of The Sea 
It is convenient to deal, at this point, with his evidence about encountering a "hot spot". The evidence disclosed that the first reference made to that phenomenon was in his witness statement. At Tp.69 it was put to Mr Lewis that the vessel did not experience a hot spot and he said:- "It did, very much so." 
He was asked why that was not recorded in the Log and his initial answer was that when the stow collapsed he went down to the deck. It was also put to him that he made no reference to a "hot spot" in his report of 24 March 1995, and he responded that that report was about damage. At Tp.70 he was asked whether the Master had made any reference to the matter in his report, and he referred to a passage in the telex sent by the Master referring to a sudden roll to port of approximately fifteen to twenty degrees, which he said was not entirely consistent with the rolling period of the vessel because up until then it had only been up to about ten degrees maximum. He continued:- "Q. Certainly there is no difficulty in the vessel addressing and catering for a roll, particularly in a gale of that type? 
A. The gale was on the starboard quarter and at that point she was rolling comfortably at ten degrees. The problem when you have reflected swell waves coming off an area like that, is that you end up with effectively a standing wave, which means that the vessel not only will roll, but she also corkscrews. In other words, she pitches well and that puts excessive strain on the vessel.

Q. But a corkscrew, I suggest to you, is a highly unpredictable event, isn't it? 
A. Yes.

Q. Why didn't you put that in the Log? 
A. I don't know, is the answer to that one.

Q. Why didn't you put it in your report? 
A. Because it wasn't relevant to the report, not that - not the theme of that report, but the Master actually put it in his and that is where it is relevant." 
At Tp.70 Mr Lewis said that the vessel was in an area of disturbed water for approximately one hour. He was asked why he did not mention that period in the
Log, and he said that he wrote the Log afterwards and:- "Q. It could have been, I suggest to you, the perfect explanation for this loss, wouldn't it? 
A. It would be the perfect explanation for this loss and if I had realised that three or four years later I would be, at this time in this Court, I would have had absolutely no doubt. At that time I must have been, I must apologise, legally naive.

Q. You knew the very next day there was going to be a potential claim because you wrote up a report, didn't you? 
A. No, that report was for the company, with regards to the ship's damage to its fittings and on that report we can issue an SPO to cover the costs." 
What Mr Lewis wrote in the Log was:- "Vessel rolling heavily at times to rough seas and steep long southerly swells taking occasional spray": Tp.71. 
He was asked, Tp.72, whether that description was of the condition prior to the containers coming down and he said:- "A. It covered the - yes, she was rolling moderately up till then. When it says `heavily at times', in other words, it was rolling moderately, but when at times it rolled very heavily, which, if you like, covered your reflected swells.

Q. That was for a time prior to the container collapse? 
A. No, it actually referred to the time of the container collapse.

Q. That's not how it reads? 
A. Heavily at times, the `at times' refers to the area of the collapse.

Q. What is a heavy roll in your definition? 
A. Anything more than ten degrees.

Q. You don't suggest that that should be read that: From time to time the vessel was rolling at more than ten degrees? 
A. You could put it that way, yes.

Q. That's the only sensible reading of it: Vessel rolling heavily at times through rough seas? 
A. Yes.

Q. That was something that was happening for a period? 
A. Yes, that's correct.

Q. No reference to a one off occurrence? 
A. No, no. I must admit that we are probably, as sea goers, not precise as the legal service would be.

Q. The whole purpose of the Log is to record what happens on the vessel? 
A. Yes.

Q. If something out of the ordinary happens, it should be recorded in the Log, surely? 
A. Yes, that's why we said, using our term, `at times'.

Q. I would suggest one thing an experienced officer would have in mind when a stack of containers came down, was, firstly, that something was going to be damaged in one of the containers? 
A. Correct.

Q. And secondly, somebody who owned whatever was damaged was going to sue? 
A. Correct.

Q. That would have been the very first thing that went through your mind? 
A. At the time, to be honest, the first thing that went through my mind was to limit the damage to the 20 foot container.

Q. The second thing that went through your mind would be the prospect that somebody would be claiming against the ship for the damage? 
A. Sometimes - yes, yes.

Q. And then somebody would be looking at the Log to see what a responsible officer had recorded about how the damage occurred? 
A. Yes." 
Although Mr Lewis said that his report of 24 March 1995 was prepared essentially to disclose the damage which had occurred, the first substantive part of it dealt with the weather conditions. It stated:- "The above containers and their cargoes suffered damage when the vessel rolled heavily to port at 1924 hrs 24th March, local time Victoria (GMT plus 11 Hrs). At the time the vessel was in heavy seas created by a Beaufort scale Force 7 wind combined with a long heavy SSW'sly swell, at the time a strong wind warning was in force for Victorian waters West of Wilson's Promontory with a gale warning East of Wilson's Promontory (Warning IDF 11V issued at 1655 Friday 24/03/95(1)). The vessel was at this time on a course of 1.25o T and making a ground speed of 16,5 Knots, in position ...

The four high stack of 40 foot containers stowed at cell position 01 fell inboard and across the cell positions 00 and 02, which was empty at the time, the containers from these positions having been discharged in Melbourne. The stack remained lashed together and fell as one unit onto the four high stack of 40 foot containers located in cell 04 pushing them outboard onto the three high containers stowed in cell position 06 which were also pushed outboard .." 
Although I accept Mr Lewis' evidence that the main reason for the report was to refer to the damage, I find it extraordinary that in describing the circumstances which led to the collapse, in the context where he dealt with the weather and sea conditions, he did not mention the "hot spot" if in fact one was encountered.

The Master, in his telex of 28 March 1995, Exhibit 1 page 310, said:- "At time of incident vessel was rolling 10-12 degrees P+S. When collapse occurred vessel took one larger sudden roll to port approx 15-20 degrees. This was the first large roll experienced until then. Previously the stow had showed no apparent signs of excessive strain or movement.

Contributing factors to collapse may have been shift of cargo within container 38-01-86.

Heavy over light.

Inability to fix outboard leading lashings at aft end due to 20-40 ft configuration.

All 40 ft containers were 8'6" requiring third tier lashing to have one or two extension hooks in place." 
When the vessel berthed at Botany Bay various marine surveyors, including
Captain Read, who was retained by the defendant, considered the situation. The various reports and the witness statement of Captain Read are Exhibit 4. In his initial report of 6 April 1995 he dealt with weather conditions under the heading "Cause of Damage". He said:- "We have not had the opportunity to inspect vessel's log book, however weather maps issued for 2200 hrs on 24th March 1995 indicate that the vessel would have been under the influence of a south westerly air stream resulting from a cold front extending roughly from Sydney in a S/SE direction into the Tasman Sea. At this time, NSW forecasts for the south coast of that state indicated winds from the S/SW between 20 and 25 knots with seas tending moderate to rough on a moderate swell. It is unlikely that the weather in the vicinity of Wilson's Promontory would have been significantly worse. The weather conditions forecast are not considered to be either unusual or extreme for the Tasman Sea. The vessel's Master would have had all relevant weather forecasts." 
In paragraph 8(c) Captain Read reported:- "The Master apparently noted Sea Protest at Sydney. Despite the fact that the vessel may have encountered adverse weather shortly after departure from Melbourne, it appears likely that the collapse of the containers may well be attributed to incorrect weight distribution in the stow and failure to adequately secure the containers. It would be prudent to request the vessel's operator/owner to provide relevant details in respect to limitations on deck stow containers. A copy of the recommended securing methods should also be obtained in relation to the vessel's stability conditions at the time of the incident." 
His next report was written on 23 May 1995 and, under the heading "Cause of
Damage", he dealt shortly with the weather conditions in the following terms:- "The vessel is reported to have encountered adverse weather shortly after departure from Port Phillip on 24th March 1995, although our investigations indicate that the weather was neither extreme nor unusual for that area of the Tasman Sea." 
In his witness statement Captain Read does not deal in terms with the weather conditions but, at paragraph 8, he stated:- "I agree that the containers in Bay No 38 were not fully lashed in accordance with the recommendations in the vessel's Lashing Manual and that this was careless. In my opinion if the recommendations in the Lashing Manual had been followed the stack would not have fallen." 
This was consistent with paragraph 8(c), which I have just quoted, in his earlier report.

In cross-examination Captain Read said that no complaint was made to him about any exceptional weather being experienced, that he was not advised that the vessel had encountered a "hot spot", and that he remained of the view set forth in paragraph 8 of his witness statement.

At Tpp.90-91 Captain Read said, in relation to the weather:- "Q. Your investigations disclose that the weather was neither extreme nor unusual for that area of the Tasman Sea at the time of the voyage? 
A. No, in my opinion it wasn't unusual.

Q. And nothing that you heard from any other person at the ship side, upon discharge in Sydney, caused you to have any other view? 
A. Not in respect of the weather, no.

Q. You were aware that Captain Bozier was appointed by the actual owner? 
A. I was aware he was appointed by P & O Nedlloyd, the P & O Group.

Q. Do you recall a conversation at that joint conversation at that joint survey where Mr Grant-Mitchell raised the questions as to whether the weather might have had anything to do with the problem and your view and Captain Bozier's view was that it hadn't? 
A. I honestly can't remember Mr Mitchell or Mr Grant-Mitchell actually raising that question. 
Q. Nobody at that time suggested to you that a hot spot had anything to do with the cause of this loss? 
A. No, no. That was never suggested.

Q. Have you ever heard that suggestion before to-day? 
A. No, I haven't." 
He also said that in his opinion had the containers been lashed in accordance with the Lashing Manual they would not have fallen.

I was not referred to this Protest.

I am not satisfied that the vessel struck a "hot spot" and, accordingly, I am not satisfied that the collapse was caused by such an event. I therefore do not accept the evidence of Mr Lewis on this point. The reasons I do not accept it are because, with one minor exception, it is totally inconsistent with the contemporaneous evidence. Firstly, Mr Lewis, notwithstanding his appreciation of the significance of the matter, made no reference to it in either the Log or the Report of Damage. I find it inconceivable that an officer of his experience appreciating, as I am satisfied he did, the potential consequences of the incident, would not have recorded a "hot spot". Further, the matter was not reported to Captain Read, notwithstanding that he was retained on behalf of the defendant and notwithstanding that he was obviously investigating the weather conditions. No attempt was made to put the Log before Captain Read to see whether that changed his view about the weather conditions. Put more accurately there was no evidence before me that Captain Read was asked to consider the Log, which he said in his initial report it would be necessary for him to do, to see whether that changed his clearly expressed statements about the weather conditions from the information before him.

The only semblance of corroboration for Mr Lewis' evidence is the reference by the Master to the one heavy roll to port in his telex of 28 March 1995.
However, that statement is inconsistent with what Mr Lewis recorded in the Log concerning the vessel's rolling heavily at times to rough seas and in steep long swells. Additionally I would have expected, if the Master had been informed or known that the vessel encountered a "hot spot", that he would have referred to it in unambiguous terms.

The defendant carries the onus of satisfying me that the damage occurred by reason of perils of the sea. It has failed to discharge that onus for the reasons I have given. I should add that Dr White made no submission that if, contrary to the view to which I have come, the vessel did encounter a "hot spot", that constituted a peril of the sea.

The Method Of Lashing 
It is now convenient to return to the evidence as to how the four containers in Cell 01 were lashed prior to the vessel's leaving Melbourne. On the trip to
Melbourne there were stacks of containers four containers high on the port side of Cell 01 and running to the outermost port cell, No 10. On the starboard side of Cell 01 there were four stacks of 20 foot containers four containers high. The vessel unloaded in Melbourne all the containers in Cells and 02 meaning, in effect, that there was a void to the port side of the containers in Cell 01 and, in so far as those containers had received any support from the containers stacked in Cells 00 and 02, that was removed.
There was also a very real problem in the stack in Cell 01 in that the container on the third tier which, together with its cargo, was much heavier in weight than the two containers below it, was stacked on top of the lighter containers, rather than underneath them. This method of stacking contravened the Lashing Manual, which specified:- "The principle of no heavies over lights is an intrinsic requirement of this system, the heavier the bottom weights the better." 
The evidence of Mr Lewis, to which I shall refer in more detail, was that he was not totally satisfied with the way in which the stack in Cell 01 was lashed when the vessel left Melbourne, and I have referred to his apprehensions in relation to it. I have also referred to the evidence of
Captain Read, which makes it clear that in his view the lashing was "careless", and that had the lashing been carried out properly the collapse would not have occurred.

Captain Read was asked whether he looked at the vessel to ascertain the stowage arrangements and to determine whether the containers had been stowed "in accordance with good seamanship". He said he did "but we were refused access to the ship" by her agents "P & O". He agreed that the guideline of having no heavy containers over light containers, as an intrinsic requirement of the lashing system, was one he endorsed.

At Tp.94 he gave the following evidence:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. Have a look at paragraph 8 on page 3 of your most recent report? 
A. Yes.

Q. Is that your final view on the matter? 
A. That is my view on having seen all of the revised information or new information.

Q. If the recommendation in the lashing plan manual had been followed, in your opinion, the stack would not have fallen? 
A. That's correct.

Q. I take it that you formed the view that the recommendation in the lashing manual had not been followed? 
A. That's correct, yes." 
In cross-examination Mr Lewis was taken through the steps he took to lash the containers in Cell 01 in great detail. He agreed, Tp.42, that there was only one starboard lashing on Bay 38 Cell 01. At Tp.43 he said that he was aware of the importance of the principle of not stowing heavies over lights, and that he knew that when the containers in Cell 01 were loaded at Foss Sur Mer that principle had been infringed. He continued that he had an idea that the container, which caused the infringement, was still in place, when he checked the lashing in Melbourne, and further that as he understood it the reason for having heavy containers at the bottom of the stack was for stability of the stack. He was taken to a number of Lashing Manuals, which reinforced and repeated this requirement.

At Tp.51 Mr Lewis agreed that there was certain re-stowing in Melbourne, and he was asked whether the containers on the third and fourth tiers in Cell 01 could have been shifted to the empty bays to port to ensure that there were no heavies over lights. He replied that he would have had to have very good reason to do that and to be able to justify it. It was suggested to him that a very good reason was the intrinsic requirement of the system with which, ultimately, he agreed. He was asked, in those circumstances why he did not adopt that system and he replied:- "A. Because I felt that there was a very good reason for the stowage trade planner not to have done it and so I tried to correct it." 
Although the answer appears inherently contradictory, I think Mr Lewis was seeking to say that the stowage planner had adopted this course in an attempt to facilitate discharging, but that it led to his having difficulties in lashing the containers. This immediately pointed up that he appreciated there was a problem and he said his attempts to correct it involved putting on extra lashings and:- "Q. You appreciated that there was a problem? 
A. I appreciated that there was a problem. I conceded there probably was a problem and tried to put on extra lashings to ensure that the problem was minimised. 
Q. What I do not quite understand is why couldn't the containers in tiers 3 and 4 of 01 have been put on the deck at 00 and 02? 
A. Because the actual point of going to Melbourne and making it purely a discharge port is to leave ground space for Sydney to load. So, as there was only 36 hours of steaming between Melbourne and Sydney, the actual trade planner will have already sent a stow probably for those positions to the terminal in Sydney.

HIS HONOUR: Q. But both of those containers were to come off in Sydney, weren't they? 
A. They were to come off in Sydney.

Q. I take it you discharged before you loaded? 
A. That is correct.

Q. So if you put the container on tier 4 and the container on tier 3, in 00 and 02, you wouldn't have affected anything? 
A. There would have been - your Honour, there would have been a delay to the vessel.

Q. Of how long? 
A. Well, the shift, when it came on, actually took five hours to discharge thirty two containers.

Q. But how long would the delay have been? 
A. About thirty minutes.

Q. That would not have affected, if you had done what I asked you was possible to be done, that would not have affected the discharging? 
A. Not overly, no.

Q. Or the loading of cargo in Sydney? 
A. No": Tpp.52-53. 
Mr Lewis was then referred to Exhibit 1 p.310, being the telex from the
Master, which referred, inter alia, to "heavy over light". He continued:- "Q. That was a risk of which you were aware when the vessel left Melbourne, weren't you? 
A. That is corrrect.

Q. And you just took that risk, didn't you? 
A. I tried to minimise that risk.

Q. That was reckless, wasn't it? 
A. No. I tried to minimise that risk and put on what I could in the way of lashings, sufficiently that I felt under the normal circumstances of sailing from Melbourne to Sydney, there was a reasonable chance that those stacks would stay up.

Q. With respect, the position was even worse than just simply having a problem with heavies over lights and contrary to the manual and good stowage practice, you actually couldn't get the lashings you wanted on, could you? 
A. That is correct": Tp.54. 
At Tp.55 Mr Lewis gave the evidence to which I have referred in relation to letting the pilot off.

At Tpp.65-66 Mr Lewis gave the following evidence:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. Does that mean you cannot have a lashing going from any one container both to port and starboard? 
A. Yes.

Q. Irrespective of which container is on deck? 
A. The hook itself is only about that wide (witness indicated) in fact, the actual area that the lashing bar would go over would be that wide. It is not possible to put two lashing bars onto the same hook.

Q. Wouldn't it be more sensible, in the configuration of this stowage as you left Melbourne, to have them going to starboard rather than to port? 
A. I think in these circumstances it would have been, yes.

Q. Because if she rolled to starboard you would have the other container beside her? 
A. Yes.

Q. If she rolls to port, you have nothing? 
A. That is correct.

Q. So that the lashing bar or lashing rod should have gone to the starboard, shouldn't it? 
A. But on the forward face we could not get one on the third tier coming across. The third tier lashing on that face, I actually managed to put the penguin pin in up there and could only get one going across to starboard. So that was my main starboard thrust going across that way and then this was the one on the after face coming to port.

Q. You mean you took a conscious decision then to have the forward one to starboard and the after one to port? 
A. I had originally wanted to put the third tier - there was one penguin hook on the after end on the third tier on the port side. In fact, I originally wanted to take that lashing across to the starboard side, so that would have solved the problem. Unfortunately, it did clash with the rods. When I was trying to remember this, I couldn't remember exactly why it clashed with it. As it came back to me, I came to realise that in fact when we had been lashing this stack, I had actually gone round to the foreward face to dictate to them what it was. The wharf labour were lashing the rear face and they shouted up the deck, `You can't get it that way because of the 20 foot split', and the lashing was that way and I requested that they come outboard.

Q. All that means is that you had a second hook? 
A. I would agree with that. The problem that I had is that, as I say, in 1995 there were waterfront rumblings going on. If we are seen to be lashing the vessel we are effectively doing the wharf labour out of a job. So if I had gone back to move that back lashing, they wouldn't move a lashing that is already in place, so if I had gone back and moved it, then there was a possibility that there might have been repercussions": Tpp.65-66. 
Shortly after Mr Lewis said that he would have liked to have put an inboard starboard lashing on the after end.

It is quite obvious from Mr Lewis' evidence that he did not lash the cargo in the manner he considered appropriate and conformably with the Lashing Manual and, further, that being placed in that position he did not take the steps of having the heavier containers removed into the empty cells at 00 and 02. There was, in my opinion, no good reason that this was not done. He confirmed, in re-examination, Tp.81, that he had taken some preliminary steps to lash the stack better, but that that had not been carried into effect and, at Tp.82, he was asked by Dr White:- "Q. I will come back to it, it probably was not a good question. I was really asking, in mentally preparing your lashing plan, you started to tell the Court what part this heavier container, which we know is in stack 01 and tier 3, played in your mental preparation for lashing? 
A. If there had not been heavies over lights in that stack, it had been just conventionally correctly stowed, if you like, as it was an inboard stack not subject to wind, according to the actual Lashing Manual, it only required lashings from the second tier. Because of the fact that I knew that there was a problem stack in that bay in those 40 footers somewhere, I wasn't 100 per cent sure whether it had been discharged at that point or whether that was it. I decided, on the grounds of commonsense, to take precautions and tried to get a third high lashing across on that container and on the other stacks on the port side as well." 
The evidence made it clear that he did not do this.

The evidence satisfies me that Captain Read's assessment of the situation is accurate and that the methods adopted by Mr Lewis were careless and resulted in the stack falling. This is corroborated by other evidence, which I accept, and was hardly in issue.

The Evidence Of Captain John Milward 
Captain John Milward, who has extensive relevant maritime experience, gave two witness statements dated 10 March 1998 and 28 September 1998: Exhibit G. In his first statement he expressed the view, based on a detailed examination of the documents with which he had been furnished and which are set forth in paragraph 2 thereof, that because of the configuration between 40 foot and 20 foot containers it was impossible to secure them in the way outlined in the vessel's Lashing Manual.

In relation to stowage weights in Cell 01 he said, without objection:- "In my opinion the ship's senior staff were indeed reckless in allowing the ship to sail from Melbourne with a four high 40 foot stack as shown on the Bay plan. Certainly prior to the Melbourne discharge it would have been difficult and costly to re-stow these containers, but after the Melbourne containers had been removed there was ground space adjacent to this stack where both the Sydney containers OCLU1104003(13t) and ICSU1836678(24t) could have been accommodated with only the cost of an internal re-stow.

This recklessness is compounded in that the Chief Officer was aware that securing Cell 01 with lashing rods would have been difficult with the 40ft-20ft configuration on those bays and, in his view, that only part of the or (sic) the lashing rod arrangement was possible.
 ...

The Stowage Manual clearly states that if this minimum weight is exceeded, or 62 tonnes (maximum stowage i.e. heavy to the bottom of stack) then diagonal rods must be fitted to the bottom tier 86. The containers stowed in Cell 01 exceeded this maximum loading on both counts and in addition were stowed heavy over light!" 
Captain Milward dealt with the assertions in Captain Read's report that there had been container failure by virtue of compression on the corner post of the bottom container, which caused the collapse. He said that was not correct and he gave reasons for that. He relied, inter alia, on the fact that the photographs did not show any sign of bending or compression. In his final submissions Dr White said that he did not submit that compression failure had caused the collapse.

Captain Milward then addressed the cause of the container stack collapse. He expressed the opinion that the only cause "was that the bottom containers were not adequately secured to the deck". He was of the view that the positioning of the lashing rods as asserted by Mr Lewis "could not have prevented the bottom container in Cell 01 from pivoting on its port side corner as the ship rolled to port". He was also of the view that the photographs of the fallen container stacks, the Master's initial message and the Damaged Container
Report of Mr Lewis further confirmed his judgment of how the accident occurred.

In considering the Lashing Manual he noted that there was no indication as to how containers were to be lashed with rods in a staggered 20foot/40foot configuration. He said rod lashings served several functions, namely to hold containers to the deck if the locating and locking devices are of insufficient strength for the stack weight containers to withstand the wind force on the outboard stacks of containers, and to overcome the racking forces which cause a container to distort from the square as the ship rolls in a seaway. He expressed the view that any lashing manual should clearly indicate that a container is fairly robust in compressive strength, but relatively weak in racking strength:- ".. and further outline the danger of placing rod lashings to one side of the stack only, this practice will increase racking forces on the stack not relieve them." 
He added that in his opinion container racking was not the reason for the stack collapse, but had the stack at Cell 01 been secured properly with rods it would have overcome the problem of the stack not being correctly secured to the deck with pin locks.

Captain Milward nextly dealt with the sailing condition of the vessel when leaving Melbourne. He concluded from the information available that when she arrived in Melbourne she was "in a comfortable sea going condition, not too stiff". This means, at least prima facie, that at the commencement of the voyage she was in this condition and, as I have said, the voyage to Melbourne was not one during which any untoward event occurred, so far as the evidence went. However his view when she left Melbourne was:- "The ship sailed with an additional 857 tonnes of fuel on board and 7,381 tonnes less cargo and never changed any ballast to compensate for the considerable changes to the on board weights. The vessel's metacentric height increased by 0.83 metres almost doubling the length of the maximum righting lever from 1.04m to 1.77m. The ship sailing from Melbourne was in a stiff condition. This is confirmed in the Master's message to owners that the roll period was ten to twelve seconds at the time of the incident.

The stiff condition and short roll period would have placed unnecessary strain on the deck securing arrangements, yet it was completely avoidable had the vessel used its ballast to reduce its stability.
 ... all the hull stresses increased. The ship in fact sailed over its permitted stress limits. A torsional stress at 5,135 tonne-metres was evident at frame 109, the ship computer actually indicated: * WARNING *Torsion exceeds Seagoing Limit.

Yet no ballast was pumped while the ship worked cargo in Melbourne." 
Captain Milward gave the following conclusions:- "I am convinced that the ship's senior staff acted in a reckless manner throughout the vessel's stay in Melbourne for the following reasons: . Insufficient notice was taken of the removal of lashings and securing devices on the deck containers during the Melbourne exchange.
 . No effort was made to re-stow deck containers to conform with the company's directive of light containers over heavy.
 . No lashing plan was provided to the terminal.
 . The rods that were placed in Cell 01 were not positioned as outlined in the Owner's Lashing Manual.
 . No check was made to ensure that containers were actually secured to the deck prior to departure.
 . The Chief Officer was not on board to indicate to the terminal how the deck lashing rods were to be installed.
 . The ship's sailing condition was unsatisfactory despite there being a gale warning in force.
 . The vessel sailed in excess of its permitted stress limits." 
In his report of 28 September 1998 Captain Milward said it was critical that the lashing at the after end of the four high stack in Cell 01 did not prevent the stack from falling to port. He referred to the statement in paragraph 8 of
Captain Read's statement, and expressed the opinion that Cell 01 should have either been re-stowed or an alternative lashing arrangement found.

He agreed with Captain Read that the "Encounter Bay" was within the design parameters of stability on her departure from Melbourne, but considered that with knowledge of the weather conditions, and with the Chief Officer's knowledge that he was unable to adequately complete the lashings, the ship made no effort to improve the sailing conditions by changing ballast on board.

In considering Captain Read's original theory of container compression failure, Captain Milward pointed to the fact that there was no damage to container TRLU4352202 and expressed the view that had Captain Read's original theory been correct there would have been considerable damage to this container, which was stowed at the bottom of Cell 01. As I have said Dr White did not seek to maintain this point. I refer to his evidence, however, because the failure to press the compression failure point confirms my view that
Captain Milward was a witness of experience and expertise.

He then entered into some argumentative discussion in relation to Captain
Read's report and concluded:- "If all the statements made in Captain Read's report were deemed to be correct and as he finally states that `Encounter Bay' was in his opinion in a fit condition for the safe carriage of deck cargo. Then with the weather experienced at the time of the incident and the relatively minor rolling of the vessel at that time, there should not have been any accident.

The sea state was not exceptionally heavy and the 15-20 degree rolling stated by the Master was not excessive when you consider that container strengths and lashing devices are made and calculated on the assumption of a 30 degree roll. Therefore there must have been some other reason for the collapse of the container stacks in question.

I stand by my original statement that in my opinion the containers were not adequately secured to the deck and the container rods were not properly arranged. The vessel should not have sailed in the condition stated with heavy containers over light weight in Cell 01 Bay 38.

As no ballast had been pumped and the ship sailed over its torsional limits, it indicates to me that the vessel was indeed being operated in a reckless manner." 
The last quoted sentence was objected to and I admitted it. The objection was that Captain Milward was giving evidence of the ultimate issue, which was not permissible. I have referred to other evidence he gave about "recklessness" to which objection was not taken.

In his evidence in chief Captain Milward described GM and the righting lever.
He said, Tp.124:- "A. Yes, the GM is the height of the vessel metacentre above its centre of gravity. The righting lever is the distance between the force of buoyancy and the force of gravity which is actually to bring the vessel back from a degree of heel. So it is a lever." 
In cross-examination Captain Milward maintained that it was wrong to stow heavy containers over light, particularly when the weight of the container at the third tier was 24 tonnes, whilst the weight of the container in the second tier was only 10 tonnes. He agreed that if there was a minor weight discrepancy that could be justified, but he was of the view that the discrepancy between 10 and 24 tonnes was totally unjustifiable and he maintained the view that the Chief Officer should have either refused to accept the container if it could only be stowed in that position or, alternatively, arranged for a re-stow. He also expressed the view that the effect of securing the container at the forward end, but not at the after end, would cause a twisting effect on it and:- ".. as the ship heels to port, that stack will want to move to port and there is absolutely nothing to stop the after end of the stack moving to port": Tp.129. 
He described that twisting as torsion, but he would not agree that containers on top of the bottom container would either preclude or limit that torsion. He said:- "A. Don't forget the boxes are not sitting on a level platform. The actual base of the ship is rolling when she is at sea. There is not much movement over 40 foot forward and aft on the centre board on the upper deck. Nor are you getting vertical forces. 
Q. Is it possible that you are becoming wedded to the idea and in fact it doesn't have much in it? 
A. No. I am talking from actual fact and from actually happens on containers on a moving platform": Tp.130. 
He described the elasticity in the container, and when it was put to him that it was a reasonable proposition that his theory may well be wrong, he said:- "A. No, I don't think that is a reasonable proposition at all, because I am saying that because the box wasn't secured in the starboard manner in the after end it was putting additional forces on the forward end. Now, we haven't said that we have delivered such a force on that bottom container to push it out of shape; we probably haven't, but we have put enough force to make the after end leave the deck and cause additional force on the forward end." 
This expert view corresponds with the commonsense approach that if one end is tightly lashed to prevent movement and the other end is not lashed, thus allowing movement, there will be stresses and strains put on the container.

He maintained that it was necessary to secure the after end of the container, which evidence I accept and which, in the end, was not really in issue. The reason it was not done was because Mr Lewis, though wanting to do it, did not.
In these circumstances Mr Lewis took no other precautions, such as moving the containers to the vacant bays.

It was then put to Captain Milward that there were other possibilities, which would explain the collapse, namely the movement of cargo in a container and a latent defect in one of the lashings. He accepted, subject to certain qualifications, that this may be so but there was no evidence advanced by the defendant to establish that. I have dealt with this matter.

Captain Milward acknowledged that Mr Lewis was confronted with problems, and it was suggested to him that when he was presented with the 24 tonne container and wished to put it midships that was a sensible decision. He said it was "a very incorrect decision" because it was put next to a 20 foot stack and Mr
Lewis knew he could not lash to starboard: Tp.135. Captain Milward added that he spent five years as a container ship planner and had been the Chief Officer and Master of a container ship. He agreed it was not an easy task to run a busy container ship, and that one is probably busier in port than at sea. He said, which must obviously be correct, that the priority of the Chief Officer is the safety of the ship and her cargo and when it was suggested to him that
Mr Lewis' decision to accept the 24 tonne container was reasonable, he replied:- "A. No, because he should not have accepted that 24 tonne container. That is where the fault lies. Not after having accepted it, not knowing where to put it. He should not have accepted it in the first place, not knowing where to put it." 
He agreed that amongst experienced master mariners there was a great deal of inherent training and skill about cargo handling, so that manuals concerning that matter were a guideline within which they could exercise that skill and experience. However, in relation to the present manual, he said, Tp.37:- "A. If the manual says intrinsic, you would guess - you would gauge from that, if you were talking maybe one or two tonnes difference in height higher over light, you would possibly accept that as a good - as a work practice. This box is in fact 14 tonnes over the weight of the box below it. That far exceeds what I would imagine the manual saying, intrinsic factors." 
Whilst he agreed it came down to a matter of judgment, he disagreed that there was any matter of judgment, which could be exercised in acting in the way in which Mr Lewis did in accepting a 24 tonne container to be placed on a 10 tonne container.

Captain Milward said that in addition to rejecting the 24 tonne container Mr
Lewis had a second option, namely to remove the two containers that had been stowed already and placed on the bottom of the stack. He said that was a commercial decision the shipping company had to make: Tp.139. He agreed it created problems, but repeated it was a commercial decision.

At Tp.140 he was referred to the difference between GM and GZ. He said the higher the GM became the greater the force imposed on the container lashing.
He agreed that experienced ships' officers know the movement of their ship reasonably well, and he explained this by saying, Tp.141, that the higher the
GM, the lower the righting lever so that the ship would come back upright at a quicker rate thereby putting more pressure on the cargo lashings. He said a high GM could have an effect on the cargo lashings, which in turn could cause a problem with the seaworthiness of the ship.

He was nextly cross-examined about his use of the word "reckless", which he said he obtained for the purposes of his report from the Hague-Visby Rules. He said he used the word because he used it in his lectures on a regular basis and:- "Q. Wouldn't it be preferable to have used another word with less serious consequences in your report? 
A. I do not think so, no, because had I used another word, it would not have had the same inference.

Q. So, you chose it deliberately because of the inference which you knew it had concerning the Hague-Visby Rules? 
A. No, I chose it because of the manner in which I could see the ship being conducted.

Q. Yes, but the inference you just referred to was the inference referring to the consequences of the use of that word, wasn't it? 
A. I think it adequately described the way I saw the ship being operated.

Q. The inference you have just referred to was the inference relating to the Hague-Visby Rules? 
A. I suppose that was in the back of my mind, yes.

Q. Well, it would have been in the front of your mind as well? 
A. Not necessarily. Had I not seen the ship being run in that type of manner, I would not have used it.

Q. Why didn't you use the word `careless'? 
A. I understand from the word `careless', that that is action taken because of - how shall we say - because it has been forgotten. That is careless." 
It was then suggested to Captain Milward that he formed the view about recklessness, with which he agreed, but he said he came to that view after he had weighed up the facts and had regard to the way in which the cargo had been stowed and secured and how the ship was being operated: Tp.143. He further explained the judgment he had formed thus:- "I had placed, if you like, a seamanlike judgment on the way the ship was being operated, that I could see from the documents. As I have said, I looked at the stowage, the lashing, and then the operation of the vessel. So I looked at it from a seaman's point of view." 
I accept Captain Milward's evidence as to the basis on which he formed his opinion. I do not consider he was in any way seeking to overstate the position.

He was asked to assume that there were two pins in the forward part of the container and whether his mind was changed on that assumption. He said it was not. The conclusion of his cross-examination was:- "Q. Could I suggest that having made up your mind there would be no way some new facts could get you to change your view? 
A. The only way I would have changed my mind, had I seen or not seen starboard lashings and pin locks in the aft end of the container. There were no starboard lashings, as I heard from the Court, there were no pin locks in the bays of that lashing that would have changed my report.

Q. I am suggesting to you that having made up your mind, there was nothing that was going to alter it? 
A. That is not correct." 
In his reports of 10 and 22 October 1996 Captain Bozier referred to various matters and he noted that on departure from Melbourne the GM was 1.512 metres.
In paragraph 20 of his witness statement, Exhibit 3, Mr Lewis said:- "In my opinion, on its departure from Melbourne, the condition of the `Encounter Bay' may be described as slightly stiff with a GM of 1.512, however it was not excessively stiff. In my opinion the ideal range of GM for the `Encounter Bay' is between .8 and 1.2. Whilst 1.512 is slightly outside the ideal range, it is neither excessive nor does it make the vessel unsafe for the carriage of cargo." 
In his statement of 13 October 1998, Exhibit 4, Captain Read noted this GM and, in paragraph 12, said that there was no GM defined as appropriate "for any specific vessel". In paragraph 13 he referred to the vessel's Trim and
Stability Booklet, which gave "a number of examples of arrival and departure conditions for the vessel with stability for various loadings", which he said varied between 0.22 metres and 3.48 metres when loaded with containers. In these circumstances he said the GM of 1.512 "was well within the range detailed in the examples", although this is somewhat at variance with the evidence of Mr Lewis to which I have referred. I appreciate that Mr Lewis was referring to "the ideal range".

Captain Milward then introduced a formula for assessing the roll period depending on the GM. He noted that the vessel reported to have a roll period of between ten and twelve seconds on her departure from Melbourne. According to his formula a GM of 1.512 would give an approximate roll period of 17.3 seconds, which prima facie, would cast doubt on the records kept on the ship or the formula put forward by Captain Read. However, he was not cross-examined on this. He expressed the view, in paragraph 16, that when "Encounter Bay" left Melbourne she was "well within the vessel's design parameters", and his opinion was that "neither the GM nor the roll period of the vessel was excessive or unreasonable". In paragraph 17 he said:- "The torsional stresses are not causative of an incident such as occurred on the `Encounter Bay'. Also, the extent that they exceeded the maximum allowable is not known and it is possible that once the torsional stress level was identified, that the vessel took appropriate action to reduce the stresses." 
There was no evidence to support this possibility. On the other hand the evidence was that there was no such problem when the vessel arrived at
Melbourne, the problem having arisen from the failure of the crew to move ballast. In so far as this is relied on as evidence of unseaworthiness, it was not a condition which existed before or at the commencement of the voyage. In any event I am not satisfied, for reasons to which I shall refer, that this made the vessel unseaworthy.

In paragraph 26 Captain Read agreed that cross-lashing rods would assist in reducing racking stresses.

In his supplementary report Captain Bozier said, in paragraph 1.5:- "The loading of 20 ft and 40 ft containers on deck in the same bay is not unusual and also took place in Bays 17/19, 21/23 and 29/31 on the same voyage. It would be expected that an alternative lashing system which gave the same security as the lashing plan would have been put in place." 
This is consistent with all the evidence, including Mr Lewis' apprehension about the method of lashing.

In relation to the movement of cargo Captain Bozier was of the view that if the lashing system was calculated, which it was not, to have been sufficient to cope with the movement of certain cargo:- ".. then the failure must have been due to a deterioration in the strength of the lashings (which may not have been apparent without special testing) or to the vessel's movement imposing stresses in excess of those given by the standard conditions." 
In paragraph 6 he expressed his opinion thus:- "6.1 In my opinion the containers at Cell 38-01 shifted because there were no lashings leading to starboard at the after end. The lashing systems are based on preventing any container movement and thus restricting any stresses to static loadings. If container movement is possible then dynamic loadings will also occur and these may cause stresses which are too large for the lashing system.
 .2 Containers, especially 40 ft units, are not rigid. As the vessel rolled to port the after end of the stack in Cell 38-01 was free to lift, imposing twisting in the structures of the two lower units. The combination of static and dynamic loadings was enough to cause the failure in the lashings." 
As I understand it this accords with the views expressed by Captain Read and
Captain Milward, and with the concerns felt by Mr Lewis.

My Conclusions On The Evidence 
The evidence satisfies me that the sole reason why the containers collapsed was that they were not properly lashed. If the view be taken that they could not have been so lashed because of the positioning of the 20 foot containers to the starboard side, then I am satisfied that the vessel's crew, and in particular Mr Lewis, were negligent in failing to re-stow the containers at tiers 3 and 4 at deck level in the vacant bays. In failing to take one or other of these precautions I am satisfied that the crew was negligent in and about the handling and stowing of the cargo.

Unseaworthiness 
I have said that the unseaworthiness must be before or at the commencement of the voyage, i.e. what occurred at Fos Sur Mer. I have noted the requirements for unseaworthiness, particularly in so far as it relates to the cargo. I would only add the statement of Lord Denning MR in The Aquacharm [1982] 1
LLR 7 at p.9:- "The word `seaworthiness' in the Hague Rules is used in its ordinary meaning and not in any extended or unusual meaning. It means that the vessel - with her master and crew - is herself fit to encounter the perils of the voyage and also that she is fit to carry the cargo safely on that voyage." 
In considering unseaworthiness it is necessary to bear in mind that the "Encounter Bay" was specifically designed to carry containers.

Mr King relied on three basic matters to establish unseaworthiness. Firstly, he submitted that there were deficiencies in the vessel's ballast tanks and gauges, which made it "extremely difficult" to control her stability and torsion to the knowledge of her operators. This cannot be accepted as a statement of the position throughout the voyage. I have referred to the evidence, which indicates that there was no such difficulty prior to the vessel's arrival at Melbourne. There is no doubt that on leaving Melbourne she was "stiffer" than the ideal situation. Although that may be attributed to the failure on the part of Mr Lewis to move ballast I do not consider that that rendered the vessel relevantly unseaworthy, nor do I consider that such additional rolling as that permitted contributed in any way to the collapse of the stack. That happened because it was improperly lashed. I am satisfied that had the stack been lashed properly it would have withstood the rolling, which the vessel experienced. If I be wrong in that view the position is that this was not unseaworthiness before or at the commencement of the voyage. It was a situation which arose by virtue of the discharge of cargo at Melbourne.

It was nextly submitted that there were deficiencies in the Lashing Manual and there was some argument as to whether the Lashing Manual had been properly corrected. I do not consider that there were any relevant deficiencies in the
Lashing Manual or that if there were that caused the inappropriate lashing. I am quite satisfied that Mr Lewis understood fully the requirements for proper lashing and that he would have carried them out but for the circumstances I have related. Even if, as to which I am not satisfied, there were any deficiencies in the Lashing Manual, they were not the reason why Mr Lewis did not properly lash the containers. He simply failed to take precautions either by lashing or re-stowing which he should have taken. In any event at the commencement of the voyage, notwithstanding that the third tier container was far heavier than those beneath it, that did not render the vessel unseaworthy qua the carriage of the cargo. That was because there was supporting cargo on the port side. There was no suggestion at the commencement of the voyage that when that was discharged at Melbourne, it would not be stowed properly.

Thirdly, it was submitted that the vessel was unseaworthy, in relation to her cargo, because an intrinsic requirement of the stowage system, namely not placing heavies over light, was "seriously contravened to the knowledge of ship and central planners". Whilst there was a contravention of this requirement, that did not render the vessel unseaworthy, in the required sense, at the commencement of the voyage. Further, when she reached Melbourne the situation which arose from the discharge of the adjacent port side cargo was obvious to Mr Lewis. His failure to correct the problem constituted, in my opinion, negligence on his part, but it did not bring about a situation of unseaworthiness. Nor was there evidence that the defendant, as carrier, directed its governing mind, or needed to direct its governing mind, to the precise steps that a competent crew, as I am satisfied there was, would take in consequence of the discharge of cargo.

In his initial written submissions Mr King wrote:- "The Vessel was unseaworthy at Melbourne because the stability of the vessel was adverse to the interests of cargo care; the Vessel's manuals were deficient with respect to lashing arrangements; the chief officer and those on the Vessel responsible for supervision of loading were not properly instructed with respect to cargo lashing and care; the Vessel was stiff for the anticipated voyage and its cargo; the cargo was improperly stowed and lashed: Sanko Steamships Inc versus Sumitomo Australia Limited (Sheppard J, FC 84.4.1996) <case>; [(1995) 183 CLR 628."] 
The initial allegation is unseaworthiness at Melbourne which, even assuming there was unseaworthiness, does not satisfy the appropriate test. The various matters Mr King then propounded are ones to which I have addressed attention save for the assertion that the Chief Officer and those responsible for supervision of loading "were not properly instructed with respect to cargo lashing and care". I reject this submission. Mr Lewis was highly proficient and must have been known to be so by his employers. There was no evidence that other officers were not competent.

In my opinion the plaintiffs have failed to establish that the vessel was unseaworthy either before or at the commencement of the voyage i.e. at Fos Sur
Mer, or, in so far as it may be relevant, at any other point in the voyage.

My Present Conclusions 
In the result I am satisfied that the collapse occurred in consequence of the negligence of the crew, which I have identified. The defendant has failed to establish that it is entitled to deny liability for any of the reasons pleaded. The issue then becomes whether it is entitled to rely on the monetary limitation. The first issue is whether the "carrier" means the defendant or its servants and agents. In my opinion the "carrier" means the defendant acting through its controlling mind and not through its servants and agents. I think this flows as a matter of construction. In paragraph 5(e) the "carrier" where first used is clearly a reference to the defendant and, consistently with usual canons of construction, the same word, where used in the same paragraph, should receive the same interpretation. Additionally, as I have said, in circumstances where the "servants and agents" are sought to be included the Rules state this.

The view to which I have come is supported by authority.

In Nissho Iwai Australia Limited versus Malaysian International Shipping
Corporation, Berhad the High Court considered clauses in a Bill of Lading, (clauses 8(2) and (3)), which exculpated "the Carrier" from liability in certain circumstances. A submission was made on behalf of the cargo owner that "the Carrier" included "agents and sub-contractors" and, accordingly, the
Carrier could not avoid liability because it had not established that its servant or agent could not have prevented the loss "by the exercise of reasonable diligence". The submission referred to the right to sub-contract under clause 4.1 and continued, somewhat in the same vein as Mr King's submission in the present case, that to construe "Carrier" as not including a sub-contractor would enable the carrier to avoid liability by adopting the permitted course of sub-contracting the whole of the carriage of goods.

In a joint judgment Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ said, at pp.229-230:- "However, both the definition of `Carrier' and the context of cl. 8(2) indicate that in cl. 8(2)((d) `Carrier' was not intended to include a sub-contractor or agent, or even an employee. By cl. 1, `Carrier' was defined to mean `the carrier named on the front of this Bill of Lading for and on behalf of whom this Bill of Lading has been signed and issued'. The carrier named on the front of the bill of lading was the respondent, Malaysian International Shipping Corporation, Berhad. Further, in cl. 8(2) reference was made to `the Carrier' and not to `the Carrier or any Carrier's employee' as occurred in cl. 8(3). Moreover, cl. 4(1), which gave the carrier the right to sub-contract, provided that in `sub-clauses 4(2), (3), (4) and (5) and sub-clauses 8(3) and (6) "Carrier's employee" means any person who is a sub-contractor, servant or agent of the Carrier or an independent contractor engaged by the Carrier and any servant or agent of such person'. This definition and the contrast between `the Carrier' in cl. 8(2) and `the Carrier or any Carrier's employee' in cl. 8(3) make it clear that in cl. 8(2) the carrier could obtain the protection of that provision even though one of its own employees or a sub-contractor could have avoided the relevant cause, event or consequence. The protection given by cl. 8(2)(d) was lost only if the lack of reasonable diligence was to be attributed to the company itself by reason of an act or omission of an officer or employee of the company whose act or omission was the act or omission of the company itself. That is to say, the company was only liable if the lack of reasonable diligence were to be attributed to `those natural persons who by the memorandum and articles of association or as a result of action taken by the directors, or by the company in general meeting pursuant to the articles, are entrusted with the exercise of the powers of the company': Tesco Ltd versus Nattrass <case>; [[1972] AC 153], at p.200, per Lord Diplock." 
Although this decision is concerned with the terms of the Bill of Lading, rather than the Rules, it is clear authority for the basic proposition for which Dr White contended.

In The "European Enterprise" [1989] 2 LLR 185 Steyn J was confronted with this precise problem. At p.187 his Lordship identified it thus:- "By agreement between the parties the issues between the parties as to the defendants' right to limit are as follows: (a) whether the terms of paragraph 3 of the consignment note/waybill are invalidated by s.1(6)(b) of the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1971; (b) whether Article IV, rule 5(e) of the Hague-Visby Rules refers only to reckless acts or omissions of the carrier himself (as the defendants contend) or, alternatively whether it includes the reckless acts or omissions of the servants or agents of the carrier (as the plaintiffs contend). It is agreed, if Article IV rule 5(e) properly interpreted refers to the reckless acts and omissions of the carrier and the carrier's servants or agents, that the question whether there was in fact such reckless acts or omissions shall be determined later. But, if Article IV rule 5(e), refers only to the reckless acts or omissions of the carrier himself, it is agreed that the provision has no application to the facts of the present case." 
His Lordship considered the matter commencing at p.191. He said:- "The received view is that rule 5(e) refers to the carrier himself, and does not include his servants or agents, except insofar as employees are to be regarded as constituting part of the alter ego of the company on the basis of the principle enunciated in Lennard's Carrying Co Limited versus Asiatic Petroleum Co Limited [[1915] AC 705] In the literature there is considerable support for this view. See Mustill, op. cit, at p.701; Diamond, op. cit, pp.20-21; Scrutton Charter Parties: 18th Edition (1974) at p.463; 19th Edition (19;84) at p.456.

It is, however, of the first importance that Judges, and notably Judges in specialist Courts, should be prepared to re-examine conventional wisdom. But having listened with care to Mr Simon's argument, I found nothing in it to induce in me any scepticism about the generally held view. Concentrating on the language of rule 5(e) it seems to me clear from the opening words of this provision that `neither the carrier nor the ship shall be entitled ..' must refer to the liability of the carrier himself. If that is so, it would be rather infelicitous to use the word `carrier' in a different and more extensive sense in the same sub-rule." 
His Lordship dealt with various other submissions, which he dismissed for the reasons to which he referred. One matter on which he placed reliance was the difference between Article IV Rule 5(e) and Article 25 of the Warsaw
Convention, which I shall quote verbatim later.

Mr King submitted that I should not follow this decision. It may be correct that strictly speaking I am not bound by it. However, not only, if I may say so with respect, do I consider that it is correct, but even if I had come to a different view I would have been loath to give effect to it because I regard it as important that there by consistency in approach and the present decision, subject to one possible exception to which I shall refer, has stood for almost ten years and is reflective of a view of the law stretching back prior to that. There is no doubt that there are strong policy reasons dictating this approach: Davies & Dickey "Shipping Law" 2nd Edition at pp.446-447. However, it is not impermissible to consider them and, in so far as they are identified, to give effect to them. The "European
Enterprise" was followed in The "Lion" by Hobhouse J [1990] 2 LLR 144. I appreciate his Lordship was dealing with a different Convention but, at p.149, he said:- "The drafting of that provision" (Article IV paragraph 5(e)) "is very similar to that in the present Convention and in fact reflects a consistent policy that has been followed in the drafting of these Maritime Conventions with regard to the setting of realistic limits, providing for their adjustment in accordance with the change of the value of money and expressing the right to limit in terms of recklessness and in general imposing the burden of proof upon the person who is seeking to set aside the limit, rather than, as under earlier regimes, leaving the burden of proof the other way round. In the European Enterprise Steyn J was invited to hold that `the Carrier' should mean the carrier or his servants or agents. He approached the construction of that Convention in those rules in a similar way to that in which I have approached the Athens Convention and came to the conclusion that clearly on the drafting of the Convention the word `carrier' meant what it said, and therefore the right to limit could only be displaced if there was the appropriate act or omission of the carrier himself as opposed to the carrier or his servants or agents. ...

In my judgment it is clearly important and correct that there should be a consistent approach to the construction of similar Maritime Conventions using similar terms and expressing similar ideas. I would require persuasion if I were to impose a different interpretation upon the Athens Convention to that which Steyn J imposed upon the Hague-Visby Rules, but as will be appreciated I am clear in my view that, on the construction of the Athens Convention, quite independently of any consideration of the Hague-Visby Rules and the decision of Steyn J, the construction is clear and the word `carrier' means what it says." 
In The "Pembroke" [1995] 2 LLR 290 Ellis J of the Supreme Court of New
Zealand may have suggested a different approach. His Honour dealt with the matter after coming to a conclusion favourable to the plaintiff on another point and, no doubt for that reason, quite shortly. At p.297 he said:- "Mr Mackenzie submitted that the recklessness and knowledge must be on the part of the carrier's management. I reject that. The recklessness and knowledge on the part of the master is what is in issue. However as I have said, Conmer in London were it seems fully informed and must have approved. I reach these conclusions on the evidence and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary. On this finding the defendant cannot rely on the limitation in the Hague-Visby Rules in any event." 
There are several points which must be noted about this decision. Firstly, I am not satisfied that his Honour was not applying the basic proposition that the "carrier" must be guilty of the conduct. The words "this finding" seem to refer to the fact that in that case the carrier was aware of the situation.
Secondly, it does not appear that his Honour was referred to the decisions in
The "European Enterprise" and The "Lion". If he was he does not refer to them or seek, in any way, to distinguish them. Thirdly, because of the view to which his Honour had earlier come the matter was not strictly necessary for his decision.

In Brown Boveri (Australia) Pty Limited versus Baltic Shipping Co [(1989) 15
NSWLR 448] Kirby P, at p.453, said:- "It is now appropriate to state a number of matters relevant to the approach which I take to the appeal. The first arises from the reference just made to the compilation of opinions and decisions placed before us. We are not dealing in this appeal with a problem which is exclusively one for this State or even for Australia. The Hague Rules being international in origin and application, they must be construed in the context of their intended operation in an international setting of great importance not only for shippers and carriers but also for the trade between nations, of which Australia is but one. With the development of faster means of international travel, and rapid advances in telecommunications, it will be increasingly necessary for Courts to avoid parochial or chauvinistic approaches to the exercise of their jurisdiction. At least in particular cases, it will be necessary for them to adopt an approach which is more sensitive to legal developments in other jurisdictions ...

Secondly, this observation of general application has particular relevance to the interpretation of the Hague Rules which are international in character and incorporated in Bills of Lading which are executed in many lands. Necessarily the meaning of such Bills (and the Hague Rules which they incorporate) fall to be construed in the Courts of many foreign jurisdictions. In such circumstances, it is sensible that Australian Courts should endeavour, so far as possible, to give the words and the rules a construction which brings the results of litigation upon them in Australia into harmony with the results reached elsewhere." 
At p.471 Hope JA said:- "I have arrived at this conclusion without reference to the decisions of Courts in other parts of the world ... However those decisions show the international significance of the Convention and its statutory equivalents, and underline the importance of international comity in its construction." 
In my opinion it is appropriate for me to follow the decisions of Steyn J and
Hobhouse J, which, as I have said, accord with my own views.

The further point would arise, even if I be incorrect on this aspect, that it is still necessary to show that the servants or agents are those of the defendant. For the reasons I have given I am not satisfied that they were.
They were servants and agents of P & O.

Recklessness 
In the event that others come to the conclusion that my decisions on the meaning of "carrier" and the identity of the servants and agents are wrong, I shall express my conclusions about the matters raised in the Reply.

In SS Pharmaceutical Co Limited & Anor versus Qantas Airways Limited [1991] LLR 288 the New South Wales Court of Appeal considered whether a carrier could invoke the limitation provisions in Article 22 of the Warsaw Convention.
The entitlement to do so was subject to Article 25, which provided that
Article 22 should not apply:- ".. if it is proved that the damage resulted from an act or omission of the carrier, his servants or agents, done with intent to cause damage or recklessly and with knowledge that damage would probably result; provided that, in the case of such act or omission of a servant or agent, it is also proved that he was acting within the scope of his employment." 
It was the terms of this Article on which Steyn J relied, in part, in The "European Enterprise".

At first instance Rogers CJCommD held that the provisions of Article 25 applied. The majority (Gleeson CJ and Handley JA, Kirby P dissenting) said, at pp.290-291:- "In particular, there was no dispute that the decision in Goldman versus Thai Airways Limited [[1983] 1 WLR 1186] settled a number of questions arising under Article 25 which are relevant for the determination of this appeal. The `damage' that the reckless party must know `would probably result' from the act or omission need not be the actual damage to the particular cargo in question. It is sufficient if `the damage complained of is the kind of damage known to be the probable result' (p.1194). Recklessness goes beyond mere carelessness (p.1191) and actual omissions are done or omitted recklessly when the person concerned: ... acts in a manner which indicates a decision to run the risk or a mental attitude of indifference to its existence (p.1194).

Finally, the requirement of knowledge involves: ... the proof of actual knowledge in the mind of the (actor) at the moment at which omission occurs, that the omission is taking place and that it does involve probable damage of the sort contemplated in the Article (p.1202)." 
Their Honours noted that the carrier acknowledged negligence, chose to call no evidence as to what in fact happened, and argued that whilst a case of negligence had been proved the higher degree of fault specified in Article 25 had not been established. They then referred to the facts as found and, at p.293, continued:- "The question for this Court, is whether the proved facts, the admission of `deplorably bad handling' and the failure of the defendant to call evidence enabled the requisite inferences to be drawn which brought the case within Article 25. These were that the damage was the result of reckless acts or omissions with knowledge that damage would probably result, rather than either recklessness without such knowledge or mere gross negligence. 
Where the inference of great fault is open on the evidence we see no difficulty in drawing that more adverse inference where the defendant fails to call evidence ..

Mr Sheller submitted that the inference of knowledge was not open on the evidence. However servants or agents of the appellant unloaded this and other cargo and moved it to its intended location. The inference is fairly open, as we have already held, that such servants or agents, including Mr Johnson and perhaps others, observed the marks on the cargo which indicated that it be stored in a dry environment, observed the poor state of the plastic wrapping later reported in Tokyo, observed that it was raining, and that a typical Sydney summer thunder storm was likely, and left the cargo in the open without taking the steps that they knew would be essential to protect that cargo if it should rain heavily. On that basis such servants and agents must also have known that such `deplorably bad handling' of the cargo would probably result in damage to the cargo." 
The first matter for determination is whether, relevantly for present purposes, Mr Lewis acted "recklessly". I am satisfied he acted negligently.
The relevant negligent act for present purposes was the failure to properly lash. I am satisfied that Mr Lewis was aware that the stack was not properly lashed and that he could, had he chosen, have re-stowed the two top containers. I am further satisfied that in failing to ensure proper lashing or re-stowing in circumstances where the vessel was to sail into weather, which he knew would be rough, he acted in a manner, which indicated as clearly as could be, a decision to run the risk that the stack would collapse. This is made clear, in my opinion, by his evidence in paragraph 19 of his witness statement and his oral evidence to which I have referred. He appreciated, when the vessel left Melbourne, that there was a likelihood that when the pilot was let off the position of the vessel to the weather would be such that the stack may well fall. He was thus prepared to run the risk that it would fall and, in my opinion, it matters not for present purposes whether the stack fell at the moment he had in mind or at some other time whilst the vessel was in the expected heavy seas. I do not think it appropriate to find that Mr Lewis had a mental attitude of indifference to the risk. In my opinion he fully appreciated the risk and, in all the circumstances, was prepared to run it.

The next question is whether he knew that if the stack collapsed damage would probably result. His evidence, in my opinion, makes this equally clear. It is not necessary that he should know the actual damage to the particular cargo.
It is sufficient, as Gleeson CJ and Handley JA said, that the damage be of the kind known to be the probable result. Obviously if the containers fell, as they did, there would, in all probability, be damage either to the goods in them or to the goods in containers onto which they fell. Mr Lewis knew this and, for that reason, immediately on the happening of the occurrence he left the bridge to try to minimise the damage, which he knew was, in all probability, occurring. It would be fanciful to suggest that an officer of his experience would not appreciate that the collapse of a stack of containers on a vessel would not cause probable damage.

Although in this case evidence has been called from Mr Lewis as to what happened, it satisfies me that he acted recklessly.

Unaided by the evidence of Captain Milward I would have come to that view.
There was objection to certain of his evidence, in so far as he said that the conduct was "reckless", on the basis that that was the ultimate question I had to determine. Section 80(a) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) causes some problems in so far as it does not render inadmissible evidence "only" "about" "a fact in issue" or "the ultimate issue". Captain Milward made clear that he was distinguishing between conduct which he understood to be careless, and conduct which he was prepared to characterise as reckless for the reasons he gave. In an area where the Court has no expertise it seems to me that the
Court can have regard to the evidence of an expert to be informed of how conduct should be characterised. Even on a more conservative approach it seems to be accepted that the Court can have regard to that evidence to confirm the view to which it comes.

If I am entitled to have regard to the evidence of Captain Milward to which objection was taken, as I believe I am, it both informs me as to the nature of
Mr Lewis' conduct and confirms the view to which I have come. If, on the other hand, I am not entitled to have regard to that evidence I would none-the-less, for the reasons I have stated, have come to the conclusion that the conduct was reckless.

In the result if I had been satisfied that "carrier" meant "carrier, its servants or agents" and, further, that Mr Lewis was a servant or agent of the carrier, then I would have come to the conclusion that the defendant is not entitled to rely on the limitation provision because the qualification in paragraph 5(e) would have applied. However as I have come to neither of those conclusions the defendant is entitled to rely on the limitation provision.

Conclusions 
I order judgment for the plaintiffs in the sum of $33,127.65.

I will consider submissions as to the appropriate order for costs.
 * * * 
