

National Australia Bank Ltd versus Kimouris and Ors [1996] NSWSC 13 (25 January )

NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LTD v. KIMOURIS & 5 ORS /95 January 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
The first, second, third, fourth and sixth defendants have applied to set aside the default judgments signed against them and to stay writs of possession.

On 13 October 1995 judgment was signed against Efstratios (Steve) Kimouris requiring him to deliver up possession of 34 Morgan Street, Earlwood and requiring him and his wife, Anna Kimouris, to deliver up possession of 95
Koona Street, Albion Park. Judgment was also entered against both of them for $572,492.52 and costs of $1745.

On 27 October 1995 judgment was signed against George Dongas and Margaret Ann
Dongas requiring them to deliver up possession of 30 and 32 Morgan Street,
Earlwood. Judgment was entered against both of them and Panagiota Dongas for $574,352.92 and $1745 for costs.

The fifth defendant (Alexander Dongas) has been overseas for a considerable time and judgment has not been signed against him.

A writ of possession was stayed as to 95 Koona Street, Albion Park until and including 13 November 1995, the tenant of this investment property having indicated that he would move out by this date. On 15 November 1995 I gave leave to the Bank to proceed with the auction on terms and on the basis that it was without prejudice to the defendants' rights. Writs of possession in respect of the premises 30, 32 & 34 Morgan Street were stayed on 15
November 1995 pending further orders.

Each of the defendants guaranteed re-payment of money borrowed by Pro Plast
Group Pty Ltd. The company provided as security a fixed and floating charge over its assets. These included its factory premises at 14 Rich Street,
Marrickville. Its principal business was manufacturing and distributing plastic coat-hangers.

The defendants seek to rely on defences and causes of action available to the company and to rely on them by way of equitable set off in the proceedings brought by the bank against them. The bank contested that the defendants had a defence on the merits. I will deal with that issue first.

On 27 September 1991 the bank and the company entered into an agreement whereby the Bank agreed to lend the company $1.5 million. The loan was to be fully drawn by 9 October 1991 and to be repaid in full on 30 September 1994.
Interest was to be debited and paid monthly. Guarantees and indemnities, unlimited as to amount, were to be provided by the defendants supported by registered mortgages over specified lands, namely, 30, 32 & 34 Morgan
Street, 95 Koona Street, Albion Park, 4 Airedale Avenue, Earlwood and 3 Gerald
Street, Marrickville. There was to be a standby letter of credit from Ergo
Bank due 3 August 1992 for $986,000 and a letter of amalgamation over a term deposit to the value of $178,481 and a second registered mortgage debenture over the whole of the company's assets.

Clause 9 provided that until the balance owing was repaid each of the following shall constitute an event of default: "(a) if the borrower fails to pay any sum due under this Agreement on the due date; or ...
 if there is committed a breach of any covenant or agreement contained in the Securities ...
 if the borrower shall stop payment or cease to carry on his business or threaten to cease to carry on the same.
 ...
 if any borrower is a company, a liquidator, provisional liquidator, trustee, administrator, receiver and receiver and manager or official manager is appointed of the whole or parts of its assets ..." 
Clause 10 provided that if an event of default occurs, the bank shall have the right to serve demand upon the borrower whereupon the balance owing shall become immediately due and payable.

By letter dated 7 October 1994 the bank extended the loan for 2 months, the new expiry date being 30 November 1994. All other terms remained as per the bank's letter of offer of 27 September 1991.

On 8 October 1991 the company executed a fixed and floating charge over the undertaking of the company and all its property, assets, rights and privileges both present and future.

Clause 1(a) provided that on demand in writing made upon the mortgagor, it must pay to the bank the moneys secured or such part as is specified in the demand. Clause 1(b) provided that the rights conferred on the bank by sub- cl.(a) are subject to any contrary agreement in writing between the mortgagor and the bank.

Clause 6 provided that the mortgagor will furnish to the bank copies of the net trading and profit and loss account and balance sheet in respect of each financial year of the mortgagor not later than the expiration of three months from the end of such financial year.

Clause 11 provided that the moneys secured should immediately become payable and that the debenture should immediately become enforceable both at the option of the bank and in any of the events following: "(a) if default shall be made at any time in the payment of the moneys hereby secured ... which have become payable ...
 (Moneys hereby secured are defined in cl.34 to mean, inter alia, moneys owing or remaining unpaid to the bank in any manner or on any account whatsoever by the mortgagor) ...
 in the event of any breach of or failure to comply with any of the covenants and agreements of this Debenture ...
 ...
 if the Mortgagor shall, or shall in the opinion of the bank stop payment or cease to carry on its business or threaten to do so ...
 if default shall be made in the performance or observance of any covenant or agreement contained or implied in any instrument collateral hereto.
 ..." 
The clause further provided that the bank should not be required to give notice to the Mortgagor before enforcing the security constituted by the
Debenture or before exercising any right or remedy (including the power of sale) of the bank.

Cl.13 provided that the Bank may at any time after the occurrence of an event of default under clause 11 and so that no delay or failure by the Bank to exercise its rights thereunder shall prejudice the later exercise of its rights, appoint a Receiver of the property thereby charged.

Cls.11 and 13 are of importance because the defendants contend that the
Receiver was prematurely and invalidly appointed.

Cl.14 provided that a Receiver so appointed shall be deemed to be the agent of the mortgagor and that the mortgagor shall be solely responsible for his acts and defaults.

Cl.18 provided: "In the event of any breach or default being made or committed by the
Mortgagor hereunder the Mortgagor shall not be entitled to claim or set up any waiver of such breach or default by the Bank unless the Bank has given to the
Mortgagor a certificate in writing under the hand of the Manager for the time being of any branch of the Bank thereof expressly waiving or acquiescing therein." 
The company did not pay the moneys owing by 30 November 1994.

About 5 or 6 December 1994 the directors of the company appointed an administrator, Mr G.K.Urwin, pursuant to s.436A of the Corporations Law. Such an appointment involves the directors being of the opinion that the company is insolvent or is likely to become insolvent at some future time. The administrator takes control of the company's business, property and affairs, acts as the company's agent and the powers of other officers are suspended.
For any officer of the company to act, the administrator's written approval is required.

From Mr Urwin's report of 14 December 1994 it appeared that he was appointed in circumstances where the directors of the company no longer had the financial capacity to support the continuing trading operations of the company. Mr Urwin detailed the work which had been done and stated that it was anticipated that the company and the directors hoped to have a meeting at an early date with the bank and put some preliminary proposals as to repayment of their outstanding obligations.

Mr Urwin wrote that as the company had, prior to his appointment, been unable to retain the long term manufacturing contracts previously held, a continuity of trading was inappropriate and that he was in the advanced stages of completing an orderly wind down of operations which was expected to be completed by Friday next (16 December 1994).

Mr Urwin advised that he had repudiated leases from various financiers. These covered a substantial part of the plant and equipment utilized by the company.
Mr Urwin intended to hold an auction sale of all plant and equipment owned by the company early in the New Year. All financiers of the leased equipment had informally agreed to participate as it had been recommended that the best return for all parties would be achieved by an insitu sale.

Mr Urwin also wrote: "Sale of Marrickville Properties 
I confirm that prior to my appointment, the Directors had listed, at short notice, the subject properties for sale as one line at auction on Saturday next.

The advice that I have received from the Real Estate Agents handling such sale, L J Hooker at Newtown, indicates that there has been to date very little interest in the property.

I am presently awaiting the valuation referred to earlier herein but am of the provisional view that the presentation, timing and circumstances of the
Auction are not conducive to obtaining an appropriate price for same." 
Mr Urwin impressed me as experienced, realistic and sensible with a sound commercial judgment. In late March 1995 he was appointed as the liquidator of the company. The bank would naturally have felt a measure of disquiet about the auction sale proceeding in the circumstances mentioned.

On the same day (14 December 1994) as the Bank received Mr Urwin's report, the bank served a Demand on the company. It demanded payment of $4,823.74 due on a current account and $1,510,171.23 due on a fixed rate fixed term loan and interest. It stated that unless each sum was immediately paid the Bank would take such action for recovery as it may be advised. On 15 December 1994 the bank executed a deed appointing Maxwell William Prentice as the receiver and manager of the property the subject of the mortgage debenture of 8 October
On 15 December 1994 the Receiver and Manager wrote to the directors of the company enclosing a copy of the deed, outlining the directors' obligations and pointing out that all assets of the company were under the control of the
Receiver and Manager.

The Receiver and Manager cancelled the proposed auction sale on 17 December .

In his oral evidence Mr Urwin adhered to the statement in his report that very little interest had been shown in the property. He had been in touch with the selling agent. The property was advertised and sold at auction on 30 March on the instructions of the Receiver and Manager by a well known firm of agents and auctioneers for about $1,300,050.

The defendants complained that the property was sold at a marked undervalue.
Some reliance was placed on a valuation of 6 April 1994 for mortgage purposes of R.V.Dimond of $2,800,000. Greater reliance was placed on a letter of 18
November 1994 from Raine & Horne to the company. It provided an estimate of achievable price expressing the view that the likely selling price would average out to a range of about $1.7 million to $2.1 million. Raine &
Horne recommended a sale prior to Christmas.

The directors entrusted the sale to L.J.Hooker Ltd. Mrs Dongas Snr stated that the agent showed her 3/4 offers. They ranged from $1.4 million to $1.6 million. She believed the letters would be in the company's file or that of Mr
Urwin. Mr M.Belogiannis, an accountant who acted as financial controller of the company from October 1994 and whose firm had acted as accountants for the company, stated that $1.4 million had been offered prior to the auction on 17
December 1995.

The claim that the property was sold at an undervalue would be hard to sustain. It is far from clear that the administrator would have proceeded with the auction sale on 17 December 1994. The directors, the creditors and the administrator were concerned that the right course was taken. The administrator did not criticise the Receiver and Manager.

The Receiver and Manager was also criticised for selling the moulds owned by the company and its machines at an undervalue. It was the defendants' case that the business should have been sold as a going concern.

Mr Belogiannis stated that the moulds for the business cost about $1.8 million. Some designs had been patented. In 1994 the company was engaged in negotiations with Rela Plastics. It asked for a price for some of the moulds and machines. There was discussion in which a figure of $600,000 was mentioned. The company submitted a proposal and prices about 18 November 1994 but there was no response. Mr Belogiannis believed that the Receiver and
Manager received about $70,000 for the moulds.

Mr Belogiannis stated that on the sale of the Marrickville factory the company was going to move to smaller premises and carry on a reconstituted business.
Mrs Dongas Snr regarded the business as potentially valuable. She accepted that the factory premises had to be sold but she wanted to save some of the machines and presumably some of the moulds. She also wanted to save some of the houses. She spoke of the efforts which she had made to sell two of the properties.

According to Mr Belogiannis, in November 1994 the company owed about $1.1 million to the bank and had lease liabilities of $1 million to $1.2 million.
Creditors each month were about $250,000 to $300,000. There was a cash flow problem and the creditors were pressing for payment. He agreed that the company had lost some substantial contracts.

Mr Dongas Snr was in Greece from about September 1994 to 7 August 1995. He stated that he had pressing commitments there. Initially he had not expected to have to stay there for so long. He was the driving spirit behind the company. He kept in touch with his wife who had remained in Australia. It is hard to envisage a reconstituted business which has lost major contracts starting up and succeeding when the driving spirit and his adult son and co- worker were overseas.

The Receiver and Manager was in office for about 11 months and has completed the realisation of the company's assets. It is probable that his fees amount to a considerable sum. The defendants have not seen the accounts of the
Receiver and Manager.

The bank did not contest, for the purposes of the present application, that the defendants as guarantors were entitled to take advantage of any defence or set off available to the company (the principal debtor). The defendants claimed that the Receiver and Manager had been appointed prematurely and that the bank was liable in damages for trespass and conversion of the company's property. Whether substantial damages would be awarded to the company depends on the facts.

The defendants submitted that any damages recoverable by the company must be set-off against the bank's claim against the company pursuant to S.533C of the
Corporations Law and would not be available to the general creditors of the company. It is unnecessary to deal with the situation if the bank did not prove in the liquidation but relied on its securities against the defendants as guarantors, leaving them to prove.

The defendants submitted that by issuing a Notice of Demand, the bank waived its right to appoint a receiver without issuing such a notice. Service of the notice was inconsistent with the right or the exercise of the right to appoint a receiver upon the occurrence of a breach.

The defendants relied upon these remarks of Mason CJ in The Commonwealth v.
Verwayen 170 CLR 394 at 406-407: "According to its strict legal connotation, waiver is an intentional act done with knowledge whereby a person abandons a right by acting in a manner inconsistent with that right... However, the better view is that, apart from estoppel and new agreement, abandonment of a right occurs only where the person waiving the right is entitled to alternative rights inconsistent with one another, such as the right to insist on performance of a contract and the right to rescind for essential breach: see Kammins. This category of waiver is an example of the doctrine of election." 
Mason CJ at 407 referred with approval to these remarks of Stephen J in
Sargent v. ASL Developments <case>; [131 CLR 634] at when referring to the doctrine of election: "The doctrine only applies if the rights are inconsistent the one with the other and it is this concurrent existence of inconsistent sets of rights which explains the doctrine; because they are inconsistent neither one may be enjoyed without the extinction of the other and that extinction confers upon the elector the benefit of enjoying the other, a benefit denied to him so long as both remained in existence." 
At pp.421-424 Brennan J discussed the doctrines of election, estoppel and waiver. As appears from his judgment at 422 waiver is a term of shifting meaning and is sometimes used in the sense of election, as where a person decides between two mutually exclusive rights. At 421 Brennan J said: "Election consists in a choice between rights which the person making the election knows he possesses and which are alternative and inconsistent rights.
... A doctrine closely related to election, and sometimes treated as a species of election, is the doctrine of approbation and reprobation. This doctrine precludes a person who has exercised a right from exercising another right which is alternative to and inconsistent with the right he exercised as, eg, where a person "having accepted a benefit given him by a judgment, cannot allege the invalidity of the judgment which conferred the benefit"." 
I would also refer to the discussion of Dawson J at 451 and his adoption of earlier remarks by Isaacs J. The passage reads: "Waiver looks "chiefly to the conduct and position of the person who is said to have waived, in order to see whether he has 'approbated' so as to prevent him from "reprobating' - in English terms, whether he has elected to get some advantage to which he would not otherwise have been entitled, so as to deny to him a later election to the contrary." 
Toohey J discussed the various principles at pp.466-475 and Gaudron J at -482. Her Honour preferred the wider expression "taking up two inconsistent positions" to the expression "asserting two inconsistent rights".

The bank sought to rely on the company's non payment of the principal on the due date (30 November 1994), the company's alleged failure to lodge accounts and the company's threat to cease carrying on business. It was probably more than a threat. It contended that each was an event of default entitling it to appoint a Receiver and Manager without serving a Notice of Demand. The Bank reminded the court that after listing the events of default cl.11 provided: "The Bank shall not be required to give notice to the Mortgagor before enforcing the security constituted by this Debenture or before exercising any right or remedy (including the power of sale) of the bank hereunder ..." 
The defendants submitted that there was no evidence that the company had not supplied its accounts as required. That submission is correct. If the supply or non supply of accounts had become important I would have been prepared to allow the bank to re-open its case on that point. The letter of 7 October 1994 from the bank suggests that they had not been supplied as at that date and were, along with other financial information, to be supplied in sufficient time prior to 30 November 1994 to allow for the review of the financial facilities by that date. It had to be determined whether an extension would be granted.

The defendants submitted that a due date being given in the loan agreement did not mean that the moneys were immediately payable as at that date. There was provision for the payment of interest and the loan agreement provided that in order for moneys to become "immediately payable" the bank must make a demand.
The loan agreement apart from pre-dating the debenture was not a "contrary agreement" obviating the necessity to make a demand.

If the bank's case had depended solely on non payment of the money secured I would have regarded the defendants as having at least an arguable case. The joint judgment in Bunbury Foods Pty Ltd v. National Bank of Australasia Ltd <case>; [153 CLR 491] at 502-503 states: "... a debtor required to pay a debt payable on demand must be allowed a reasonable time to meet the demand. ... A notice requiring payment forthwith will be regarded as allowing the debtor a reasonable time within which to comply. Until a reasonable time ... has elapsed the creditor cannot enforce his security." 
The Bank's case depends mainly on cl.11(g), namely, that the company had threatened to cease carrying on its business. Such cessation was expected to take place on 16 December 1994, two days after the administrator's letter. The letter referred to lost contracts and intended sales of assets including plant, equipment and realty. There was more than a mere threat. There had been an investigation and a statement from the administrator that the orderly wind down of operations was expected to be completed by 16 December 1994. The company could hardly do otherwise when there had been a loss of its major contracts and it could not trade at a profit.

No demand was necessary in respect of this default. The debenture is concerned not only with the payment of the moneys secured but with the preservation of the company's assets and business. This includes their management. Thus, under cl.14 the Receiver may take possession of the mortgaged property, carry on or concur in carrying on the business, sell or concur in selling the mortgaged property or any part or parts thereof or any interest therein after giving to the company at least seven days' notice, to make arrangements or compromises, to make repairs and exercise other wide ranging powers.

Once this event of default occurred the bank was entitled immediately to appoint a Receiver and Manger. No demand was required.

The defendants contended that, notwithstanding that a demand was not necessary in respect of this event of default, as a demand was made the bank was bound to allow the defendants a reasonable time to comply with the demand.

The demand was directed towards obtaining payment. It stated that if the sums were not paid the bank would take such action for recovery as it may be advised. After a reasonable time the bank may have sued the company in debt, sought possession of the property, or sued the guarantors. The bank had a variety of options. The serving of the demand was a prudent step.

It is not inconsistent with the service of a demand for the Bank to appoint a
Receiver and Manger, if it is entitled to do so under another power in the debenture.

I turn to the second basis on which the defendants challenge the appointment of a Receiver and Manager.

The defendants contended that the Bank was estopped from denying that the receiver was invalidly appointed where it did not first enforce the securities held over other mortgaged premises owned by the guarantors and not owned by the company.

The defendants rely on representations allegedly made by various bank officers to Mr Dongas Snr. He gave evidence that he had banked with the National
Australia Bank for 20 years, always dealing with the Marrickville Branch. He had initially been in business as a clothing manufacturer. About 7 or 8 years ago he became engaged through Pro Plast Group Pty Ltd in the manufacture and sale of coathangers.

In 1991 he held talks with Messrs I Brown and P Leahy of the Bank's
Marrickville branch. The company wished to borrow about $1.5 million. The security offered comprised some five houses, 30 and 32 Morgan Street (Mr and
Mrs Dongas Snr), 34 Morgan Street (his sister) Koona Street Albion Park (or
Rail) and his brother's property and an interest bearing deposit of $450,000.
Mr Dongas Snr claimed that one of the bank officers mentioned said that 'the boys in the city' (the bank's head office) wanted a debenture over the business. Mr Dongas Snr remonstrated that the bank already had ample security.
The houses were worth $1.8 million dollars and there was the cash deposit of $450,000. The bank officer replied that the city executives were nervous with the business. A large sum was being borrowed. The bank officer stated that the last thing that the bank would touch or sell was the company's business. The bank officer stated that if Pro Plast defaulted three houses would be sold and the proceeds applied to pay off the debt. The business would be untouched. Mr
Dongas Snr insisted that the agreement was that the bank would sell the houses first and then if the proceeds were insufficient the bank would sell the business. Mr Dongas Snr pointed out that it was easy to sell houses at their true value. It was often necessary to wait some time before a suitable offer was received for the purchase of a business.

Mr Dongas Snr read the documents or had them read to him. He said that his solicitor had explained the documents to him and advised him that it was risky to sign the business. All the family understood that the bank would sell the houses first. They did not expect to sell the business to pay the bank. He had also conveyed this information to Mr Xuereb the solicitor who had acted for him in about 1991, 1994 and until about late August - early September 1995.

Counsel for the defendants stressed the importance of the representations.
They led to Mr Dongas Snr and the other defendants agreeing to grant a debenture over the business. In cross examination Mr Dongas Snr stated that it was "ethical" of the bank to go against the houses first and then the business.

As would be expected, Mr Dongas Snr was in telephone contact from Greece with his wife and was aware of what was happening. He told her to do what she believed to be best.

By the time Mr Urwin was appointed the company's position had radically changed from that in 1991 when the loan had been negotiated. The directors of the company had accepted that the company had serious insolvency problems and that it had lost its major contracts. The directors had accepted that the factory premises had to be sold and they had placed that property on the market for a quick sale. The company's driving spirit, Mr Dongas Snr, had been out of the country for some months and would be away for many months. The administrator appointed by the directors saw no future for the company and closed it down. The administrator had repudiated the machinery leases.

Even the most optimistic forecast involved the sale of the factory premises and a smaller reconstituted business somewhere else. It was not clear how it would manage. The company which had showed some interest in purchasing some of the machinery and equipment did not proceed.

As earlier mentioned the administrator intended, to sell all the plant and equipment owned by the company and had so advised the bank. He had had a draft valuation and analysis of plant and equipment completed by Hymans.

The administrators did not seem to have any knowledge of or confidence in a reconstituted business.

Whatever may have been the position prior to the appointment of the administrator, he took decisive action which changed the position forever. He had to take action to avoid insolvent trading. There ceased to be a business.

Mr Urwin advised that he was appointed liquidator of the company about late
March 1995. The company has no assets and the creditors exceed $1 million.

The Receiver and Manager followed the actions of the directors in selling the realty and those of the administrator in selling the plant and equipment.

It was not suggested that the guarantors had sold their properties to meet the indebtedness to the bank although there was time to do so. No substantial attempt was made to sell any of their properties until much later.

I am of the opinion that the bank is not estopped in the circumstances, from denying that the receiver was invalidly appointed. I am unable to accept the defendant's alternative submission that the bank had waived its right to appoint a receiver under the debenture without first enforcing its other securities in respect of the principal debt.

I am of the opinion that the defendants have no arguable defence on the merits.

There were a number of other matters covered in the written submissions of the parties but I have found it unnecessary to deal with them. The bank relied on other provisions in the documents.

During argument I indicated to the parties that I would not refuse relief on the ground of delay. The delay was not gross and it had been sufficiently explained.

I dismiss the application of the defendants to set aside the default judgments. I discharge the orders staying the writs of possession at the expiration of twenty eight days from today. The defendants must pay the plaintiff's costs of these applications.
 * * * 
