

Df McCloy Pty Ltd versus Oldfield and Anor Matter No 5009/97 [1997] NSWSC 664 (19 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 `

DF McCloy Pty Ltd versus Wayne John Oldfield & Anor` ` 5009/97` `19 December 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `
 `
 /97 DF McCLOY PTY LTD versus WAYNE JOHN OLDFIELD & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff is a builder. It entered into a contract with Abel Palms Pty Limited to construct 24 residential units upon land at Wallsend. The registered proprietors of that land were the defendants, Messrs Oldfield. The plaintiff did considerable work on the land, but was not paid and proceeded to wind up Abel Palms Pty Limited. 
The plaintiff lodged caveat 3409390 over the defendants' land. The caveat claimed a "charge over the land created by building contract with the caveator" and claimed that the parties to the building contract were the plaintiff and the defendants, the latter "through its agent Abel Palms Pty
Limited".

On 5 December 1997, the plaintiff commenced these proceedings to extend the caveat under s.74K of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) and when the matter came before the duty judge the caveat was extended until further order without either assent or dissent from the registered proprietors.

Today the registered proprietors sought expedition or, alternatively, an order that the caveat be removed.

A caveat can only be lodged against land if the caveator has a caveatable interest by way of an estate or interest in the land. There are some exceptions to this general principle involving urgent cases, but I can put those to one side for present purposes.

The plaintiff can have two claims to the land. First, that there is some sort of equitable estoppel whereby the defendants are estopped from denying that the land should be treated as the land of Abel Palms Pty Limited for the purposes of the charge given over Abel Palms' land in the relevant building contract. This is a very awkward argument to run and particularly awkward in the instant case because there is evidence in his own affidavit from a person who is a director and the general manager of the plaintiff, that shortly before the plaintiff entered into the building contract it searched the title and found that Abel Palms Pty Limited was not the registered proprietor of the land. Accordingly, it would seem that any assumption that had been previously made would have come to an end. Mr Faulkner of counsel for the plaintiff says that it will be shown at the trial that, in fact, the plaintiff did believe that the Oldfields and Abel Palms Pty Ltd were virtually one and the same and that the land would be treated as if it were the land of Abel Palms Pty Ltd for the purposes of the contract. As I say, that is a very hard argument to run, but even if it were right that would only provide what is generally called a mere equity, that is a right to approach the equity court for relief and would not in itself give a caveatable interest in the land.

The second method of approach is to say that the court would, in all the circumstances, give relief under s.87 of the Trade Practices Act. That section sets out a large number of orders which might be made and it is possible that the court would order a caveat or some other security. However, this is a mere lis pendens, although as far as I am aware there is no case where the claim under the Trade Practices Act has been considered in respect of caveatable interest. Claims under the Family Law Act and other statutes are usually held not to give sufficient estate or interest in land; see for instance Bethian
Pty Ltd versus Green <case>; [(1997) 3 Fam LR 11],579.

Because in my view there is no caveatable interest, it is not necessary to look at the question of balance of convenience. However, I would note that the plaintiff was prepared to give an undertaking as to damages and that the defendants would probably have given an undertaking to the plaintiff not to sell the land without giving the plaintiff seven days' notice. I think this last undertaking, if renewed, would probably be sufficient to meet any claim for an injunction, not that one has actually been made.

Accordingly, on the motion as filed by the defendants on 17 December 1997, I order that the plaintiff withdraw caveat 3409390 lodged against folio identifier 231/537282 no later than 4 pm on Monday 22 December 1997 and order that the plaintiff pay the defendants' costs of the motion.

In view of the decision on the motion re the caveat, and in view of the fact that the plaintiff's statement of claim has not been verified, the proper course is to refuse expedition though a fresh notice of motion may be filed if circumstances change.
 * * * 
