

Regina versus Audsley Matter No 70096/95 [1997] NSWSC 226 (30 May 1997) 
Regina versus Gary Bruce Audsley /95 May 1997 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division /95 - REGINA versus Gary Bruce AUDSLEY 
REMARKS ON SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: On 12 May 1997 Gary Bruce Audsley appeared for trial for the murder of his wife, Lesley Jane Audsley, at their home at Frenchs Forest on 3
August 1995. He pleaded not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. The
Crown prosecutor did not accept that plea in satisfaction of the indictment and the trial proceeded. Manslaughter was left to the jury on the basis of provocation and unlawful and dangerous act but, on 21 May, they returned a verdict of guilty of murder.

The prisoner is now 41 years old and his wife was 30 at the time she died.
They were both in the Australian army and met at Puckapunyal in Victoria in the late 1980's. They married in 1990 and had two sons, who were only three and two years old respectively at the time of the offence. In 1995 they were living at Frenchs Forest and the prisoner, then a warrant officer, was posted to the School of Artillery at Manly. Each weekday he travelled from his home to work at Manly and his wife, it seems, remained at home with the children.

There is no doubt that at the time of her death the deceased had a severe drinking problem which, according to the prisoner, had been the case for about two years. Analysis of a sample of her blood taken at the post mortem examination revealed a blood alcohol content of 0.408. Dr Peter Bradhurst, the forensic pathologist who conducted the post mortem, described this in evidence as a "very, very high reading" and said that, in a person without tolerance for alcohol, it could be fatal. It was consistent with the deceased having been an alcoholic of long standing. In evidence, the prisoner described himself as a light drinker, apparently confining his consumption to low alcohol beer.

There was evidence in the trial of an incident early in May 1995 when the prisoner roundly abused his wife because of her state of intoxication. He expressed the fear that their children might be taken from them by the authorities because of her inability to care for them in his absence, and threatened to kill her if that occurred. The Crown prosecutor did not suggest that that threat should be taken literally, but submitted that the incident demonstrated the intensity of the prisoner's anger at his wife's intemperance.
There was also evidence of two other incidents, one later in May and the other in mid-June 1995, when he physically assaulted her when she was drunk. In his evidence at the trial he said that, throughout 1995 up to her death in August of that year, the deceased was frequently drunk when he came home from work of an afternoon and that he would find empty bottles of spirits and empty wine casks around the house. He acknowledged that her condition placed a considerable strain upon their relationship and that, on many occasions, he was very angry with her.

I should record that, in the sentence proceedings, the Crown prosecutor tendered some statements of witnesses whose evidence I rejected in the trial: see my judgment of 19 May 1997 concerning the admissibility of general evidence of the relationship between the deceased and the accused. I rejected it also in the sentence proceedings. For the most part, it was evidence tending to show that there may have been many more occasions on which the accused inflicted violence on his wife in the context of her excessive drinking. I did not allow that evidence for much the same reasons that I disallowed it in the trial, particularly having been informed by Mr Finnane that it was in dispute. It would not surprise me at all if the fatal assault were the culmination of a wider and more longstanding pattern of anger and violence, but I do not consider that this would significantly affect the assessment of the prisoner's culpability for the killing. The Crown also tendered the statement of David Audsley, the prisoner's son from his previous marriage, which suggested that he had been habitually violent to the deceased in a period before she became a problem drinker. Again, Mr Finnane informed me that this was in dispute and, again, I rejected it for much the same reasons as I did in the trial: particularly as the statement was made when the boy was about thirteen years old and related to a period when he was aged between only eight and eleven years. In the result, I do not believe that any injustice is done to the Crown by my considering only the evidence of prior incidents admitted in the trial.

It is against this background, and in the light of the events of the days leading up to it, that the killing must be understood. The day of the death, 3
August 1995, was a Thursday. On the previous Friday, 29 July, the deceased had agreed to attend a football match with the prisoner that night and he bought tickets for the match, but he got home only to find her intoxicated. They had an argument and he punched her in the ribs. On each night of the following week from the Monday to the Thursday she was drunk when he got home. He remonstrated with her continually and, on several occasions on each of those nights, he gave her what he described to police as "clips", by which he meant slapping her face and pushing her. It is clear that his anger was escalating to the rage which erupted on the Thursday night and led to the fatal assault.

It was the prisoner's evidence that on that Thursday he arrived home at about .30 pm, a little earlier than usual. He found his wife slumped on the toilet and, from her appearance, it was clear that she had been drinking. As was his usual practice, he took the two boys to the back yard and helped them put away their toys. As he walked back into the house he noticed an empty brandy bottle on the kitchen table. He asked the deceased, who was still sitting on the toilet, whether she had drunk the brandy that day and she said that she had.
He sat in the loungeroom with the children for a short time watching television. He heard the toilet flush and got up to go to the toilet himself.
The deceased was walking unsteadily down the corridor from the toilet (as he put it, "bouncing off the walls"). The prisoner said that, as he passed her in the hallway, something inside him "just snapped". He added: "... for a long period of time now with her constant drinking, everything came to a head at that particular time, just made me snap. I knew the boys were at home, I didn't know whether she had been drinking over that day, whether they had been looked after properly during the day ... " 
He seized her by the shoulders and kneed her three times in the stomach. He then punched her in the ribcage on both sides of her body, delivering perhaps as many as four punches to each side. She fell to the floor.

He claimed that he did not realise the force of his blows and did not intend to hurt his wife, but the jury, by their verdict, clearly rejected this. I have no doubt that the assault was spontaneous and I do not believe that he intended to kill her. In the light of the verdict, I shall sentence him on the basis that his intent was to inflict grievous bodily harm. However, I think that it was not until some hours later that he realised that his blows were life-threatening.

The prisoner went on to say that he then went to the toilet and, when he came out, his wife was sitting in the loungeroom. She said to him, "Why are you doing this to me?" He said, "I don't have to tolerate this and the boys don't need this." She got up and went to the toilet again. She then went into the bathroom and the prisoner heard what he described as "this almighty thump". He went to the bathroom to find her lying on the floor. Three times he asked her if she was alright and, on the third occasion, she appeared to say "yes". He picked her up and assisted her to the bedroom. She was walking while he had hold of her. He laid her on the bed and covered her with the bedclothes. He wiped some blood from around her eye with a towel and laid the towel over the pillow. He said that at no stage did she indicate that she was in pain and he thought that she was simply drunk.

He returned to the loungeroom and watched television with the boys. He then took them to a nearby Kentucky Fried Chicken outlet, where he bought an evening meal. They returned to the home and had the meal. They watched television for a while and he then bathed the boys and, in due course, put them to bed. He continued to watch television until after 10.00 pm, when he decided to go to bed himself. When he entered the bedroom he observed that his wife was pale. He said that he shook her and asked her whether she was alright, and again she appeared to say "yes". He was unable to find a book in which his wife had recorded her doctor's name and phone number, so he rang the emergency line.

To the emergency line operator and to ambulance officers who arrived at the scene, the prisoner suggested that the deceased's condition was the result of her intoxicated state and her having fallen in the bathroom. He denied having assaulted her. He maintained the same account to the police who came to the home, and during an electronically recorded interview with police in the early hours of 4 August. In a further interview on 8 August, he still denied any involvement in his wife's death, but he did tell police of her drinking problem and admitted having struck her on two prior occasions. However, at the conclusion of that interview he was confronted with the post mortem findings and then admitted the fatal assault. In a third recorded interview, he gave police the same account he gave to the jury, which I have outlined.

The Crown prosecutor submitted to the jury that even that account was sanitised to some extent. He questioned the prisoner's credibility generally in the light of his admitted lies to ambulance officers and to police prior to the final interview on 8 August. He referred to some injuries, apparently of recent origin, observed by Dr Bradhurst at the post mortem examination for which the prisoner could offer no acceptable explanation: in particular, abrasions and bruising on and around her right nipple and an abrasion and bruising in the perineal area. He questioned the possibility that she could have been kneed three times in the stomach and sustained several punches to both sides of her body before she fell, that, having sustained serious abdominal injuries and fractures of her ribs, she could get from the hallway to the loungeroom, back to the toilet and bathroom and then from the bathroom to the bedroom, and that she made no complaint of pain.

I should add that it is certainly not possible that the deceased responded to an enquiry by the prisoner whether she was alright after 10.00 pm, immediately prior to his making the 000 call. The evidence of Dr Bradhurst was that she died no later than 6.15 pm. The doctor did say, however, that if the prisoner shook the deceased as he said there might have been an escape of air from her lungs through her mouth which could produce a sound like a groan. This could have been mistaken by the prisoner as a response by her to his enquiry.

There is considerable force in the Crown prosecutor's criticisms of the prisoner's account. However, having had the opportunity to hear and observe him in the course of his fairly lengthy evidence, it did not appear to me that he was being deliberately untruthful in his description of the events of that evening. Whilst acknowledging the jury's adverse finding as to his intent, it was my impression that he was doing his best to recount everything which he could recall. His earlier lies to the ambulance officers and to the police do not dissuade me from that view. As I observed to the jury, it is the experience of the courts that some people who have killed spontaneously initially lie out of shame and an inability to face the awful significance of what they have done, but do later tell the truth.

Certainly, I am left wondering whether the prisoner has given a complete account of the violence he inflicted upon the deceased on this occasion but, if he has not, it may not be because he has consciously held anything back. As the Crown prosecutor fairly pointed out, he may have unconsciously repressed his memory of parts of the event so as to have a genuinely patchy and, perhaps, confused recollection of it. In the result, I am not satisfied that the prisoner inflicted violence upon the deceased other than that which he has described.

Clearly, the fatal incident took place quickly while the prisoner was enraged and deprived of self control. (That was how the case was put to the jury by the Crown prosecutor and I have no doubt that they rejected provocation in the light of the "ordinary person" test.) The prisoner told the jury, as he had told the police, that his treatment of the deceased in the months leading up to 3 August, and on the fatal evening itself, was the product not of ill-will on his part, but rather frustration at her inability or unwillingness to deal with her drinking problem. His love of his wife, he said, never wavered.
Before the jury, the Crown prosecutor challenged this, submitting that the evidence as a whole demonstrated that the prisoner felt hatred and contempt for his wife or, at the very least, indifference towards her.

In this regard also I accept the prisoner's evidence. It is a matter of notoriety that many a loving relationship is marred by occasional, or even habitual, violence. Of course, the prisoner's reaction to his wife's drinking was hardly likely to resolve the problem. Asked in evidence whether he had tried to find outside help, he said that he had not, because he considered that the counselling services available in the Army lacked confidentiality and he feared that to engage those services would result in the situation being widely known within the Service. It needs hardly be said that that is anything but an adequate response to a deep-seated and enduring family problem.
Nevertheless, I accept that the incidents of abuse and violence arising from the deceased's excessive drinking and the fatal assault itself were the result of frustration on the prisoner's part about her condition arising, in part at least, from his genuine concern for the welfare of the children. In evidence he expressed remorse for what he had done, which I also believe to be genuine.

The two sisters of the deceased made statements about the impact upon them of her death, which were tendered by the Crown prosecutor as victim impact statements under the provisions recently inserted into the [Criminal Procedure
Act, 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/).
They write of the impact of the death, not only upon them, but also upon their mother and the deceased's children. As one would expect, they make very sad reading indeed. They would elicit the deepest sympathy of any right-thinking member of this community. They certainly elicit mine. To have written them must have been no easy task, and I can but hope that the undertaking has in some way assisted those women and their mother to come to terms with their tragic loss. No doubt, the picture of the deceased which emerged in evidence is anything but complete.

That said, I must determine whether these statements are relevant to my task as a sentencing judge. The legislation requires me to receive them in evidence, as I have done, but provides that I must not consider them in relation to the sentence to be imposed unless I consider it appropriate to do so: <case>. The matter has been considered recently by Hunt CJ at CL in his remarks on sentence in Reg versus Previtera (unreported, 27 May 1997) at pp -19, and I respectfully agree with his Honour's observations. In particular,
I agree that it is difficult to conceive of a case in which statements of this kind could properly bear upon the question of sentence. It would be grotesque to suggest that the determination of the appropriate sentence for an offender convicted of homicide should be influenced by whether there are loved ones of the deceased who are bereaved by his or her death and, if so, whether they have the will and the capacity to articulate their feelings to a sentencing court. Indeed, their ability to express those feelings might well depend on the extent to which they have come to terms with their loss at the time of the trial (however long it might have taken for the trial to come on for hearing).

In accordance with the new provision, I acknowledge receipt of the statements by the two sisters of the deceased, but I do not consider it appropriate to have regard to them in determining the sentence to be imposed.

The prisoner has no prior convictions. He has seen lengthy Army service, having joined up in September 1974. He has not seen the two children of his marriage to the deceased since 4 August 1995, the day after the event, when they were taken into the care of the Department of Community Services. They are now with family members and there is a very real question when, if at all, he will be able to re-establish contact with them. He has been in custody since his arrest on 8 August 1995.

I must have regard to the prisoner's background, to the circumstances of the crime, and to my assessment that he is most unlikely to reoffend.
Nevertheless, the sentence which I pass must reflect the need for deterrence, both particular and general. The community cannot tolerate resort to violence, particularly homicidal violence, in the face of emotional difficulties in an intimate relationship. The more is this so when the violence is inflicted in the presence of children.

Neither counsel addressed me on special circumstances within the meaning of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) but, given the current trend of authority on the matter, there would appear to be none. The sentence which I propose, maintaining the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms, will result in an additional term more than adequate to facilitate the prisoner's reintegration into society.

Gary Bruce AUDSLEY you are sentenced to penal servitude for 14 years, comprising a minimum term of 10-1/2 years to commence on 8 August 1995 and to expire 7 February 2006; and an additional term of 3-1/2 years to commence on 8
February 2006 and to expire on 7 August 2009. You will be eligible for release on parole on 8 February 2006.
 ------ * * * 
