

Perera versus Dr Ng Matter No 20390/97 [1997] NSWSC 375 (4 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Perera versus Dr Ng /97 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Perera versus Dr Ng 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff is the widow of the late Nihal Perera (the deceased). In 1993, the deceased was a patient of the defendant. The deceased died on 23 January 1993. It is said that, as a result of negligence and/or breach of duty on the part of the defendant, the deceased died of varicella pneumonia. 
On 7 May 1997, the plaintiff filed the Statement of Claim and a Notice of
Motion. The Statement of Claim propounds a claim for damages. It is brought on two bases. There is a claim for nervous shock. There is a claim pursuant to the Compensation to Relatives Act, 1987 on behalf of herself and the children of the marriage. The Notice of Motion seeks an order extending the relevant limitation period.

The application was heard on 30 July 1997. In support of the application, the plaintiff has sworn two affidavits. She has given some supplementary oral evidence and was cross-examined. She tendered a copy medical report (Exhibit
A). It was from Dr Lucire (a consultant psychiatrist) and dated 17 July 1997.

In her affidavit sworn on 14 March 1997, the plaintiff deposes to the following:- "30. I now know that I had only three years from my husband's death in which to take proceedings against Dr Ng. I did not know that until I went to see
Catherine Henry. I first saw her on Tuesday 20 August 1996.
I took no action to investigate my rights until seeing Catherine Henry because I have been grief stricken following the sudden and unexpected death of my husband." 
In the later affidavit sworn on 13 June 1997, the plaintiff deposed to other matters which are relevant to the question of delay. That material may be gleaned from the affidavit itself. I shall mention certain matters only. About one month after the death of the deceased she was alerted to the possibility of legal aid for a case founded on negligence. It seems that nothing further was done until 1996. It appears that conversations had with others in July led to her instructing her present solicitor. In supplementary oral evidence, she mentioned a further matter (concerning her reaction to letters of condolence). For present purposes, I need not set out that evidence.

She commenced employment as a teacher's aide in about April 1993. Since that time, she has been able to perform the duties required of her in that employment.

The plaintiff did not rely on any affidavit from her solicitor (Catherine
Henry). By consent, certain matters were read on to the record. These were matters which concern the solicitor's conduct of the claim. Ultimately, no submission was made concerning the matter of delay on the part of the solicitor.

The relevant statutory provision is section 60C of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969 (the
Act). It is in the following terms:- 
C. (1) This section applies to a cause of action, founded on negligence, nuisance or breach of duty, for damages for personal injury, but does not apply to a cause of action arising under the [Compensation to Relatives Act 1897](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/). 
If an application is made to a court by a person claiming to have a cause of action to which this section applies, the court, after hearing such of the persons likely to be affected by the application as it sees fit, may, if it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so, order that the limitation period for the cause of action be extended for such periods, not exceeding 5 years, as it determines. 
In exercising the powers conferred by section 60C, the Act requires the
Court to have regard to all the circumstances of the case (including the matters enumerated in section 60E). The Court may make an order if it first decides that it is just and reasonable to do so. The power to make the order is discretionary. The onus rests with the plaintiff (Brisbane South Regional
Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] and BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 March 1997)).

There was no issue between the parties that the evidence disclosed an arguable case of negligence on the part of the defendant. The plaintiff does not dispute that the appropriate jurisdiction for the prosecution of her claim is the District Court. Indeed, the Court has been asked to order that the proceedings be remitted to that jurisdiction.

The relevant limitation period is three years. The present application was brought about one year after the expiry of the limitation period. Prior to the coming into force of the present legislation, the limitation period had been six years. Some evidence was adduced from the plaintiff which might be seen as evidencing some belief on her part that there was a seven year limitation period. It is common ground that the evidence she gave on this matter was unhelpful. In the light of her other evidence, it was not of significance.

One of the principal matters relied on to explain delay is the condition of the plaintiff since the death of the deceased. There is evidence that she has had depression which "was of a high intensity" and of a duration that "was also prolonged". The report from Dr Lucire contains the following:- "She has had a severe grief reaction and it is still going on. The grief reaction was well in the abnormal range. She is a woman of good personality and she accepts that the grief is receding. She feels that her husband's death might have been prevented had her doctor referred him to a hospital or made an appropriate diagnosis earlier." 
The real question agitated in opposition to the application is that of prejudice. It is not said that the defendant himself has suffered from any diminution in recollection and/or has lost any relevant records. It is said that there is some presumptive prejudice (see Taylor).

Different submissions were made in relation to the two bases of the plaintiff's claim. In respect of the claim made for nervous shock, it is said that the delay has occasioned actual prejudice. In my view, there is substance in that submission.

The plaintiff has not received any medical treatment for her condition. She did not see a psychiatrist until July 1997. A diagnosis was then made of a severe grief reaction which was receding.

The defendant has been deprived of the opportunity of earlier examination of the plaintiff. She can only be now examined at a stage when her condition is receding. The history given by her will be of significance. She concedes that her memory has been adversely affected by her condition. A fair trial on the question of nervous shock may not now be possible (see Taylor).

The diagnosis provided by Dr Lucire is of grief reaction. This is the only medical evidence available to the plaintiff to support her claim for nervous shock. There may be little, if any, utility in making an order in respect of that part of her claim.

In the circumstances of this case, I am satisfied that it would be just and reasonable to make an order extending the limitation period for the claim made under the [Compensation to Relatives
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/), 1987 and that such an order should be made. I order that the relevant limitation period for the claim made under the [Compensation to Relatives
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/), 1987 be extended up to and including 7 May 1997.

In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that it would be just and reasonable to make an order in respect of the claim for nervous shock. In my view, the onus has not been discharged in relation to that aspect of her claim.

The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the application. The exhibit may be returned. The proceedings are to be remitted to the District Court.
 * * * 
