

Townshend versus Owers and Ors; Estate Dennis Charles Owers [1996] NSWSC 343 (8
August 1996) 
TOWNSHEND V. OWERS & ORS. ESTATE DENNIS CHARLES OWERS /95 
Thursday 8th August 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES PROBATE DIVISION 
HODGSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Dennis Owers died on 9th September 1995 aged 64 years. He was a widower, his wife having died about three weeks earlier. He left no children, but he left two brothers and one sister.

In these proceedings, the deceased's solicitor, Mr. Townshend, seeks probate of a duly executed will of the deceased dated 29th July 1993. By a cross- claim, Owen Owers and Colin Owers, the two brothers of the deceased, seek probate of an undated informal testamentary document; and in the alternative, seek that another informal testamentary document dated 1st January 1995 be admitted to probate as an amendment to the will of 29th July 1993.

I will first outline the facts, which are not really in dispute.

On 29th July 1993, the deceased and his wife made wills in similar form. Each will made the other spouse executor and sole beneficiary of the estate, conditional on survival for thirty days, and otherwise appointed their solicitor, Mr. Townshend, executor, and gave the estate to three charities (one being the Salvation Army). There is no evidence to suggest any agreement that either will not be revoked after the death of the other party.

On or about 1st January 1995, the deceased signed a document in the following terms:- 
As regards to my will 
If I do not outlive my wife this is nothing.

But if Faye dies before me and I have not had time to change my will 
I wish to leave all my personnel (sic) belongings to my brother Colin Owers.

Everything in my bedroom clothes, Jewelery (sic), Money and my car go to him.

A photocopy of this document is annexed to this judgment.

It appears that this document was not shown to anyone, and it was found after the deceased's death in circumstances which I will relate.

On 14th August 1995, the deceased's wife died. Her estate comprised a joint interest with the deceased in a home unit at Randwick, and about $48,000.00 in bank accounts. In the events which have happened, the deceased took the home unit by survivorship, and the rest of the estate went to the three charities because the deceased did not survive his wife by thirty days.

After the wife's funeral, according to Colin Owers, he and his wife went to the deceased's flat and there was some discussion about wills. According to
Colin Owers, the deceased said words to the effect "All of this is to go to you", at the same time sweeping his hand around. At this time also the deceased gave Colin Owers an envelope containing a document on which was written the word "Colin", and then the words "Kitchen sink cupboards four drawers under bottom drawer left base feel right". A photocopy of this document and the envelope is also annexed to this judgment.

On 29th August 1995, the deceased went to see Mr. Townshend concerning his wife's estate. After some discussion about the wife's estate, there was a short discussion concerning a will for the deceased. Originally the terms of this discussion were not included in evidence, because it was thought that they were the subject of legal professional privilege, and that this legal professional privilege could not be waived because of the death of the deceased and the absence of any legal personal representative. However, after further consideration, the representatives of the parties came to the view that this conversation was not privileged, because it was not a confidential communication made for the dominant purpose of the solicitor providing legal advice, within the meaning of s.118 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/); and on that basis the evidence was given orally by Mr. Townshend. The effect of the evidence was that the deceased said something to the effect that he wanted to change his will, that he was considering making gifts to his nephews, that he had not finally decided what to do, and would get back to Mr. Townshend. In fact, it appears that the deceased had three nephews, there being one son of each of the two brothers and the sister. There were also a number a nieces.

I interpolate here that, in my view, this conversation was not the subject of legal professional privilege, for the reason outlined above. An interesting question might arise in a case such as this where a deceased gave instructions to a solicitor for a will, and in the course of doing so, sought advice on some legal matter such as perhaps the minimisation of taxation in connection with the way he disposed of his estate. If, in those circumstances, the deceased died before any formal will was signed, and an informal testamentary document was found, the terms of the discussion with the solicitor could well be highly relevant to the deceased's intention in relation to the informal document. It may be that no-one would have the authority to waive the legal professional privilege unless and until the question of the informal testamentary document was resolved, and a grant of administration had been made. In those circumstances, I think the Court would probably at least be prepared to sever the part of the conversation which related to confidential advice, and admit the rest. It is an interesting question, which I do not have to decide, what would be the true position about that part of any such conversation which was clearly the subject of legal professional privilege, if that was relevant to the deceased's intention concerning the informal document.

On 3rd September 1995, the deceased was admitted to Prince of Wales Hospital at Randwick. On 5th September, Owen Owers and his wife visited the deceased in hospital. During that visit, the deceased said words to the effect that "the doctor expects me to leave next week", and also said words to the effect "I have to live another fourteen days". According to Owen Owers, the deceased also said words to the effect "I have changed my will", and words to the effect that the deceased's sister would get nothing. There is evidence that the deceased did not get on with his sister. The statement concerning changing the will was not corroborated by Owen Owers' wife, who was apparently talking to a nurse at the time this conversation was made.

The deceased died on 9th September 1995 as a result of a heart attack. That afternoon, Owen Owers and his wife, and also Colin Owers and his wife and his daughter, Natasha, went to the unit. Natasha found a writing paid on the dining room table of the unit, the top page of which (still attached to the pad) contained the following writing:- 
Greg Rankmore $20,000 
Daryl Rankmore $10,000 
Justin Rankmore $10,000 
All my sporting goods Rifles Fishing Gear etc. to above 
Maureen McGirr $5,000 
Rest of Estate to be shared by my 2 brothers 
Owen Owers 
Colin Owers 
If either my brothers are deceased it is left to their families (wife and children) 
My two brothers EX. with you.

The deceased's signature was at the very bottom of the document, some distance from the other writing. A photocopy of this document is annexed to this judgment. The persons named Rankmore, and also the person named Maureen
McGirr, were friends of the deceased.

The following day there was a further search in the deceased's unit, and an envelope containing the document dated 1st January 1995 was found in a cupboard drawer. The envelope containing that document was addressed to Mr.
Townshend and to Colin Owers, and was sealed; and the deceased had placed his signature across the sealed flap of the envelope. There was a search made in the kitchen cupboard and drawers referred to in the document earlier given to
Colin Owers, but nothing was found there.

In those circumstances, Mr. Wilson, who appeared for the cross-claimants, submitted that the formal will of 29th July 1993 clearly recognised a primary obligation in the deceased to provide for his wife. The document of 1st
January 1995 showed an intention to adhere to this primary obligation, but an intention that if the wife pre-deceased him, Colin should be benefited. Mr.
Wilson submitted that this document was clearly intended to have testamentary operation. Not only was the document itself signed and expressed in a way consistent with having testamentary effect, but also the fact that it was placed in an envelope with the envelope then being sealed and a signature being placed across the seal showed a high degree of solemnity. This intention had some confirmation by the deceased's statement after his wife's funeral to
Colin to the effect "All of this is to go to you", and the other document then given to Colin which referred to a place where (in all probability) this document was then hidden.

Mr. Wilson submitted that the circumstance that the deceased intended this document to operate as a will or an amendment to his earlier will showed that the deceased had some belief that informal documents of this kind could be effective, and was willing to seek, by informal documents of this nature, to give effect to testamentary intentions.

Turning to the undated document, Mr. Wilson submitted that it could be inferred, having regard to the circumstance that the document was found attached to a writing pad on a table in the deceased's unit, and having regard to the conversation with Mr. Townshend on 29th August, that this document was written some time between 29th August and 3rd September when the deceased was admitted to hospital. The contents of the document confirmed that the deceased intended it to be a will. It was headed "Will"; it was signed by the deceased; it dealt with the whole estate; it contained a gift over in the event of the death of one of the brothers; it purported to appoint executors. That the deceased intended this to be a will was confirmed by the statement which the deceased made two days later to Owen Owers to the effect that "I have changed my will". Mr. Wilson referred me to the cases of Application of Brown [(1991) 23 NSWLR 535] and Estate of Masters [(1994) 33 NSWLR 446] at 455 and 462.

Mr. Willmott, who appeared for the Salvation Army, provided written submissions which I will leave with the papers. He referred me to the cases of
Public Trustee v. Commins, Powell, J., 19/6/92, Estate of Masters, and
Application of Brown [(1991) 23 NSWLR 535] at 539 for the proposition that not only did it have to be shown that there was a document which purported to record testamentary intentions of the deceased, but also the Court had to be satisfied that, at the time the document was brought into existence or at some later time, the deceased by some words or act evidenced his or her intention that the document should, without more, constitute his or her will.

In relation to the 1st January 1995 document, Mr. Willmott submitted that it was expressed only as a "wish" as to how property was to be left, not as a testamentary direction. The words in the document "I have not had time to change my will" showed that the deceased was aware that some formality had to attach to a change of a will, which was not satisfied by this document. The document was fairly regarded as an expression of a wish as to what should be the position if the deceased had not had time to change his will. In any event, Mr. Willmott submitted that, even if the document could be regarded as showing some intention that it operate as a stopgap until there was time to change the will, the visit to Mr. Townshend on 29th August meant that any time in which this intention could operate had passed.

Turning to the undated document, Mr. Willmott submitted that the conversation on 29th August with Mr. Townshend showed that the deceased clearly had it in mind to change his will, and understood that in order to do so he had to have a will properly drawn up and executed. The conversation indicated that he had not decided what he wanted to do, although he was minded to benefit his nephews, and also that his intention was to go back to Mr. Townshend and have a formal will drawn up when he did decide what he wanted to do.

The circumstance that the document was still affixed to the writing pad confirmed, Mr. Willmott submitted, that what was written on the document could be no more than proposed instructions to Mr. Townshend. This was confirmed by the wording concerning executors, namely "My two brothers EX. with you". This was clearly intended as something addressed to Mr. Townshend, and suggested an intention of the deceased that this be given to Mr. Townshend, to be given effect to by way of the preparation and execution of a formal will. This was further confirmed by the fact that the document was undated. While the document did bear the deceased's signature, the signature did not immediately follow the body of the document, but was at the bottom of the page.

As regards the conversation with Mr. Owen Owers at the hospital, Mr. Willmott pointed out that in circumstances where Owen Owers was now himself in hospital and unable to attend, he had not been cross-examined. The Court should not give too much weight to the exact words chosen by Owen Owers in the affidavit.
The effect of the conversation could well have been that the deceased was in the process of changing the will. The deceased did say that his doctor expected him to leave hospital next week, and the deceased may well have had it in mind that, as soon as he was out of hospital, he would go out to fix up the will with Mr. Townshend.

Miss Oakley for Mr. Townshend submitted that the evidence suggested some fluidity in the views of the deceased as to what his will should provide. She pointed out that he did not communicate to anyone the contents of the undated document. It was an available inference that in the undated document he was just trying out ideas: at most the document might amount to proposed instructions to the solicitor. Miss Oakley pointed out that the undated document stood in some contrast to the document of 1st January 1995 which had been treated with some formality by the deceased, as mentioned earlier in this judgment.

It is convenient to consider first the document of 1st January 1995, both because I have a very clear view as to that document, and because the status of that document has some relevance to the intention to be inferred in relation to the undated document.

Although, in certain context, the use of the word "wish" could be taken to indicate something of a desire rather than a testamentary direction, in my view it is clear in the context of this document that the word is used in the sense of a testamentary direction. In my opinion, it is clear that what the deceased is saying is that if his wife dies before him, and he does not have time to make a formal amendment to this will, his intention is that the dispositions referred to in that document take effect.

The nature of the intention is not unlike that which I considered in the case of Permanent Trustee v. Milton, (18/8/95) where a letter was sent to a solicitor from overseas expressing a testamentary disposition; and the letter also said that when the writer returned home, she would visit the solicitor "to make it proper". In that case, I found that that document did not have effect thirty years later, when no visit was made to the solicitor upon the person's return; but that if the writer of the letter had died while overseas, or very shortly after returning, then it would have had effect. I think that is the situation here. In my view, but for the existence of the undated document, to which I will come, this document would have had effect as an alteration to the deceased's will. I do not think the time which elapsed between the death of the wife and the death of the deceased would have meant that this document no longer had effect. The intention that this document be a testamentary document is, in my opinion, indicated not only by the terms of the document itself, but by the formality involved in placing the document in an envelope, sealing the envelope, and signing over the sealed flap.

Turning to the undated document there is some force in the submission that the fact that the document was left attached to a writing pad suggests that the deceased may have intended to do more with the document; that is, that he did not intend the document, without more, to be his will. The wording on the document "my two brothers EX. with you" does strongly suggest that the deceased was intending that this document, in some way, be conveyed to Mr.
Townshend; and there is force in the submission that that suggests either that it was intended as instructions for Mr. Townshend to draw up a will, or at least was not intended to constitute a will unless and until the deceased had taken steps to have this document conveyed to Mr. Townshend. There is also some force in the submission that, whereas the document of 1st January 1995 had been treated with some formality in the way outlined earlier, that did not happen with this document.

On the other hand, the existence of the document of 1st January 1995 does, in my opinion, demonstrate that the deceased did have some belief that testamentary intentions could be given effect to by informal documents and was willing to take this course. The fact that the undated document is entitled "Will" and actually signed by the deceased also suggests that the deceased did intend that document to constitute a will.

On the whole, I think those latter factors do outweigh the factors against a present testamentary intention, and I think this is confirmed by the conversation at the hospital with Owen Owers. The circumstance that Owen Owers was not cross-examined does mean that I cannot give as much weight to his account of this conversation as I may have been able to do if he had been cross-examined, and strongly maintained that the words in his affidavit were the actual words used; but in the absence of cross-examination, I think I still should give some weight to Owen Owers' account of the conversation, and to the indication it gives that the deceased believed he had actually changed his will. That belief I think could only be referable to this undated document.

For those reasons, in my view, not only in this case does the undated document purport to contain testamentary dispositions by the deceased, but the contents of the document and the surrounding circumstances do satisfy me that at the time the deceased went to hospital and thereafter, the deceased did intend that the document should immediately constitute his will. Accordingly, I think the document does satisfy the requirements of s.18A of the Wills Probate
Administration Act. Because it deals with the whole estate, I think it does effect a revocation of both the formal will, and the document of 1st January .

I think it is clear that the document does appoint three executors, namely the two brothers and Mr. Townshend, because, as I have said before, the reference in the document to "you" must be to Mr. Townshend. Mr. Townshend has not specifically renounced probate, and perhaps before a final decision is made as to whether probate is granted just to the two brothers, or to the two brothers and Mr. Townshend, he should be given an opportunity to decide whether he wishes to renounce.

Miss Oakley now tells me that Mr. Townshend does wish to renounce probate, and in those circumstances, the grant will be just to the cross-claimants.
 [Submissions ensued on costs] 
A question has arisen about costs. The estate is a relatively small one, and
Mr. Wilson has opposed the making of an order that the costs of the plaintiff and the Salvation Army both be paid from the estate.

This is a matter where there was a real question about the deceased's will, and the difficulty and doubt was created by the conduct of the deceased, so that it does fall within those categories of cases where the costs of the unsuccessful party may have to be paid out of the estate. I believe Mr. Wilson concedes this, but opposes payment of two sets of costs out of the estate.

In my opinion, it was appropriate for Mr. Townshend, as executor in the formal will, to propound that will and to seek to have it recognised by the Court.
The question is whether it was appropriate also to have adversary involvement in the case by a beneficiary under that will; and if that was appropriate, whether Mr. Townshend should have reverted to some submitting role in the case. I accept Mr. Wilson's submission that the case is not analogous to cases of construction of wills, where the executor may take a substantially neutral role, and the parties substantially interested take adversary roles; and costs are allowed to all parties. As Mr. Wilson points out, in that situation the executor does have the duty by reason of his office of administering the will, and it is regarded as appropriate that he be represented in such cases. On the other hand, this situation is not like the situation in [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) cases, where there is a well-established practice of the Court not to allow costs to beneficiaries seeking to uphold the will, unless the executor fails in his duty to uphold the provisions of the will.

I think it would be desirable in cases such as this at some early stage to carefully investigate whether the incurring of three sets of costs is justified, and if possible give directions with a view to avoiding that. If more than two parties then contest the matter, it should be clear that additional parties are explicitly at risk as to costs. It appears that that did not happen in this case; and in those circumstances, I do not believe I can find that the representation of either Mr. Townshend or the Salvation Army before me today was not justified.

On the whole, it seems to me in those circumstances that it is appropriate that the costs of both those parties be paid out of the estate; but I will not order that that be done on a trustee basis, and it will simply be on a party and party basis. In assessing what was reasonable on a party and party basis, it will be appropriate, I think, to have regard to the circumstance that Mr.
Townshend assumed a substantially neutral role in the case, leaving the adversary position to be taken largely by the Salvation Army.

I make the following orders.

I declare that the undated document headed "Will" annexed to the affidavit of the cross-claimants dated 2nd March 1996 is, for the purposes of s.18A of the
Wills Probate Administration Act 1899, the last will of Dennis Charles Owers.

I order that probate of that will be granted to the cross-claimants, on the basis that the plaintiff renounces probate, subject to completion of formalities to the satisfaction of the Registrar.

I refer the matter to the Registrar to complete the grant of probate.

I order that the costs of the plaintiff and of the Salvation Army on a party and party basis be paid out of the estate.

The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
