

Womboin Pty Ltd and Anor versus Reichelt and Ors No. 5175/92 Tort [1995] NSWSC (19 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
WINDEYER J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 22-26, 30-31 May, 1, 5 June, 8-9 June and 8
August 1995 #DATE 25:8:1995 #ADD 19:10:1995 
Counsel for Plaintiffs:       P. Stone with 
K.A. Drayton 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs:    Snelgrove and Partners 
Counsel for 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 8th,   P.M.
Donohoe QC with th, 11th and 12th Defendants:    P.H. Greenwood 
Solicitors for 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 8th,  Emil Ford and Co th, th and 12th Defendants
ORDER
Judgment for the Defendants
JUDGE1
WINDEYER J This is an action for damages for conspiracy and for procuring a breach of contract. It should be noted that this action has now no proper place in the Equity Division list. There were incidental claims giving some semblance of entitlement to equitable relief but these claims have been abandoned. The claim for damages under [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) , or its equivalent for misleading or deceptive conduct, which is in any event a Common Law claim, was abandoned at the end although it was claimed such conduct was evidence of the conspiracy. This statement is not made by way of complaint; there should be no unnecessary walls between divisions of the
Court and generally no late orders for transfer to other divisions. The point is however, that damages are an essential ingredient of the claims yet for some unexplained reason counsel for the plaintiff had apparently been advised by his solicitor that any question of damages would be determined separately from the question of liability, although no order to that effect had been made. In fact the defendants and I had proceeded on the basis that the trial was a trial on all issues and it was not until the evidence was complete and counsel for the plaintiff commenced to speak to his written submissions that his misapprehension became known. To do my best to balance the competing interests I then made an order for separate determination of damages if a right to damages were shown in accordance with normal Equity procedure leaving it for subsequent consideration to decide whether damages would be determined by me or by a Master.
 
FACTS
The plaintiff company Womboin Pty Ltd (Womboin) is controlled by a Mr Knox
Greenaway (Greenaway) and his wife. It obtained a judgment in the Commercial
Division in 1990 against Robin Howard Reichelt for $2 379 806.05. There were other defendants against whom judgment was also obtained. RHR was the first defendant in the present action but the proceedings have been discontinued so far as they were against him.
RHR was a director of Danlex Pty
Ltd (in liquidation) (Danlex) the 13th defendant. That company, although served, took no part in the action. No relief is sought against it. Its shares were originally held by RHR and probably his father and mother as to 50% and by Mr and Mrs Porter as to 50%.
The 6th defendant Patricia Reichelt, now known as Patricia Buring (Buring), is the mother of RHR. His father, Frederick William Reichelt, was the 5th defendant but the proceedings against him have been discontinued. The winding up order in respect of Danlex was made in Queensland on 1 February 1993.
 
Deed of Licence
Danlex was licensed by a Deed dated 19 September 1988 to exploit and market in Australia, and on certain conditions elsewhere, the intellectual property rights to an invention known as the "Cockroach Zapper" .
Those rights were conferred on Danlex under that Deed by Lawrence Victor Stone the third defendant, Gregory Jefferys the fourth defendant,
Cornelius Joseph Van Mourik (Van Mourik) and Nabinda Nominees Pty Ltd (Nabinda. Nominees) the second defendant. Jefferys held such rights as inventor and assigned them to himself, Stone and van Mourik, it seems in 1987 and they in turn assigned those rights to Nabinda Nominees. There is an unresolved question about whether the rights related only to what might be described as the "trap" and whether the rights to the attractant tablet remained in a company Genesearch Pty Ltd. The directors of Nabinda Nominees at the time were Stone and Jefferys together with Messrs Van Mourik, Rawnsley and
Wolff. Stone and Jefferys were the principal shareholders. Jefferys ceased to be a director probably in 1993.
 
Woodman Charge
On 1 February 1991, Peter Jurgen
Woodman (Woodman) the second plaintiff, lent to Danlex the sum of $100 000 for 1 year upon the security of a fixed and floating charge over the assets of that company. That charge was registered.
It provided for an interest rate of 100% per annum. There was an entitlement in the borrower to extend the loan for a further six months on the basis that the original interest was capitalised and that interest for the extended six months would be paid at 20% per annum on the new principal sum of $200 000.
That entitlement was exercised.
No moneys have been paid.
 
Commercial Division Proceedings and Court Orders
In March 1991 Womboin filed a notice of motion in the Commercial Division proceedings seeking orders that Danlex and other companies be joined as defendants and that they be restrained until further order from disposing of any of their assets except bona fide in the ordinary course of business or with the consent of Womboin or its solicitor. Danlex was not a body against which relief was sought, or could have been sought, in the Commercial
Division action prior to judgment. Nevertheless on 4 April 1991 Danlex consented to the orders sought against it (the Court orders) which on any basis at that stage could have been made only in aid of execution. It is perfectly clear that consent was improperly given in that there was no requirement to give it and no benefit to Danlex in giving it.
 
Deed of Forbearance
By Deed dated January 1992 RHR, in consideration of Womboin not enforcing its judgment immediately, covenanted to transfer to Womboin certain assets including his 50 shares in Danlex, and his 100 shares in Reichelt
Holdings Pty Ltd, and to assign to Womboin a debt of $69750 due to him by
Danlex. There is no evidence that the debt was in fact assigned. Transfers of the shares were executed and so far as those in Danlex were concerned were registered. The evidence is not clear as to registration of the transfers of the shares in Reichelt
Holdings Pty Ltd (Reichelt Holdings) or as to whether
RHR in fact held 100 shares (see Document 1524) in the company. That company was formerly the 9th defendant but the proceedings against it have been discontinued. RHR was assumed to hold 50% of the shares in it which, pursuant to the Deed of Forbearance, were transferred to Womboin. While not pleaded as such, the terms of the Deed of Forbearance provided for an assignment subject to a right of redemption which might well have been lost when RHR disappeared on leaving Australia.
 
Incorporation of ZSA
In early 1992 Stone, Jefferys and RHR arranged the incorporation in the
United States of America of the company Zapper Sales of America Inc (ZSA) for the purpose of exploiting the Zapper in the United States of America. The directors of ZSA were Stone, Jefferys, RHR and Tom Norman, a United States citizen. The shareholders were Stone, Jefferys and RHR.
 
March Agreement
On 24 March 1992 a company Zapper Sales International Pty Ltd (ZSI) was incorporated; the shareholders of which were Reichelt Holdings and companies controlled by Stone and Jefferys, each holding one third of the shares. Stone,
Jefferys and
RHR had agreed while they were in the United States setting up
ZSA that there were problems with Danlex's marketing of the Zapper.
They blamed, or at least RHR blamed, Porter to a large extent for these problems and wished to exclude him from the operation. As a result of discussions to which Porter was a party, an Agreement dated 30 March 1992 (the March 1992
Agreement) was entered into between Nabinda Nominees, Stone, Jefferys, Danlex,
Mr and Mrs Porter, RHR, Buring and Frederick William Reichelt, which Agreement by its terms terminated the 1988 Licence Agreement with Danlex and envisaged conferring world marketing and manufacturing rights on ZSI. ZSI is the 7th defendant. It was previously represented in this action by the solicitors representing the defendants who remained other than Danlex Pty Ltd and
Jefferys. Later that representation ceased and the company did not appear on the hearing.
No relief was sought against it.
The March 1992 Agreement is a strange document. In effect it provided for
Danlex to substitute for its rights under the 1988 Agreement the entitlement to receive a royalty of $US2.50 in respect of each Zapper delivered ex-factory or ex-factory warehouse by any manufacturer anywhere in the world. Nabinda
Nominees, to whom the rights reverted on relinquishment by Danlex, agreed in clause 4 that it would bind any other appointed manufacturer or marketer to pay such royalty and would guarantee payment of such royalty. There were provisions intended to secure to RHR and his parents and Mr and Mrs Porter the same entitlements as Danlex Ltd had in the event of Danlex being wound up, and whereby Nabinda Nominees agreed to grant the rights to ZSI on terms of the royalty payment to Danlex and equal payment to Nabinda Nominees. Clause 16 provided that it should be "a condition precedent of this deed", that agreement be reached between the Reichelt family interests and the Porters for the transfer of the Porters' shares in Danlex to the Reichelt interests.
Clause 18 provided for the arbitration of "any dispute arising between the parties in respect of interpretation of the true meaning and effect" of the
Deed. Clause 11 of the Deed provided as follows: "Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 6 hereof, the parties agree that upon Danlex providing notification to the parties hereto that all loan accounts of Danlex as of the date hereof have been repaid, any royalties payable pursuant to this deed shall be deemed to be payable thereafter to LP and PP jointly (or their nominee or nominees) as to the sum of USD .50 (FIFTY CENTS UNITED
STATES CURRENCY) for each USD 2.50 royalty payable, and to RHR, PB, FWR jointly (or their nominee or nominees as to the sum of USD 2.00 (TWO DOLLARS UNITED STATES
CURRENCY) for each USD 2.50 royalty payable, and to RHR, PB,
FWR jointly (or their nominee or nominees as to the sum of
USD 2.00 (TWO DOLLARS UNITED STATES CURRENCY) and thereafter no royalty shall be payable to Danlex".
It should be noted that clause 6 of the Deed has no apparent relevance and that clause 11 seems to conflict with clauses 3 and 9. But that may not matter as the loan accounts were never paid. The loan accounts would presumably include the Woodman debt and the RHR debt agreed to be assigned to
Womboin but would not have included the debt of RHR to Womboin.
Stone claimed that the March 1992 Agreement in evidence was a forgery, being different from the document signed by him. At one stage Jefferys also expressed doubts about it. I do not accept this evidence of Stone. His evidence about the signing and the differences was not convincing.
At the time the March 1992 Agreement was executed Buring had received notice of the consent orders of 4 April 1991 through a letter from Mr
Snelgrove, the solicitor for Womboin. She said in evidence she did not read past the first paragraph of that letter and then spoke to RHR who told her to send it to him to take care of. I do not accept that evidence as to how much was read but I do find that Buring had no comprehension of what she was being told in the letter, she saying, obviously truthfully, that so far as her directorship of Danlex was concerned she did what she was told without understanding or question. In the same way she had notice of Woodman's charge but no understanding of its effect.
 
Events after March 1992
ZSI traded to some limited extent between
March and June 1992. Some of the parties were overseas in June. RHR left Australia on 27 June 1992 and has not returned. He appears to have left a trail of debts. In July 1992 Stone and
Jefferys became aware of the Court orders. At the same time they became concerned about their own positions in view of RHR's departure as did John
Reichelt, the 11th defendant, who was the major shareholder of Genesearch
Pty
Ltd, as did Tim Reichelt the 10th defendant and as did Houston. Tim Reichelt had over the years done some computer work for RHR and later for Danlex and
ZSI. He had witnessed the signature of RHR to the transfer of shares in Danlex and Reichelt Holdings to
Womboin pursuant to the Deed of Forbearance but I accept he had not seen that deed and did not understand its terms. Until July he had no knowledge of the Court orders. He knew something of the Woodman charge by April 1992.
Mr Ben Houston (Houston) is the 12th defendant. He commenced an association with RHR as an articled clerk, RHR being a solicitor, but left there to work for
Danlex and then for ZSI and subsequently became a director and shareholder in Nabinda Enterprises.
On 4 August 1992 Nabinda
Enterprises Pty Ltd (Nabinda Enterprises), the th defendant was formed, its directors being Stone, Jefferys, John Reichelt,
Houston and a Dan Leffler. Tim Reichelt was secretary. The shareholders were the directors except that John Reichelt's company Genesearch
Pty Ltd was a shareholder in his place.
 
Termination of March 1992 Agreement
Between July and September 1992 Nabinda
Nominees purported to terminate its agreement with ZSI and in some way seems to have conferred the same worldwide marketing rights on Nabinda Enterprises (with some other intervening arrangements) but without any obligation to pay the Danlex Royalties. The income stream from the royalties, if it existed, was the only remaining asset of Danlex. Once that stream was removed there was no way in which Mr Woodman's loan could be repaid - it having been extended to 1 August 1992 - and no way in which either the debt agreed to be assigned to Womboin could be repaid, or dividends paid to shareholders through which the original RHR judgment debt could be satisfied through Womboin holding the shares in Danlex as a result of the transfer from RHR, or Womboin through its shareholding in Reichelt
Holdings having an interest in ZSI. It will be necessary to return to this crucial period between July and September 1992.
 
November Interlocutory Orders
On 4 November 1992 an interlocutory consent order was made in this action until further order under which Nabinda Nominees, Stone, Jefferys, Buring and
Nabinda Enterprises were restrained from encumbering, disposing of or dealing with any assets of RHR, Nabinda Nominees, ZSI and Danlex, excluding assets used in the ordinary course of business, and including any benefits receivable under an agreement of 2 March 1992 and the March 1992 Agreement and any rights in relation to the Zapper and from permitting, assisting, aiding or abetting any persons so to do. That order was varied on 8 February 1993 allowing among other things the sale and distribution of trading stock through third parties appointed by the defendants as agents, distributors and representatives and allowing sale of the intellectual property rights relating to the invention but not the sale or disposal of the manufacturing or marketing rights.
Subsequent to those orders: in March 1993 it is said Nabinda Nominees granted marketing rights to the Zapper to Nabinda Enterprises in respect of
Australia and the rest of the world; in March or April 1993 Nabinda Nominees and Nabinda
Enterprises purported to terminate the distribution rights of the Zapper in the
United States of America held by Tom
Norman or by ZSA and granted those rights to Mattioli.
on 28 April 1993, or a few days later, Nabinda Nominees granted to Jefferys and his wife, trading as Jantra Moon, the exclusive rights to exploit in
Australia its right, title and interest in the Zapper rights.
on 5 June 1993 Nabinda Nominees purported to terminate that licence; on 13 August 1993 Nabinda Nominees and Nabinda Enterprises appointed Danoz Exports as distributor in
Sydney; on 17 August 1993 Stone purported to grant the United States of America patent rights in the Zapper to Nabinda
Nominees; on 4 October 1993 Nabinda Nominees and Nabinda Enterprises appointed Mr Chick Scull as exclusive distributor to purchase from Nabinda. Enterprises and re-sell the Zapper in Brisbane.
It is claimed that the foregoing acts and agreements are overt acts evidencing the conspiracy claimed to which I will shortly come.
Nominees was informed of the Woodman charge on 30 July 1992. On about the same day Stone, Jefferys and ZSI were informed that Womboin had an interest in
ZSI through its shareholding in Reichelt Holdings.
 
Alleged Representations to Plaintiffs
The foregoing facts, apart from whether the March 1992 Agreement is a forgery being altered after signature, and the events between July and
September 1992, are not really in dispute. It is further claimed by Womboin: that Tim Reichelt represented to it that he, Stone, John
Reichelt and Houston were aware of Womboin's entitlement to shares in Danlex and in Reichelt Holdings and that he and
John Reichelt would recognise this; that he, Stone,
Jefferys and John Reichelt intended to conduct themselves in a way that
Danlex investors, including Womboin and Woodman, would receive moneys to which they were entitled and would conduct themselves in such a way that the assets of Danlex and the value of its shares would be preserved. Similar representations are said to have been made between 26 August 1992 and October 1992 by
Tim Reichelt and John Reichelt in respect of the business of
Danlex and Reichelt Holdings; this series of representations was not made out.
that representations were made between June and October 1992 to Woodman by Stone,
Jefferys, Tim Reichelt, John Reichelt and
Houston of awareness of the entitlements of Woodman, their intention to act so that he would receive his principal and that they intended to act in relation to Danlex in a way which would preserve the value of the charge. This was not made out.
that Stone represented to Woodman that the 1992 Deed was forged and represented to Womboin on 6 August 1992 that ZSI had never traded, that its shares were worthless, and that none of the rights or assets of ZSI had been removed from it. In general this was established.
On the basis of these facts and alleged representations it is claimed: that Buring and Tim Reichelt procured Danlex to breach the
April 1991 Court orders; that the defendants other than ZSI and Danlex conspired and combined to injure Womboin and Woodman by removing rights under the March Agreement from ZSI; that Nabinda. Nominees, Nabinda Enterprises, Stone, Jefferys,
Tim Reichelt, John Reichelt and
Houston adopted and participated in breach by RHR of his obligations under the Deed of Forbearance and combined to injure
Woodman and Womboin; that in September and October 1992 Nabinda Nominees, Nabinda
Enterprises, Stone, Jefferys, Tim Reichelt,
John Reichelt and
Houston combined to procure Nabinda Enterprises to take benefits under the 1992 Deed which were the property of ZSI; that the defendants other than ZSI and Houston have engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct and aided, abetted and conspired with the others to effect the misleading and deceptive conduct alleged.
 
PLEADING CLAIMS
In the Third
Further Amended Statement of Claim the relief sought by the plaintiffs is set out under 17 paragraph numbers. Of those the plaintiffs abandoned at the end of the evidence the claims under numbers ,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10(c) and 14. Numbers 13,15,16 and 17 are for interest, costs and consequential orders. In the result the substantive claims of the plaintiff which remained, adopting the numbering from the statement of claim:
A declaration that Woodman is, and was since his advances became due, entitled to enter into and to take possession of the assets and undertaking of Danlex. There is no doubt that under the terms of the charge he was so entitled.
 .(a) Damages against Buring and Tim Reichelt: for conspiracy with RHR to induce Danlex to breach the injunction and/or Deed of Forbearance; and for inducing Danlex to breach the injunction and/or Deed of Forbearance.
- Damages against the defendants other than ZSI and Danlex for conspiracy to wrongfully deprive and remove the rights of ZSI under the March 1992 Agreement; and for wrongfully removing those rights; in each case to injure the plaintiffs (note the words "or otherwise" in 10(b) were not relied on).
Damages under [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and its equivalents in New South Wales and Queensland in respect of the representations made by various defendants.
Remedial orders under [s87](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) to restore rights to the plaintiffs.
Claims 11 and 12 were abandoned during final submissions but I should say something about them.
These claims were in the end not pressed by Mr Stone, counsel for the plaintiffs, as a ground for damages, he conceding quite correctly that there was no evidence of damage arising from the representations if they were made.
He relied upon the representations only as evidence of conspiracy. There was no evidence that Mr Woodman relied upon any representations allegedly made to him or of what action he would have otherwise taken or of any damage flowing from any action or lack of action as a result of reliance on the representations. The same situation applies to Womboin. On the basis of some statements which were undoubtedly made Mr Greenaway might have hoped his claim would be recognised and in some way protected; but it could have gone no further than that and there is no evidence of any damage arising from reliance on any representation.
One further matter should be dealt with and put aside. In written submissions, counsel for the plaintiff claimed that one of the causes of action for which the plaintiff claimed was interference with the trade or business of another by unlawful acts. While it might have been possible to find somewhere some facts pleaded which might give rise to such a claim, the whole of the case was run on the claims of inducing a breach of contract and for civil conspiracy, together with the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) claims which were later abandoned. In the written submissions the claims for interference with the trade or business by unlawful acts were stated to arise from Stone,
Jefferys, John Reichelt, Tim Reichelt, Ben Houston and Nabinda Nominees removing rights and assets from the business of ZSI or conferring those rights on Nabinda Enterprises with the intention of interfering with the business of
ZSI and Danlex. That being the case and neither of those companies being a plaintiff nothing further need be said. It was accepted in the long run that the removal of ZSI's rights could, if anything, be relied upon only as being an unlawful act.
I move now to the claims which remained. Even these presented great problems through the way in which paragraph 55 of the 3rd Further Amended
Statement of Claim and paragraph 10 of the claims were expressed.
 
Paragraph 10(a) claims against Buring and Tim Reichelt Inducement of breach of contract - 4 April 1991 Orders/Deed of Forbearance by Danlex and conspiracy to induce such breach
The breach is alleged to have been brought about by the March 1992
Agreement. Tim Reichelt did not know of the Court orders or the terms of Deed of Forbearance. He could not have procured their breach. Buring knew of the
Court orders but not their effect. She did not know of the Deed of
Forbearance. There could be no procuring of breach of contract between Danlex and Womboin by her. Any conspiracy could only arise through the agreement underlying the March 1992 Agreement to which Buring was a party. Tim Reichelt could not have conspired as he had no knowledge of the Womboin claims. He was not party to the agreement. All he did was to advise his mother he thought she had no option but to enter into it. Buring could not have conspired with RHR as she had no knowledge of the Deed of Forbearance and no understanding of the
Court orders. This claim must fail. I should add that on the evidence, and leaving aside the Court orders, there was nothing untoward in terminating the agreement. Woodman could have no claim in any event. He was not a party to the
Court orders; while he had been asked to consent to the arrangements behind the March Agreement and had not by then done so, he did not consider he could have prevented the termination of the 1988 agreement, and he later did consent becoming in essence an agent of ZSI. No claim was based on procuring a breach of his charge and whatever the purpose of the March Agreement, it was not for the purpose of causing injury to Woodman nor was any conduct of Buring and Tim Reichelt in any way directed towards Womboin.
 
Claim for conspiracy to deprive ZSI of its rights under the March 1992
Agreement and for wrongfully removing such rights so as to injure the plaintiffs - paragraph 10(b)
There are two preliminary points. The first is that ZSI never had any rights under the March Agreement; it was not a party to it. It might have acquired some rights as a result of it as envisaged by clause 8 but there is no evidence of the terms upon which any marketing rights were granted. Further no loss would arise so far as Danlex was concerned by removal of rights from
ZSI because either Nabinda Nominees under Clause 3 or any new marketer under
Clause 4 would be bound to pay the royalty. It is true that it is possible some loss would have been suffered by ZSI if rights given to it as intended under clause 8 of the agreement were terminated without cause and that such loss might have flowed through to one of its corporate shareholders and that a shareholder in that corporate shareholder might possibly suffer some loss but that is problematical in the extreme and no more than a rather remote and unsubstantiated possibility.
The second preliminary point is that while it was never properly pleaded that there was a conspiracy to injure the plaintiffs by bringing to an end the
March 1992 Agreement the case was conducted and proceeded on the basis that was one of the claims. This was because Danlex's rights to royalties arose under the Agreement not from ZSI having the marketing rights; it was also because Woodman's rights in no way depended upon any rights in ZSI. The
Statement of Claim in its final form was anything but a perfect document but it was at least much better than the earlier versions. In any event this claim was treated as made.
It was never made clear to me quite how the 10(b) claim, apart from conspiracy, was said to arise. As I best understand it, what was said is that the defendants other than ZSI and Danlex procured a breach by Nabinda
Nominees of the March 1992 Agreement. If that is what was claimed then that claim must fail unless brought by Danlex or ZSI. Neither plaintiff was a party to that
Agreement and thus cannot sue for its breach or procuring its breach. Senior
Counsel for the defendants on many occasions both before the hearing commenced and during it said that Danlex ought to be a plaintiff. It was not. There were submissions about breach of fiduciary duty of Stone and Jefferys to ZSI and its shareholders including Reichelt Holdings Pty Ltd.
The answer to that is first that ZSI would need to have been a plaintiff, or in some circumstances perhaps Reichelt Holdings could have been plaintiff, and neither company was, and second, such a claim for breach of duty as director was never pleaded. It was not pursued. Finally in so far as there was in. paragraphs 55(d) and (e) some allegation of adoption of tortious acts, if such a claim could exist, which I doubt, that in 55(d) must fail through lack of knowledge of the Deed of Forbearance and that in paragraph 55(e) fails because it does not make sense and was never amended. Counsel for the plaintiff stated in address that what was probably meant was paragraph 24 rather than 29; if that were correct it must fail anyway.
I turn to the claim for conspiracy.
This is the claim which presents more difficulty. Little attention was paid to the question of liability of individual defendants. They were all lumped together. As I have indicated Buring never understood the effect of the
Court orders and apart from her being a signatory to a Deed of Subordination it was not shown she knew anything about the Woodman debt or that she knew there was a charge. She did not know of the Deed of Forbearance. She resigned as a director of Danlex in July 1992. It was not suggested to her that she knew of the possible preferential payment she might get on the basis of
Exhibit H. There is nothing to show she took any part in any relevant event between July and October 1992. The claim so far as it is against her fails.
The claim against Nabinda Enterprises also fails. It was not formed until August 1992. It became a beneficiary as a result of certain actions but it was not shown to have participated in those actions at the relevant time. It did of course participate in some of the overt acts relating to marketing agreements and it was well aware of the Danlex royalty claim as Exhibit H shows. But the decision to carry out the acts complained of was taken at a meeting of 3 September 1992 which was not a meeting of Enterprises or its directors.
There remains the claim against Stone, Jefferys, John Reichelt, Tim
Reichelt, Houston and Nabinda Nominees.
Stone met Woodman in April 1992 but did not know of his charge until probably the end of July 1992. He became aware of the Court orders about 15
July 1992. He became aware of the interests of Greenaway in Danlex and the interest claimed in ZSI through Womboin's interest in the Reichelt Holdings at the end of July. He first met Greenaway on 6 August 1992. Jefferys' knowledge was the same.
John Reichelt became aware of the transfers of the RHR shares in Danlex to Womboin in late June 1992. He met Greenaway on 6 August 1992. It is not established he knew of the Woodman charge at any relevant time before
September. He said that when his company Genesearch Pty Ltd took its interest in
Nabinda Enterprises it exchanged the right to be paid for the pellets for a shareholding in that company. I accept that.
Tim
Reichelt knew of the debt and the Woodman charge by April 1992. By then of course it had not become due. I find that he did not ever understand
Womboin's interest in Danlex as I accept his evidence that he thought the transfers were to be held pending payment of the debt of RHR to Womboin of which he was aware but that is all. His evidence would indicate at the most knowledge of some unspecified charge. He was not a director of Nabinda
Nominees at the earlier time and was not a party to the March 1992 Agreement although he knew of it and its terms.
Houston had discussions with Woodman in June 1992 as Woodman was marketing the Zapper by then. He knew by April 1992 that Woodman had a "lien over Danlex". He became aware of the court orders around 15 July 1992.
It became clear to those concerned by the end of June 1992 that RHR had deceived them and was unlikely to return. Stone and Jefferys, and probably the
Reichelt brothers thought, and probably with good reason, that moneys which
RHR had received which should have gone to the benefit of Danlex or ZSI had been misappropriated by him. RHR had agreed to work full-time with ZSI and provide secretarial services to that company and of course he was not able to do so in the future. Most people involved at this stage started to try to look after themselves.
An emergency meeting of Nabinda Nominees was held on 21 July 1992.
Whether valid or not that meeting decided to terminate the 1988 Deed of
Licence granted to Danlex for Australia. That resolution, if valid, seems to have little purpose as the March 1992
Agreement terminated the 1988 Agreement.
It is perhaps the strongest evidence supporting Stone's allegations that he thought the Deed was altered after he signed it. A meeting of directors of ZSI was held on 23 July 1992. At that stage Stone and Jefferys did not know that Womboin had the shares of RHR in Reichelt Holdings. The meeting decided to close down the company. There followed a series of letters apparently written with at least some assistance from Mr Henderson, RHR's former partner in the law firm of Reichelt
Henderson, by which Nabinda Nominees purported to terminate the 1988 Agreement and the March 1992 Agreement. At the same time steps were taken to incorporate Nabinda Enterprises, which occurred on 4
August 1992. In effect, without any written agreement, at some stage thereafter ZSI ceased marketing the Zappers and Nabinda Enterprises commenced to do so. It is quite clear, at least so far as agents and others dealing with the Zapper product were concerned, that every effort was made to make it appear that business was as usual, "Zapper Sales" appearing prominently on the letterhead.
The attitude of the parties involved differed a little over the time. For instance Jefferys changed his view about the authenticity of the March 1992
Agreement and he had some sympathy for the Danlex creditors. Stone's attitude was always that Danlex had nothing to do with him and that he did not have to concern himself with its creditors. So far as he was concerned, Danlex had obtained the Zapper rights under false representations as to ownership of all the rights including the pellet rights and that as the March 1992 Agreement was not the one he signed he had every right to look after himself. I find the agreement was the one he signed although I accept he was misled as to its contents. He was not an impressive witness; some of his other evidence about signatures and instructions to Houston being unacceptable as was his late explanation of his statements to Greenaway that ZSI had not traded and was not worth much. But in the long run apart from credit these matters are not significant. While the claims of the plaintiff as formulated in the final document had alternative claims based on whether or not the March 1992
Agreement was in force, in the long run the claim was only made on the basis of that Agreement having been brought into effect and I think that was clearly correct. All parties worked on that basis in their efforts to terminate it although they did give some consideration about their rights to treat it as void - but not I think because it was a forgery.
Tim Reichelt and Houston sought advice from Mr Henderson between the end of July and the end of August about the agreements. Houston drafted notes for a meeting with Henderson on 3 September which were circulated prior to the meeting. That meeting was attended by Stone, Jefferys,
Tim Reichelt, John
Reichelt and Ben Houston. On its face the document proposed to guide discussion would appear to assume that the
March 1992 Agreement was still in force. However taking into account what had gone before and taking into account the evidence of
Mr Henderson, which I accept, there was at least a feeling among some of the parties that the Agreement might have already been terminated.
Letters were however forwarded after that meeting, in slightly different and probably even more inappropriate terms than those sent after the
July meetings, to the relevant parties, and to Porter as well, which on any basis presumed the existence of the Agreement.
Certainly it is clear that not everybody was satisfied that the agreements had been satisfactorily brought to an end by then as there were certainly discussions which took place between
Greenaway, Stone and Tim Reichelt prior to that meeting which would not necessarily have indicated that the March 1992 Agreement had been terminated, whether validly or not. On the other hand there is no evidence which would in any way make out as having been made the representations alleged in the statement of claim to have been made that
Stone, Jefferys and others intended to do nothing which would take away the rights of Danlex and other parties claiming through Danlex.
 
Tort of Conspiracy
The law as to civil conspiracy is not easy to express succinctly in view of the spate of litigation on it over the past 15 years or so. The claim in this action was ultimately put as a conspiracy by unlawful means. That must I think be correct. Otherwise it would have had to have been shown that the defendants or some of them combined for the predominant purpose of causing injury to the plaintiffs. McKernan versus Fraser <case>; [(1931) 46 CLR 343.] That was apparently the claim made in paragraph 55(c) of the final version of the
Statement of Claim. While there is some evidence, particularly as to what happened at the 3 September meeting, which might possibly indicate the ultimate objective was to injure Danlex, there was certainly no evidence sufficient to establish that the dominant purpose of any combination was to injure either of the plaintiffs. It would have been difficult for Danlex or
ZSI to succeed in such an action. It would not I think have been possible for anyone claiming through them to succeed.
Conspiracy to procure breach of contract would amount to what is sometimes called "unlawful means conspiracy". In Williams versus Hursey <case>; [(1959) 103
CLR 30] Menzies J said at p122: "(5) Conspiracy: Some general observations about the law of conspiracy are, I think, necessary.
If two or more persons agree to effect an unlawful purpose, whether as an end or a means to an end, and in the carrying out of that agreement damage is caused to another, then those who have agreed are parties to a tortious conspiracy. Although it is probably too late in the day to divide conspiracies, for the purpose of legal classification, into two sorts depending upon whether the purpose of the combination would be lawful or unlawful if it were the purpose of an individual, there is much to be said in favour of approaching any consideration of the law of tortious conspiracy and its application in that way. It is, I think quite clear that an agreement to do something, either as an end or as a means to an end, it being something that would, if it were done by an individual, be a criminal offence, is a tortious conspiracy if another suffers damage by reason of action pursuant to the agreement. The same it seems is true if the agreement is to do something which, if done by an individual, would be a tort or breach of contract".
I do not take that passage to mean that if the unlawful act is not the end itself the end need not be intended. "Another" who suffers damage cannot extend to 'anybody however remote and means to an end must mean intended end.
I do not understand the passage on p127 of the same judgment that "the agreement to use unlawful means vitiated it (the agreement) entirely and made it an actionable conspiracy when it was carried out so as to cause damage to the plaintiffs" describes the result rather than the intention. The picket line was aimed at the plaintiffs.
It is I think appropriate for the purpose of actions for civil conspiracy to divide combinations into three kinds: 
A combination to do an act which would be lawful if done by an individual, if the dominant intention is to harm the plaintiff; Crofter Hand Woven
Harris Tweed Co Ltd versus Veitch <case>; [(1942) AC 435]
A combination to do an unlawful act as an end in itself, such as to commit a crime or to commit a tort. In such a case those liable for the tort could be sued separately as joint tortfeasors or in conspiracy. No evidence of intention is necessary as the tort is a direct interference with another.
Williams versus Hursey; Galland versus Mineral Underwriters Ltd [(1977)
WAR 116], and unreported in part Young J, 12 August 1986, and Beach Petroleum NL versus Johnson <case>; [(1993) 115 ALR 411] at 562. In such an action the plaintiff must be a person who could sue for tortious conduct, irrespective of conspiracy, so that an action for conspiracy to induce a breach of contract could be brought only by a party to that contract while an action for conspiracy to assault or to intimidate could be brought by the party assaulted or intimidated. Separation of this category seems to receive support from those who consider there is little if any difference between an action against conspirators for unlawful means conspiracy and an action against the same persons as joint tortfeasors; Sorrell versus Smith [(1925) AC 700];
Fleming Law of Torts 8th Ed 709.
A combination to do an unlawful act as a means to an end being injury to the plaintiff.
In this type of conspiracy I am of the view for reasons I will later set out that for an action to succeed there must be more than a combination or agreement to commit an unlawful act and the carrying out of that act. This is the tort of conspiracy to injure and must therefore require some intent or conduct directed at the plaintiff.
The crucial acts in this case are the termination of the March 1992
Agreement and the removal of rights of ZSI. The plaintiff's case was run on the basis that these were unlawful acts, which would bring the claim under category 2 or category 3. But if the unlawful act is inducing a breach of contract then in principle it must be for the plaintiff to establish there was a breach and therefore an unlawful act. So far as ZSI is concerned there is no evidence of the term of any contract which has been breached. So far as Danlex is concerned I am not satisfied that the plaintiffs have established that
Nabinda Nominees was not entitled to terminate its agreement for breach.
The directors had been told by RHR on 23 June that he proposed to liquidate
Danlex. RHR was most probably not providing the services for ZSI which were to some extent the consideration for the royalty. However inappropriate the correspondence, including the reliance on clause 18, the fact is that Nabinda
Nominees purported to terminate the agreement. If a contract is terminable and is terminated then an action cannot lie for inducing its termination by a party entitled to terminate. Danlex has taken no action for breach following termination and Mr Henderson advised that he thought there were grounds for termination for breach although he considered further advice should be obtained. The breach alleged is unlawful termination or unlawful removal of
ZSI rights; I find that the plaintiffs have not established either breach. The onus is upon them to do so. Second, the claim as pleaded was clearly for wrongful removal of the rights of ZSI. It is not established precisely what those rights were. But if they were the marketing rights and were removed then as I have explained no loss was suffered by Danlex and no loss is shown to have been suffered by Womboin and no loss was suffered by Woodman through ZSI no longer holding the rights. No conduct was directed towards injuring a shareholder in ZSI. It should not be thought, however, that this then brings the case within category I because, it was never suggested the dominant intention was to injure the plaintiffs.
These findings dispose of the matter, but as the matter was carefully argued, and in case I am wrong,
I think I should discuss the conspiracy claim further on the assumption that there were an unlawful act.
 
Unlawful means conspiracy
In the Carlton versus Tooth and Co case Young J was dealing with an action in conspiracy to carry out an unlawful act, namely to procure a breach of an implied term of the contract, so that while some of his statements appear to apply to conspiracy to perform an unlawful act as a means to an end, rather than as an end, they were not necessary for his judgment and a careful reading of the judgment makes it clear it was a case of unlawful act conspiracy.
In Lonrho versus Fayed at p465, Lord Bridge, after discussing parts of the speeches of Viscount Simon LC and Lord Wright in Crofter, said at p465: "Where conspirators act with the predominant purpose of injuring the plaintiff and in fact inflict damage on him, but do nothing which would have been actionable if done by an individual acting alone, it is in the fact of their concerted action for that illegitimate purpose that the law, however anomalous it may now seem, finds a sufficient ground to condemn their action as illegal and tortious. But when conspirators
INTENTIONALLY INJURE the plaintiff and use unlawful means to do so, it is no defence for them to show that their primary purpose was to further or protect their own interests; it is sufficient to make their action tortious that the means used were unlawful". (my emphasis)
At page 467 Lord Bridge went on to quote, and appeared to approve, the following statement of
Lord Denning MR in Lonrho versus Shell, (unreported, CA , 6 March 1981): "So this point of law arises directly: Is an agreement to do an unlawful act actionable at the suit of anyone who suffers damage from it which is reasonably foreseeable? Even though the agreement is not directed at him, nor done with intent to injure him? In discussing this point of law I put aside the many modern cases on conspiracy - in which there is an agreement by two or more to do a lawful act. It is now settled by the House of Lords that such an agreement is actionable if it is done with the predominant motive of injuring the plaintiff and does in fact injure him: see Crofter Hand Woven Harris
Tweed Co Ltd versus Veitch <case>; [(1942) AC 435], where Lord Simon LC said, at p445: 'Liability must depend on ascertaining the predominant purpose. If that predominant purpose is to damage another person and damage results, that is tortious conspiracy.' Here we are concerned with a different problem altogether. It is an agreement by two or more to do an unlawful act... I think there is a cause of action when it is remembered that the tort is a conspiracy to injure. I would suggest that a conspiracy to do an unlawful act - when there is no intent to injure the plaintiff and it is not aimed or directed at him - is not actionable, even though he is damaged thereby. But if there is an intent to injure him then it is actionable. The intent to injure may not be the predominant motive. It may be mixed with other motives. In this context, when the agreement is to do an unlawful act, we do not get into the ;quagmire of mixed motives,' as Lord Simon LC described them in the Crofters case at p445. It is sufficient if the conspiracy is aimed or directed at the plaintiff, and it can reasonably be foreseen that it may injure him, and does in fact injure him. That is what Parker J thought. I agree with him."
It would follow from this that it would not be sufficient proof of some sort of constructive intention to injure to establish the plaintiff's injury was a likely consequence of the action of the defendants; something must be directed towards the plaintiff. This accords with the judgment of Street J in
Vickery versus Taylor <case>; [(1910) 11 SR NSW 115]; [(1906) 3
CLR 686] nor contrary to Williams versus Hursey. More importantly however, it appears to accord with certain statements in the joint judgment of
Mason CJ,
Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ in Northern Territory of Australia v
Mengel <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 1] At page 14 of Mengel under the heading "Intentional and Negligent Infliction of Harm in the Law of Torts" the following passage appears (with footnotes omitted): "It is the intentional element of the cause of action described in Beaudesert that has given rise to most concern. More precisely, it is that the principle as formulated permits of liability notwithstanding that there is neither negligence nor an intention to inflict harm. So far as intention is concerned, the cause of action does not depend on an intention to harm the plaintiff, but on the doing of an act which is intentional and the inevitable consequence of which is to cause loss to the plaintiff.
 
It will later be necessary to say something of the action for breach of statutory duty. But putting that action aside, the recent trend of legal development, here and in other common law countries, has been to the effect that liability in tort depends on either the intentional or the negligent infliction of harm. That is not a statement of law but a description of the general trend, the most recent example of which in this country is to be seen in
Burnie Port Authority versus General Jones
Pty Ltd. In that case it was held that, subject to one qualification, the special rule in Rylands versus Fletcher imposing strict liability for the escape of dangerous substances involved in the non-natural use of land had been absorbed in the general law of negligence. The qualification was that there might be cases in which "it is preferable to see a defendant's liability in a Rylands versus Fletcher situation as lying in nuisance (or even trespass) and not in negligence." 
Moreover, developments involving the so-called "economic torts" (which the cause of action described in
Beaudesert is sometimes said to be) have largely proceeded on the basis that liability depends on the intentional infliction of harm. However, the "economic torts" emerged only in the second half of the last century and, even now, the law in that regard is far from settled. The first development of significance was the recognition, in Lumley versus Gye, of the tort of intentional interference with contractual rights. Subsequent developments in the United Kingdom have, to some extent impinged upon the intentional element of that tort. Liability does not depend on whether there is a predominant intention to injure and it has been held that constructive knowledge of the terms of a contract is sufficient, so that a defendant may be liable if he or she recklessly disregards the means of ascertaining those terms. But it is still accurate to describe the tort as one that depends on an intention to harm for that is necessarily involved if a person knowingly interferes with the enjoyment by another of a positive legal right, whether such knowledge is actual or constructive.

Other early developments saw the recognition of the torts of intimidation and conspiracy, both of which require an intention to cause economic harm. More recent developments in the United
Kingdom suggest the emergence in that country of a tort of interference with trade or business interests by an unlawful act directed at the person injured, although not necessarily done for the purpose of injuring his or her interests. It seems to be accepted that this embryonic or emerging tort does not extend to all unlawful acts and that, at least in that regard, it is in need of further definition. So far as this emerging tort depends on an unlawful act, there is an obvious similarity with the cause of action recognised in Beaudesert. However, there is an obvious difference with respect to intention. The emerging tort requires that the unlawful act be directed at the person injured whereas there is no like requirement in
Beaudesert."
It is fair to say that the footnotes to the statement that "conspiracy requires an intention to cause economic loss" named cases of conspiracy not by unlawful means but that does not necessarily take away from the thrust of the passage.
Intention itself is a difficult concept which might in some circumstances be thought to relate to an obvious result of an intended action. But that would not preserve the distinction between intentional torts and negligence.
For instance in the present case any creditor of RHR would on the plaintiff's case have been detrimentally affected by the termination of the
March 1992
Agreement, as would any creditor of Danlex and perhaps of ZSI. It might be for this reason that Lord Denning said in the passage referred to that reasonably foreseeable damage resulting from an unlawful act does not found a cause of action in unlawful means conspiracy and that something more is required, namely intention to injure the plaintiff or conduct aimed or directed at the plaintiff or perhaps both. See also Fleming 8th Ed p709.
In the Canadian case often cited in textbooks, Canada Cement La Farge
Ltd v British Columbia Lightweight Aggregate Ltd [(1983) 145 DLR (3d) 385], Esty J said at p389 that a claim for conspiracy arises: "where the conduct of the defendant is unlawful, the conduct is directed towards the plaintiff (alone or together with others) and the defendant should know in the circumstances that injury to the plaintiff is likely to and does result". (See also Balkin and
Davis Law of Torts 1991 p655, but note the authors seem to combine those categories of conspiracy which I have set out as categories 2 and 3 above). In so far as Goodchild Fuel Distributors Pty Ltd versus Holman [(1992) 59 SASR 454] might appear to be contrary to this and relies on Williams versus Hursey to hold that it is sufficient if damage is the natural and possible result of tortious conduct I think this fails to appreciate that in Williams versus Hursey the unlawful acts were directed at the plaintiffs so that the resultant damage came from the directed act.
It follows from this that it is my view that it is not the law in
Australia that all that is required to establish an action for conspiracy by unlawful means is the agreement to carry out the unlawful act and the carrying out of that act together with damage to the plaintiff. An intention to injure the plaintiff is required albeit that this can be implied where conduct is required albeit that this can be implied where conduct is aimed or directed at the plaintiff and damage to the plaintiff is the obvious result of such conduct.
 
Application of law to particular facts .
I return to the facts. Assuming for the moment that there was an unlawful act by some of the defendants in procuring a breach by
Nabinda Nominees of the
March 1992 Agreement then for an action in conspiracy to succeed by either
Woodman or Womboin there must have been an intention to injure the plaintiffs, or one of them, on the part of the conspirators or at the least their conduct in engaging in the tortious unlawful act must have been directed to or aimed at the plaintiffs, causing damage which would be seen to flow from that directed or intentional act.
So far as the happenings in July 1992 were concerned I do not consider that there was any agreement among any of the defendants to do an unlawful act. The meeting of Nabinda Nominees resolved to terminate the 1988 agreement with Danlex. Whatever the purpose, as the plaintiffs' case was that the 1992
Agreement brought the 1988 Agreement to an end, this act was irrelevant and in any event not shown to be unlawful. In any event the conduct was not intended to injure the plaintiffs whose claims were unknown.
After Nabinda Enterprises was formed on 4 August it is clear some further discussions took place as a result of which the meeting was arranged for 3
September 1992 at the office of Mr Henderson. The meeting was attended by
Stone,
Jefferys, John Reichelt, Tim Reichelt and Ben Houston and Mr Henderson.
I am satisfied that the purpose of the meeting was for advice to be given to
Nabinda Nominees of its position but that everyone was there to hear that advice, express views and probably to take part in discussions or at least to contribute to them. I am satisfied that it was not a meeting of Nabinda
Enterprises and no agreement was reached at it to which Nabinda Enterprises was a party. I am also satisfied that the decision to close down ZSI had been effectively taken before that time. There is no doubt that a decision was taken at the 3 September meeting to bring the March 1992 Agreement to an end and it seems that it was at least thought that whatever had been done to that date had not achieved that purpose. It is also clear that if it had not already been done it was intended that the marketing rights held by ZSI would be transferred to Nabinda
Enterprises. While there is some diversion in the evidence about what was discussed at this meeting there is no doubt that
Nabinda
Nominees, Stone and Jefferys agreed to bring the March 1992 Agreement to an end. Of those present they were the ones who had an interest in it. They were determined to do this to rid themselves of the problems caused by RHR and
Danlex. However while it is clear that
Tim Reichelt, John Reichelt and Ben
Houston accepted that this would be done I find that they were not part of any combination for the purpose of bringing about an end to the March 1992
Agreement let alone as a means of injuring the plaintiffs. Houston was at most an employee; the action was one of Nominees and its directors accepted by John
Reichelt and Tim Reichelt. It was Nabinda. Nominees which brought about the alleged breach of the agreement and any combination at all would in my view not go beyond it and its directors.
A combination to injure an employer by assaulting his employee is much more obvious and easier to establish than a combination to injure a company creditor by procuring breach of a contract held by that company unless there is some physical action against a contracting party which brings about the breach.
There is no doubt that the decision to end the March 1992 Agreement was formed with an intention of injuring Danlex although I would not have found this was the dominating motive. The question remains whether or not any two or more of Nabinda Nominees, Stone and Jefferys had an intention to injure either of the plaintiffs by the unlawful act of terminating the March 1992 Agreement or whether the unlawful act was directed or aimed at them or either of them.
The result of an action causing injury does not mean that the intention in carrying out that action was to cause that injury. For instance Mr Stone's evidence was that he did not intend that the Danlex creditors would not be paid; I could accept that although would have no difficulty in finding he know that would be the result of the termination action. Mr Jefferys said, and I accept, that he had no wish to injure the plaintiffs. This is not surprising as he was called by the plaintiffs having come to some arrangement with them the terms of which were not altogether clear. So the inference of intention to injure must be drawn, if at all, from the events rather than the statements of the alleged conspirators. The events in September 1992 and perhaps the formation of Nabinda Enterprises are the events which count. I do not think that the overt acts relied on take the matter much further and in the long run it was not really contended they did. They were all carried out upon the premise that the marketing rights belonged either to Nominees or to
Enterprises; certainly it was never established that those actions were intentional breaches of any Court order and in fact the evidence was that advice was given that they were not.
I consider it established by Exhibit J and the evidence of what took place on 3 September, that the rights of Woodman as debenture holder and the rights of Greenaway -(if not of Womboin) - at least as assignee of the RHR debt were discussed. That would be almost certain to have happened and is borne out by the limited evidence relevant to the representations alleged. But again I do not consider there was a combination by Nabinda Nominees, Stone and
Jefferys to bring about the end of injury to the plaintiffs by unlawful means; there was an agreement directed at the plaintiffs or intended to injure them.
So far as Jefferys is concerned I think this quite clear as I accept his evidence that his change of position with Stone was partly as a result of what he perceived to be a changed attitude towards the Danlex creditors; and I am not satisfied that the conduct of Stone and Nabinda
Nominees then or later was directed in the relevant sense at either of the plaintiffs. Disregard of their interests is not in itself sufficient to establish the intentions alleged. It follows even if there were an unlawful act in procuring breach of the March 
Agreement that the plaintiffs' claim fails.
 
ORDERS
The third Further Amended Statement of Claim be dismissed. 
Judgment for the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 11th and 12th Defendants.
Plaintiff to pay costs of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, th and th Defendants.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/94.html  
