

Sim versus Powell Matter No 2100/95 [1997] NSWSC 393 (10 September 1997) ` 
Robert Alfred Sim versus Gail Maree Powell` ` 2100/95` `10 September 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `2100/95 - ROBERT ALFRED SIM versus GAIL MAREE POWELL ` `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under the De Facto Relationships Act 1984 for an order that the defendant's property be distributed in part, to the plaintiff under section 20 of that Act. 
Both the plaintiff, a man, and the defendant, a woman, were involved at all material times with horses. The plaintiff is a farrier and the defendant spends a good proportion of her time riding horses in equestrian events and giving riding lessons.

Prior to 1990, the parties were acquainted with each other and during 1990 they became closer. There is some dispute as to when in 1990 they became closer, but it matters very little because between April and at least August the defendant went overseas and was absent from the plaintiff.

In December 1990 the parties became engaged. The parties were both living at that stage in the same house, being the home of the defendant's parents. That house has three bedrooms. The defendant's parents gave evidence and it is quite clear from their evidence, and indeed from the evidence of the parties, that they would not accept the parties occupying the same bedroom at least until the time when the parties had become engaged or were intending that their occupying the same bedroom would be a prelude to marriage.

I accept that the time when the parties commenced living in the same bedroom was December 1990. The duration of the engagement is, again, subject to a conflict in the evidence, but it would seem to me that it did not extend past
April 1991.

After April 1991 the parties continued to reside in the same house. They, I believe, continued to have an occasional sexual relationship, but they only slept in the same bed at night together on the occasions when the defendant's parents were not in the house. This happened every so often, but not that often. The defendant's parents had seven children and would be away from their house for what the defendant's father called "baby-sitting purposes" from time to time, but his evidence was, which I accept, that almost every night of his life he slept in his house, which was the same house in which the plaintiff and the defendant were living.

After their engagement broke off, somewhere probably in about 1993 the parties had a business relationship. Exactly what was this business relationship is a bit unclear. It seems to me that the plaintiff's business as a farrier was making a profit and he and the defendant became involved in successful negative gearing by offsetting the expenses of the equestrian and horse trading enterprise which produced either a negative income or a very small income, when one is looking on the net basis, against the profits of the farrier's business. During that business relationship the plaintiff provided not only for horses which were being cared for by the parties together for resale, but also horses which were being used by the defendant for her sport.
That business relationship too ceased somewhere around the middle of 1994.

The plaintiff's only claim is that he is entitled to an order under the De
Facto Relationships Act. Accordingly, that is the only dispute between the parties that I need determine.

The Act in <case> defines "de facto partner" in relation to a man as: "A woman who...has lived with the man as his wife on a bona fide domestic basis although not married to him..." 
Section 20 of the Act provides that on an application by a de facto partner, the Court may make an order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property of the de facto partners or either of them. Section 17 provides that the Court is not to make an order unless it is satisfied that the parties to the application have lived together in a de facto relationship for a period of not less than two years. Section 17 is subject to various provisos but they do not apply in the instant case.

The basic question is whether, on the facts, there has been a de facto relationship within the meaning of the Act which has lasted for two years or more.

There is some tension in the authorities as to what are the methods of approach in determining whether there is a de facto relationship. It does not seem to me to matter very much in the instant case, because whichever way one approaches the matter, one gets a similar result.

The approach taken by Mr Tregilgas, counsel for the plaintiff, was that one looks at the relationship in the same sort of way as one looks at a de jure marriage. Just as in a de jure marriage parties may remain married to each other even though they are not necessarily living together or having sexual relations together, or have cooled towards each other, so one can have the same type of situation with a de facto relationship. Accordingly, when one sees that certainly by December 1990 the parties have become engaged and have slept together in the one room for some months, and thereafter have shown mutual respect by giving each other things and by looking after each other, the Court is entitled to find that the relationship continues. Counsel refers to the fact that when the defendant was involved in a nasty accident and fire in September 1991, she appealed to the plaintiff for assistance and he went interstate and drove back her heavy vehicle from interstate to the place where the parties were residing.

There are many very real distinctions between marriage and a de facto relationship. For present purposes, the most significant is that people remain in the state of marriage despite long absences. The essence of a de facto relationship is that the parties are continually treating the other as if he or she were a husband or wife: Hibberson versus George [(1989) 12 Fam LR ], 740, though see Thomson versus Badger [(1989) 13 Fam LR .] 
On the other hand, Mr J Robson, for the defendant, looked at the factors that were mentioned by Powell J in Roy versus Sturgeon [(1986) 11 NSWLR 454] at 459 and which were also employed by Kearney J in Simonis versus Perpetual Trustee Co
Ltd [(1987) 21 NSWLR 677.] When looking at those matters, Mr Robson submitted that one could see that whilst there were some indicia of a de facto relationship, the preponderance of the evidence went the other way.

Looking at the 10 factors in Roy versus Sturgeon and using the numbers employed by Powell J, my assessment of the evidence is as follows:
The Duration of the Relationship.

The relationship, on the plaintiff's claim, lasted for four years. On the defendant's evidence it was very much shorter. The parties, by the giving and acceptance of an engagement ring, were looking forward to a marriage relationship in due course which never took place. The amount of time which they slept together as man and wife was only a matter of a few months. The relationship, in the broader sense of that word, did last for many years but the sexual and emotional relationship was for a much shorter period.

I have found a difficulty in this case, as I often find in this sort of case, that counsel, in putting questions to the witnesses, tend to get a little prudish. Accordingly, questions are often put in code about "emotional relationships" or "relationships", and it is sometimes not clear to either the witness or the judge as to exactly what is meant. Insofar as there was a relationship of treating each other as husband and wife, it does not seem to me that on the evidence this lasted for more than four months.
The Nature and Extent of the Common Residence.

There is no doubt at all that the parties shared a common residence for about five years. However, as is pointed out in the CCH De Facto Relationships Law at paragraph 2-620: "How parties share their common residence will be just as important as the actual fact." 
In the instant case they were occupying separate bedrooms, except during the period of the engagement and except when the defendant's mother and father were away. The factor of common residence is very much weakened by that lastmentioned matter.
Whether or not a Sexual Relationship Existed.

There is no doubt that there was a sexual relationship. There is no doubt that it was a regular relationship as man and wife for some months and thereafter intermittent. Again, the importance of this factor over the whole period of to 1994 is weakened by the fact that the plaintiff, at the beginning of the period, and the defendant, at the end of the period, also had other relationships of this nature.
The Degree of Financial Interdependence and Arrangements for Support.

There was some financial interdependence, but it does not appear with great clarity just how far this went. This case, like many others, was one where the parties gave some oral evidence and at least the plaintiff produced some financial statements, prepared by his current girlfriend at his direction, but it was very difficult to see just how far the parties were interdependent financially. The flavour that I have is that the plaintiff bore the bulk of the expenses, but to a degree they operated on a cash economy and the defendant would receive cash moneys for some of her activities and grooms for the horses, et cetera, would be paid in cash. They do not seem to have reached the crisis period where one became completely dependent on the other financially, so the arrangements were never tested. The interdependence is as much a matter of being business partners as being husband and wife.
The Ownership, Use and Acquisition of Property.

The parties did, together, buy part of the defendant's parents' land. However, this was after the engagement was broken off and on the evidence of the defendant's parents, which I accept, the plaintiff paid for his aliquot share, and the defendant was given hers. The purchase was necessary because the plaintiff had his workshop on the part of the land that was being purchased.
There was some discrepancy in the evidence as to the reason for the purchase.
The defendant says that the zoning was such that no house could be built on it, but her parents seem to think that a house could be built on it. It is difficult to make a finding but I think the parents' assessment is probably nearer the mark, but it matters very little because at that stage there does not appear to have been any real intention of erecting a common matrimonial home on the land.
 & 7. Procreation of Children and Care and Support of Children.

Not applicable.
The Performance of Household Duties.

Neither of the parties really performed household duties. The plaintiff spent his whole working week from dawn to dusk at his work and the defendant spent her time competing in equestrian events, being away from home or tending the horses and giving riding lessons. This factor, accordingly, is not one which plays much part in the case.
The Degree of Mutual Commitment and Mutual Support.

There was some mutual support; the incident after the fire where the plaintiff drove the defendant's vehicle back to New South Wales is one aspect of that.
The parties do not, however, seem to have considered that they were under an obligation to commit to the supposed partner their time and their love and affection.
Reputation.

As is usual in this sort of case, both sides brought some friends along to court to say that they thought that the parties were a couple and to say why they supported one side rather than the other. However, I think Mr Robson was correct in saying that there was not, in this case, the evidence one normally finds, and that is of non-friends giving evidence that at public functions one or other of the parties introduced the other as "my wife" or "my husband" or that they were always seen together at community functions. Mr Robson's point is, however, to be discounted by the fact that it would appear that these people, with their long working hours, on a property out of Morisset, were rarely in the situation where public social events were a normal part of their lives.

Looking at all those factors together, it does not seem to me that the plaintiff has established on the balance of probabilities that for a two year period between 1990 and 1994, he and the defendant were living as husband and wife. I am tempted not to say anything about the credit of the major witnesses in the case because, even accepting most of the evidence of the plaintiff, I am not satisfied that he has discharged the onus of proof. Unless counsel invite me to do otherwise, all I will say is that I did not feel confident that I could accept everything that either the plaintiff or the defendant told me in the witness box. To a degree this is not surprising because people do not take notes of everything that happens in a domestic relationship and it is sometimes difficult to recall dates and events and when one tries to reconstruct, one is prone to make errors.

The only other point that need be noted is that there was a debate before me as to whether a Mrs Roycroft was a person who could give opinion evidence as to the value of the horses involved in this case.

Valuation questions require witnesses to have: (1) experience; (2) knowledge of the standard of value; and (3) knowledge of the object to be valued; see
Wigmore on Evidence (Vol III, 1970 revised ed, Little Brown & Co,
Boston) paras 711 et seq.

On the first of these elements, no particular standard has been laid down.
However, it is clear that a person who deals in a commodity other than land, is a competent witness as to value. Examples where valuation of horses are involved are, Brady versus Brady 90 Mass (8 Allen) 101 (1864); Southern
Railroad versus Morris [42 So 17] (1904) (Alabama) and Smith versus Armstrong [198 P (2d) ]
(Montana).

Mrs Roycroft gave evidence that although she had no formal qualifications as a valuer, she and her husband would buy and sell some six to 10 horses on their own account each year and some 10 to 20 horses for other persons each year, and they had been doing that for some 15 years. She also was well versed in horse lore generally. Her experience in the market over a long period of time, especially when there is no equivalent to the stock exchange, is the sort of experience that is covered by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).
Accordingly, I admitted Mrs Roycroft's evidence as to the value of the horses.
As things turned out, it is not necessary to go into that question because the plaintiff fails at the barrier, but I thought, in case this matter goes further, I should give some brief reasons for the decision I made.

Accordingly, the plaintiff's case fails and must be dismissed. I order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs. The exhibits may be returned, on the basis that if there is an appeal they will be returned to the Court.
 * * * 
