

Regina versus Civici Matter No Cca 60102/97 [1997] NSWSC 599 (2 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
Regina versus Mehmet Civici /97 December 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL, James J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus MEHMET CIVICI 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: Mehmet Civici has applied for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him in the District Court by his Honour Judge O'Reilly on 21 February 1997, after he had pleaded guilty to one charge of attempted robbery and one charge of breaking, entering and stealing. On the charge of attempted robbery Judge O'Reilly imposed a sentence of penal servitude for four years, consisting of a minimum term of one and a half years commencing on 21 February 1997 and expiring on 20 August 1998 and an additional term of two and a half years. On the charge of breaking, entering and stealing his Honour imposed a sentence of penal servitude for twelve months commencing on 21 February 1997 and hence to be served concurrently with part of the minimum term of the sentence for attempted robbery. 
By virtue of <case> and <case> of the Crimes Act the maximum penalty for the offence of attempted robbery is penal servitude for fourteen years. Under s of the Crimes Act the maximum penalty for breaking, entering and stealing is penal servitude for fourteen years.

The two offences had been committed by the applicant on the same night, the night of 23-24 July 1995. The offence of attempted robbery was committed shortly before midnight on 23 July 1995 and the offence of breaking, entering and stealing was committed shortly after 5 o'clock on the morning of 24 July
The applicant was arrested on 24 July 1995 and was granted bail. He remained at liberty until the date of sentencing.

Both the offences had been committed with a co-offender, Youssef El Mohammed.
The co-offender El Mohammed had been sentenced by Judge O'Reilly on 7 May
El Mohammed had pleaded guilty to a charge of assault with intent to rob whilst being armed with an offensive weapon, namely a metal bar (a charge under <case> of the Crimes Act carrying a maximum penalty of penal servitude for 20 years), and to a charge of breaking, entering and stealing.

On the charge under <case> Judge O'Reilly sentenced El Mohammed to penal servitude for five years consisting of a minimum term of two and a half years commencing on 7 May 1996 and an additional term of two and a half years. On the charge of breaking, entering and stealing his Honour imposed a sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude for two years, to be served concurrently with part of the minimum term of the sentence for the other offence. An appeal by
El Mohammed against the severity of the sentences imposed upon him was dismissed by a two judge bench of this Court on 7 May 1997.

In his remarks on sentencing the applicant his Honour said, in regard to the offence of attempted robbery: "What happened that evening (ie the evening of 23 July 1995) was a rather confusing tale because many different versions have been given by the primary participants, namely Mr Civici and Mr El Mohammed." 
The first offence was committed shortly before midnight at a service station on the Central Coast. His Honour found, notwithstanding a denial by the applicant when the applicant was being interviewed by police after having been arrested, that the two offenders had formed a plan to rob the service station before they entered it. The two offenders entered the service station together, the co-offender El Mohammed being armed with an iron bar. His Honour rejected an assertion made by the applicant when he was interviewed by the police that he knew nothing about the iron bar until El Mohammed produced it inside the service station. Inside the service station El Mohammed produced the iron bar and struck the victim, the console operator of the service station, on the head. El Mohammed attempted to open the cash till at the service station but was unsuccessful. The two offenders left the service station, without taking any money or property. However, damage to the value of about $7,000 was done to the service station. According to the facts sheet placed before his Honour, this damage was done to the till by El Mohammed smashing it by striking it with the iron bar.

His Honour was satisfied that in the commission of the offence at the service station the co-offender El Mohammed was the main offender and had been the main architect of the planned robbery and that the applicant's involvement was "not nearly as significant as that of Mr El Mohammed", although his Honour was satisfied there was a common purpose to rob the service station.

In his remarks on sentence his Honour said little about the second offence, the offence of breaking, entering and stealing. According to the facts sheet placed before his Honour the two offenders had left a flat some time on the morning of 24 July and had gone to Ettalong Markets. At the markets El
Mohammed jemmied a padlock on the main gates and upon entering that area prised open another padlock on a roller door and broke into one of the shops.
He put numerous items into boxes and carried those boxes to a vehicle in which the applicant was waiting. The applicant then helped Mohammed put the stolen property into the vehicle. Mohammed re-entered the Markets, where he was apprehended by the owner of the Markets, who called the police. The applicant escaped but was arrested later and all the goods which had been stolen were recovered. When questioned by the police the applicant admitted to police that he had had some involvement in both offences.

The applicant was born on 4 January 1975 and was accordingly 20 years old at the time the offences were committed. He had one conviction for stealing and while he was on bail for these offences he was convicted of a further offence of stealing. The only penalty imposed for each offence of stealing was a fine.

In February 1993 the applicant was injured in a motor vehicle accident.
Reports prepared by a psychiatrist for the purposes of a claim by the applicant for damages arising out of this accident were admitted in the proceedings on sentence before his Honour but his Honour found those reports were not sufficient to show that the applicant had suffered any significant brain injury. His Honour found that even before the accident the applicant had been impulsive and aggressive. Although his Honour's treatment of the psychiatric evidence was made the subject of a submission by counsel for the applicant, I consider that the assessment of the medical evidence made by his
Honour was open to his Honour and that this Court cannot interfere with it.

His Honour found there were special circumstances within <case> of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).
His Honour made this finding in the context of a pre-sentence report prepared by a probation officer who spoke in his report of the applicant's dysfunctional behaviour and frequent abusive and violent episodes. In the sentence which his Honour imposed for the more serious offence his Honour made the minimum term much shorter than the additional term.

In his written submissions counsel for the applicant made four principal submissions. These were:
The sentencing Judge did not sufficiently differentiate between the roles of the two participants.
The sentencing Judge failed to take proper account of the applicant's brain injury.
In sentencing the applicant and the co-offender the sentencing Judge failed to adequately differentiate between them.
The sentences imposed upon the applicant were manifestly excessive.

I consider that the second submission can be dealt with quite summarily. As I have already indicated, the view taken by his Honour about the applicant's alleged brain injury was open to his Honour and, in my opinion, cannot successfully be challenged in this Court.

It is convenient to deal next with the first and third submissions, which are related. At the time of sentencing the applicant the sentencing Judge was well aware that he had earlier sentenced the co-offender. In his remarks on sentence in sentencing the applicant his Honour said that he had read again the reasons he had given when sentencing El Mohammed.

As I have already indicated, the sentencing Judge did distinguish between the roles of the applicant and the co-offender in the commission of the more serious offence at the service station, in that his Honour found that the co- offender was the main architect of the attempted robbery and that the applicant's role had not been nearly as significant as the co-offender's. His
Honour found it was the co-offender who had brought the iron bar to the premises and had struck the attendant with it.

However, it was submitted that the sentencing Judge had not in his remarks on sentence referred to material in the proceedings on sentence which showed that there had been some unwillingness on the part of the applicant to participate in the robbery and that the applicant had participated only after some coercion by the co-offender. When interviewed by the police on the day he was arrested the applicant said, in his answer to question 23, that just before he and the co-offender entered the service station the co-offender had said to the applicant, "If you open your mouth and try to run I am going to hit this bar across your head." 
It is clear from his Honour's remarks on sentence that his Honour did not accept some of the answers given by the applicant in the interview. His Honour said, "I don't place much credence on Mr Civici's version of events given to the detectives at Woy Woy." However, there was other material before his
Honour, apart from the answers given by the applicant, which tended to show that there might have been some coercion by El Mohammed. In the facts sheet prepared by the police which was admitted into evidence, the following passage occurs: "When both offenders neared the Caltex Service Station the co-offender El
Mohammed told the defendant to enter the service station. The co-offender said to the defendant, 'I'm gonna hit him over the head and clean out the till.'
The defendant said 'No. Let's just go'. The co-offender said, 'If you make a move I'll hit you. Stand near the door and wait.'" 
It is probable, of course, that the source of this information in the facts sheet was the applicant himself.

In the proceedings on sentence in a dialogue between his Honour and the applicant's legal representative his Honour referred to an answer by the applicant when interviewed by the police, that before entering the service station he had been threatened with being hit with a bar, as showing that the applicant knew that the co-offender had the bar before they entered the service station. His Honour asked what was the evidence about the applicant being threatened by the co-offender and was told by the applicant's representative that it was the evidence of a woman named Jody Cromer. His
Honour then said that amongst the papers he had found Ms Cromer's five page statement. In her statement Ms Cromer said that the two offenders had returned to her flat after committing the first offence. The co-offender had then said that the applicant would not do what he was told to do at the gas station. Ms
Cromer also said that later that night the co-offender was arguing with the applicant, with a metal pole in his hand. The applicant's legal representative told his Honour that at the joint committal proceeding the co-offender's legal representative had not, during his cross-examination of Ms Cromer, cross- examined her about these parts of her statement.

The sentencing Judge was entitled to be sceptical about some of the answers given by the applicant when he was interviewed by the police, particularly in the light of parts of the statement by the service station console attendant about the applicant's behaviour when inside the service station. As I have already said, it is likely the applicant himself was the source of the information in the facts sheet. Ms Cromer had no first hand knowledge of what had happened outside the service station and, in any event, did not allege in her statement that El Mohammed had threatened the applicant with the bar before the two of them entered the service station. However, having regard to the terms of the facts sheet and to the fact that Ms Cromer's statement had been discussed in the brief proceedings on sentence and had been made the subject of a submission by the applicant's legal representative, I consider that his Honour should have made some explicit reference in his remarks on sentence to the question of the willingness or unwillingness of the applicant to take part in the robbery and the question of whether the co-offender had exerted any coercion on the applicant.

It is not entirely clear from the remarks on sentence whether his Honour found that there had not been any unwillingness or coercion or whether his Honour found that there had been some, limited, unwillingness and coercion and these findings were comprehended within his general finding that El Mohammed was the main offender and the applicant's role had been much less significant or whether his Honour simply omitted to deal with these questions. However, I have reached the conclusion that on a fair reading of his Honour's remarks on sentence his Honour did not accept any of the material tending to suggest that the applicant had been unwilling to take part in the robbery and had done so only after some coercion by the co-offender.

The third principal submission raises the question of parity, or rather disparity, between the sentence imposed on the applicant and the sentence imposed on the co-offender El Mohammed. As previously stated, the effective sentence imposed on the co-offender was for five years with a minimum term of two and a half years and the effective sentence imposed on the applicant was for four years with a minimum term of one and a half years.

It was common ground there were relevant differences between the applicant and the co-offender. Accordingly, due allowance had to be made for those differences and there had to be a due proportion between the sentence passed on the applicant and the sentence passed on the co-offender, so as not to give rise to a justifiable sense of grievance. I propose to quote briefly from what
Dawson and Gaudron JJ said in Postiglioni versus The Queen <case>; [71
ALJR 875] at 878: "The parity principle upon which the argument in this Court was mainly based is an aspect of equal justice. Equal justice requires that like should be treated alike but that, if there are relevant differences, due allowance should be made for them. In the case of co-offenders, different sentences may reflect different degrees of culpability or their different circumstances If so, the notion of equal justice is not violated. On some occasions, different sentences may indicate that one or other of them is infected with error.
Ordinarily, correction of the error will result in there being a due proportion between the sentences and there will then be equal justice.
However, the parity principle, as identified and expounded in Lowe versus The
Queen, recognises that equal justice requires that, as between co-offenders, there should not be a marked disparity which gives rise to `a justifiable sense of grievance'. If there is, the sentence in issue should be reduced, notwithstanding that it is otherwise appropriate and within the permissible range of sentencing options." 
It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the degree of disparity between the sentences was insufficient to achieve a due proportion between them, when regard was had to the relevant differences. The relevant differences between the applicant and the co-offender included the following:
The offences for which they were sentenced were not the same. The applicant was sentenced for attempted robbery and breaking, entering and stealing. The co-offender was sentenced for assault with intent to rob whilst being armed with an offensive weapon, an offence under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s97.html) of the
Crimes Act. I have already referred to the different maximum penalties under ss 94 and 97 of the Crimes Act.

His Honour found there was a joint enterprise to commit a robbery and that the applicant knew the co-offender had the iron bar in his possession. However, his Honour was not entitled to sentence the applicant on the basis that the victim was assaulted by the co-offender with the bar in furtherance of a common purpose between the co-offender and the applicant (see de Simoni v
The Queen <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383).]
In the case of both offences the co-offender was the main offender. At the service station it was the co-offender who was the architect of the criminal venture and the applicant's role was not nearly as significant. At the
Ettalong Markets it was the co-offender who, according to the facts sheet - and his Honour did not express any dissent from the facts sheet in his remarks - broke into the premises and stole the goods.

Subjectively, the applicant and the co-offender were in a number of important respects similar. They were both young, El Mohammed was only about four months older. They both pleaded guilty and neither had been sentenced to a custodial sentence before. His Honour found that both of them had drug problems.

Counsel for the applicant submitted that the sentencing Judge had erred in not regarding the applicant's alleged brain injury as being a distinguishing feature in favour of the applicant, but, in the light of his Honour's assessment of the medical evidence, this submission should not be accepted.

It was submitted on behalf of the Crown that in some respects El Mohammed's subjective circumstances were better than those of the applicant, and that those differences justified the relative lack of differentiation in the sentences. It was submitted that El Mohammed pleaded guilty at an earlier stage in the proceedings. However, neither offender had pleaded guilty until after the committal hearing and the applicant pleaded guilty at the first opportunity after the principal charge against him was reduced to a charge under <case> of the Crimes Act.

In his remarks on sentence in sentencing the applicant his Honour said El
Mohammed had provided a statement to the Director of Public Prosecutions and had undertaken to give evidence at the trial of the applicant who, at that stage, had not yet pleaded guilty. In his remarks on sentence in sentencing the applicant his Honour confirmed that he had given El Mohammed some discount because of assistance to be provided by him in the prosecution of the applicant and then added: "On reflection, it is a rather curious concept that he should be contemplating giving evidence against Mr Civici, because on any view of it, Mr El Mohammed was the main offender." 
I would agree with what would appear to be his Honour's second thoughts that any discount in sentencing El Mohammed because of assistance to be provided by him in the prosecution of the applicant, the much less important offender, should not have been substantial.

Further matters noted by his Honour in his remarks on sentence in sentencing
El Mohammed were sought to be relied upon by the Crown as reducing the overall relative difference between El Mohammed and the applicant. These matters included membership by El Mohammed of an emergency service organisation, that he had served two months of pre-sentence custody and that at one point in time whilst in custody he had been treated as a person at risk of suicide.

However, there were respects in which the subjective circumstances of El
Mohammed compared unfavourably with those of the applicant. El Mohammed had a much worse criminal record, including convictions not only for stealing but for breaking, entering and stealing, possessing house-breaking implements, assault and being in possession of an imitation firearm. At the time of committing these offences El Mohammed was on two separate recognisances, both of which had been breached by the commission of these offences.

In my opinion the submission has been made out that the degree of disparity between the sentences passed upon the applicant and the co-offender was insufficient to achieve a due proportion between them, when regard is had to the difference between the objective facts of the offences so far as each offender is concerned, the different nature of the offences and the subjective circumstances of the offenders, even though the sentences imposed upon the applicant would, standing by themselves, have been, in my opinion, within the permissible range of sentences.

Accordingly, I consider that leave to appeal should be granted and that the appeal should be upheld. For the reasons given by his Honour I would find that there were special circumstances and that the total sentence imposed by this
Court should be divided between a minimum term and an additional term in approximately the same proportion as was used by his Honour.

I would propose that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal against sentence be upheld, that the sentence imposed on 21 February 1997 be quashed and that in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced on the first charge of attempted robbery to penal servitude for three years consisting of a minimum term of one year commencing on 21 February 1997 and expiring on 20 February and an additional term of two years. I would propose that on the second charge of breaking, entering and stealing the applicant be sentenced to a fixed term of penal servitude for one year.

HUNT CJ at CL: This Court has usually recognised that the circumstances in which District Court judges have to deal with the sentencing of prisoners render unreal any expectation that those judges will make specific findings in relation to every issue raised in the sentencing proceedings before them. Their task is a difficult one, and they cannot be perfect. 
However, it would certainly have been preferable in this case for the judge to have dealt specifically in his remarks on sentence with the issue as to whether the applicant had been coerced in taking part in the robbery, particularly as that issue seems to have assumed such a large part in the sentencing proceedings. I am, however, quite satisfied that the judge did intend to make a finding rejecting that evidence, however imprecisely it may have been expressed when he said that he did not place much credence in the appellant's version of events.

I agree that the applicant has a justifiable sense of grievance in relation to the disparity in the sentences imposed upon himself and his co-accused. That disparity is not explained by the subjective features which the judge had taken into account in relation to the co-offender. The discount to be given for assistance to the authorities in favour of a principal offender where he offers to give evidence against a minor offender cannot be great in any circumstances.

I agree with the orders proposed, for the reasons which James J has given.

SIMPSON J: I agree with the orders proposed by James J and I also agree with the additional remarks made by the Chief Judge. 
HUNT CJ at CL: The orders of the Court are as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
