

Regina versus Barbaro and Ors Matter Nos Cca 60094/98; Cca 60137/98; Cca /98; Cca 60139/98 [1998] NSWSC 322 (20 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
REGINA versus PASQUALE BARBARO & ORS 
CCA 60094/98; 60137/98; 60138/98; 60139/98 July 1998 
Handley JA, Grove J, Hulme J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown appeal against interlocutory orders of Armitage DCJ in the District Court 
FILE NO/S: 60094/98 60137-9/98 
DELIVERED: Monday 20 July 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: Monday 20 July 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus PASQUALE BARBARO & ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: Handley JA; Grove J; Hulme J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: R A Hulme 
Respondent: I M Barker QC (Barbaro & Rovere) 
D W Thomas (Pangallo & Romeo) 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: S E O'Connor 
Respondent: Mitchell's (Barbaro) 
Graham W Howe & Co (Romeo) 
W G McNally & Co (Rovere) 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - STAY OF PROCEEDINGS - DEFERRAL OF
RETRIAL UNDER AFTER RETRIAL OF RELATED CASE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Extempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 6 
R versus PASQUALE BARBARO & ORS 
CRIMINAL LAW - practice and procedure - stay of proceedings - deferral of retrial until after retrial of related case 
This was an appeal by the Crown from an order by Armitage DCJ staying the respondents' retrial until after the retrial of the third party. At the respondents' first trial for drug offences, important evidence for the defence was given by M, a solicitor. The respondents were convicted but ultimately the convictions were set aside and new trials ordered. M's evidence was later the subject of a successful prosecution for perjury. After two appeals M's conviction was set aside and a new trial ordered. Armitage DCJ ordered that the respondents' retrial not occur until after M's retrial. The Crown appealed this decision.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: (1) The fact that the respondents' trial could not occur until after the date scheduled for M's trial made the appeal largely academic. The Court noted that the dismissal of this appeal did not mean that the respondents' retrial should necessarily be deferred until M had exhausted all his appellate rights. This would be a discretionary matter for a District Court Judge if any application for a further stay of proceedings was made. 
ORDER 
Appeal dismissed.

R versus PASQUALE BARBARO & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: Before the Court is an appeal as of right by the Crown under <case> F of the Criminal Appeal Act from a decision of Armitage DCJ on 3 March 1998 who directed that the retrial of the respondents, Mr Barbaro and others on certain drug related charges should not occur until after the retrial of Adrian Simon McKenzie, a solicitor. 
The cases have a long history. The offences in question are alleged to have occurred in 1989. At the first trial of the respondents, at which they were convicted, Mr McKenzie gave important evidence in the defence case for Mr
Barbaro. Ultimately the convictions of the respondents were set aside and new trials were ordered. These are the trials which Judge Armitage directed should not be listed until after the retrial of Mr McKenzie.

Following the first trial of Mr Barbaro, Mr McKenzie was prosecuted for perjury and convicted. An appeal to this Court failed but a further appeal to the High Court succeeded and a new trial was ordered. The new trial is presently fixed in the Supreme Court to commence on the 30 November this year.

The order of Judge Armitage was made in the exercise of a judicial discretion and any challenge to such an order faces considerable obstacles. Counsel for the respondents foreshadowed a contention that the order of Armitage DCJ was not an interlocutory order which fell within <case> F of the Act. However this objection was withdrawn this morning and I have no doubt that the order in question was an interlocutory order susceptible of review by this Court under s 5 F. Orders of this nature can have a significant effect on the fairness of a trial, and it is important that they be susceptible of appellate review in an appropriate case.

The immediate difficulty with the Crown's appeal is that it is common ground that even if it were to be allowed, the retrial of the respondents could not occur prior to 30 November this year. That demonstrates that the present appeal is almost academic, and that this Court should not interfere.

However, Mr Hulme for the Crown submitted that there is a risk that the retrial of the respondents might continue to be deferred until the appellate processes in respect of Mr McKenzie's retrial, assuming it leads to another conviction, have been exhausted.

While I am of the view that the appeal fails simply because of the current situation in the District Court with regard to the listing of these cases, there are other issues on which it is appropriate for this Court to make some brief statement.

The Crown submitted that Mr McKenzie would be a compellable witness at the retrial of the respondents and that seems to be clear so far as it goes.
However, it is not clear that Mr McKenzie would be willing to or could be compelled to give the same evidence at the new trial of the respondents as he gave at the first. That evidence of course resulted in his conviction by a jury on a charge of perjury since set aside.

It is not appropriate for anything final to be said about the operation of s of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) in the circumstances of this case. It is sufficient to note that it is arguable that a certificate granted pursuant to <case> (6) would not protect Mr McKenzie from the risk of further incrimination in respect of the same evidence having regard to the provisions of <case> (7).

In these circumstances a trial Judge would be faced with a situation of some difficulty if the respondent Mr Barbaro called Mr McKenzie and wished him to give the same evidence as he gave at the first trial and Mr McKenzie wished to refrain from giving that evidence.

Where the interests of justice would lead the trial Judge in such a case in terms of <case> (5) is not immediately self-evident. The retrial of the respondents could be greatly complicated if it took place before the retrial of Mr McKenzie. It could also miscarry because of this complication.

There is therefore much to be said, for this reason also, for deferring a retrial of the respondents until after the retrial of Mr McKenzie. However, it does not follow that the retrial of the respondents should be deferred indefinitely after the retrial of Mr McKenzie until all appellate processes have been exhausted, assuming that he is convicted on that retrial. If he were to be acquitted it seems at present that the difficulty would largely, if not completely, disappear.

The offences the subject of the charges against the respondents are alleged to have occurred in 1989, nine years ago. In view of the date for the retrial of
Mr McKenzie, the retrial of the respondents is not likely to occur prior to some date in the first half of 1999, ten years after the offences. By that time it may be necessary for a District Court judge to direct that the retrial proceed even though the appellate procedures in respect of any conviction of
Mr McKenzie, should that occur, have not yet been exhausted.

I express no final view on that situation which obviously will require the trial Judge, faced with any such application, to carefully balance the factors affecting the exercise of his or her discretion. However, I do wish to make it clear that nothing that I am saying today should be taken as endorsing further indefinite deferral of the retrial of the respondents pending the exhaustion of appellate rights by Mr McKenzie in the event that he is convicted at his new trial.

For those reasons I would propose that the appeal should be dismissed.

GROVE J: I agree with Justice Handley for the reasons which he has given. 
HULME J: I also agree with the orders proposed and with his Honour's reasons. I would however add this. It is an appalling indictment to the administration of justice in this State that it is contemplated that a trial of offences committed in 1989 should come on in 1999, even though that is a second trial. * * * 
