

Didovich versus Australian Securities and Investments Commission Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 534 (7 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 November 1998 
ARTHUR DIDOVICH versus AUSTRALIAN SECURITIES & INVESTMENTS COMMISSION /98 September 1998 
Austin J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
TITLE OF COURT: Supreme Court of New South Wales (Equity Division) 
FILE NO: 3330/98 
DELIVERED: Sydney, 7 September 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 4, 7 September 1998 
PARTIES: ARTHUR DIDOVICH versus AUSTRALIAN SECURITIES & INVESTMENTS COMMISSION 
JUDGMENT OF: AUSTIN J 
CATCHWORDS: 
Company Law - Commission's power to order persons not to manage corporations - principles upon which Court may grant relief to permit a person to manage a corporation. 
Corporations Law, ss600, 533, 1317B 
Blunt versus Corporate Affairs Commission (No 2) (1988) 6 ACLC 1077 
Cullen versus Corporate Affairs Commission [(1989) 7 ACLC 121] 
Re Dawson Print Group Ltd [1987] CLC 601 
Dwyer versus National Companies and Securities Commission (No 2) [(1987) 7 ACLC ]

Friend versus Corporate Affairs Commission [(1988) 7 ACLC 106] 
Hosken versus Australian Securities & Investment Commission (Supreme Court of Tasmania, Slicer J, 25 August 1998, unreported) 
Iliopoulos versus Australian Securities Commission [(1997) 15 ACLC 1512] 
Laycock versus Forbes [(1997) 25 ACSR 659] 
REPRESENTATIONS: 
Plaintiff: Mr P Somerset (solicitor) 
Defendant: Ms L Macaulay (solicitor) 
JUDGMENT (ex tempore and revised) 
AUSTIN J: In this matter the Plaintiff seeks on order granting him leave to manage a company called Combined Crane and Rigging Pty Ltd ("Company") under section 600(5) of the Corporations Law. He is the sole shareholder and director and the company secretary of the Company. 
The Plaintiff was previously a director of the following companies ("Liquidated Companies"): 
Baradom Construction Services Pty Ltd (in liquidation), Baradom Holdings Pty
Ltd (in liquidation), 
Baradom Transport Pty Ltd (in liquidation), 
Baradom Contracting Pty Ltd (in liquidation).

Further, he has been a director of: 
Baradom Properties Pty Ltd, 
Combined Crane and Rigging Services ACT Pty Ltd ("Combined Crane ACT"), 
ACT Rigging and Cranes Pty Ltd, 
Westmet Pty Ltd, 
Dalmoss Pty Ltd, 
Marino Garden Products Pty Ltd.

However, he has resigned all other directorships and now his only directorship is of the Company.

The evidence shows that the Plaintiff became a director as well as the secretary of three of the Liquidation Companies in 1984 and of the fourth in
One of those companies was wound up in 1992 and the remaining three in
In all four cases the liquidator made a report during 1997 under section of the Corporations Law on the ground stated in section 533(1)(c), namely that it appeared to the liquidator in the course of the winding up that the company may be unable to pay its unsecured creditors more than 50 cents in the dollar. The liquidators' reports are not in evidence in the present proceedings.

According to a subsequent report by Mr C J Reynolds, a staff member and delegate of the Defendant, The Australian Securities and Investment Commission ("ASIC"), the total estimated deficiency of the four Liquidated Companies as per the liquidators' reports was $2,501,285.

For the purposes of section 600 of the Corporations Law and by virtue of the definition of "relevant body" in section 9, the four Liquidated Companies are relevant bodies. In light of the liquidators' reports under section 533 they are "section 600 bodies" under the definition in section 600(1)(b). The
Plaintiff, being a director at the relevant time, is a "relevant person" in relation to each of the Liquidated Companies for the purposes of that provision.

Under section 600(2) ASIC may give to a person who is a relevant person in relation to two or more relevant bodies that are at the time of service section 600 bodies a notice in writing requiring the person to show cause why
ASIC should not serve a section 600(3) notice. A section 600(3) notice prohibits the person from managing a corporation for such period as is specified not exceeding five years. ASIC served a notice to show cause under section 600(2) on the Plaintiff on 13 January 1998. The Plaintiff sought a hearing in order to show cause why a section 600(3) notice should not be served.

A hearing was conducted by Mr Reynolds as a delegate of ASIC on 15 June 1998.
Mr Reynolds subsequently set out his findings in a document dated 9 July 1998 which is in evidence in the present proceedings. As required by section (4), Mr Reynolds had regard to the fact that the Liquidated Companies were related bodies corporate but he took the view on the evidence before him that they were treated and should be regarded as two group entities rather than as a single entity.

He found that with respect to some or all of the Liquidated Companies and some other companies previously mentioned the Plaintiff: failed to ensure that group tax was remitted to the Australian Taxation
Office thus permitting the companies to use unpaid group tax for trading purposes and thereby displaying a disregard for the standards of commercial morality expected of a director; by: permitting the companies to trade while insolvent; failing to ensure that one of the companies had minimal controls in place to allow for accurate estimation of labour and on costs; failing to provide a liquidator of one of the companies with all the books of the company in their original state; failing to ensure that annual returns for the years 1994 and 1995 were lodged for some of the companies; failing to ensure that annual returns for the years 1990 to 1993 were lodged for some of the companies within the statutory period; had demonstrated his lack of understanding of the duties of a director and a disregard for the interests of creditors.

He concluded that the Plaintiff's conduct indicated that it would be in the public interest for the Plaintiff not to take part in the management of the company. He rejected a submission by the Plaintiff that since he would in future rely upon consultants and specialists, he should be permitted to continue as a director of the company. Mr Reynolds pointed out that the
Plaintiff had in place a similar regime of reliance on professional advisers at the time of the events complained of.

Mr Reynolds concluded that a notice of prohibition should be issued under section 600(3) prohibiting the Plaintiff from managing a corporation without the leave of the Court for four years commencing on the date of service of the notice. But he undertook to advise the Plaintiff four weeks in advance of the issuing of the notice to enable the Plaintiff to get the financial affairs of the various companies in order.

An appeal from a decision by ASIC to serve notice under section 600(3) lies to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal under section 1317B of the Corporations
Law (see Iliopoulos versus ASC [(1997) 15 ACLC 1512]; Laycock v Forbes [(1997) 25 ACSR 659).] 
The Plaintiff has given evidence that while he does not necessarily accept Mr
Reynolds' findings, he has elected not to apply to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal for review. His solicitor, who appeared for him in the present proceedings, has not challenged Mr Reynolds' findings.

The Plaintiff's Contentions 
After the winding up of the Liquidated Companies, the Plaintiff continued to carry on business through Combined Crane ACT. The fact that Combined Crane ACT had previously been called "Baradom Rigging and Cranes Pty Ltd" caused the
Plaintiff problems in commercial dealings during 1996 and 1997. Therefore in
July 1997 he commenced using the Company for trading and all new contracts were entered into by the Company rather than Combined Crane ACT. Combined
Crane ACT has no assets and no liabilities and has ceased to trade.

In these circumstances the Plaintiff makes, in effect, seven submissions in support of his application for leave to manage the company.

First, he points out that the events which led to Mr Reynolds' adverse conclusions occurred some years ago. He acknowledges that he was remiss in the past and says that he accepts that his conduct fell below the level of commercial morality required of a competent and conscientious company director. He has tendered a character reference by Mr Ross McDiven, Managing
Director of Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd, dated 10 August 1998 which says that he is competent, hard working inventive and honest. The Plaintiff says that he has now overcome the defects in his "corporate character" and is aware of the level of compliance which is required. He points out that nothing in Mr Reynolds' findings impugned his honesty.

Second, the Plaintiff draws attention to the specialist nature of the
Company's business which is to act as a contractor to major builders specialising in pre-cast concrete erection, steel erection, heavy lifting of materials and crane hire. The business is managed exclusively by the Plaintiff and he says that while some of the Company's employees are highly experienced specialists in what they do, none of them has the skills necessary to manage the business of the Company. He says that if he were precluded from managing the Company, the Company's current work would come to a halt. However, he says that it would not be feasible or practical for him to take over the Company's business and operate it as a sole trader. All of the contracts for work, labour and equipment hire are in the Company's name and he says it would be extremely difficult or impossible to renegotiate them into his own name. He says it is reasonable to have the benefit of limited liability in an industry fraught with commercial risk, where a business may fail through circumstances entirely beyond the control of its managers such as the failure of another contractor or a disastrous act of negligence by an employee.

Third, he draws attention to the fact that both Combined Crane ACT and the
Company have traded profitably in recent times. Unaudited financial statements show total assets as at 30 June 1998 of $834,756, total liabilities of $710,107 and an operating profit for the year to 30 June 1998 of $124,648. He says he has met all obligations to employees and has paid all workers' compensation, public risk and machinery insurance due to date. Creditors have been paid in accordance with their terms of trade.

Fourthly, he says that the Company has obtained some large contracts, including a contract for the Superdome at Homebush Bay (value about $550,000), a contract for the Olympic Stadium light tower (value about $110,000) and a contract for Phillip Cook Park (value about $395,000). He has obtained a preliminary review of the commercial adequacy of these projects by Ludlow
Gavahan Pty Ltd dated 12 August 1998 which concludes that the prices, rates, overheads, profits and contingency sums submitted or allowed for the projects are reasonable. On this basis, the Plaintiff submits that the Company will earn significant profits in the near future if he is permitted to continue to manage it. Further, he says that if the Company could not complete its work on these projects, there would be serious repercussions for the entire projects as well as for the Company's employees.

Fifth, he says that all group tax for the Company and Combined Crane ACT has been paid when due. The evidence shows that at one stage Combined Crane ACT owed the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation about $85,000 for unpaid group tax but that amount has now been paid in full. The Plaintiff proposes to undertake to the Court to ensure that every payment of group tax that requires to be paid is paid within seven days of the conclusion of the calendar month.

Sixth, as to past failure to lodge annual returns, he points out that the annual returns for Combined Crane ACT and the Company for 1996 and 1997 were duly lodged as required by law and he proposes to undertake to ensure that annual returns are filed strictly in accordance with the Corporations Law.

Seventh, as regards financial compliance, he proposes to continue to avail himself of the advice of Mr Peter Finn of Finn Maher and Associates,
Accountants, whose advice is "independent" in the sense that Mr Finn has never been an employee of any company associated with the Plaintiff. Additionally, he has put in place an accounting system which he describes as "sophisticated and satisfactory" which enables him to monitor on a monthly basis whether the actual labour and on-costs are in accordance with estimates. He has engaged the services of a qualified engineer competent in estimating to ensure that the basis of costing is correct. Additionally, he proposes to retain the services of Cowell Abbott, Chartered Accountants, to prepare a financial report by 31 January 1998 (and if necessary, at subsequent six monthly intervals) and is prepared, if required, to engage them as auditors. Cowell
Abbott have indicated that they will act in either capacity.

ASIC's Approach 
By a letter to the Plaintiff's solicitor dated 3 September 1998 ASIC expressed concern in the event that leave is granted over the adequacy of "supervision" of the Plaintiff's conduct as a director of the Company and his understanding of a director's obligations and the need to discharge those obligations personally rather than relying without enquiry on others. ASIC stated that it would not oppose the Plaintiff's application provided that leave be granted only on the condition that a registered auditor be retained to audit the
Company's accounts for the six months to 31 December 1998, the six months to June 1999 and annually thereafter until the prohibition period expires or the Plaintiff ceases to manage the company.

At the hearing, the Plaintiff's solicitor indicated that his client would agree to these conditions and that his client would give undertakings about the group tax and annual returns as previously mentioned.

The Law 
The question for the Court therefore is whether to exercise its discretion to grant leave under section 600(5) subject to conditions along the lines proposed by ASIC. There appears to be no direct guidance in reported cases as to the exercise of the discretion to grant leave under section 600(5).
However, case law provides some useful guidance as to the function of section and its predecessor, section 562A of the Companies Code. The basic principle was stated by Powell J in Friend versus Corporate Affairs Commission [(1988) 7 ACLC 106], 115. His Honour said: "It is, I believe, clear - and I believe, generally, if not universally accepted - that the function of section 562A of the Code is to protect the public - not merely the investing public, but ordinary businessmen and trades people who might deal with the company - from the depredations of, and from losses which might be caused by the activities of dishonest, unscrupulous, untrustworthy, irresponsible, or merely incompetent, company directors." 
This implies that the purpose of section 600 is protective rather than punitive. Nevertheless the past conduct of the director is relevant to the exercise of the discretions which section 600 confers on ASIC and the Court, at least to the extent that it may indicate a propensity to harm creditors or investors calling for protective intervention. In Re Dawson Print Group Ltd [[1987] BCLC 601], 604, speaking of section 300 of the Companies Act 1985 (UK),
Hoffmann J (as he then was) said that there must be: "some conduct which if not dishonest is at any rate in breach of standards of commercial morality, or some really gross incompetence which persuades the
Court that it would be a danger to the public if he were allowed to continue to be involved in the management of the companies ..." 
There is room to doubt whether such conduct is a necessary ingredient for the proper exercise of the discretions conferred by section 600 but it is clearly a factor to be taken into account. As Young J said in Blunt versus CAC (No 2) ACLC 1077, 1079-80, the Commission and its delegate: "must turn their minds to the factors of each particular case and ask themselves questions such as whether there has been a breach of the standards of commercial morality; whether there has been recklessness; whether there has been gross incompetence; whether the public interest requires that the person concerned should not take part in the management of a company." 
See also his Honour's observations in Dwyer versus NCSC (No 2) [(1989) 7 ACLC ], .

While these considerations are generally relevant, both in the case of ASIC exercising its discretions under subsection 600(2) and (3) and the Court exercising its discretion under section 600 (5), it seems to me that there are differences between the discretions of ASIC and the Court. The question for
ASIC under section 600 is whether to prohibit a director for a time from managing "a corporation". I take it that the words "a corporation" refer to corporations generally; in other words, ASIC has to decide whether in the stated circumstances, it should exclude the director from the activity of managing corporations. Section 600(5) does not confer on the Court the role of reviewing ASIC'S determination under section 600(3) since that very role is vested in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal by section 1317 B. The Court's role under section 600(5) is, rather, to permit one or more exceptions to
ASIC's general determination.

In considering an application for leave, the Court can take into account a more specific range of circumstances than is appropriate when the question is whether to issue a general prohibition. For example, since the Court can grant leave subject to conditions that upon directions (see in an analogous context
Hosken versus ASIC, Supreme Court of Tasmania, Slicer J, 25 August 1998 unreported), it is relevant for the Court to consider whether the danger to the public can be minimised or eliminated through conditions which establish a regime of regulatory and financial monitoring. Moreover, while it may be true of ASIC's discretions that "one looks merely to see whether the director involved is a person who can be trusted with the precious gift of limited liability" (Dwyer versus NCSC (No 2) [(1989) 7 ACLC 743], 748 per
Young J) a balancing of somewhat broader considerations seems appropriate in an application to the Court for leave - such is the likely effect of refusal of leave on the employees and external contractors of the company in question.

The Decision to Grant Leave 
In the present case the evidence points to some serious lapses by the
Plaintiff, amply justifying the findings made by Mr Reynolds. Particular criticism must be directed against the Plaintiff for allowing various companies to use unremitted group tax as, in effect, a form of working capital. Young J has succinctly explained the seriousness of this form of misconduct in Cullen versus Corporate Affairs Commission [(1989) 7 ACLC ], :
 "It is always significant in this class of case that the company has traded with moneys that are its own. In this Court over the last 20 years at least, judges have been extremely reluctant to grant adjournments in winding up proceedings where it appears that there is a claim for outstanding group tax because the group tax is part of the employees' wages which have been withheld to be paid to the tax office on behalf of the employees. They are, for all intents and purposes, trust moneys which do not belong to the company. If the company's directors use these moneys for trading purposes, it shows a complete lack of appreciation of this situation and a serious lack of commercial reality." 
Since his Honour spoke, the seriousness of this lack of commercial morality has been underlined in statutory law reform: see [Insolvency (Tax Priorities)
Legislation Amendment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/iplaa1993511/) .

The Plaintiff's failures as identified by Mr Reynolds were a pattern of conduct rather than isolated lapses. Nevertheless, the seven matters advanced by the Plaintiff are all balancing factors to be taken into account in the exercise of the Court's discretion to grant leave.

The following aspects of the Plaintiff's submissions appear to me to be particularly significant: The Plaintiff appears, according to character references, to be honest and hard working and his honesty is not impugned by
ASIC; the Plaintiff's companies have traded successfully in recent times and have good short term prospects; and the accounting and costing systems have been significantly improved.

It is of concern that Mr Reynolds specifically rejected a submission that the
Plaintiff should be permitted to manage the company as an exception to the general prohibition. However, I believe, for the reasons given above, that Mr
Reynolds was engaged in an exercise different from the Court's role in considering whether to grant leave; and the Plaintiff, with the encouragement of ASIC, has responded to Mr Reynolds apprehension about the adequacy of relying on external advisers by reinforcing the arrangements for financial monitoring of the company; and the Court is able to give greater effect than
ASIC can to such arrangements by granting leave, subject to conditions, and on the basis of undertakings to the Court.

I also take into account the fact that ASIC does not oppose the granting of leave provided that there are undertakings and conditions in the form which it has discussed with the Plaintiff's solicitor. Weighing up all these factors in the particular circumstances of this case, I propose to grant leave subject to the undertakings and conditions now proposed by the parties.

I therefore order: 
Upon the Plaintiff undertaking to the Court that: he will personally ensure that annual returns in respect of Combined Crane and Rigging Pty Ltd ("Company") are filed strictly in accordance with the
Corporations Law; and he will personally ensure that payments of group tax in respect of the
Company are paid to the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation within seven days of the conclusion of each calendar month.

I order that: 
Leave be granted to the Plaintiff to manage the Company, provided that a person registered as an auditor under the provisions of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/iplaa1993511/index.html#p9)
Point 2 of the Corporations Law be retained to audit the accounts of the company for the six months to 31 December 1998, six months to 30 June 1999 and annually thereafter for the period of the Plaintiff's prohibition under section 600(3) of the Corporations Law or such lesser period as the Plaintiff continues to manage the Company.

The audit referred to in order 1 hereof in respect of each audit period is to be completed within two months of the conclusion of that audit period.

The Plaintiff pay to the defendant its costs assessed at $400 within seven days of the date hereof.

I will make the minutes in the short minutes of order which have been consented to by both of the parties and I will identify those by initialling the facsimile document that was sent to me by Mr Somerset.
 * * * 
