

Akai Pty Limited versus The People's Insurance Company Limited Nos Ca 40748/93 and Comm D 50065/93 Private International Law - Insurance - Contracts [1995]
NSWSC 37 (18 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1) MEAGHER(2) AND SHELLER(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 11-14 November #DATE 28:4:1995 #ADD 18:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:  H D Sperling QC with C R R Hoeben 
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Gadens Ridgeway 
Counsel for the Respondent:  D E J Ryan with P D A Mallon 
Solicitor for the Respondent: Freehill Hollingdale and Page
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P: Before the Court is an appeal from a decision of O'Keefe CJ Comm D ordering a stay of proceedings brought by Akai Pty Limited (Akai) (the appellant) in the Commercial Division of the Supreme Court.
Akai sought a declaration that The People's Insurance Company Limited (the respondent) was liable to respond to an insurance policy for losses suffered by Akai resulting from non-payment of moneys owed to it by Norman Ross Homeworks Pty Limited, a
New South Wales company.
The relevant facts have been set out in the reasons for judgment of
Sheller JA. Akai, although a subsidiary of a Japanese company, was incorporated in New South Wales. Its business was carried on almost entirely within Australia, with only some ten percent of its income being derived from business in New Zealand. The remainder was derived in Australia, thirty five percent of it from activities in New South Wales.
The subject policy was a comprehensive insurance policy providing indemnity for certain credit risks in Akai's business. The policy was limited in its operation to Australia and New Zealand. Other than Australia (and New
Zealand), the policy had no practical connection in the facts with Singapore, except that the insurer happened to be a Singaporean company.
The policy, and the events alleged to give rise to its application, have absolutely no factual connection with England. Negotiations for the policy were carried out by letter and by facsimile between Singapore and New South Wales. Save for the clause in the policy which gives rise to this litigation (cl VI 9), the only possible nexus with England was that the insurer might have secured reinsurance in that country. However, whether the present policy was subject to reinsurance was not established by the evidence. The non payment of debts to Akai by Norman Ross Homeworks Pty Ltd arose in Australia. The debts arose from goods supplied by Akai to Norman Ross
Homework Pty Ltd in Australia. The acts and defaults of supply and non payment were thus exclusively Australian, having their principal connection with the Australian jurisdiction of New
South Wales. The witnesses as to the insured events giving rise to the alleged application of the policy were all Australian. By these facts, it is clearly established that the nexus of the contract, its alleged breach and the relevant witnesses were overwhelmingly with Australia and principally with New
South Wales.
In such circumstances, it would not be entirely surprising that a reforming statute of the Australian Federal Parliament enacted to govern insurance of this character in Australia, should apply to the parties and their dispute. Least of all would it be surprising when the Australian
Parliament had made it plain that that is what is to occur so that parties might not exclude the Act's beneficial provisions (or the forum and law of the relevant jurisdiction of Australia) by clauses purporting to oust them.
With respect to the primary judge (O'Keefe CJ Comm D) and to the majority in this Court, the mistake that is made is to construe the provisions of the statute with insufficient regard to the foregoing considerations. By the general rules of private international law, parties to an ordinary contract may agree between themselves that any dispute between them will be determined in a specified foreign forum according to a specified legal system. But for insurance contracts operating in Australia, a different statutory regime has been applied by the
Australian Parliament. By force of the Act, in that class of contract, the ordinary rules for the ascertainment of the applicable law and forum are not to apply uncontrolled. This is clear. And it is deliberate.
It is the duty of this Court to give effect to the Act. Its application in this case requires that the appeal be allowed. The stay ordered by O'Keefe CJ
Comm D should be lifted.
The dispute between the parties should proceed to trial in the ordinary way in New South Wales. The applicable law is that of
Australia.
 
The [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/)
The [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth) (the Act) provides: "[s8(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) (Proper law of contract) Subject to [section 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s9.html), the application of this Act extends to contracts of insurance and proposed contracts of insurance the proper law of which is or would be the law of a State or the law of a Territory in which this Act applies or to which this Act extends.
 "[s8(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) (Where express provision does not apply) For the purposes of subsection (1), where the proper law of a contract or proposed contract would but for an express provision to the contrary and included or to be included in the contract or in some other contract, be the law of a State or of a Territory in which this
Act applies or to which this Act extends, then, notwithstanding that provision, the proper law of the contract is the law of that
State or Territory." [Section 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) concerns the application of the Act to a particular insurance contract. Clause VI 9 of the subject insurance contract states: "GOVERNING LAW
This policy shall be governed by the laws of England. Any dispute arising from this policy shall be referred to the Courts of
England
Whether the Act has application to the present policy is thus principally dependent on the effect of [s8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the Act on this clause. No matter what interpretation is given to the words "an express provision to the contrary", the first sentence of Clause VI 9 falls clearly within the statutory prohibition. Such an express choice of proper law by the contract, other than the law of Australia which otherwise would have been applicable, was clearly within the sights of the section. Whatever the parties might wish, they could not thereby exclude the operation of Australian law. They could not effectively agree that their bargain should be governed by the laws of
England. This is because their private contract could not override the will of the Australian Parliament acting within its constitutional authority to make binding laws governing insurance policies with a relevant Australian connection.
However, problems are said to arise from the second sentence of clause VI of the subject insurance contract. A choice of forum clause is not, as such, an express choice of proper law. But, the choice of forum will often be a very strong indication of such a choice of law absent a clear specification of the applicable law. See eg John Kaldor Fabricmaker Pty Limited versus Mitchell Colts
Freight (Australia) Pty Limited [(1989) 18 NSWLR 172 (SC)], 290. See also Compagnie d'Armement Maritime SA versus Compagnie Tunisienne de Navigation SA [(1971) AC 572 ] 590, 594. Consequently, the question arises whether the terms of [s8(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the Act are broad enough, in their language and apparent purpose, to operate upon the second sentence of cl 9.
O'Keefe
CJ Comm D adopted a narrow interpretation of the [s8(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the
Act. His Honour found that the phrase 'express provision to the contrary' referred only to provisions which expressly, and in terms, chose the proper law of the contract. He set about a detailed examination of the authorities.
He concluded that a choice of forum clause should not be treated as an express choice of law provision even though it was a significant indication of an implied choice that the law of the chosen jurisdiction would be the proper law of the contract. He stated: "The effect of these cases is, in my opinion, that clauses which require the submission of disputes under a contract or policy to the courts of a named country should not be treated as express provisions in relation to the proper law of the contract or policy of which they form part, but rather as terms from which the intention of the parties can be inferred or implied. As a consequence, when construing clause 9 I am of the opinion that the part of the clause at which I am prevented from looking by virtue of [section 8(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) is the first.
However, the intention of the parties can be inferred from the second sentence of the clause, namely, that the proper law of the contract is the law of England."
Thus, freed of the inhibitions of [s8(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the Act, his Honour went on to construe the proper law of the subject insurance contract by reference to general principles of private international law. He concluded that a stay of the local proceedings, which Akai had commenced against the insurer, should be granted on the grounds that the choice of forum clause was not forbidden by the Act. He rejected other arguments. He held that discretionary considerations were not sufficient to withhold the stay which he therefore granted. The appellant has, by leave, appealed to this Court against that stay order.
In this Court, the appellant urged that a broader construction of [s8(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the Act should be adopted. For the effective operation of the Act and the achievement of its purpose, I agree with its submission.
The words contained in an Act of Parliament - particularly one so novel and reformatory as the [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) - should not be construed narrowly. Specifically, they should not be given meaning without appropriate reference to the background to the Act and to the purpose and policy of Parliament in enacting it. I therefore turn to these considerations. I am authorised to take them into account to give meaning to the terms of [s8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the Act which are otherwise ambiguous.
 
The background of the [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/)
The Act was enacted for, amongst other reasons, the protection of insured persons or businesses in a range of dealings with insurers having a relevant connection with Australia. The Australian Parliament intended the Act to apply to relevant insurance contracts which had their principal connection with
Australia. To achieve this end, s8 was inserted. Its purpose was to prevent the contracting out of the legislation by the simple expedient of inserting a clause in the insurance contract which would destroy, or undermine, the achievement of a national Australian code of insurance law containing novel reformatory features. Within its undoubted constitutional authority, the
Australian Parliament had the right to legislate with respect to facts relevant to insurance contracts occurring within
Australia or having a relevant connection with Australia. No question as to the validity of the relevant provisions of the Act has been raised.
The rationale behind s8 of the Act was explained in the Explanatory
Memorandum. See Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, Explanatory
Memorandum [Insurance Contracts Bill 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/bill/icb1984230/) at 16. It states: "The Bill effects long needed reforms to the law of insurance contracts. It would not be proper if the effect of these reforms could be avoided simply by selecting a foreign law of a Territory in which the Act does not apply."
In stating this object, the drafters of the Explanatory Memorandum and of the Act, placed before the Australian Parliament clearly had in mind the large number of international insurers now operating in Australia, providing cover to Australian companies in respect of Australian events. The drafters were surely not ignorant of the growing international trade in services, including insurance services.
Parliament's purpose in inserting s8 into the Act was therefore to protect insureds, otherwise entitled to the benefits of the Act, from clauses inserted in an insurance contract which would have the effect of avoiding what would otherwise be the operation of the Act and consequently the protection offered by it. This Court must be careful not to construe s8(2) of the
Act too narrowly so that it misses that clearly stated statutory target.
The appellant submitted that the section should be read widely, so as to include express provisions, the effect of which would be equivalent to a provision excluding Australian law from being the proper law of the contract.
Thus, in the instant case, as the second sentence of clause VI 9, read in its context, raised a strong, almost conclusive inference that the proper law of the contract was intended to be that of England (and would almost certainly be that of England unless the stay was lifted), that provision had the proscribed force, unless its effect were negated in some way by s8 of the Act. Another way of expressing this proposition is that the second sentence of clause VI 9, especially read in its context, conveys an intention of the parties to chose a foreign forum and a foreign law. As such, it falls within the section.
Even if the first sentence of cl VI 9 were ignored for the purposes of s8 of the Act, the second sentence would make no real sense unless the first sentence were read into it. The two sentences of the policy, read in context, were clearly intended to be interrelated and interconnected. The law and the forum for disputes was to be England. So the policy was expressed. So it was implied by the choice of forum. The choice of law clearly fails by force of the
Australian Act. But so must the choice of forum with it. Parliament cannot have intended an artificial and inconsistent result of proscribing one but condoning the other which would, in a stroke, undo the proscription.
It is true that there are some cases where a choice of forum clause (standing alone without a partner clause such as existed in the subject contract) has not resulted in the law of that forum being determined as the proper law, although the choice of forum clause has been upheld. But the present case is not one of that kind. Compagnie d'Armement Maritime SA v
Compagnie
Tunisienne de Navigation SA (above) illustrates the point. There,
French law was found to be the proper law of the contract, although a clause specifying that arbitration was to take place in the City of London was upheld. In that case, by the contract, the proper law was to be that of the flag of the vessel carrying the goods. The flags of the vessels differed substantially throughout the term of the contract. The Law Lords had differing approaches to the determination of the proper law. Sheller JA has paraphrased and quoted from their Lordships' speeches. However, each agreed that, in the circumstances, the arbitration clause did not necessarily imply that English law was to be the proper law of the contract. Their Lordships severally took into account considerations of the flag of the owner's vessels (being the vessels primarily used for carriage) the presence and terms of the clause in the contract and the other terms of the contract from which an intention to chose the proper law of the contract could be inferred. They also had regard to the country and systems of law with which the contract had its closest and most real connection.
No such tension or conflict exists in the present case. No doubt can trouble the mind with respect to this insurance contract. There was no inconsistency between the choice of law and choice of forum provision. Each was express. Each was clear. If the choice of forum clause alone were to stand, the result would still necessarily be the determination of the proper law of the contract. It would be English law. With every respect to the other opinions, viewing the clause in its context, I find it virtually impossible to conceive the contrary conclusion. That being so, the Act would clearly be thwarted by clause VI 9, if it were given operation as expressed. This provides a strong indication that Parliament would have intended that an express clause which had the indirect effect of assigning a legal regime other than Australia's, in the circumstances of the present case, would be treated in the same way as an express clause which had the direct effect. Each was an express provision included in the contract. Each had the effect contrary to the operation of the proper law which in the instant case would, but for the express provision, be the law of the relevant Australian jurisdiction - ie that of New South Wales - the place with which the contract had its closest and most real connection.
There is some support for the argument that s8(2) of the Act should be read in a way similar to [s 67(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s67.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). The latter reads: [S67](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s67.html) "Where: the proper law of a contract for the supply ... of goods or services to a consumer would, but for a term that it should be the law of some other country or a term to like effect, be the law of any part of Australia ... this Division applies notwithstanding that term."
Such a comparison was foreshadowed by the Australian Law Reform
Commission in its report Insurance Contracts (ALRC 20) on which the Act is based. The Commission suggested, at 8: "There are two ways in which ... an attempt to evade the operation of the legislation might be avoided The intended territorial application of the Act might be set out in terms. Alternatively, the insertion of a choice of law clause might be rendered ineffective. Doubts exist over which of these two methods should be generally preferred. The latter is the method which was chosen for effectiveness, in relevant respects, of the [Trade Practices
Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). For the sake of consistency that is also the method which has been adopted in the draft legislation." (Emphasis added) .
With this explanation in mind, it is to be conceded that the Australian
Parliament failed to copy the broader and clearer words of [s67](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s67.html) of the [Trade
Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) when enacting [s8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s8.html) of the Act. The wording of the Explanatory
Memorandum, Clause 8 - Application of the Act, at 15, lends some support to the suggestion that Parliament (and the drafters) may simply not have envisaged a case with facts such as the present: "21. Proper Law - In general terms, the validity and effect of a contract is governed by what is known as the 'proper law' of that contract. This may or may not be the domestic law which is applied in the courts in the jurisdiction in which the contract is being considered
Again in general terms, it will be either the law specified as such by the contracting parties; or if no law is specified by the parties, the law of the place with which the contract has its closest and most real connection."
The above exposition suggests an attention by the authors to only two options for a choice of law. But this does not negative the general policy of [s8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s8.html) of the Act which was clearly to avoid the Act being circumvented by the provisions agreed by the parties. The drafters clearly intended that priority would be given to the law of the place with which the contract has its closest and most real connection (where that place is Australia) over any law specified by the contracting parties. No distinction was made between a law specified expressly or impliedly. The Parliament differentiated between an objective approach to determining the proper law and a subjective approach which looked to the actual choice of the parties, either expressly or impliedly stated in their contract. The wording "the proper law of the contract" was a reference to generally accepted rules for determining the proper law of contracts. So how is that "proper law" ordinarily found? In
Compagnie d'Armement Maritime SA versus Compagnie Tunisienne de Navigation SA at 587, Lord Morris of
Borthy-Gest stated the general rule: "The general rule is that the proper law of a contract is that law by which the parties intended that their rights should be determined: see In re United Railways of Havana and Regal
Warehouses Ltd [(1961) AC 1007.] Parties may agree, either in express terms or in terms which can be inferred to submit themselves to a particular system of law. If they have not done this, then the governing law will be that "by reference to which the contract was made or that with which the transaction has its closest and most real connection": see Bonython versus Commonwealth of
Australia [(1951) AC 201],219, (emphasis added).
In James Miller and Partners Ltd versus Whitworth Street Estates (Manchester)
Ltd [1970) AC 583], at 603 (HL) Lord Reid said: "The general principle is not in doubt. Parties are entitled to agree what is to be the proper law of their contract, and if they do not make any such agreement then the law will determine what is the proper law ...
t must be a contractual agreement. It need not be in express words." (emphasis added).
See also Amin Rasheed Corporation v Kuwait Insurance Co [(1984) AC 50, ], 61. The [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), in effect, provides an exception to this general rule. The objective test is given priority over to the agreement, express or implied, in the parties' contract. The Explanatory Memorandum suggests that such was what was intended when the legislation was drafted.
Factors linking the particular insurance contract with Australian law were to take priority over the law specified by the parties, either expressly or impliedly, in the contract.
I do not find that result remarkable. The law of insurance varies significantly in different legal systems of the world and even as between different jurisdictions of the common law. In Australia, the law of insurance was formerly unclear and in some respects unjust. Enacting a major reforming statute to be applicable to insurance contracts having an appropriate
Australian connection was an important legislative achievement. It seems highly unlikely that such a statute would operate in this case to strike down the first part of cl 9 but not the second. To countenance that result is to permit a construction of the Act which defeats one of its major purposes: clearly expressed and equally clearly implied. Contracts at large may contain a choice of law and forum clause which the parties determine for themselves.
But not insurance contracts. There, for consumer protection and other reasons, the reformed Australian statute law was to apply if the proper law was otherwise that of an Australian jurisdiction, excluding impermissible express clauses which sought to oust that jurisdiction. Foreign insurers writing insurance contracts having their closest and most real connection with
Australia were henceforth on notice that they would be subject to the new
Australian legal regime. So with the present respondent.
 [Section 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) - a purposive construction
The [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) should be given a purposive construction. If problems are said to arise if the section is read broadly, far greater problems result from giving it a narrow reading. The Parliament cannot have intended that what could not be done in terms could be done by inference.
It is difficult to imagine that Parliament would have intended to restrict the limitations on exclusion of the legislation by the simple device of choosing a law other than Australian law not by an express specification of that consequence but not by an express provision with an implied consequence. It would be absurd, if an insurer could circumvent the Australian Act by the simple device of adopting an express clause stating that all disputes will be heard by the courts of a specified overseas jurisdiction. The Australian
Law
Reform Commission report (ALRC 20) made it clear that provision was needed in the new Act to prevent the effectiveness of the legislation being circumvented by such simple expedients. The Commission suggested, at 280, that the courts: "will not be permitted to take into account, in determining what the proper law of the contract of insurance is, provisions included in the contract ... that specify that the proper law is some foreign law. This is to avoid circumventing the Act."
If a Singapore insurer decides to write insurance business in Australia, it must do so according to Australian law. That is the clear intention of the
Act.
Notions of freedom of private contract and principles of private international law, important though they are, must give way to the right of a
Parliament within power, to make laws overriding such norms within its jurisdiction. Contract law has often been subject to regulation by the legislature. When a statute exists with a clear policy to prevent circumventory expedients, the common law principles of contract or conflict of laws must be modified.
There is no equivalent legislation in England to the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/). Perhaps the respondent set out (by the choice of law and choice of forum clause) to avoid the operation of that Act. However that may be, the
Australian Parliament has legislated to protect insureds and to restrict the express exclusion of that protective legislation from policies otherwise having their closest and most real connection with Australia. This Court should not ignore the clear policy of the statute.
Support for the broad interpretation of [section 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the Act, urged by
Akai, can be found in 'The Hollandia' [(1983) AC 565 (HL)] a closely analogous case. In that case, there was a contract for the carriage of goods by sea between Scotland and the Netherlands
West Indies. The goods were to be carried on board a Netherlands vessel. Amongst other things, the contract limited liability for negligence to a specified amount. During carriage, the goods were dropped and severely damaged while being unloaded. The shippers brought an action for damages for an amount twice as much as that purportedly limited by the terms of the contract. The Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1971(UK) incorporated certain of the Hague Rules as amended by the Brussels Protocol of (the Hague-Visby
Rules). These rendered ineffective any clause purporting to lessen liability for negligence in specified, applicable, situations.
Netherlands law, however, did not incorporate the Rules. The carriers sought to circumvent the Rules by stipulating that the law of the Netherlands applied to the contract and further that all actions under the contract of carriage were to be brought before the Court of Amsterdam. Had that clause not been inserted, the United Kingdom Act would have applied. The carriers sought a stay of proceedings brought in England, principally on the ground that the choice of forum clause agreed to by the parties required the matter to be tried in Amsterdam. In short, it was argued, the contract contained a choice of law clause as well as a choice of forum clause. In that sense, the contract was similar to the present insurance contract. The question arose whether the
Rules extended to strike down the choice of forum clause which, of itself, did not actually lessen the liability of the carrier although it would have that effect because, as a matter of practicability, the Court of Amsterdam would, with virtual certainty, apply Netherlands law.
In concluding that the Rules struck down both provisions, Lord Diplock emphasised: "(The Rules) should be given a purposive rather than a narrow literalistic construction, particularly wherever the adoption of a literalistic construction would enable the stated purpose of the international convention, viz., the unification of domestic laws of the contracting states relating to bills of lading, to be evaded by the use of colourable devices that, not being expressly referred to in the Rules, are not specifically prohibited."
The trial judge in The Hollandia had granted a stay of the English proceedings on the basis that the choice of forum clause in the contract did not expressly state, or even determine, a choice of law and so was not expressly contrary to the Rules. In that sense, he took an approach not dissimilar to that taken in this case by O'Keefe CJ Comm
D and the majority in this Court. However the House of Lords did not accept such a narrow view. Lord
Diplock said (at 574): "My
Lords .... I have no hesitation in rejecting this narrow construction of (the Rules), which looks solely to the form of the clause in the contract of carriage and wholly ignores its substance. The only sensible meaning to be given to the description of provisions in contracts of carriage which are rendered "null and void and of no effect" by this rule is one which would embrace every provision in a contract of carriage which, if it were applied, would have the effect of lessening the carrier's liability otherwise than as provided in the Rules. To ascribe to it the narrow meaning for which counsel contended would leave it open to any shipowner to evade the provisions of (the
Rules) by the simple device of inserting in his bills of lading issued in, or for carriage from a port in, any contracting state a clause in standard form providing as the exclusive forum for resolution of disputes what might aptly be described as a court of convenience."
Such reasoning is entirely applicable to the present case. In light of the policy considerations behind the legislation it is plain that Parliament intended the [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) to apply to insurance policies having their closest and most real connection with Australia. To accept a narrow construction of [s8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) of the Act would be to leave the Act open to simple evasion by the insertion of a choice of jurisdiction clause in exactly the way the
House of Lords believed should be rejected in the parallel circumstances of
The Hollandia. It is true that, in The Hollandia, the House of Lords in considering the application of the Hague-Visby Rules, did not have to apply a statute which referred to an "express provision" of the contract. But this is a distinction without a difference. The Act does not speak of an express choice of law provision or an express choice of forum provision. It is enough that the provision is express, as cl VI 9 of the subject contract undoubtedly is. Then it is necessary to ask whether its operation is to the contrary of the application of the Act to circumstances in Australia to which the Act would otherwise apply. A purposive construction of s8 of the Act, such as I favour, allows the legislation to work effectively and according to its clear policy. The opposite construction makes the section a futility. It would permit an easy way to circumvent the operation of the Act as Parliament intended.
In interpreting s8 of the Act as I would, it is not.
suggested that all express provisions which might tend to indicate that the proper law of a contract is to be other than Australian law (assuming there is the initial nexus with Australia as in the present case) are invalid. This is a question which should be approached on a case by case basis. But in the present case, the structure of Clause VI 9 was blatantly contrary to the Act. The clause contained two sentences side by side. One referred to a choice of law. The other chose a forum. The latter is generally a very strong indication of an implied choice of law. See above. Not all clauses with references to countries or laws other than Australia need be excluded by s8. In the present case however, clause 9 cannot stand with s8 of the Act. The Act overrides cl VI 9 in this Australian insurance contract applying to Australian events happening in Australia. Accordingly, the [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) and not English law in
English courts, applies to the insurance policy. This may not represent the agreement of the parties. But it is the result of the operation of the applicable Australian law.
 
Application of the Act to the policy
Because the Act applies to the subject insurance contract, Akai was entitled to relief pursuant to [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s52.html) of the Act. That section prohibits the contracting out of the Act: "[s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s52.html) (Provision excluding, restricting or modifying operation of
Act void). Where a provision of a contract of insurance (including a provision that is not set out in the contract but is incorporated in the contract by another provision of the contract) purports to exclude, restrict or modify, or would, but for this subsection have the effect of excluding, restricting or modifying, to the prejudice of a party other than the insurer, the operation of this Act, the provision is void.
Clearly, clause
VI 9 purports to exclude, or would have the effect of excluding, the operation of the Act. The first sentence of the clause, which purports to chose English law to govern the parties' disputes, necessarily excludes the Act as English law does not incorporate the
Act's protective provisions. As far as the second sentence is concerned, English courts would apply English law pursuant to the first sentence of the clause. They would not exclude English law by giving the Australian statute operation in England.
Accordingly, the effect of the choice of forum provision would effectively be the exclusion of the operation of the Act.
The exclusion of the
Act would be to the prejudice of the appellant. The appellant would not then have the benefit of [s54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) of the Act upon which it foreshadows its intention to rely in answer to the alleged breaches of condition asserted by the insurer.
[Section 54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) limits the reliance of an insurer on alleged breaches of conditions in the insurance policy which are either unrelated, or only partly related, to the loss sought to be recovered.
Relevantly, the section reads: "[s54(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) (Insurer's liability reduced where interests prejudiced)
Subject to this section, where the effect of a contract of insurance would, but for this section be that the insurer may refuse to pay a claim, either in whole or in part, by reason of some act of the insured or of some other person, being an act that occurred after the contract was entered into but not being an act in respect of which sub-section (2) applies, the insurer may not refuse to pay the claim by reason only of that act but his liability in respect of the claim is reduced by the amount that fairly represents the extent to which the insurer's interests were prejudiced as result of that act.
 [s54(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) (Where insurer may refuse to pay claim) Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section, where the act could reasonably be regarded as being capable of causing or contributing to a loss in respect of which insurance cover is provided by the contract, the insurer may refuse to pay the claim.
 [s54(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) (Where loss has not related to act) Where the insured proves that no part of the loss that gave rise to the claim was caused by the act, the insurer may not refuse to pay the claim by reason only of the act......
The breaches of conditions of the subject policy which the insurer is seeking to rely on were stipulated in a letter to Akai dated 30 December 1992 in evidence before this Court. The letter sets out the alleged breaches as follows: failure to comply with the confidentiality obligation contained in clause V 4 of the policy; failure to notify the Company immediately of any occurrence which would give rise to a claim, as provided under clause IV 6 of the policy; failure to adhere to its standard credit evaluation and control procedures to reasonably determine a credit limit that a
Buyer has both the financial capacity to meet its payment obligations and has a record of meeting similar obligations on a timely basis as required under clause IC 1b of the policy; the failure to submit or submit timely to the company the credit control procedures, financial and in-house approval papers concerning the individual buyers, to enable the company to review the individual credit limits of the various buyers, including
Norman Ross.
Arguably the first two breaches would appear to be of the type for which [s54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) of the Act was enacted. A question would arise as to whether the insurer had suffered any loss flowing from the alleged breaches.
If it did not, it could not rely on the alleged breach and refuse the claim. At best they could rely on the defence to the extent that the breach had occasioned loss to it.
These cases appear to be precisely the kind to which the operation of [s54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) of the Act was intended to apply. They state a different law of insurance contracts for Australia. There is no such law in England.
The third claim also presents a factual question which would also have to be decided pursuant to [s54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) of the Act. The final claim relates to an implied term alleged to exist in the contract of insurance which, similarly, would fall to be determined under [s54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) of the Act.
For these reasons, I am satisfied that prejudice to Akai, as the insured, is made out for the purposes of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s52.html) of the Act. The requirements of that section being satisfied, clause VI 9 is void. It certainly cannot sustain the stay application.
The basis upon which the stay was granted by O'Keefe CJ Comm
D, therefore evaporates.
In the light of these conclusions, it is not necessary for me to consider
Akai's other submissions relating to [s43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s43.html) of the Act, nor its alternative submissions regarding [s19](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1902116/s19.html) of the [Insurance Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1902116/). Nor need I consider
Akai's submissions addressed to other discretionary considerations. Once the fundamental basis of the stay is knocked away, the whole point of the application of the Act to this case is seen in sharper focus. The Act aims to stop insurers trying to exclude the beneficial operations of the Act by "express provisions" (whether, for example, by express choice of law or choice of forum clauses). Insurers and insureds in Australian insurance cases, like the present are then held to their rights and obligations as Australian insurance contracts law provides.
 
Conclusions and orders
The general choice of law regime for contracts having an international element presents interesting and important questions. But it does not, ultimately, determine this case. This is a case about the operation of an Act of the Australian Parliament in Australia upon an insurance contract which is either wholly or overwhelmingly Australian. It is not surprising therefore, that the Australian Act should apply. Given its reformatory provisions, it would be quite remarkable if, by a simple clause, written by it, the insurer could unilaterally, or even consensually, exclude the operation of the Act. It cannot.
Because the Act applies and because so many other discretionary reasons conduce to the hearing of the litigation in Australia, the attempt by express provision to adopt foreign law and a foreign forum should be ignored.
The
Court should accept the undertaking of the appellant to discontinue the proceedings which it began, defensively, in the English courts. The stay, which rested on the void provisions of the insurance contract should be lifted. The case should proceed to trial as Akai wishes - in an Australian
Court according to applicable Australian law.
I favour the following orders:
Allow the appeal;
Set aside the orders of O'Keefe CJ Comm D in the Commercial
Division of the Supreme Court;
In lieu thereof, order that the motion to stay the hearing of the appellant's claim against the respondent be dismissed;
Order that the proceedings be returned to the Commercial
Division for trial; and
Order that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and of the motion for a stay.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Sheller JA.
JUDGE3
INTRODUCTION
SHELLER JA: Akai Pty Limited (Akai), by leave of the Court granted on 7 March , appealed from the decision of O'Keefe CJ CommD of 7 December 1993 staying proceedings commenced by Akai against the respondent, The People's
Insurance Company Limited (People's
Insurance). In those proceedings Akai sought a declaration that People's Insurance was liable to indemnify it under a Comprehensive
Credit Insurance Policy for loss suffered by Akai in consequence of the non-payment of moneys owed to it by Norman Ross Homeworks
Pty Limited for goods supplied on credit. Akai claimed that the policy insured against the loss resulting from non-payment of these moneys and sought judgment in the sum of $1,292,184.98 with interest from 1 November 1991.
An issue likely to arise in the proceedings was whether the [Insurance
Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (the 1984 Act) applied to the policy and if so whether Akai was entitled to be excused for any breaches of condition which might be proved against it under the policy. People's Insurance applied for a stay of the proceedings in reliance upon general provision of the policy which provided as follows: "Governing Law 
This policy shall be governed by the laws of England. Any dispute arising from this policy shall be referred to the Courts of
England."
O'Keefe CJ CommD stayed the proceedings until further order of the Court or until final determination of proceedings brought by Akai against People's
Insurance in the Courts of
England in relation to the cause of action set out in the summons.
 
THE PROPER LAW OF THE CONTRACT
In accordance with well-established principle, the express statement in general provision 9 of the parties' intention that the policy of insurance should be governed by English law determined that law to be the proper law of the contract. In Vita Food Products versus Unus Shipping Company [(1939) AC 277] Lord
Wright, giving the opinion of the Privy Council, said at 289-90: "It is now well settled that by English law (and the law of Nova
Scotia is the same) the proper law of a contract is the law 'which the parties intended to apply'. That intention is objectively ascertained, and, if not expressed, will be presumed from the terms of the contract and the relevant surrounding circumstances........ where the English rule that intention is the test applies, and where there is an express statement by the parties of their intention to select the law of the contract, it is difficult to see what qualifications are possible, provided the intention expressed is bona fide and legal, and provided there is no reason for avoiding the choice on the ground of public policy."
Parties are free to choose the law by which a transaction is to be governed subject to a qualification that there must be no reason for avoiding their choice on the grounds of public policy; Augustus versus Permanent Trustee Co
Limited <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 245] at 252 and 260 per Walsh J, with whose judgment the other four members of the High Court concurred. Vita Food
Products versus Unus Shipping
Company was cited with approval. In Bonython v
Commonwealth of Australia [(1951) AC 201] at 219 Lord Simonds defined the proper law of a contract as "the system of law by reference to which the contract was made or that with which the transaction has its closest and most real connection." In Amin Rasheed Shipping Corporation versus Kuwait Insurance Co [(1984)
AC 50] at 61 Lord Diplock pointed out that the "or" in this pithy definition of the "proper law" of the contract was disjunctive. In speaking of a policy which contained no express provision choosing English law as the proper law of the contract, Lord Diplock at 62 went on to say "... nevertheless its provisions taken as a whole, in my opinion, by necessary implication point ineluctably to the conclusion that the intention of the parties was that their mutual rights and obligations under it should be determined in accordance with the
English law of marine insurance."
If a dispute resolution clause expressly states that all disputes should be submitted to the courts of a particular country, that gives rise to a strong, though not conclusive, inference that the law of that country is the proper law of the contract. In Compagnie d'Armement Maritime SA versus Compagnie
Tunisienne de Navigation SA [(1971) AC 572] one clause (cl 13) of a contract for the transport of crude oil provided that it should be governed by the laws of the flag of the vessel carrying the goods and another (cl 18) that disputes were to be settled by arbitrators in London. Since the contract contemplated that vessels of different flags might be used the first clause gave rise to possible uncertainty. Proceeding on the basis that cl failed in its purpose to determine the proper law of the contract (583F), Lord Reid weighed together the place where the contract was negotiated and signed and the freight payable, the place where the contract was to be performed and the place where disputes were to be settled in order to determine with what country or system of law the contract had the closest connection. French law was preferred to
English law. Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest at 587 held that by cl 13 the parties had agreed the contract was to be governed by French law. Nevertheless his
Lordship went on to consider the matter on the basis that the parties had not by that clause expressly so agreed. At 587H he said that even if the clause had failed to be clear and explicit it remained to negative any implication that might arise from the agreement to refer disputes to arbitration in
London. At 588 his Lordship said that while an agreement to refer disputes to arbitration in a particular country might carry with it, and was capable of carrying with it, an implication or inference that the parties had further agreed that the law governing the contract (as well as the law governing the arbitration procedure) was to be the law of that country, he did not agree that it was a necessary or irresistible inference or implication. He referred to Tzortzis versus Monark Line
A/B [(1968) 1 WLR 406.] That concerned a contract made in Stockholm for the sale of a ship; the sellers were Swedish; the buyers were Greek; delivery was to be in Sweden. There was to be a deposit at a Stockholm bank where payment (in
Sterling transferable to Swedish Kroner) was to be made. The contract provided that any dispute in connection with its interpretation and fulfilment should be decided by arbitration in the city of London. The proper law was held, ultimately by the Court of Appeal, to be English law. Lord Morris said at
F: "The conclusion that English law was the proper law of the contract may well have been a reasonable one (though no occasion now arises to form any opinion as to this) but some of the statements concerning the inferences to be drawn from an arbitration provision are, in my view, expressed much too positively. The circumstance that parties agree that any differences are to be settled by arbitration in a certain country may and very likely will lead to an inference that they intend the law of that country to apply. But it is not a necessary inference or an inevitable one thought it will often be the reasonable and sensible one. Before drawing it, all the relevant circumstances are to be considered."
According to Viscount Dilhorne at 591 the form of the contract contemplated that the proper law of the contract should not be English in consequence of the inclusion of the arbitration clause. Although any arbitration would be in London, the law governing the contract would depend on the nationality of the ship employed. This he concluded was French law. At
F Lord Wilberforce referred to the conclusive presumption that the parties intended English law to govern said to arise, failing an express choice of any other law, from the existence of an arbitration clause, however strongly other factors might point away from it. His Lordship set about examining this doctrine in the light of authority.
He did not think that cl 13 (a meaningless clause he described as "a corpse which the undertakers have not removed" ) assisted in the resolution of the problem. At 596 he concluded that it was a sound general rule that the selection of a certain place for arbitration and, by inference, of nationals or residents of that place as arbitrators, was an indication that the parties intended the law of that place to govern. But it should not be treated as giving rise to a conclusive or irresistible inference. Nor did he find the leading cases, when properly understood suggested a different approach. At 600 his Lordship said that he was of opinion that the language used in Tzortzis was too strong, too absolute.
"Neither authority nor commercial reality supports the necessity for so rigid a rule. An arbitration clause must be treated as an indication, to be considered together with the rest of the contract and relevant surrounding facts. Always it will be a strong indication; often, especially where there are parties of different nationality or a variety of transactions which may arise under the contract, it will be the only clear indication.
But in some cases it must give way where other indications are clear."
In the case in hand where every indication pointed strongly to French law, that law must govern unless the inference from London arbitration was irresistible or conclusive. At 605
Lord Diplock said: "That the presence of an arbitration clause, though powerfully persuasive, was not conclusive of an intention to choose the curial law as the proper law of the contract was clearly recognised in Hamlyn and Co versus Talisker Distillery [(1894) AC 202] and was never doubted until after the Kwik Hoo Tong case [(1927) AC ."]
Strong though the implication may be, it can be negatived by the other terms of the contract when the contract, as it must be, is construed as a whole in the light of the surrounding circumstances. Ultimately his Lordship concluded at 609 that any implication that the arbitration clause was intended to operate as a choice of proper law as distinct from curial law was negatived by the retention in the contract of cl 13. His Lordship said that he did not wish to throw any doubt upon the proposition that an arbitration clause is generally intended by the parties to operate as a choice of the proper law of the contract as well as the curial law and should be so construed unless there are compelling indications to the contrary in the other terms of the contract or the surrounding circumstances of the transaction.
I have engaged in this rather lengthy analysis in order to emphasise that a dispute resolution clause which provides that all disputes be submitted to the courts of a particular place is not necessarily decisive in determining the proper law of the contract. However it raises a strong inference that the parties intended that the law of that place should govern.
 [INSURANCE CONTRACTS ACT 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/)
Section 8 (1) of the 1984 Act provides that, subject to exceptions not here material, the application of the Act "extends" to contracts of insurance and proposed contracts of insurance the proper law of which is or would be the law of a State or the law of a Territory in which the Act applies or to which the Act extends. Section 8 (2) extends the application of the 1984 Act to contracts or proposed contracts the proper law of which would, but for an express provision to the contrary included or to be included in the contract or in some other contract, be the law of a State or a Territory. It provides: "For the purposes of subsection (1), where the proper law of a contract or proposed contract would, but for an express provision to the contrary included or to be included in the contract or in some other contract, be the law of a State or a Territory in which this Act applies or to which this
Act extends, then, notwithstanding that provision, the proper law of the contract is the law of that State or Territory."
At least in the case where the contract of insurance or proposed contract of insurance has its closest and most real connection with the law of a State or a Territory of Australia, the purpose of subs (2) is to prevent the parties avoiding the operation of the 1984 Act by the simple expedient of an express provision that the contract will be governed by some other system of law.
 .
Section 8 (2) has one odd result. As Lord Wright indicated in Vita Food
Products versus Unus Shipping Company at 289 the proper law of a contract is that which the parties intended. Ordinarily this intention will be expressed by the parties in the contract or can be implied by the Court from the terms of the contract or from surrounding circumstances. To set out to discover the intention of the parties about the proper law of their contract without paying attention to the clearest indication of this intention, the parties' express statement, is an artificial endeavour. This artificiality is aptly illustrated in the present case. General provision 9 not only says that the policy should be governed by the laws of England and, undoubtedly, is, within the meaning of s8 (2) of the 1984
Act, an express provision to the contrary of the proper law being that of a State or Territory, but goes on, in the second sentence, to provide that any dispute arising from the policy shall be referred to the
Courts of England. It may be that, in describing the contracts or proposed contracts of insurance to which the application of the 1984 Act should extend, the legislature had in mind that the proper law would not be determined by the parties' intention but by whether the contract of insurance or proposed contract of insurance had a closer and more real connection with the law of a
State or Territory of Australia than with some other system of law. In the present case the inference from the parties' choice of the Courts of England to resolve disputes is that they intended that the proper law of the contract should be English law, despite its connection with Australia. Thus, if the second sentence of general provision 9 is not treated as an express provision to the contrary, the legislative intention may have been defeated.
 
JUDGMENT
OF THE COMMERCIAL DIVISION
After referring to general provision 9, O'Keefe CJ CommD analysed in detail the cases and textbook passages concerned with different approaches, taken in the cases and amongst the textbook authors, in determining the proper law of a contract. The approach most commonly adopted in the modem cases is a staged one of looking first for an express statement of common intention in the contract, and next, if no express statement of common intention is to be found, for inferences of the parties' intention drawn from the terms and nature of the contract and from the general circumstances of the case.
Finally, if the parties' common intention is not expressed and cannot be inferred, the contract is governed by the system of law with which the transaction has its closest and most real connection. The parties had no intention or their intention was unknown. In practice the line between the search for the inferred intention and the search for the system of law with which the contract has its closest and most real connection is a fine one.
This approach is explained in Dicey and Morris on The Conflict of Laws, 1987, th ed, 1168-1197 (the 12th and latest edition of Dicey and Morris published in 1993 deals with the Treaty of Rome which for the most part superseded the common law rules). It has been described as the three tiered rule and contrasts with a two tiered rule or an approach involving no tiers.
The question of which of these approaches should be adopted assumed importance in the appellant's argument which aimed to show that the second sentence of general provision 9, concerned with the choice of forum for the resolution of disputes, should have no greater weight in deciding what was the proper law of the contract than other considerations showing a close and real connection with Australian jurisdictions. His Honour agreed with the conclusion reached by Brownie J in John Kaldor Fabricmaker Pty Limited versus Mitchell Cons
Freight
Pty Limited [(1989) 18 NSWLR 172.] At 185 Brownie J said: "In my judgment the better view is that the law is as stated by
Dicey and Morris (The Conflict of
Laws (1980) 10th ed, r 145) in their subr 2, or, to paraphrase Graveson (Conflict of Laws (1974) th ed, at 407), the correct view is that the proper law of the contract is determined by the subjective view, or the inferred actual intention of the parties, where that inference can be drawn. Where that inference cannot be drawn, then and only then should the court go on to impute an intention to the parties, by reference to the system of law having the closest and most real connection with the transaction."
I also agree, though with respect if the parties' intention is not expressed and cannot be implied, I regard it as unreal and unnecessary to impute an intention to the parties. The proper law will be determined by reference to the system of law with which the transaction has its closest and most real connection. If the parties have expressed their intention, unless this was not bona fide or there are reasons of public policy which would lead the Court not to give effect to the parties' intention, the Court in most cases need look no further. In such circumstances it would be rare that a
Court would infer that the parties' intention was different from the one they had expressed.
O'Keefe CJ CommD went on to determine what should be excluded from consideration by applying s8 of the 1984 Act His Honour was of opinion that clauses which required the submission of disputes under a contract or policy to the courts of a named country should not be treated as express provisions in relation to the proper law of the contract or policy of which they form part, but rather as terms from which the intention of the parties can be inferred or implied. As a consequence, his Honour was of a view that the only part of the contract at which he was prevented from looking by virtue of s8 was the first sentence of general provision 9. Having regard to the second sentence his Honour concluded that the proper law of the contract was the law of England. O'Keefe CJ CommD referred to the first edition of Nygh, Conflict of Laws in Australia, 1968, at 297 for the proposition that if the clause expressly stated "that 'all disputes shall be submitted to the courts of country X', there is little room for argument." The consequence of this was that s8 (1) of the 1984 Act did not make the Act applicable to the policy of insurance. The parties had agreed that the policy of insurance, the proper law of which was English law, and which was not subject to the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), should, in case of dispute, be referred to the Courts of England. In later editions, dealing with the choice of law in arbitration,
Justice Nygh modified this view; see Nygh, Conflict of Laws in Australia, 5th ed at 162. As
I have said the inference is not a conclusive one.
Having determined that the proper law of the policy of insurance was
English law, O'Keefe CJ CommD came to consider People's
Insurances' claim that the proceedings should be stayed. His Honour took account of various matters, to which I shall return, in exercising his discretion to grant the stay of proceedings as sought by Peoples' Insurance.
 
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
Essential to the Akai's success in this appeal was the proposition that by force of [s8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s8.html) the 1984 Act applied to the contract of insurance. The validity of this proposition depended upon treating each sentence of governing provision 9 as Ilan express provision to the contrary" within the meaning of s8 (2) with the result that the whole provision should be ignored in determining the proper law of the contract. Alternatively, it depended upon treating the second sentence as not carrying with it an implication or inference that the law governing the contract was to be the law of the country of dispute resolution, but merely as one of a number of factors to be taken into account in determining with which system of law the contract had its closest and most real connection. The appellant submitted that by either route the proper conclusion was that for the purposes of s8 the proper law of the contract was the law of a State or a Territory in which the Act applied.
If either of these arguments succeeded and the Act applied to the contract of insurance, so it was submitted, O'Keefe CJ CommD proceeded on an erroneous basis in determining the stay application. There were powerful additional reasons to be taken into account in determining the application which would result in its being refused. The appellant submitted, in reliance particularly on ss52 or 43 of the 1984 Act that the parties could not contract out of the operation of the Act either by agreeing that the governing law should be the law of England or by referring their dispute to the courts of
England. As a separate argument the appellant relied upon [s19](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1902116/s19.html) of the [Insurance
Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1902116/) of New South Wales which provides that a provision in a contract of insurance, being a provision with respect to the submission to arbitration of any matter arising out of the contract of insurance, does not bind the insured except where the provision is contained in a contract or agreement, entered into after a difference or dispute has arisen between the insurer and the insured, providing for the submission to arbitration of that difference or dispute.
 
GENERAL PROVISION 9
The appellant contended that the second sentence of general provision 9 should also be treated as "an express provision to the contrary included... in the contract" within the meaning of s8 (2). The appellant submitted that what the 1984 Act dictated could not be done directly by the expression of intention could not be done indirectly in accordance with the parties' implied intention. If the application of the 1984 Act extends to contracts of insurance, the proper law of which would be the law of a State or Territory in which the Act applies, but for an express provision stating that the proper law is that of some other system of law, it would be extraordinary that in the same circumstances, the application of the Act would not extend where the express provision that the resolution of any dispute between the parties be referred to the
Courts of another country resulted in an inference that the parties intended that the proper law of a contract be the law of that country.
The appellant relied upon The Hollandia [(1983) 1 AC 565.] The Carriage of
Goods by Sea Act 1971 (UK) provided that certain of the Hague Rules as amended by the Brussels Protocol of 1968 ("the
Hague-Visby Rules") should have the force of law. Article III, paragraph 8 of the Rules provided that any clause in a contract of carriage relieving the carrier or the ship from liability for loss or damage to goods arising from negligence, fault or failure in the duties and obligations provided in the article or lessening such liability otherwise than as provided in the Rules, should be null and void and of no effect. The defendant carriers issued a bill of lading in Scotland to the plaintiff shippers which specified that the law of the Netherlands applied to the contract and that the carriers' maximum liability per package was an amount in Dutch currency equating to about 250 pounds. The condition stipulated that all actions under the contract of carriage were to be brought before the Court of Amsterdam and that no other court was to have jurisdiction in any such action unless the carriers elected otherwise.
The carriers applied to stay an admiralty action commenced in England on the ground that the action could only be brought in Amsterdam where, under Dutch law at the relevant date, the liability would be limited to the amount specified in the bill of lading and not to a greater amount set by the Hague-Visby Rules. The
House of Lords held that since the Hague-Visby Rules were to be treated as if they were part of directly enacted statute law in the United Kingdom, article
III, paragraph 8, rendered null, void and of no effect not only that part of condition 2 of the bill of lading which purported to lessen the liability of the carriers but also that part which would subject the dispute to a jurisdiction whose substantive law provided a lower maximum limit of carriers liability than that prescribed in the Hague-Visby Rules. Since the choice of forum clause was ineffective and there were no other valid grounds for granting a stay, the shippers' action should be allowed to proceed. At 574
Lord Diplock, with whose reasons the other members of the House agreed, rejected a narrow construction of Article III, paragraph 8 as dealing only with procedure and not with liability on the ground that it was a construction which looked solely to the form of the clause in the contract of carriage and wholly ignored its substance. His Lordship said: "The only sensible meaning to be given to the description of provisions in contracts of carriage which are rendered 'null and void and of no effect' by this rule is one which would embrace every provision in a contract of carriage which, if it were applied, would have the effect of lessening the carrier's liability otherwise than as provided in the Rules."
The 1984 Act does not purport to render null and void clauses in policies of insurance which would have the effect of making the proper law of the contract of insurance some law other than the law of a State or a Territory.
Indeed the section does not extend as far as [s67](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s67.html) (a) of the [Trade Practices
Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) which provides that, where the proper law of a contract for the supply by a corporation of goods or services to a customer would, "but for a term that it should be the law of some other country or a term to the like effect, be the law of any part of Australia" (my emphasis), Division 2 of [Part
V](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p5) applies to the contract notwithstanding that term. Section 8 (2) of the 1984
Act does no more than extend the application of the
Act to contracts or proposed contracts of insurance where the proper law would be the law of a
State or Territory "but for an express provision to the contrary". The phrase "an express provision to the contrary" means an express provision that the proper law of the contract will be a law other than the law of a State or a
Territory. The first sentence of general provision 9 is clearly such a provision. Despite the careful arguments of counsel for the appellant to my mind the second sentence equally clearly is not. The sentence says nothing expressly about what law will govern the contract. It says only that the forum for resolving any dispute arising from the policy shall be the Courts of
England.
The second part of the appellant's argument was directed to the approach to be taken in determining the proper law where there is no express statement of relevant intention in the contract or such express intention must for the purpose be ignored, and there is a clause referring the resolution of disputes between the parties to the Courts of one country, but the system of law having the closest and most real connection with the transaction is that of another country.
The appellant submitted that English law had no connection with the transaction and that Australian law or the law of a part of Australia had the closest and most real connection with it, considerations which outweighed the reference of disputes to the Courts of England in determining the proper law of a contract. This submission gains some support from the conclusion reached in Compagnie d'Armement Maritime SA versus Compagnie Tunisienne de Navigation SA but is contrary to the view of the law accepted by Brownie J in John Kaldor
Fabricmaker Pty Limited versus Mitchell Cons Freight (Australia) Pty Limited and applied by O'Keefe CJ CommD.
In his reasons for judgment O'Keefe CJ CommD reviewed the cases and texts. Despite the appellant's arguments I think there is no point in my repeating this exercise. In a particular case the connection between a transaction and a system of law may, but rarely will, be regarded in the circumstances as defining that system of law as the proper law of the contract despite express statements to the contrary in the contract or what otherwise might be inferred, as, for example, from a dispute resolution clause, about the parties' intention. Such would be an unusual case. In essence Australian law accepts the right of the parties to choose the law by which their contract is to be governed. It follows that if that intention is expressed or can be inferred it will determine the result. As I have said, if the parties express this choice in a clause in the contract, ordinarily the Court need look no further. If they do not so express their choice but their choice can be inferred from the terms of the contract or the circumstances of the case, for like reason that choice prevails. It is only if the Court is unable by these means to discern what law the parties intended to be the proper law of a contract, so that their choice, if any, is unknown, that the Court must determine it by resort to that system of law which has the closest and most real connection with the transaction. A clause in a contract referring disputes to the Courts of a country is a persuasive indicator of the parties' intention that the law of that country be the proper law of the contract.
Furthermore, in his reasons for judgment, O'Keefe CJ CommD said that factors external to the contract, namely, that
People's Insurance is a Singapore company, that Akai, for reasons of its own, sought insurance offshore and that
People's Insurance was not prepared to give cover unless such a term was included in the policy, were consistent with such an intention. In my opinion s8 of the 1984 Act does not operate to extend its application to this policy of insurance. It follows that the sections of the 1984
Act relied upon by the appellant do not apply nor does the New South Wales [Insurance Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1902116/); a New
South Wales statute does not normally apply to a contract unless the proper law of the contract is the law of New South Wales or unless it is an overriding statute in the sense that it must be applied regardless of the normal rules of the conflict of laws;
Dicey and Morris, 11th ed, at 1170;
Mynott versus Barnard <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 68] at 79.
 
THE STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
Since the 1984 Act does not apply to the policy of insurance under which
Akai claims to recover from People's Insurance, the application for a stay of those proceedings must be looked at in the circumstance that Akai, which has commenced proceedings in New South Wales, had agreed that the policy should be governed by the laws of England and any dispute arising from it should be referred to the Courts of England. The weight that the Court should attach to a clause referring disputes arising under the contract to a foreign Court was considered by Beazley J in Leigh-Mardon Pty Limited versus PRC Inc <case>; [(1993) 44 FCR .] in which Brandon J, as he then was, said at 99-100 that where plaintiffs sue in England in breach of an agreement to refer disputes to a foreign Court, and the defendants apply for a stay, the English Court, assuming the claim to be otherwise within its jurisdiction, is not bound to grant a stay but has a discretion whether to do so or not. The discretion should be exercised by granting a stay unless strong cause for not doing so is shown. The burden of proving such strong cause is on the plaintiff. In exercising its discretion, the Court should take into account all the circumstances of the particular case. His Lordship then identified particular matters which might, in an appropriate case, be taken into account in the exercise of discretion. At 103 his Lordship said: "I think that it is essential that the court should give full weight to the prima facie desirability of holding the plaintiffs to their agreement. In this connection I think that the court must be careful not just to pay lip service to the principle involved, and then fail to give effect to it because of a mere balance of convenience."
Beazley J referred also to the judgment of Lord Brandon (Brandon LJ) in
The El Amria [(1981) 2 Lloyds Rep 119] at 123-4, where his Lordship again stated the principles. At 95 her Honour said that this approach had been consistently applied by the Courts. Her Honour reviewed the cases, not only in the United
Kingdom and Australia but the United States where in The Bremen v Zapata
Offshore Co <case>; [407 US 1] (1972) at 15 Chief Justice Burger said: "... in the light of present day commercial realities and expanding international trade we conclude that the forum clause should control absent a strong showing that it should be set aside." In Oceanic Sun Line Special Shipping
Co Inc versus Fay <case>; [(1988) CLR 197] the Court held that a condition that the Courts of Greece should have exclusive jurisdiction in any action against the shipowner did not form part of the contract. However, at 224 Brennan J said that where the parties to a contract agreed that the Courts of a foreign country shall have exclusive jurisdiction to decide disputes arising under the contract or out of its performance, the
Courts of this country regard that agreement as a submission of such disputes to arbitration and will, in the absence of countervailing reasons, stay proceedings brought here to decide those disputes: Huddart
Parker Limited versus The Ship "Mill Hill" <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 502] at 582, 585 and 589-591.
At 230 his Honour left open the question whether, where there was an exclusive foreign jurisdiction clause in the contract, there was any reason why the guidelines affecting the exercise of the Court's discretion which the English
Court of Appeal laid down in The El Amria should not be adopted in Australia.
His Honour observed that the guidelines had been referred to without dissent in the House of Lords: The Sennar (No 2) [(1985) 1 Lloyds Rep 521] at 527 and were consistent with the broad approach espoused by Dixon J in The "Mill
Hill". At 23 0-1 his Honour said: "A case where the plaintiff seeks the exercise of a discretion to refuse to give effect to a contractual stipulation that a nominated court should have exclusive jurisdiction requires justification of a different order from that required in a case where the plaintiff has simply chosen to sue in one forum rather than another, both being available to him."
At 259 Gaudron J observed that where there is an agreement to submit to another jurisdiction, the power to grant a stay rests on the principle that the Courts will, except where the plaintiff adduces strong reasons against doing so, require the parties to abide by their agreement. In Leigh-Mardon
Pty
Limited versus PRC Inc it was argued that the test to be applied on an application for a stay of proceedings which required service outside the juristiction, whether or not there was a foreign jurisdiction clause, was that laid down by the High Court in Volh v
Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538] and that the test laid down in The Eleftheria was no longer applicable. In
Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited the majority of the Court held at -5 that a defendant who applies promptly for a stay will ordinarily discharge the onus that the defendant is entitled to an order for a stay if the defendant persuades the local Court that, having regard to the circumstances of the particular case and the availability of the foreign tribunal, it is a clearly inappropriate forum for the determination of the dispute between the parties; see Oceanic Sun Line Special Shipping Company Inc v Fay at 248. In Leigh-Mardon Pty Limited versus PRC Inc Beazley J concluded at 99 that there was no decision binding on her as to the appropriate test to apply in the case where there was a foreign jurisdiction clause. Of Voth she said that the Court was not dealing with a foreign jurisdiction clause. She was of opinion that the traditional rule expounded in The Eletheria, The El Amria and
The "Mill Hill" was correct and that there were sound policy reasons which supported it. I agree with this conclusion. Furthermore it seems to me that until such time as the High Court says expressly that the well-established principles expounded in these cases do not apply in Australia this Court should apply them.
O'Keefe CJ CommD exercised his discretion to grant a stay by looking at a number of factors. He referred to Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited. He did not refer to The Eleftheria or Leigh-Mardon Pty Limited versus PRC Inc but observed that provisions of a like kind to clause 9 have been traditionally supported by the Courts, as have agreements to refer disputes to arbitration.
His Honour said: "Given such an agreement by the parties, where one of the parties wishes to depart from the bargain which it has made, it must show a good case." I would echo the language of Lord Brandon. The Court must be careful not just to pay lip service to giving full weight to the prima facie desirability of holding
Akai to its agreement and then fail to give effect to it because of a mere balance of convenience.
O'Keefe CJ CommD did not regard Akai's submissions that there would be considerable expense and inconvenience in getting New South Wales witnesses to
England and that New South Wales witnesses could not be compelled to go to
England as a persuasive ground of inconvenience. Akai said that it proposed to call four witnesses all of whom were either in its employ or in the employ of its broker. Akai also submitted that legal costs in England would be higher than those in New South Wales. Evidence was produced that the rates charged by partners of firms of solicitors in England were higher than those charged by partners in firms in Australia. His Honour said that counsel were clearly no more expensive in England than in Australia, indeed senior counsel appeared to be less expensive in England than in Australia and junior counsel much less expensive. Ms Honour said that on balance the question of costs did not present to him as one in which there was a significant difference in the two countries and the fact that Akai had issued a writ out of the High Court of
Justice in England seemed to him to be material in weighing this matter in the balance. The other matters to which his Honour adverted were a submission by
Akai that documentary evidence would be required in the course of proving the case and that it may wish to join the broker as an additional defendant. His
Honour was unimpressed by these arguments. He concluded by saying: "In exercising my discretion
I think that the circumstances in which the bargain was made, the proper law of the contract, the fact that the parties have agreed to submit their disputes to the determination of English Courts and the desirability of parties being kept to their bargain, on balance, outweigh the considerations of inconvenience which have been advanced on behalf of Akai. I think that this conclusion is reinforced by Akai's own act in issuing the writ out of the High Court of Justice in
England in respect of the same matter. Accordingly I am of the opinion that there should be a stay of proceedings as sought by the People's
Insurance and I so order."
For this Court to interfere with his Honour's exercise of discretion in granting a stay of the proceedings it would need to be satisfied that his
Honour had erred in principle. I am unable to discern any such error. Akai submitted that avoidance of domestic statutory law was, in the circumstances of this case, contrary to public policy. Reference was made to
Golden Acres
Limited versus Queensland Estates Pty Limited [(1969) QdR 378], a case in which Hoare
J was satisfied that the attempted selection of some other law than that of
Queensland was for no other purpose than to avoid the operation of Queensland law and the consequences of illegality which would or might have followed if
Queensland law applied. His Honour concluded that the purported selection of the law of Hong Kong was not a bona fide selection. In the present case the local law which Akai wishes to invoke does not extend to apply to this policy of insurance. In my opinion the grant of a stay of proceedings was not contrary to public policy. It was pointed out that the stay may deprive Akai of a legitimate personal or juridical advantage - see generally MacShannon v
Rockware Glass Limited [(1978) AC 795] at 575. Undoubtedly this is a factor to be weighed in the scales but, it seems to me, the weight attached to it is much reduced in the present case by Akai's agreement to refer any dispute arising from the policy to the Courts of England. In my opinion no ground is shown for interfering with the order made by O'Keefe CJ CommD.
 
CONCLUSION
I would propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/37.html  
