

Nikolay Malakhov Shipping Co Ltd versus S.E.A.S. Sapfor Ltd and Anor Matter No
Ca 40459/97 [1998] NSWSC 65 (25 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 April 1998 
NIKOLAY MALAKHOV SHIPPING CO LTD versus S.E.A.S. SAPFOR LTD & ANOR 
CA 40459/97; Admiralty 3/95 March 1998 
Handley JA, Sheller JA, Cole JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Supreme Court - Admiralty Division - Hunter J 
FILE NO/S: CA40459/97;Admiralty 3/95 
DELIVERED: 25 March 1998 
HEARING DATE: 3, 5, 9 December 1997 
PARTIES: NIKOLAY MALAKHOV SHIPPING CO. LTD versus S.E.A.S. SAPFOR LTD & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: HANDLEY JA;SHELLER JA;COLE JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: A W Street SC/M K Condon 
Respondent: P E King/ M J Watts 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Norton Smith 
Respondent: Withnell & Co. 
CATCHWORDS: ADMIRALITY- Cargo claim by a consignee against a carrier - damage to cargo - application of Hague Rules - bill of lading - breach of contract - definition of "discharge" - timebar defence. Held: (1) Deviation to port of discharge was reasonable and within the terms of the contract of carriage (2) (By majority) No conflict between Hague Rules and bill of lading regarding carrier's responsibility relating to discharge (discussion regarding when discharge complete). (3) (By majority) Trial judge was right to reject the appellant's contention based upon a defence grounded on the time bar provisions of the Hague rules and clause 24 of the bill of lading. Bridge Shipping Pty Ltd versus Grand Shipping SA & Anor <case>; [(1991) 173 CLR 231] applied. 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 84 
NIKOLAY MALAKHOV SHIPPING CO LIMITED versus S.E.A.S. SAPFOR LIMITED & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: In this appeal I have had the benefit of reading the reasons for judgment of Sheller and Cole JJA. Cole JA has set out the relevant facts and the history of these proceedings and there is no need for me to repeat these matters. I agree with Cole JA that the respondents' challenge to the trial Judge's decision on the deviation issue fails. However I have the misfortune to differ from my brethren on the other issues. 
Time bar defence 
The goods were discharged from the ship at Port Kembla on 6 March 1994. They had been shipped from Port Kelang, Malaysia, on the Nikolay Malakhov under a bill of lading which incorporated the Hague Rules (Cl 2), which also applied by force of The Carriage of Goods by Sea Ordinance 1950 of the Federation of
Malaya. Article III r6 of the Rules provides that " ... The carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all liability in respect of loss or damage unless suit is brought within one year after delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered".

The goods were delivered in Sydney, the contractual destination, between 9 and March 1994. The statement of claim which commenced an action in personam in the Admiralty Division was filed on 1 March 1995. The bill of lading did not disclose the name of the owner or the carrier, but a search of Lloyds'
Register, provided by facsimile to the plaintiff's solicitors, disclosed that
Nikolay Malakhov Shipping Co Ltd of Limassol, Cyprus was the owner. However the solicitor who prepared the statement of claim misread the search and named the Far-Eastern Shipping Co of Vladivstock as the sole defendant.

The statement of claim makes it clear that the defendant was sued as the carrier. It alleged that the bill of lading was issued on behalf of the defendant who was the bailee of the goods shipped and a party to the contract of carriage. The plaintiff's discovered their mistake after the limitation period had expired and applied under SCR Pt 20 rr 1 and 4 for leave to substitute the owner as the defendant. They established a clear case under the rules, as Rolfe J held, and he made the order, but in my respectful opinion it is necessary to consider whether this power is available at all in a case such as this.

This time bar was long considered to be procedural in effect, barring the remedy but not extinguishing the right, but this view was rejected by the
House of Lords in Aries Tanker Corp versus Total Transport Ltd [[1977] 1 WLR .]
As Lord Wilberforce said at 188: "... it is a time bar of a special kind viz one which extinguishes the claim ... not one which as most English Statutes of Limitation ... do, bars the remedy which leaves the claim itself in existence ... the charterer's claim had not merely become unenforceable by action, it had simply ceased to exist ... It is a claim which ... had no existence in law".

See also The New York Star <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 300 (PC)] at 306; The Captain Gregos [[1990] 1 Lloyd's Rep ] at 315; and The Reefer Badger [(1996) 140 ALR 658] at 671-2.

Clause 2 of the Bill made the law of Malaysia the proper law of the contract of affreightment (see also Cl 31). There is no reason to doubt the efficacy of this choice as the law of Malaysia would prima facie have been the proper law in any event. See The Hollandia [[1983] 1 AC 565] at 573.

It has long been settled that the discharge of a contract in accordance with its proper law has international effect. Thus in Ellis versus M'Henry [(1871) LR CP 228] at 234 Bovill CJ said: "There is no doubt that a debt or liability arising in any country may be discharged by the law of that country, and that such a discharge, if it extinguishes the debt or liability and does not merely interfere with the remedies or course of procedure to enforce it, will be an effectual answer to the claim, not only in the courts of that country, but in any other country".

The reference to a debt or liability arising in any country is in modern parlance a reference to the proper law of the contract. See In re United
Railways of The Havana versus Regla Warehouses Ltd [[1958] Ch 724] at 746.

Matters of procedure are governed by the law of the forum, in this case New
South Wales, whereas the substantive rights of the parties are governed by the law of Malaysia as the proper law of the contract. The established principles which work out this distinction in the context of limitation legislation were summarised by the majority in McKain versus R W Miller & Company Pty Limited (South Australia) <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 1] at 40-1 as follows: "Traditionally a distinction has been drawn between substantive law (the subject of the conflict of law rules) and procedural law, which is governed by the lex fori alone. Though the dividing line is sometimes doubtful or even artificial, the need to distinguish between substantive law and procedural law is clearly recognised ... For the purpose of applying conflict of law rules
English courts have long adopted the distinction that a true statute of limitation which does no more than cut off resort to the courts for enforcement of a claim, is a procedural law, while a statute which extinguishes a civil liability and destroys a cause of action is a substantive law".

The effect of these principles is explained in Dicey & Morris, "The
Conflict of Laws", 12th Ed, 1993 at pp 185-6 as follows: "Where proceedings in England concern a matter which is under English choice of law rules to be governed by English law, i.e. English law is both the lex fori and the lex causae, nothing turns upon the classification of the
English Statute of Limitations which is applicable in any event. Where the lex causae is that of a foreign country difficult questions can arise ...
But once a substantive period of limitation of the lex causae has expired, no action can be maintained even though the procedural period of limitation imposed by the lex fori has not yet expired: in such a case there is simply no right left to be enforced".

The provisions of SCR Pt 20 rr 1 and 4 are laws of procedure which apply to this action as part of the law of the forum. Prima facie these rules and any orders made under them have no effect on the substantive rights of the parties under Malaysian law. However the Court must give effect to legislation in force in this State, including Rules of Court having statutory force, which affect the substantive rights in this State of parties to transactions otherwise governed by foreign law, if that intention is sufficiently clear.

Rules of Court made under <case> of the Supreme Court Act 1950 may regulate practice and procedure but cannot directly affect the substantive rights of the parties. The validity of Rules similar to these made pursuant to a power to regulate practice and procedure was upheld in Rodriguez versus R J Parker [[1967] 1 QB 116] and Mitchell versus Harris Engineering Company Ltd [[1967] 2 QB .]
See also Yew Bon Tew versus Kenderaan Bas Mara [[1983] 1 AC 553] at 563-5.

It follows that the relevant rules of this Court, and the order made under them by Rolfe J, have no application to a foreign limitation provision applicable as part of the proper law of the contract which has operated to effect a substantive discharge of the defendant's liability.

Mr King, counsel for the respondent, sought to meet these difficulties by reliance on the decision in Bridge Shipping Pty Limited versus Grand Shipping SA & Anor <case>; [(1991) 173 CLR 231] which expressly approved the decision of Clarke J in Lloyd
Steel Co (Aust) Pty Ltd versus Jade Shipping SA [(1985) 1 NSWLR 212.] Although these decisions establish that Rules of Court, such as Pt 20 rr 1 and 4, apply to contractual as well as statutory limitation provisions, they are not authority for the proposition that such Rules can displace the operation of a time bar under foreign law which has extinguished the cause of action. There is nothing to suggest that the defendants in those cases relied on the substantive effect, under foreign law, of this time bar, or referred to Aries
Tanker.

Aries Tanker was referred to by Cooper J in Teys Bros Pty Ltd (Beenleigh) v
ANL Cargo Operations Pty Ltd [[1990] 2 Qd R 288], but the loss occurred prior to loading in Brisbane so that the Hague Rules, including
Art III r 6, were not applicable. Moreover the proper law of the contract was that of Queensland. The power under Rules of Court to correct the name of the defendant was therefore available as part of the proper law, and as Dicey & Morris explain in the passage previously quoted, nothing turns on the substantive procedural distinction in such a case. This decision was referred to in Bridge Shipping during argument (234), and also in the judgments of
Dawson J at 244 and McHugh J at 258, but these references do not include pp -8, where Cooper J considered the substantive effect of the time bar under
Art III r 6.

In Bridge Shipping McHugh J, whose judgment was concurred in by Brennan CJ and Deane J, held that Lloyd Steel was correctly decided but he said the same about Evans Constructions Co Ltd versus Charrington & Co Ltd [[1983]
QB 810], a landlord and tenant case. In my respectful opinion both decisions were endorsed as correctly decided on the meaning of the relevant Rules of Court.

The Judges of the High Court who participated in Bridge Shipping do not appear to have had the present point in mind and therefore, in my judgment, it is not a decision on the present question. An amendment to the name of the third party was refused in that case, because the requirements of the Rules of
Court for such an amendment were not satisfied. A decision upholding Mr
Street's point therefore would not be inconsistent with the actual decision in
Bridge Shipping.

In my view, the decisions on the power to extend time for the commencement of arbitration proceedings, to which Sheller JA refers, are distinguishable. A power to extend time, which can be exercised after the time has expired, is a power to substitute the extended period for all purposes. In Consolidated
Investment & Contracting Co versus Saponaria Shipping Co Ltd [[1978] 1 WLR ], the Court of Appeal exercised the power to extend time under <case> of the
Arbitration Act after the expiration of the one year limitation period under Art III r 6. The arbitration was being conducted in England, pursuant to an arbitration clause in the charter party. English law was therefore the proper law of the arbitration agreement (Dicey & Morris, above, at 577), and was probably the proper law of the contract of affreightment.

The situation was similar in Australian Shipping Commission versus Kooragang
Cement Pty Ltd <case>; [[1988] VR 29](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1988%5d%20VR%2029 "View LawCiteRecord" ), where the charter party provided for the arbitration of disputes in
Melbourne (35), and the law of Victoria was the proper law of the arbitration agreement, and probably of the contract of affreightment. As Dicey &
Morris state, in the passage previously quoted, nothing turns on the distinction between procedural and substantive limitation provisions where the same law governs both procedure and substantive rights. This situation also applied in Proctor versus Jetway Aviation Pty Ltd [[1984] 1 NSWLR 166], where the substantive limitation provision incorporated by the [Civil Aviation (Carriers Liability) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cala1967327/)  was held to be subject to the operation of the Rules of this Court.

The conclusion I have reached on principle is supported by The Jay Bola [[1992] 1 QB 907] to which we were referred for the first time on the third day of the argument. The writ in a cargo claim was issued in time but not against the owner of the vessel. An attempt by the plaintiff to substitute the name of the owner after the one year limitation period had expired was refused. At -3 Hobhouse J said: "... Ord 20, r 5 (similar to SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cala1967327/index.html#p20) r 4) cannot deprive a party of a substantive defence. Neither the statutory provisions under which the rule was made nor any general power to regulate the procedure of the courts can deprive a person of an accrued substantive legal right or, more precisely in the present context, create a substantive legal cause of action which did not previously exist. If Ord 20, r 5 and the inclusion in it of the words `any applicable limitation period' is to be construed as referring to substantive provisions which extinguish causes of action, it would, in my judgment, be ultra vires; but the correct approach is that the words must be read as referring only to limitation periods properly so called which impose a procedural restriction only. Where the Hague
Rules time limit is involved, the rule will not assist a party whose cause of action has already been extinguished".

This decision has been followed on this issue in The Anna L [[1994] 2
Lloyd's Rep 379] at 389-390. Compare The Reefer Badger [(1996) 140
ALR 658] at 662-3.

Mr King argued that the appellant should have appealed from Rolfe J and it was now too late for it to take this point. The notice of appeal did not challenge the interlocutory judgment of Rolfe J but only the final judgment in which
Hunter J rejected the defendant's submission that the substantive discharge under Art III r 6 could not be displaced by an order under the rules.

Rolfe J did not decide in terms that an order under the rules could displace a substantive discharge under Art III r 6 and this question was not res judicata before Hunter J. Even if it had been, the decision of Rolfe J could have been reviewed on an appeal from the final judgment. See Crowley v
Glissan <case>; [(1905) 2 CLR 402], Bunning versus Cross <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54] at 82, and National Employers Mutual General Insurance
Association Ltd versus Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Ltd [(1989) 17 NSWLR ]
at 231, 238. This Court is therefore free to decide this question.

It is necessary to consider whether the original action was a "suit ...
brought within one year" within the meaning of Art III r 6. The rule does not define the nature of the suit which will prevent "the carrier and the ship" from being discharged from all liability. The original proceedings were clearly not against the ship, but were they against "the carrier"? There is authority in England that properly constituted proceedings displace the time bar under Art III r 6 and enable other proceedings to be commenced later. See
The Nordglimt [[1988] 1 QB 183] where timely proceedings in personam in Belgium enabled proceedings in rem to be commenced in England outside the time limit. Hobhouse J said at 192: "Once one identifies the relevant question as being whether the cargo owner has done something within the year sufficient to prevent the liability of the carrier from being discharged at the end of that year, one then can see that the answer depends upon what event will satisfy the criterion `suit is brought'. An action brought by somebody who has no title to sue the carrier, as was the case in Compania Colombiana De Seguros versus Pacific Steam Navigation
Co [[1965] 1 QB 101] clearly cannot suffice to prevent the carrier from being discharged from liability: `suit brought must mean suit brought by the person properly entitled to bring it' (per Roskill J at p 129). The plaintiff must accordingly be the competent plaintiff in respect of the cause of action which the plaintiff is seeking to assert in the subsequent proceedings ... By a parity of reasoning, just as an action by an incompetent or irrelevant plaintiff would not suffice to prevent the carrier from being discharged, so also an action before an incompetent court would not suffice".

This decision was approved by the Court of Appeal in The Amazona [[1989] 2
Lloyd's Rep 130] at 135-6 and was followed in The Leni [[1992] 2
Lloyd's Rep 48] at 56-8, The Havhelt [[1993] 1 Lloyd's Rep 523] at , and The Finnrose [[1994] 1 Lloyd's Rep 559] at , 575. See also The Reefer Badger at 667-9, 676-8.

In The Jay Bola [[1992] 1 QB 907] at 921 the same Judge, after referring to The Nordglimt, said: "In that case it was not necessary to consider the effect of proceedings brought against someone other than the carrier or the ship. But it was implicit, as it is implicit in Article III Rule 6 itself, that the suit must have been brought against the carrier or the ship".

The error in this case was not a mere misnomer which did not affect the identity of the party sued and could be corrected by the Court under its inherent jurisdiction without the need to join a new party. Compare Bridge
Shipping at 239, 255, The Joanna Borchard [[1988] 2 Lloyd's Rep 274] at , and The Anna L [[1994] 2 Lloyd's Rep 379] at
It must follow that suit was not brought against the appellant within the limitation period, and it was discharged from all liability prior to the amendment. In my opinion therefore the appeal should be allowed on this ground.

Art III, r 2 of the Hague Rules 
The diversion of the vessel into Port Kembla was an exercise of the liberty conferred on the carrier by cl 7 (3) of the bill of lading. This provides: "(3) Should it appear that ... labour troubles ... would prevent the vessel from ... reaching or entering port of discharging or there discharging in the usual manner and leaving again all of which safely and without delay the
Master may discharge the cargo at ... any other port as considered safe and convenient by the Master or the carrier".

The obligation to discharge the cargo at Port Kembla thus fell upon the owners. The vessel discharged at the multi purpose berth and arrangements were made for the cargo to be transported by road to the open bond store of Tex
Transport Pty Ltd (Tex Transport) for quarantine clearance and later collection for transport to Sydney.

The physical operation of discharging the cargo from the vessel to the dock was completed without incident, as was the movement by road to the bond store.
However the goods were there stored in the open, without protection from the weather, and were damaged by rain.

Article III r 2 relevantly provides that "the carrier shall properly and carefully ... discharge the goods carried". The presently settled construction of this article in Anglo-Australian law leaves the parties free to allocate among themselves the responsibility for performing the operations covered by this article. The effect of the rule is that where the carrier has undertaken responsibility for performing such an operation in whole or in part it will be bound to do so properly and carefully. As Devlin J said in Pyrene Co Ltd v
Scindia Navigation Co Ltd [[1954] 2 QB 402] at 418, the object of this rule "is to define not the scope of the contract service but the terms on which that service is to be performed". See also G H Renton & Co Ltd versus Palmyra Trading Corporation of Panama [[1957] AC 149] at 169-70, 174 ; Albacora SRL versus Westcott & Laurance Line, Ltd [[1966] 2
Lloyd's Rep 58] at 64 (Albacora); The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd v
Gamlen Chemical Co (A/asia) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 142] at 163 (Gamlen).

The judgments of Sheller and Cole JJA demonstrate that the carrier's responsibility under this bill of lading for the continued safety of the goods ceased when they were safely discharged on to the wharf. There is therefore no question of this carrier being liable under Art III r 2 for damage to the goods while they were in the bond store or during land transport merely because they were not "properly and carefully" handled, carried, kept or cared for during those operations. Liability was found by the trial Judge on a completely different basis.

The vessel owned by the appellant was under time charter to SEAS Shipping & Trading Pty Ltd and was operated by Pineseas Maritime Pte Ltd . Pacific Asia Express Pty Ltd (Asia Express) acted as the
Australian agents for Pineseas.

The contract for bond storage was made by Asia Express as agent for Pineseas with Tex Transport. It was evidenced by facsimile messages from Tex Transport to Asia Express of 24 February and 4 March 1994, and provided for "outside storage for seven (7) days" in Tex Transport's bond store at Port Kembla. The amended quotation was accepted orally by Mr Blackwell of Asia Express. The vessel discharged this cargo between 6.30 pm on 5 March and 11 am on 6 March.
The Judge made the following findings: "It is indisputable that the conduct of Asia Express in contracting for the discharge of the cargo into open storage bond was an act of negligence on its part. Blackwell was unequivocal in his `shocked' response to the information that the cargo had been rain damaged while in open storage with Tex Transport.
During cross-examination he made no bones about the fact that the cargo should not have been stored in the open and, had he realised that the contract with
Tex Transport called for open storage, he would have insisted on covered storage".

The Judge's ultimate conclusions on this issue were as follows: "In my view the act of contracting for and discharging the subject cargo into open bond storage, an act which `shocked' Blackwell, and which Kirkland (a marine surveyor) regarded as `totally wrong' should be treated as a serious breach of the obligation to `properly' or to `carefully' discharge the cargo ... The failure of the owner to properly and carefully discharge the cargo may be looked at in two ways; viz: 
The act of the ship's agent in contracting for the discharge of the cargo into open bond storage, and 
The act of the ship's agent in causing the discharge of the cargo to Tex
Transport for open bond storage.

In my view the duty imposed on the carrier by Article III r 2 is not satisfied by a damage-free transfer of the cargo from vessel to wharf or from vessel to
Tex Transport trucks. On the owner's argument its duty in discharging would be satisfied by discharging the cargo on to a wharf being consumed gradually by fire or a wharf that was known to lack the stability to support the cargo.
While the duty ... may be seen as one requiring use of a `sound system' without `geographical significance' I do not see that description as robbing the act of discharge of the character of being performed improperly and carelessly when it consists of discharge into open storage of cargo which, of its nature, was well known to require covered storage".

These conclusions find initial support in the established construction of Art
III, r 2 which requires certain operations, including that of discharge when undertaken by the carrier, to be performed "properly and carefully". In
Renton at 166, Viscount Kilmuir said: "The natural and ordinary meaning of `properly' in antithesis to `carefully' in the phrase `properly and carefully load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for and discharge' is in accordance with a sound system. It has not a geographical significance".

This passage was approved in Albacora at 58, 62. At 64, Lord Pearson said, in a passage approved in Gamlen at 149, 163, 168: "The word `properly' adds something to `carefully', if `carefully' has a narrow meaning of merely taking care. The element of skill or sound system is required in addition to taking care".

Where the carrier undertakes to discharge the cargo, but sub contracts this work to stevedores, it will remain bound by its obligation under Art III r 2 to carefully and properly discharge the cargo. The carrier therefore will be responsible for any damage to the goods during actual discharge. In such a case the care or lack of it exercised by the carrier in the selection and employment of the stevedores will be irrelevant.

The stevedores may however damage or lose the goods after they have been safely discharged. The carrier will not be liable for such losses under a bill of lading such as this merely because the stevedore was negligent, but the position would in my view be different if the carrier had negligently appointed incompetent stevedores. Compare The Saudi Prince (No 2) [[1986] 1
Lloyd's Rep 347] at 355. A carrier, who negligently engaged incompetent stevedores, would in my view be in breach of its personal obligation to put in place "a sound system" for the discharge of cargo and render itself liable for post-discharge loss or damage causally related to its negligence.

The same situation would apply in the examples mentioned by the trial Judge if the goods were discharged without damage onto an obviously unsafe wharf. The
Judge's comments on that situation echo those of Lord Shaw in Thomas Wilson,
Sons & Co Limited versus Cargo Ex SS Galileo [[1915] AC 199] at 205: "The course of transhipment adopted by the appellants was to put these valuable goods ... into a lighter, and upon the evidence it is demonstrated that they might as well have been put into an eggshell ... In principle ...
there is no difference between the case of a man pretending to fulfil his obligation of transhipment by putting goods into an unseaworthy lighter and the case of a man pretending to fulfil his obligation of transhipment by putting the goods into the sea. For all purposes in law and in fact these goods are just the same as if they had been negligently dropped by the ship owner ... into the bottom of the dock".

The carrier's responsibility for the careful and proper discharge of the cargo must, in my judgment, include the making of proper arrangements for the reception and care of the goods on shore. The discharge of cargo by the use of the ship's gear onto a wharf in good condition, without proper arrangements for the cargo to be stored and looked after until collected by the consignee, would not fulfil the carrier's obligation under Art III r 2. When in Renton the owners unloaded the vessel in Hamburg because of a strike in the Port of
London, they were bound, in my view, to make proper arrangements for the cargo to be received and stored in Hamburg pending instructions from the consignee.
That vessel could not, without breach of Art III r 2, have unloaded the goods without more and sailed away. A similar obligation attached to this carrier when it diverted this vessel to Port Kembla.

The carrier's obligation under Art III r 2 to make proper arrangements for the reception and care of the goods on shore will also attach to a carrier who is to discharge freezer cargo. Loss or damage to such cargo on shore is inevitable unless proper arrangements are made before discharge. See generally
The Arawa [[1977] 2 Lloyd's Rep 416] at and Mayhew Foods Limited versus Overseas Containers Ltd [[1984] 1 Lloyd's
Rep 317] at 319.

These conclusions are reinforced by decisions of the United States Federal
Courts in their Admiralty jurisdiction. In Tan Hi versus United States of America [(1951) 1 AMC 127] at 130, Goodman DJ held that an ocean carrier at common law was bound to discharge at "a fit wharf". See also J Kinderman & Sons v
Nippon Yusen Kaisha Lines [(1971) 1 AMC 743] at 746. In
Levatino Company versus American President Lines, Ltd <case>; [337 F. 2d 729] (1964), the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held the carrier liable for freezing damage to chestnuts after they had been discharged. The Court said at 729-30: "The basic question is whether President Lines `properly delivered' the chestnuts ... a `proper delivery' implicitly requires that the cargo be placed upon a fit wharf at the port of destination ... But here, even though the evidence established that fresh chestnuts are likely to freeze in a temperature range from 20 F to 28 F, President Lines began unloading bags of chestnuts when the thermometer had dipped as low as 20 F ... Moreover the pier upon which the bags were unloaded was unheated and no emergency heating equipment was available. Even when bags were covered with tarpaulin the icy wind could reach the chestnuts from underneath the pallets on which they were piled. And some of the chestnuts were stored in the section of the pier where the doors were opened or not permanently secured. Under the circumstances the
District Court Judge was justified in holding that most of the deliveries to the unheated pier were not `proper'. An ordinarily safe wharf is not `fit' for deliveries or storage if it is being inundated by extraordinarily cold air any more than if it is being flooded by waves of water. Here the weather was cold enough to create a serious hazard of freezing. At the very least President
Lines should have taken minimal steps to protect the chestnuts ... It is true that cl 12 of the bill of lading disclaimed responsibility for furnishing special heating facilities at the discharge pier. But that clause could relieve President Lines of liability for lack of due care only if it had made `proper deliveries' which it did not".

F J Walker Limited versus M/V Lemoncore [(1978) 1 AMC 300], a decision of the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, raised similar issues in relation to freezer cargo. The Court said at 304-5 that under general principles of maritime law, a carrier is obliged to place the cargo on a fit wharf and continued: "... the District Court found that the accumulation of frozen meat in the unrefrigerated section of the dock and its consequent thawing was by `reason of a shortage of terminal personnel, a high rate of discharge by the stevedoring personnel from the Lemoncore, and/or a large number of mixed bills of lading'. Considering these factors the Court concluded that the
Lemoncore `failed to make proper delivery ... in that (the) perishable cargo of frozen meat product was discharged by the carrier to an unfit wharf '. The
Court also held that the discharge occurred under circumstances `that would obviously result in damage' ...".

I find these cases persuasive in the context of the carrier's obligation to discharge the cargo under Art III r 2, although they were decided in the context of the Harter Act which extends the obligation of the carrier beyond discharge to delivery. The principles applied in those cases were said either to be based on general principles of common or maritime law or were focussed on discharge rather than later delivery.

This view of the scope of the obligation to discharge under Art III r 2 also finds support in the decision of the Supreme Court of Pakistan in East &
West Steamship Company versus Hossain Bros [[1968] 2 Lloyd's Rep 145] where the Hague Rules governed the discharge of goods into a lighter at
Chittagong. Fazle-Akbar J, delivering the leading judgment, said at 149: "... it was the duty of the ship owners to see that the lighter was seaworthy in the ordinary sense of the word, that is to say, it was structurally fit for reception and carriage of particular goods. Now the evidence has established that the lighter had no fixed cover to protect the cargo from rain ... As the cargo consisted of valuable goods it was the bounden duty of the ship owner or his agents before discharging the cargo, to be satisfied that the lighter was properly equipped for the purpose. This they did not do".

This approach makes the carrier liable for its own acts and defaults in failing to establish and observe a proper system for the safe discharge of the cargo. If the carrier complies with this obligation, it will not be liable for the acts and defaults of others in the care and handling of the goods. Thus in
The Arawa [[1977] 2 Lloyd's Rep 416] at Brandon J, speaking of the arrangements made by the carrier in that case for the movement of freezer cargo during a strike, said: "The conclusion which I have reached on the evidence is that the ship owners were not personally negligent ... I think that they acted reasonably in making with Chambers Wharf the contract which they did make and in leaving them to carry it out without supervision".

If the appellant's obligation under Art III r 2 for the discharge of the cargo included an obligation to make proper contractual arrangements for the reception and custody of this timber in Port Kembla, there can be no doubt on the Judge's findings, which were unchallenged, that the appellant failed to perform this obligation. The duty so understood was not onerous. In this case it would have been performed if Asia Express had contracted with Tex Transport for inside instead of outside storage.

The Court heard extensive argument on the effect of various exclusion clauses in the bill of lading but on the view that I have taken these questions do not arise because Art III r 8 renders null and void any clause in the bill of lading which would relieve the carrier from liability for breach of Art III r or lessen its liability for such a breach.

In my opinion therefore the appeal from the Judge's findings and conclusions on liability should fail. In the result, because of my conclusions on the time bar issue, I agree that the appeal should be allowed. In the circumstances I would have proposed a special order as to costs, but I need not formulate such an order since mine is a minority view.

NIKOLAY MALAKHOV SHIPPING CO LIMITED versus S.E.A.S. SAPFOR LIMITED & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: A defendant shipowner appeals from a decision of Hunter J sitting in Admiralty. His Honour decided the proceedings in favour of the plaintiffs, the consignee and shipper of a cargo of timber which had been carried to Port Kembla on the defendant's vessel and damaged in store after it had left the defendant's vessel. I have had the benefit of reading in draft the judgment of Cole JA. His Honour has set out the salient facts and those parts of the bill of lading and the Hague Rules which, under cl 2 of the bill, the general paramount clause, applied to the contract of carriage which the bill evidenced. 
THE HAGUE RULES 
The Hague Rules are divided into nine Articles. Article I assigns meanings to the following expressions "carrier", "contract of carriage", "goods", "ship" and "carriage of goods". The expression "contract of carriage" applies only to contracts of carriage covered by a bill of lading or any similar document of title, in so far as such document relates to the carriage of goods by sea, from the moment at which such bill of lading or similar document of title regulates the relations between a carrier and a holder of the same. The expression "carriage of goods" covers the period from the time when the goods are loaded on to the time when they are discharged from the ship. When applicable, as in the present case, the Rules impose themselves on a contract of carriage covered by a bill of lading in so far as the document "relates" to the carriage of goods by sea, meaning the series of operations which start with loading on and finish with discharge from the ship.

Article II is pivotal and, subject only to Article VI which applies in special circumstances not here relevant, provides that under every contract of carriage of goods by sea the carrier, in relation to the loading, handling, stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of such goods, shall be subject to the responsibilities and liabilities, and entitled to the rights and immunities thereinafter set forth. The present case concerns an act of negligence which related to the storage of the goods, the subject of the contract of carriage, after they had left the vessel and been carried to and placed in the store.

Article III prescribes the responsibilities and liabilities of the carrier.
Rule 2 of that Article provides that, subject to the provisions of Article IV, which is concerned with rights and immunities, "the carrier shall properly and carefully load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for and discharge the goods carried". To the extent that it applies, rule 2 fixes the carrier with the obligation properly and carefully to perform the operations referred to in
Article II, that is to say, those operations occurring during the period from loading on to discharge covered by the expression "carriage of goods" under
Article I. As will be seen, Article VII applies to the period "prior to the loading on" and "subsequent to the discharge from the ship".

Seventy years ago in Gosse Millerd versus Canadian Government Merchant Marine,
Limited [[1927] 2 KB 432] at 434, Wright J, later Lord Wright of Durley, who had been a pupil of Scrutton, said that the word "discharge" in Art III, r2 "......... is used, I think, in place of the word `deliver,' because the period of responsibility to which the Act and Rules apply (Art I (e)) ends when they are discharged from the ship. Art III, r3, requires the bill of lading to state (inter alia) `the apparent order and condition of the goods,' that is, on shipment.

The words `properly discharge' in Art III, r2, mean, I think, `deliver from the ship's tackle in the same apparent order and condition as on shipment,' unless the carrier can excuse himself under Art IV. Hence the carrier's failure so to deliver must constitute a prima facie breach of his obligations, casting on him the onus to excuse that breach." 
The Court of Appeal reversed the decision (Scrutton LJ was one of the majority) but it was restored by the House of Lords [[1929] AC 223.] So far as I am aware, Wright J's dictum stands unchallenged. If shore tackle is used, discharge is treated as complete when the goods cross the ship's rail; Tetley,
Marine Cargo Claims, 3rd ed, 14.

Rule 8 of Article III makes null and void and of no effect any clause, covenant or agreement in a contract of carriage which relieves the carrier or the ship from liability for loss or damage to or in connection with goods arising from negligence, fault or failure in the duties and obligations provided in Article III or lessening such liability otherwise than as provided in the Rules.

Article IV, r4 excuses "any reasonable deviation" and r5 provides for a package or unit limitation on liability. Article V, "Surrender of Rights and
Immunities and Increase of Responsibilities and Liabilities by a Carrier" has no present relevance. Article VII, which is headed "Limitations on the
Application of the Rules", provides that nothing therein contained shall prevent a carrier or a shipper from entering into any agreement, stipulation, condition, reservation or exemption as to the responsibility and liability of the carrier or the ship for loss or damage to or in connection with the custody and care and handling of goods "prior to the loading on and subsequent to the discharge from the ship on which the goods are carried by sea".
Articles VIII and IX are not presently relevant.

BILL OF LADING 
By the signing of the bill of lading the carrier acknowledged that it received the goods described to be transported from the port of loading to the port of discharge, Sydney, "there to be delivered". Clause 3 of the bill of lading (Period of Responsibility) is divided into two sentences. The first purports to excuse the carrier or his agent from liability for loss or damage to the goods "after the goods leave the ship's deck in discharging port, howsoever such loss or damage arises." Arguably, Article III r8 of the Hague Rules made this clause null and void and of no effect since the carrier's responsibility for discharge of the goods, consistent with its agreement to transport them to the port of discharge there to be delivered, extends to the moment when they cross the ship's rail or are delivered from the ship's tackle, depending upon whether shore tackle or the ship's tackle is used.

However, the second sentence of cl 3 provides: "Goods in the custody of the carrier or his servants before loading and after discharge whether being forwarded to or from the ship or whether awaiting shipment landed or stored, or put into hulk or craft belonging to the carrier or not, or pending transhipment at any stage of the whole transport, are in such custody of the sole risk of the merchant and the carrier shall not be liable for loss or damage arising or resulting from any cause whatsoever." 
This does not relieve the carrier from liability for loss or damage to the goods arising from negligence or fault or failure in the duties and obligations provided in Article III. Nor does it lessen such liability otherwise than as provided in the Rules since the period of the carriage of goods for the purpose of the Rules ends when the goods are discharged from the ship. Put another way, "contract of carriage" in Article II applies only in so far as the bill of lading relates to the carriage of goods by sea. Therefore, the second sentence of cl 3 remains effective and applies after the goods have been discharged from the ship.

Clause 5 (Substitution of Vessel, Transhipment and Forwarding) enables the carrier to carry the goods to their port of destination by other vessels or other means of transport "and to tranship land and store the goods either on shore or afloat and reship and forward the same at Carrier's expense but at
Merchant's risk." The clause continues: "When the ultimate destination at which the Carrier may have engaged to deliver the goods is other than the vessel's port of discharge, the Carrier acts as Forwarding Agent only. The responsibility of the Carrier shall be limited to the part of transport performed by him on vessels under his management and no claim will be acknowledged by the Carrier for damage or loss arising during any other part of the transport even though the freight for the whole transport has been collected by him." 
The first sentence of cl 6 provides: "The Carrier retain [sic] the option of delivery at all times from the ship's [sic] or from craft, hulk, custom house, warehouse, wharf or quay, in all cases at the risk of the Merchant and all expenses incurred by delivery otherwise than from the ship's [sic] shall be borne by the Merchant." 
Clause 7 provides, relevantly, as follows: "(3) Should it appear that ....... labour troubles, labour obstructions, strikes, lockouts or congestion arising therefrom, any of which onboard or on shore difficulties in loading or discharging or any other cause whatsoever beyond the Carrier's control would prevent the vessel from ........ reaching or entering the port of discharging or there discharging in the usual manner and leaving again all of which safely and without delay the Master may discharge the cargo at port of loading or any other port as considered safe and convenient by the Master or the Carrier.

The discharge under the provisions of this clause of any cargo for which
Bill of Lading has been issued shall be deemed due fulfilment of the contract.
......" 
The clause qualifies the obligation to carry the goods to Sydney and provides a substituted method of performing the contract in the circumstances specified.

CARRIER'S OBLIGATION TO DISCHARGE 
In Pyrene Co Limited versus Scindia Navigation Co Limited [[1954] 2 QB 402] at 417-8,
Devlin J said: "The phrase `shall properly and carefully load' may mean that the carrier shall load and that he shall do it properly and carefully: or that he shall do whatever loading he does properly and carefully. The former interpretation perhaps fits the language more closely, but the latter may be more consistent with the object of the rules. Their object as it is put, I think, correctly in
Carver's Carriage of Goods by Sea, 9th ed; (1952), p186, is to define not the scope of the contract service but the terms on which that service is to be performed. ....... I see no reason why the rules should not leave the parties free to determine by their own contract the part which each has to play." 
In GH Renton & Co Limited versus Palmyra Trading Corporation of Panama [[1957] AC 149] at 170,172, 173 and 174, at least four members of the House of Lords agreed with what Devlin J said.

On the other hand the United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit, in
Associated Metals & Minerals Corporation versus M/V Arktis Sky 978F 2d 47 (Second Cir 1992) at 49 confirmed earlier decisions of the Second Circuit that
Article III r2 of the Hague Rules as incorporated in the United States
Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1936 (COGSA) created a non-delegable duty on behalf of the vessel to load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for and discharge the goods carried. A conclusion that vessels could be held liable for cargo damages only in cases where the vessel exercised control over the stowage or the stevedores was said to be directly contrary to the equivalent of Article III r8. At 52 the Court said that the parties cannot by private agreement circumvent the legislative purposes of the Act. The vessel might exonerate its responsibility by carrying its burden of proof that the damage did not occur because of its own acts under the equivalent of Article IV r2 and (q). No mention was made of the English cases. Devlin J suggested that the interpretation preferred by the Court of Appeals might fit the language more closely. Professor Martin Davies has observed ("Two Views of Free In and
Out, Stowed Clauses in Bills of Lading", [22 Australian Business Law
Review, 198] at 203 and following) that this interpretation accords with the express intention of those responsible for drafting that part of the Hague
Rules.

In Gosse Millerd in the Court of Appeal [[1928] 1 KB 717] at 732,
Scrutton LJ said that except in some exceptional periods the United States of
America had not been a shipowning country and had approached shipping matters from the point of view of the cargo owners. "I cannot think that their decisions, while treated with great respect, should necessarily control the shipping decisions of the Courts of the greatest ship owning country of the world." Devlin J's dictum may, in an appropriate case, call for review. If it does, the United States approach rather than the English approach, may be apposite in Australia.

In the present case, in my opinion, the carrier by agreeing to deliver the goods to the port of discharge undertook to discharge the goods at that port and was accordingly by operation of the Hague Rules obliged to do so properly and carefully. It is unnecessary to consider whether this obligation could legitimately have been lessened if the consignee had agreed to be responsible for discharging the goods.

DISCHARGE AT PORT KEMBLA 
The House of Lords in Renton & Co versus Palmyra Trading Corporation considered the effect of the Hague Rules on clauses in bills of lading which in three cases provided for carriage to London and in one case for carriage to
Hull. The clauses were relevantly indistinguishable from clause 7 (3) and (4) of the appellant's bill of lading. At 168 Lord Morton of Henryton, with whom
Lord Cohen agreed, said that the contract contained in one of the bills of lading under consideration, read as a whole, provided in effect "that the goods must be carried to London unless there occurs an event specified in one or other of the provisos already mentioned; but if such event happens, the goods may be discharged elsewhere, and such discharge is to be deemed to be due fulfilment of the contract." See also pages 165, 172 and 174.

Their Lordships made plain that although the contracts evidenced by the bills of lading provided in three cases for carriage to London and in one case for carriage to Hull, in the circumstances, they were fulfilled by carriage to
Hamburg. In the present case, by parity of reasoning, the contract was fulfilled by the carriage of the goods to Port Kembla and the discharge there of the goods from the ship. I agree with Cole JA for the reasons he has given that the circumstances proved allowed the carrier to discharge the goods at
Port Kembla and that in accordance with cl 7 (4) the discharge should be treated as due fulfilment of the contract.

RESPONSIBILITY FOR NEGLIGENCE 
The carrier did not purport to make the goods available for delivery in Port
Kembla. It agreed and arranged for them to be carried on to Sydney for delivery there. This was done pursuant to the contract evidenced by the bill of lading.

In Port Jackson Stevedoring Pty Limited versus Salmond & Spraggon (Australia)
Pty Limited <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 300] at 309 Lord Wilberforce delivered the judgment of the Privy
Council. After referring to cll 5 and 8 of the bill of lading, which defined the carrier's responsibility as terminating as soon as the goods left the ship's tackle at the port of discharge and dealt with delivery, his Lordship said: "These provisions must be interpreted in the light of the practice that consignees rarely take delivery of the goods at the ship's rail but will normally collect them after some period of storage on or near the wharf. The parties must therefore have contemplated that the carrier, if it did not store the goods itself, would employ some other person to do so. ...... These practical considerations, which are developed in the judgment of the Chief
Justice, explain the somewhat intricate interrelation of cll 5 and 8." 
In the High Court Barwick CJ <case>; [(1978) 139 CLR 231] at 251-253 described the course followed in handling general cargo off loaded from the carrying ship as a practice to which judicial knowledge extended. At 251-2 his Honour said: "It is necessary in the practical course of the unloading of a ship that the cargo be progressively removed from the ship's side. It could not be just left where and as it emerged from the tackles. Generally it is placed in a shed on the wharf, or at any rate at a point well removed from the ship's side, being sorted and stacked appropriately for delivery to the various consignees.
Inevitably, either the ship or a stevedore must do this work. Clearly enough, each consignee could not either attend to take his consignment or send a stevedore of his own to handle it. The practical course in general is for the stevedore who undertakes to discharge the ship to remove the cargo to store as it becomes free of the ship's tackles. Of course, the carrier may itself fill the role of stevedore instead of engaging an independent contractor to stevedore the cargo, in which case the carrier acting as stevedore removes and stores the cargo. As I have indicated, the bill of lading deals with the carrier's liability if the carrier does handle the cargo after it has left the ship's tackles. ....... It is apparent, therefore, that in order to facilitate the practical course of cargo handling some arrangement for the removal of the goods from the place on the wharf where they rest after release from the ship's tackles must be made before the ship's arrival. Therefore the carrier, unless it acts itself as stevedore, engages a stevedore to remove, sort and stack the cargo when it is free of the slings: and does so in advance of the arrival or expected arrival of a ship." 
The trial Judge said that it was indisputable that the conduct by Pacific Asia
Express Pty Limited as agent for Pineseas Maritime Pte Limited, the ship's agent, in contracting for the discharge of the cargo into open storage bond was an act of negligence on its part. The issue was whether the carrier was liable for this negligence. His Honour said: "For the purposes of this case, the primary obligation of the carrier is to be found in Art III r 2 and, in particular, the obligation to `properly and carefully discharge the goods carried'. In my view the act of contracting for and discharging the subject cargo into open bond storage, an act which `shocked' Blackwell and which Kirkland regarded as `totally wrong', should be treated as a serious breach of the obligation to `properly' or to `carefully' discharge the cargo." 
With the greatest respect I disagree with his Honour's conclusion. In my opinion, the last operation for which the carrier was responsible by force of the Hague Rules was the discharge of the goods from the ship. That operation was complete either when the goods crossed the ship's rail or when they were delivered from the ship's tackle, if the ship's tackle was used. From that moment any operations undertaken were not subject to the Hague Rules and the obligation of the carrier in respect of them must be found elsewhere.

If the carrier had by its own employees, rather than by an independent contractor, removed the goods to store from the place where they left the unloading tackle, and had done so negligently, the terms of the contract evidenced by the bill of lading would have exempted it from liability. This would have been so if the carrier had negligently decided to place the goods in store in the open. In this case, the result can be no different because the carrier employs an independent contractor to arrange the storage.

In my opinion, the responsibilities placed upon the carrier by application to the contract of the Hague Rules cease, in the circumstances of this case, when the goods crossed the ship's rail or were delivered from the ship's tackle. At that point within the meaning of the expression "carriage of goods" and
Article II and Article III, r2, and Article VII the goods had been discharged from the ship in due fulfilment of the contract. The parties had agreed that subsequent to discharge from the ship, goods in the custody of the carrier or his servants should be at the sole risk of the merchant and the carrier should not be liable for loss or damage arising or resulting from any cause whatsoever; cl 3. To the extent that the goods were to be forwarded on from
Port Kembla or stored the same was "at Carrier's expense but at Merchant's risk"; cl 5.

TIME BAR DEFENCE The statement of claim was issued on 1 March 1995. The defendant was named as Far Eastern Shipping Co. On 9 June 1995 that defendant, an existing entity, filed a defence that it was neither the owner nor the operator of the vessel nor the carrier under the bill of lading. On 24 July 1995 the plaintiffs applied to amend the statement of claim to substitute another entity, the present appellant, Nikolay Malakov Shipping Co Limited, in place of Far Eastern Shipping Co pursuant to Part 20, rules 1 and 4 of the [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/). 
Rule 1, which is headed "General", so far as presently material, provides: "(1) The Court may, at any stage of any proceedings, on application by any party or of its own motion, order that any document in the proceedings be amended, or that any party have leave to amend any document in the proceedings, in either case in such manner as the Court thinks fit.

All necessary amendments shall be made for the purpose of determining the real questions raised by or otherwise depending on the proceedings, or of correcting any defect or error in any proceedings, or of avoiding multiplicity of proceedings.

Where there has been a mistake in the name of a party, sub-rule (1) applies to the person intended to be made a party as if he were a party." 
Rule 4, which is headed "Statutes of limitation", so far as presently material, provides: "(1) Where any relevant period of limitation expires after the date of filing of a statement of claim and after that expiry an application is made under rule 1 for leave to amend the statement of claim by making the amendment mentioned in any of sub-rules (3) ....... the Court may in the circumstances mentioned in that sub-rule make an order giving leave accordingly, notwithstanding that that period has expired.

Where there has been a mistake in the name of a party and the Court is satisfied that the mistake was not misleading nor such as to cause reasonable doubt as to the identity of the person intended to be made a party, the court may make an order for leave to make an amendment to correct the mistake, whether or not the effect of the amendment is to substitute a new party.

An amendment made pursuant to an order made under this rule shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, relate back to the date of filing the statement of claim." 
To some extent these rules reflect and seek to resolve problems that historically have arisen when one party sought to correct a mistake in the naming of another party in the pleading documents. The mistake may be a misnomer in its simplest form, the misspelling or omission of part of a name;
Whittam versus W J Daniel & Co Limited [[1962] 1 QB 271.] But amendment became more complicated if the mistake involved using the name of an existing entity, when clearly it was intended to refer to another entity, and the relevant limitation period had expired; J Robertson & Co versus Ferguson
Transporters Pty Limited [(1970) 44 ALJR 441.] In such cases the effect of an amendment is technically to add or substitute a new party which is thereby deprived of an accrued defence.

The broad rule was the Court would not allow a party to be added as a defendant to an existing action if the claim sought to be made against the added party was already statute barred and that party wished to rely on that defence. One explanation for the rule proceeded from the theory that the addition related back so that the person added would be deprived of an accrued defence. Another, ultimately the favoured explanation, was that if the addition did not relate back so that the defence remained, to allow the addition would serve no useful purpose; Liff versus Peasley [[1980] 1 WLR ] at and following, per Brandon LJ, a dictum the House of Lords approved in
Ketteman versus Hansel Properties Limited [[1987] AC 189.] At 804, Brandon
LJ said that the difficulties of the preferred theory could be overcome by adding an express provision that the amendment should relate back to the date of the original writ. Such an amendment would explicitly allow the Court to remove the foundation of the time bar.

From this background evolved r4 (3) and (5A). Sub rule (5A) was added in 1989.
The Court may amend to correct a mistake by substituting a new party and the amendment, absent an order otherwise, will relate back to the filing of the statement of claim. Thus, a party may be added and thereby deprived of an accrued defence. However, the amendment must be justified by a mistake in the name of a party that was not misleading nor such as to cause reasonable doubt as to the identity of the person intended to be made a party. In Evans
Constructions Co Limited versus Charrington & Co Limited [[1983] QB 810], Donaldson LJ, applying RSC Order 20, r5 (3), which set substantially the same pre-conditions to the making of an order as found in r4 (3), said at 821 that: "......... it is, in my judgment, important to bear in mind that there is a real distinction between suing A in the mistaken belief that A is the party who is responsible for the matters complained of and seeking to sue B, but mistakenly describing or naming him as A and thereby ending up suing A instead of B. The rule is designed to correct the latter and not the former category of mistake. Which category is involved in any particular case depends upon the intentions of the person making the mistake and they have to be determined on the evidence in the light of all the surrounding circumstances." 
Rolfe J heard the plaintiffs' application to amend and made the order for substitution having found that the plaintiffs intended to sue the carrier and that their solicitor considered, correctly, that the carrier was the owner of the vessel. Because of a wrong reading of the Lloyd's register search or the incorrect transposition therefrom to the statement of claim of the name of the owner, the plaintiffs sued a party, which neither they nor their solicitor intended to sue, by mistake. There was no suggestion the plaintiffs or their solicitor ever considered they had any rights against the defendant, and it seemed to his Honour that the defendant could never have been in any doubt there was no right to sue it. Further, the evidence did not satisfy the Judge that the mistake was misleading nor such as to cause reasonable doubt as to the identity of the person intended to be made a party; SEAS Sapfor Limited v
Far Eastern Shipping Co [(1995) 39 NSWLR 435] at 446-7.

Article III, r6 of the Hague Rules provided that the carrier and the ship should be discharged from all liability in respect of loss or damage unless suit was brought within one year after delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered. In Aries Tanker Corporation versus Total
Transport Limited [[1977] 1 WLR 185] at 188, Lord
Wilberforce said that this provision amounted to a time bar created by contract. His Lordship did not think that sufficient recognition to this had been given in the courts below. It was a time bar of a special kind viz., one which extinguished the claim (compare Article 29 of the Warsaw Convention ) not one which, as most English statutes of limitation (eg the
Limitation Act 1939, the Maritime Conventions Act 1911) and some international conventions (eg the Brussels Convention on Collisions 1910,
Article 7) did, barred the remedy while leaving the claim itself in existence.
In that case the charterer's claim against the shipowner had not merely become unenforceable by action, it had simply ceased to exist. It was a claim which had no existence in law and could have no relevance in proceedings commenced later.

The Aries has been discussed in Consolidated Investment & Contracting
Co versus Saponaria Shipping Co Limited (The Virgo) <case>; [[1988] VR 29.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1988%5d%20VR%2029 "View LawCiteRecord" ) In those cases, where charterers and shipowners had agreed to refer their disputes to arbitration and the charterparty incorporated the Hague Rules, application under local arbitration statutes was made, after the expiry of the one year period prescribed by Article III, r6, to extend the time for commencing arbitration proceedings. In each case an extension was granted.

Referring to the English case, Prime & Scanlan in The Modern Law of
Limitations, 1993, at 243 observed that the discretion conferred by s27 of the Arbitration Act 1950 (UK), whereunder the application for an extension was made, applied where the expiry of time limit had the effect of extinguishing a plaintiffs' right as much as if it barred his remedy. That section applied whenever the terms of an agreement provided that "any claims to which the agreement applies shall be barred" unless notice is given etc.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s48.html) (1) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/) (Vic) provided, relevantly, that the Court should have power on the application of a party to an arbitration agreement to extend the time fixed by the agreement for doing any act or taking any proceeding in or in relation to an arbitration. In Australian Shipping Commission versus Kooragang Cement Pty
Limited the Full Court of the Victorian Supreme Court unanimously upheld a decision extending the time pursuant to this section. The application was opposed in reliance upon what Lord Wilberforce had said in The Aries and upon the difference in wording between the United Kingdom and Victorian legislation. The appellant submitted that any extension could serve no useful purpose and that, accordingly, the section should not be interpreted as countenancing such an extension. At 37 Tadgell J, with whose reasons Murphy J agreed, said: "While counsel for the appellant conceded that art. III, r.6 fixes a time of the kind referred to in [s48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s48.html) , he stressed that it does much more than that: it also imposes a bar on claims and serves to extinguish them by its own force; and he argued that [s48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s48.html) is not apt to revive, restore or resurrect them. The submission was that [s48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s48.html) does not allow the Court to interfere with such a contractually-imposed time bar.

I take leave to point the obvious: that a claim becomes time-barred by contract only because of the effluxion of an arbitrarily fixed and agreed period of time. There is nothing else to it. Nothing is added to the concept by saying that the claim is forever stopped or killed or conclusively extinguished, to use the metaphors referred to by Geoffrey Lane LJ in
Consolidated Investment and Contracting Co versus Saponaria Shipping Co Limited (The Virgo) at 993. If the fixed period can by appropriate means (for example, by consent or under statute) be extended, or by some operation of law (for example, by virtue of the doctrine of estoppel) be ignored, even after it has expired, the result is as if the original time bar had not been imposed at all. One does not, therefore, need to resort to such dramatic or conceptually difficult notions as revival, restoration or resurrection of the claim by an order under [s48.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s48.html)
To say that [s48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s48.html) is not apt or intended to deal with a contractual provision that bars the claim so as to extinguish it, as opposed to a purely procedural provision that merely bars the remedy, is in my opinion therefore beside the point. While it is true that an order under [s48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s48.html) may do no more in terms than extend the period within which arbitration proceedings, otherwise barred by time, may be commenced, it has the effect that the very foundation of the time bar is removed. It does not matter whether the relevant period is extended before or after its expiry, for the time bar is no more effective than its own capacity to resist an extension of the period. In my opinion it follows that if the discretion conferred by [s48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s48.html) has been validly exercised the respondent's claim may be prosecuted as though not time-barred by art. III, r.6." 
In Teys Bros (Beenleigh) Pty Limited versus ANL Cargo Operations Pty Limited [[1990] 2 QdR 288] at 297, Cooper J, who was dealing with an application to add or substitute a party to an action for damages for loss of goods carried under a bill of lading which incorporated the Hague Rules as enacted in the Sea
Carriage of Goods Act 1924 (Cth), the time having expired, said, by reference to Australian Shipping Commission versus Kooragang Cement, that where the liability is extinguished as opposed to the remedy being barred, it cannot be revived without the benefit of some statute granting to the Court the power to do so. His Honour said: "The substantial number of cases referred to by the plaintiff to support a submission that the Court has power to revive a liability where Article III, r6 of the Hague Rules applies, upon examination show a recognition of the principle of The Aries with the ability to have recourse to have some statute, for example, an arbitration statute where the statutory provision operates a relation back so as to avoid the consequence of the time bar." 
Shortly afterwards in his judgment his Honour said: "The position in New South Wales as reflected in Lloyd Steel Co Australia Pty
Limited versus Jade Shipping SA [(1985) 1 NSWLR 212] is based on the view of the Court of Appeal in New South Wales that the [Supreme Court
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/), [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p20) abolished the settled practice of Weldon versus Neal [[1887] 19 QBD 394] and enables the operation of a time bar to be avoided notwithstanding that the liability has been extinguished. (See Proctor versus Jetway Aviation Pty Limited [[1984] 1
NSWLR 166] explaining the decision in McGee versus Yeomans [[1977] 1 NSWLR .)"](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1977%5d%201%20NSWLR%20273 "View LawCiteRecord" )

His Honour went on to allow an appeal from a decision of the Master to grant leave to substitute. In so far as Cooper J's decision gave a restricted meaning to the rule, Bridge Shipping Pty Limited versus Grand Shipping SA <case>; [(1991) 173 CLR 231] at 259, overruled it.

The question for Rolfe J was whether, in light of Article III, r6, the plaintiffs should have been permitted to substitute the appellant as a defendant so as either to deprive it of an accrued defence by force of the contractual limitation or to no useful purpose if the defence survived the amendment. The respondent pointed out that the appellant did not ask Rolfe J to make an order under r4 (5A) that the amendment not relate back to the filing of the statement of claim. Rolfe J applied the reasoning of Clarke J in
Lloyd Steel Co (Aust) Pty Limited versus Jade Shipping SA. In that case the goods, the subject of the claim had been carried under bills of lading from
Korea to Sydney. At 214-5, Clarke J said that he proposed to approach the applications made to him under [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p20), r4 "upon the basis that there are relevant time bars the benefit of which will be lost to the proposed defendants, if the amendment application is granted."
His Honour considered whether the rule applied to time bars which were purely contractual and concluded that there was jurisdiction under [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p20), r4 to grant amendments in cases where the relevant time bar was contractual.
At 217, his Honour said: "Leaving aside for the moment relevant authorities the considerations which persuade me to that view are as follows. These rules are remedial in nature and are designed to attenuate hardship in particular circumstances which can flow from the rigid application of limitation provisions. Rules of limitation are designed to protect persons from stale claims and to ensure that action cannot be taken after a stipulated time. [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p20), r4, is conditioned upon the existence of proceedings which have been commenced within time, allowing amendments in those cases where the plaintiff meets the conditions stipulated in one of r4 (2) to 4(6). Finally the words of the rule are in my opinion clear and, bearing in mind the social reform sought to be achieved, I see no reason why they should be read down." 
In granting the applications and giving leave to the plaintiffs to make amendments substituting the proposed party for the first defendants in each case, Clarke J said that he found the dictum of Donaldson LJ in Evans
Constructions Co Limited versus Charrington & Co Limited, which I have quoted, "utterly persuasive." At 218, his Honour said: "I would add that the later reference in the rule to identity supports the view that the rule is not limited to those cases where there is a mere misdescription of a particular entity but extends to cover cases where the party intended to be sued is wrongly identified." 
Rolfe J also referred to and applied the reasoning of the High Court in
Bridge Shipping Pty Limited versus Grand Shipping SA. In that case a defendant sought to substitute in its third party notice the name of the demise charterer, which was the carrier of goods shipped from Brazil to Melbourne under bills of lading which incorporated the Hague Rules, for the name of the shipowner, which was not the carrier. By the time the application was made, more than a year had passed since the delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered within the meaning of Article III, r6.
The High Court dismissed an appeal from a series of decisions up to the Full
Court of the Victorian Supreme Court which refused the amendment on the ground that there was not a mistake "in the name of a party". In the course of the appeal in the Full Court ((1991) 1 VR 258 at 260), counsel agreed that for the purpose of the proceedings no distinction was to be drawn between a time limitation of action imposed by statute and one imposed by contract. It was thus unnecessary to determine whether that was or was not correct in law. In issuing its third party notice it was the defendant's intention to sue the shipowner. It could not be inferred that it impliedly intended to sue the carrier.

At 261, McHugh J, with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed, said that in his opinion Evans versus Charrington and Lloyd Steel were correctly decided. The other members of the Court were Dawson and Toohey JJ. In a separate judgment
Dawson J, at 242, after quoting the conclusion of Donaldson LJ in Evans v
Charrington that an intention to sue the landlord, when suing some other party, was a genuine mistake of a character which RSC Order 20, r5 (3) applied to, said: "With the greatest respect (and notwithstanding the contrary view expressed by
Clarke J in Lloyd Steel (Aust) Pty Limited versus Jade Shipping SA), I do not think that the conclusion follows. A mistake in the name of a party is not, to my mind, the same thing as a mistake in the identity of that party. In other words, one may intend to sue the landlord but be mistaken in the belief that X is the landlord. That is not to mistake the name of X, but to mistake the identity of the landlord." 
Toohey J in a separate judgment at 250-1 referred to Lloyd Steel but distinguished it.

Clarke J decided that Pt 20, r4 permitted the substitution of a party as a defendant even though the effect of the substitution would be to deprive that party of a defence under Article III, r6. The Court intervenes because of a mistake in the name or the identity of a party. The party added is not deprived of the benefit of a defence which it would have had if the mistake had not been made and the proceedings had been properly formulated or constituted when instituted. The party's existing right to the defence is only one which pre-supposes that the Court will not use its powers to cure a mistake in naming that party in the proceedings; see generally Rodriguez versus R
J Parker (male) [[1967] 1 QB 116] at 128.

The exercise by the Court of a power to correct such a mistake seems to me to be procedural albeit that the existence of the mistake may have allowed the party to raise a defence for so long as the mistake remained uncorrected. I see no reason why a party should be permitted to rely upon a defence available to it only because of a mistake by the other party's solicitor of the sort which occurred in the present case, when the Court, which is hearing the proceedings, has the means to correct the mistake and the party added as a result of the correction is in no worse position than if the mistake had not been made in the first place. To refuse such an application allows technicality to prevail over merit, a result the Courts should strive to avoid. As McHugh J said in Bridge Shipping Pty Limited versus Grand Shipping SA at 260-1 of an equivalent provision, it is a remedial rule and should be given a beneficial interpretation. "It is proper to give it the widest interpretation which its language will permit." I do not accept that the majority view in the High Court that Lloyd Steel Co (Aust) Pty Limited versus Jade
Shipping SA was correctly decided overlooked the substance of Clarke J's decision, namely that the power vested in the Court by Pt 20, r4 extended to the case where, by contract, the claim was extinguished rather than the remedy denied. To this I should add that Payabi versus Armstel Shipping Corporation "The
Jay Bola" [[1992] QB 907] was decided by Hobhouse J without reference to the Australian cases. His Lordship's conclusions at 932 that RSC Order 20 r5, which significantly and despite what Brandon LJ said in Liff versus Peasley, contained no equivalent to sub-rule (5A) of Pt 20, r4 cannot deprive a party of a substantive defence, if not confined to the particular statutory environment, notably ss35 and 39 of the Limitation Act 1980 (UK), with which his Lordship was concerned, conflicts with Australian authority and with the High Court's conclusion that Lloyd Steel Co (Aust) Pty Limited versus Jade Shipping SA was correctly decided.

For these reasons, I agree with Cole JA that the trial Judge was right to reject the contentions of the appellant based upon a defence grounded on the time bar provisions of the Hague Rules and cl 24.

CONCLUSION 
I agree with the orders that Cole JA proposes.

NIKOLAY MALAKHOV SHIPPING CO. LIMITED versus S.E.A.S. SAPFOR LIMITED & S.E.A.S. WOOD PRODUCTS S.D.N B.H.D.
 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: Nikolay Malakhov Shipping Co. Limited (the Carrier) has appealed from a decision of Hunter J of 25 June 1997 by which the Carrier was held liable to S.E.A.S. Sapfor Limited (the Consignee) for water damage to a cargo of timber purchased by the Consignee from S.E.A.S. Wood Products S.D.N B.H.D. (the Shipper). Judgment entered was in the sum of $52,652.29 together with interest of $19,348.64. 
FACTUAL CIRCUMSTANCES 
The Shipper shipped the timber cargo from Port Kelang for discharge at the
Port of Sydney on the vessel Nikolay Malakhov. The shipping contract was a bill of lading issued at Port Kelang on 2 February 1994. It was an owner's bill executed by Pineseas Maritime Pte Limited (Pineseas) on behalf of the
Master. It was accepted at trial that Pineseas was the agent of the owner of the vessel.

Hunter J found: "The cargo was loaded on 2 February 1994 and discharged between 6.30pm on 5
March and 11.00am on 6 March 1994 from the multi-purpose berth in the inner- harbour of Port Kembla to which it had been directed by the Australian agents for Pineseas, Pacific Asia Express Pty Ltd (Asia Express) pursuant to a contract between Asia Express, as agent for Pineseas, and Tex Transport Pty
Ltd (Tex Transport). The cargo was collected by Tex Transport haulage contractors and bond store proprietors, and taken to its open bond store for quarantine clearance and collection by TNT Australia Pty Ltd (TNT) for transport to Sydney. There is no dispute that, when so collected by TNT, the cargo was found to be badly water damaged and unsuitable for sale in the ordinary course by Timber Sales (the consignee). It was sold at public auction and it is the loss on sale for which these proceedings are brought by Sapfor (the Consignee) and Wood Products (the Shipper) against the owner."[1] 
The bill of lading showed the port of discharge as Sydney.

Hunter J found that the decision to divert the vessel to Port Kembla was reasonable. The decision was taken in the following circumstances found by his
Honour: "1. Prior to the loading of the cargo, Pineseas was investigating the cost of directing the unloading of the cargo to Port Kembla in order to fit in with possible freight commitments and to avoid waterfront twenty four hour bans on the unloading of foreign timber.
While the ban was in place along the east coast ports, Asia Express entertained the view that the ban was "less likely to happen in Kembla".
At all times Pineseas regarded the costs of any diversion as being to its account and regarded the choice of discharge ports a matter for its discretion, having regard to questions of cost and convenience.
 Before it was necessary to make any decision based upon those considerations, the industrial dispute between Australian Stevedores and the
Maritime Union became a significant factor in those considerations.
As a result of the dispute, from about mid-February, there was a likelihood of delay in obtaining a berth and in discharging the vessel's cargo in Sydney port.
The extent of that delay in obtaining a berth and in discharging the cargo was indeterminate, as was the time that the union would continue to have
Australia Stevedores' berths shut down.
When the vessel entered Port Kembla early in the morning of 2 March 1994 the position affecting Sydney port was unchanged.
The industrial dispute affecting Sydney port was the principal reason for the decision to divert to Port Kembla, that being the nearest port to Sydney for the discharge of general cargo."[2] 
Hunter J found that on 22 February 1994 Pineseas representative informed the
Consignee's representative of the change to the port of discharge for the cargo from Sydney to Port Kembla "and that Pineseas would bear the cost arising out of that change, including storage costs at Port Kembla and road carriage charges from Port Kembla to Sydney: presumably, treating that cost as being covered by the pre-paid freight for carriage of the cargo from Port
Kelang to Sydney".[3] 
It was in those circumstances that Asia Express, as agent for Pineseas, contracted with Tex Transport for the cartage and storage from the wharf at
Port Kembla to its bond store. Tex Transport's quotation was in the following terms: "I CONFIRM QUOTATION FOR CARTAGE OF 37 JUMBO PACKS TIMBER (270 TONNES) FROM NO JETTY PORT KEMBLA TO TEX BOND. QUOTE INCLUDES RECEIVING, BOND AND QUARANTINE
SITE CHARGES, OUTSIDE STORAGE FOR 7 DAYS AND DISPATCH/LOADING AND SEMI
TRAILER".[4] 
Once it became clear that the vessel was to berth not at No. 6 jetty but at the multi-purpose berth, the quotation was increased because of additional travel time, but there was no change to the quotation otherwise in respect of the outside storage for seven days of the timber. It is to be observed that
Tex Transport's quotation was not for unloading: it was for cartage, receiving, bond and quarantine charges, outside storage, dispatch/loading and semi-trailer. Presumably the unloading was to be performed by the ship using its tackle, or by stevedores.

Asia Express as agent for Pineseas, the agents of the owner and Carrier, thus arranged for the cartage and outside storage of the timber after its unloading from the vessel.

Hunter J found that the diverting of the vessel to Port Kembla was reasonable and was "warranted by the terms of the bill and of the (Hague) Rules". These findings have been challenged on appeal.

Against that background Hunter J said: "The issue on the plaintiffs' summons then narrows down to a question of the owner's liability for the negligence of Asia Express, as agent for Pineseas, in the open storage of the cargo at Tex Transport prior to its delivery to
Sapfor."[5] 
His Honour's finding was: "For the purposes of this case, the primary obligation of the carrier is to be found in Art III r2 and, in particular, the obligation to "properly and carefully discharge the goods carried". In my view the act of contracting for and discharging the subject cargo into open bond storage, an act which "shocked" Blackwell and which Kirkland regarded as "totally wrong", should be treated as serious breach of the obligation to "properly" or to "carefully" discharge the cargo.

There is nothing in Art IV of the Rules to which the owner may have recourse which would ameliorate the owner's liability for that breach and Art VII does not address liability for a failure to act properly and carefully in discharging the cargo."[6] 
His Honour further said: "The failure of the owner to properly and carefully discharge the cargo may be looked at in two ways, viz: 
The act of the ship's agent in contracting for the discharge of the cargo into open bond storage, and 
The act of the ship's agent in causing the discharge of the cargo to Tex
Transport for open bond storage.

In my view, the duty imposed upon the carrier by Art III r2 is not satisfied by a damage free transfer of the cargo from vessel to wharf or from vessel to
Tex Transport trucks. On the owner's argument, its duty in discharging would be satisfied by discharging the cargo on to a wharf being consumed gradually by fire or a wharf that was known to lack the stability to support the cargo."[7] 
Breach of contractual duty contained in the Hague Rules incorporated into the bill of lading, and in particular Art III rule 2, having been established,
Hunter J found for the respondents.

NOTICE OF CONTENTION 
Before considering the issues raised by the appellant it is convenient to deal with a challenge to the factual finding by the trial judge that the deviation to Port Kembla was reasonable. The respondent contended that such deviation to
Port Kembla was both an unjustifiable deviation from the contract of carriage and a breach of that contract. It sought to use the asserted unjustified deviation and breach of contract to deprive the appellant of the benefit of protective clauses in the bill of lading, in particular clauses 3, 5 and .[8] 
Hunter J held that: "[W]hether the conduct of the vessel is to be viewed in the light of cl.7 or of Art IV r4 the substitution of Port Kembla for Sydney as the port of discharge should not be regarded as a breach of the terms of carriage of the cargo."[9] 
His Honour was of the view that the deviation was pursuant to a liberty under clause 7(3). His Honour held that it was established that: "...[It] "appeared" to the ship's agent, Pineseas, as at 22 February 1994, when the decision to divert to Port Kembla was taken, that "labour troubles" or "labour obstructions" and "congestion arising therefrom" were affecting the port of Sydney and that delays in berthing, unloading, loading cargo and departure should be expected. The question arises, does that amount to the fact that it "appeared" to the ship's agent that those matters would prevent the vessel from ... reaching or entering the port of discharging or there discharging in the usual manner and leaving again all of which safely and without delay"? I think that question should be answered in the affirmative.
At all times from mid-February up until the afternoon of 2 March 1994 any vessel entering the port of Sydney was likely to suffer an indefinite delay in obtaining a berth and in loading and discharging cargo once a berth had been obtained. While vessels were continuing to use the port of Sydney during that period, that factor does not deprive the decision to divert to Port Kembla of the quality of reasonableness. It follows if cl.7 is to be given full effect, that the "Master" was entitled to "discharge the cargo at any port as considered safe and convenient", in this case, Port Kembla."[10] 
In my judgment the challenge to the trial judge's findings that the deviation was reasonable and within the terms of the contract of carriage fails.

On 18 February 1994 Asia Express, the Sydney agents of Pineseas, the ship's agent, advised Pineseas that Australian Stevedores Limited and the Maritime
Union had been in dispute within the Port of Sydney since 10 February. That dispute had closed all Australian Stevedores' operations in the Port of Sydney and Botany. It advised that eight vessels were due into Sydney to berth at
Australian Stevedores' berths but an unknown number were expected to bypass
Sydney, or to be subcontracted to Conaust, alternative stevedores, at its
White Bay wharves. Australian Stevedores berths were stacked with uncleared goods and were plainly inoperable. Asia Express advised, that regarding the
Conaust berths at White Bay that: "At present all berths expected to be occupied between now and the ETA of
Nikolay Malakhov based on how many vessels are subcontracted to Conaust. AS these negotiations are still in progress." 
Asia Express kept Pineseas notified of the situation in the Sydney Port. On 21
February they advised: "1. Australian Stevedores are again meeting with union but are not hopeful of return to work before Thursday.
 ...
Port Kembla is working and berths should be free around 27/28 Feb. Do you have contract with AS for Kembla & cost wise is it feasible to load/discharge at Kembla." 
Consideration was given to subcontracting the stevedoring to Conaust at White
Bay, in circumstances where Australian Stevedores' wharves were not working and clogged.

On 22 February the decision to discharge the cargo at Port Kembla was taken.
At that time the expected arrival of the vessel at Sydney was 28 February.

It is clear that the respondent was kept informed of the intended deviation.
Mr Redfern, the respondent's shipping officer, noted in a memorandum that "I spoke with Captain Alex Wan in Adelaide on 22.2.94 regarding the charges. He advised that the charges would be as normal, even though this vessel was discharging at Port Kembla on this occasion due to industrial disputes and unrest on the Sydney waterfront". Captain Wan was the manager of Pineseas.
Pineseas made clear that the Carrier would bear the costs of transport of the goods by road from Port Kembla to Sydney.

Having made the decision to deviate on 22 February, on 24 February a quotation was obtained from Tex Transport for the carriage of the goods from the wharf at Port Kembla to the outside storage in its bond store. The vessel arrived in
Port Kembla on 2 March.

The respondent's contention was that, had the vessel not diverted to Port
Kembla but arrived in Sydney Port on 2 March, it would have obtained a berth.
The fact that there may have been some delay, described as minor, in unloading or leaving the port, did not justify such a deviation.

I should have thought it plain that any decision to deviate must be taken some time in advance of the actual deviation. That is necessarily so in order that arrangements can be made for the stevedoring of the vessel in the port of deviation, for the discharge of cargo and for transport and delivery arrangements for the cargo to be made. Similarly, alternative loading arrangements would need to be made, here to load steel planking in Port
Kembla, rather than in Sydney. To take a decision to deviate on 22 February, when arrival of the vessel in its port of destination (Sydney), was then anticipated as being the 27 or 28 February was, from a time viewpoint, a reasonable time at which to make that decision. The decision was taken against the background that, at that time industrial disputes had for twelve days closed the Australian Stevedores' wharves in Sydney, the Conaust wharves at
White Bay were clogged, other vessels were bypassing and were expected to bypass Sydney because of the congestion, and, as Hunter J found "all berths were expected to be occupied at the estimated time of the vessel's arrival at
Sydney, with some vessels being "subcontracted" to Conaust, a stevedore in competition with Australian Stevedores, and with an unknown number of vessels bypassing Sydney".

It is not an answer to the reasonableness of that decision to say that, with the benefit of hindsight, had the vessel proceeded to Sydney arriving on 2
March there may have been a berth available. The decision had to be taken in advance of arrival of the vessel and against the background of known industrial disputes, closure of portion of the port, and clogging of the balance. Hunter J was correct in his finding that "at all times from mid-
February up until the afternoon of 2 March 1994 any vessel entering the Port of Sydney was likely to suffer an indefinite delay in obtaining a berth and in loading and discharging cargo once a berth had been obtained". More importantly, that was the perception at the time when the decision to divert was taken on 22 February. Hunter J was correct in holding that the decision to divert was reasonable. The challenge to the trial judge's finding that the deviation was not reasonable fails at the factual level.

It also fails at the legal level. A "reasonable deviation" is stated by Art IV rule 4 not to be an infringement or breach of the Hague Rules or of the contract of carriage. That being so it is not necessary to find in the terms of the contract of carriage a specific right to deviate, for such a right is implicit in Art IV rule 4, and falls within performance of the contract.[11] 
However, in my view, a contractual "liberty" to deviate is found in clause (3) of the bill of lading. The right to discharge the cargo at a port other than the port of discharge nominated in the bill of lading is expressed in clause 7(4) to be "the exercise of (any) liberty under this clause ...". There was a contractual liberty to divert to Port Kembla. Hunter J was also correct in holding that the deviation was within the contractual entitlement contemplated by clause 7(3) of the bill of lading.

ISSUES ON APPEAL 
Mr Street SC argued four matters on the appeal. They were:
Clause 3 of the bill of lading excluded the Carrier from liability for damage after the goods left the ship's deck in the discharging port, being
Port Kembla. The effect of cl.7(3) was to permit a deviation to Port Kembla where discharge occurred. After discharge, Art VII permitted the carrier to exclude liability, and in terms, cl.3 did.
Clause 5 of the bill of lading excluded liability as it provided that the
Carrier in arranging transport from Port Kembla to Sydney acted as Forwarding
Agent only, and restricted the carrier's liability to "the part of transport performed by him on vessels under his management".
Clause 24 of the bill of lading limits liability to 100 per package. That clause is not struck down by Art III r8 because the loss or damage occurred outside the scope or operation of the Hague Rules. Accordingly there should not have been any judgment in excess of 2700.
Clause 24 of the bill of lading discharged the Carrier from all liability unless suit was brought against the carrier within one year after delivery of the goods. The goods were delivered to the consignee on 9 March 1994. Although a suit was commenced on 1 March 1995 within the twelve months period, that suit was against Far East Shipping Company, not the carrier. Whilst there was no appeal against the decision of Rolfe J of 31 August 1995 granting leave to amend the statement of claim so issued by substituting Nikolay Malakhov
Shipping Co. Limited in place of Far East Shipping Company, which order in consequence of Part 20 rule 4(5A) of the [Supreme Court
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/) relates that amendment back to the date of filing of the statement of claim, that order did not have the effect of excluding or negating the pleaded defence based upon clause 24 of the bill of lading which operated to discharge the carrier from liability absent a writ being issued against the carrier within one year after delivery. The rules of the Supreme Court of New South Wales could not revive a cause of action extinguished by cl.24. Art III rule 6 applied similarly to cl. 24 to provide the same time for defence.

THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE BILL OF LADING 
The receipt clause provided: "IN ACCEPTING THIS BILL OF LADING, the shipper, owner and consignee of the goods, and holder of the bill of lading expressly accept and agree to all its stipulations, exceptions and conditions, whether written, stamped or printed as fully as if signed by such shipper, owner, consignee and/or holder. No agent is authorised to waive any of the provisions of the within clauses.

RECEIVED from the shipper herein named the goods or packages said to contain goods hereinafter mentioned, in apparent good order and condition unless otherwise indicated in this Bill of Lading, to be transported from the port of loading with liberty to proceed via any route ports within the scope of the voyage, to the port of discharge or so near thereto as the ship can safely get and leave, always afloat at all stages and conditions of water, and there to be delivered or transshipped on payment of the charges thereon."[12] 
This clause is repeated in the body of the bill.

Clause 2.
 "(General Paramount Clause): The Hague Rules contained in the International
Convention for the Unification of certain rules relating to Bills of Lading, dated Brussels the 25th August 1924 as enacted in the country of shipment shall apply to this contract. When no such enactment is in force in the country of shipment, the corresponding legislation of the country of destination shall apply, but in respect of shipments to which no such enactments are compulsorily applicable, the terms of the said Convention shall apply." 
Clause 3 "3. (Period of the Responsibility): The Carrier or his Agent shall not be liable for loss or damage to the goods before the goods have passed the ship's rail in loading and after the goods leave the ship's deck in discharging port, howsoever such loss or damage arises. Goods in the custody of the carrier or his servants before loading and after discharge whether being forwarded to or from the ship or whether awaiting shipment landed or stored, or put into hulk or craft belonging to the Carrier or not, or pending transhipment at any stage of the whole transport, are in such custody at the sole risk of the Merchant and the Carrier shall not be liable for loss or damage arising or resulting from any cause whatsoever.

Clause 5 (Substitution of Vessel, Transhipment and Forwarding): Whether expressly arranged beforehand or otherwise, the Carrier shall be at liberty to carry the goods to their port of destination by the said or other vessel or vessels either belonging to the Carrier or others, or by other means of transport proceeding either directly or indirectly to such port and to carry the goods or parts of them beyond their port of destination, and to tranship, land and store the goods either on shore or afloat and reship and forward the same at
Carrier's expense but at the Merchant's risk. When the ultimate destination at which the Carrier may have engaged to deliver the goods is other than the vessel's port of discharge, the Carrier acts as Forwarding Agent only. The responsibility of the Carrier shall be limited to the part of transport performed by him on vessels under his management and no claim will be acknowledged by the Carrier for damage or loss arising during any other part of the transport even though the freight for the whole transport has been collected by him.

Clause 7 (Government Directions, War, Epidemics, Ice, Strikes Etc): (1)...

Should it appear that the performance of the transport would expose the vessel or any goods on board to risk of seizure or damage or delay resulting from war, warlike operations, blockade, riots, civil commotions or piracy, or any person onboard to the risk of loss of life or freedom, or that any such risk has increased, the Master may discharge the cargo at port of loading or any other ports as considered safe and convenient by the Master or the
Carrier.

Should it appear that epidemics, quarantine, customs, ice, shallow water, weather, labour troubles, labour obstructions, strikes, lockouts or congestion arising therefrom, any of which onboard or on shore-difficulties in loading or discharging or any other cause whatsoever beyond the Carrier's control would prevent the vessel from leaving the port of loading or reaching or entering the port of discharging or there discharging in the usual manner and leaving again all of which safely and without delay the Master may discharge the cargo at port of loading or any other port as considered safe and convenient by the
Master or the Carrier.

The discharge under the provisions of this clause for any cargo for which
Bill of Lading has been issued shall be deemed due fulfilment of the contract.
If in connection with the exercise of any liberty under this clause any extra expenses are incurred, they shall be paid by the Merchant in addition to the freight, together with return freight if any extra services rendered to the goods.

Clause 24.
 (Limitation of Liability): In case of any loss or damage to or in connection with goods exceeding in actual value 100 per package, or in case of goods not shipped in packages, per customary freight unit, the value of the goods shall be deemed to be 100 per package or per unit on which basis the freight is adjusted and the Carrier's liability, if any, shall be determined on the basis of a value of 100 per package or per customary freight unit or pro rata in case of partial loss or damage, unless the nature of the goods and a valuation higher than 100 shall have been declared in writing by the Merchant upon delivery to the Carrier and inserted in this Bill of Lading and extra freight paid if required and in such case if the actual value of the goods per package or per customary freight unit shall exceed such declared value, the value shall nevertheless be deemed to be the declared value and the Carrier's liability, if any, shall not exceed the declared value and any partial loss or damage shall be adjusted pro rata the basis of such declared value. Unless notice of loss or damage and the general nature of such loss or damage be given writing to the Carrier or his agent at the port of discharge before or at the time of the removal of the goods into custody of the person entitled to delivery thereof under the contract of carriage, such removal shall be prima facie evidence of the delivery by the Carrier to the goods as described in this Bill of Lading. If the loss or damage is not apparent the notice must be given within three days of the delivery. In any event the Carrier and the vessel shall be discharged from all liability in respect of loss or damage unless suit is brought within one year after the delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered." 
The Federation of Malaya enacted The Carriage of Goods by Sea Ordinance 1950 (No.13 of 1950), which rendered applicable the Hague Rules.[13] 
THE RELEVANT HAGUE RULES "ARTICLE I 
DEFINITIONS 
In these Rules the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them respectively, that is to say- "carrier" includes the owner or the charterer who enters into a contract of carriage with a shipper; "contract of carriage" applies only to contracts of carriage covered by a bill of lading or any similar document of title, in so far as such document relates to the carriage of goods by sea, including any bill of lading or any similar document as aforesaid issued under or pursuant to a charter-party from the moment at which such bill of lading or similar document of title regulates the relations between a carrier and a holder of the same; "goods" includes goods, wares, merchandises, and articles or every kind whatsoever, except live animals and cargo which by the contract of carriage is stated as being carried on deck and is so carried; "ship" means any vessel used for the carriage of goods by sea; "carriage of goods" covers the period from the time when the goods are loaded on to the time when they are discharged from the ship.

ARTICLE II 
RISKS 
Subject to the provisions of Article VI, under every contract of carriage of goods by sea the carrier, in relation to the loading, handling, stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of such goods, shall be subject to the responsibilities and liabilities, and entitled to the rights and immunities hereinafter set forth.

ARTICLE III 
RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIABILITIES
The carrier shall be bound, before and at the beginning of the voyage, to exercise due diligence to- make the ship seaworthy; properly man, equip, and supply the ship; make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers, and all other parts of the ship in which goods are carried fit and safe for their reception, carriage and preservation.
Subject to the provisions of Article IV, the carrier shall properly and carefully load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for and discharge the goods carried.
 ...
Unless notice of loss or damage and the general nature of such loss or damage be given in writing to the carrier or his agent at the port of discharge before or at the time of the removal of the goods into the custody of the person entitled to delivery thereof under the contract of carriage, or, if the loss or damage be not apparent, within three days, such removal shall be prima facie evidence of the delivery by the carrier of the goods as described in the bill of lading.

The notice in writing shall not be given if the state of the goods has at the time of their receipt been the subject of joint survey or inspection.

In any event the carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all liability in respect of loss or damage unless suit is brought within one year after delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered.

In the case of any actual or apprehended loss or damage the carrier and the receiver shall give all reasonable facilities to each other for inspecting and tallying the goods.
 ...
Any clause, covenant or agreement in a contract of carriage relieving the carrier or the ship from liability for loss or damage to or in connection with goods arising from negligence, fault or failure in the duties and obligations provided in this Article or lessening such liability otherwise than as provided in these Rules, shall be null and void and of no effect.

A benefit of insurance or similar clause shall be deemed to be a clause relieving the carrier from liability.

ARTICLE IV 
RIGHTS AND IMMUNITIES ...
Any deviation in saving or attempting to save life or property at sea, or any reasonable deviation shall not be deemed to be an infringement or breach of these Rules or of the contract of carriage, and the carrier shall not be liable for any loss or damage resulting therefrom.
Neither the carrier nor the ship shall in any event be or become liable for any loss or damage to or in connection with goods in an amount exceeding per package or unit, or the equivalent of that sum in other currency, unless the nature and value of such goods have been declared by the shipper before shipment and inserted in the bill of lading.

This declaration if embodied in the bill of lading shall be prima facie evidence, but shall not be binding or conclusive on the carrier.
 ...

Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible in any event for loss or damage to or n connection with goods if the nature or value thereof has been knowingly mis-stated by the shipper in the bill of lading.
 ...

ARTICLE VII 
LIMITATIONS ON THE APPLICATION OF THE RULES 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a carrier or a shipper from entering into any agreement, stipulation, condition, reservation or exemption as to the responsibility and liability of the carrier or the ship for the loss or damage to or in connection with the custody and care and handling of goods prior to the loading on and subsequent to the discharge from the ship on which the goods are carried by sea.

ARTICLE IX 
The monetary units mentioned in these Rules are to be taken to be gold value." 
THE PLEADINGS 
The amended statement of claim in personam pleaded in clause 2 that: "Under Bill of Lading No. PKS/SYD 2 issued at Port Kelang, Peninsular Malaysia on 2 February 1994 for and on behalf of the Defendant, there was shipped on board the vessel "Nikolay Malakhov" at Port Kelang a cargo comprising 27 crates containing 12892 pieces of immunised/kiln dried red meranti machine processed timber in good order and condition, for an agreed freight for carriage to Sydney for delivery in accordance with the terms and conditions of the said bill of lading, in the same good order and condition." 
Clause 5 asserted that: "In the premises the Defendant was under a duty as carrier by sea and bailee for reward, or alternatively, contracted by the bill of lading, to deliver the cargo in the same good order and condition as when accepted." 
By its amended defence, the Carrier pleaded: "In answer to paragraph 2 of the Amended Statement of Claim, the Defendant admits the issue of Bill of Lading No. PK/SYD-2 dated 2/2/94 acknowledging receipt of 27 crates in apparent good order and condition to be carried on the "Nikolay Malakhov" from Port Kelang to Sydney, and otherwise does not admit the said paragraph." 
Regarding the duties alleged to be imposed upon the defendant as "carrier by sea and bailee for reward" in paragraph 5 of the amended statement of claim, the amended defence pleaded: "In answer to paragraph 5 of the Amended Statement of Claim the Defendant says that the Defendant's possession, custody or control of the said crates was pursuant to the terms of the said Bill of Lading and that any bailment, which is not admitted, was a bailment on terms, and otherwise does not admit the said paragraph." 
In addition the defence pleaded reliance on clauses 3, 5 and 24 of the bill of lading and Art III rule 6.

It is of particular importance that the defendant carrier did not plead reliance upon clause 7 of the bill of lading. It did not argue at trial or on appeal that the deviation which it contended was reasonable so as to defeat the argument that the carrier was not entitled to rely upon exclusion clauses in the bill of lading, permitted deviation to Port Kembla with the consequence that discharge at that port was deemed to be "due fulfilment of the contract" as contemplated by clause 7(4). At all times the carrier has acknowledged its obligation to deliver the goods to Sydney, although it is not clear whether its acknowledgment of that obligation was to give delivery at the Port of
Sydney, or elsewhere in Sydney.

THE FIRST THREE ISSUES ON APPEAL 
Art III rule 2 imposes upon a Carrier the duty to "properly and carefully ...
carry, keep, care for and discharge the goods carried". Art III rule 8 renders null, void and of no effect any clause in a bill of lading which purports to relieve or lessen the liability of the Carrier for damage resulting from negligence or failure to perform the obligations imposed by Art III rule 2.
The obligations pursuant to Art III rule 2 are subject to Art IV.

Clauses 3 and 5 in the bill of lading are clauses purporting to relieve the
Carrier from or lessen the liability of the Carrier for damage to goods being carried arising from negligence or breach of the duties imposed by Art III rule 2, including the duty to "properly and carefully ... discharge" the goods carried. Thus, in relying upon clauses 3 and 5, the Carrier, to avoid the operation of Art III rule 8, contended that the damage suffered was weather damage which occurred at the Tex Transport open bond store, as it undoubtedly did, and such damage occurred after "discharge". The argument was that whatever "discharge" might mean it was complete prior to the damage occurring.
The functions of the carrier could be segregated in to what were called "operations". In essence, "discharge" within the meaning of the Hague Rules was complete when the unloading to wharf occurred. The damage occurred in subsequent storage after the operation of transport and storage had occurred post discharge. Thus, so it was argued, the Hague Rules had no application at the time the damage occurred, and thus the Carrier had the benefit of the exclusions from liability contained in clauses 3, 5 and 24 as a matter of contract unrestricted by the operation of Art III rule 8.

Four matters were advanced by Mr Street in support of his contention that the
Hague Rules had no application at the time of damage.

First, it was contended that the trial judge had made an unchallenged finding that the goods had been "discharged" prior to the damage occurring. Reference was made to Hunter J's finding that "the cargo ... was discharged between .30pm on 5 March and 11.00am on 6 March 1994", whereas the damage occurred some days later. Hunter J had also said: "After completion of discharge of the cargo at 11.00am the vessel sailed at approximately noon on 6 March 1994".[14] 
Use of the expression "discharge" by Hunter J was said to be the use of that expression within the meaning of Art III rule 2, and Art VII.

Second, it was said that Arts I(d) and VII which each used the expression "discharged from the ship" made plain by the last three words quoted that the concept of discharge was completed once goods were removed from the ship. The damage occurred after that point of time.

Third, it was argued that, quite apart from the first two contentions, as a matter of ordinary language, supported by references to the Oxford and
Macquarie dictionaries, "discharge" meant, essentially, unloading. It was said it might be difficult precisely to define when discharge of the timber cargo ceased but it was plainly able to be recognised that it had ceased well before completion of transport to the open bond store where sometime later the damage occurred.

The fourth argument was that the Hague Rules internally made clear that they applied only to impose obligations upon the Carrier whilst the ship was "at sea". They were not intended to cover events causing damage which occurred on land.

In support of this fourth contention emphasis was placed upon the definition in Art I of "contract of carriage" which provided that such a contract relates to the carriage of goods by sea," the repetition in Art I clause (d) of the expression "the carriage of goods by sea" and the use of the expression "carried by sea" in Art VI, and Art VII.

It is undoubted that the Hague Rules relate to bills of lading in respect of carriage of goods by sea. The use of the expression "by sea", however, is not determinative of the point at which there has been completion of the obligation to "properly and carefully ... discharge" the goods carried. Art
III rule 1 makes plain that some obligations are imposed upon the carrier, prior to the point of time when a vessel loads goods or puts to sea. There is thus no general proposition available that the rules only have application in the time period during which the vessel is at sea, including being in port, with goods on board.

The contention that the Hague Rules attach rights and liabilities only for a time period was rejected by Devlin J in Pyrene Company Ltd versus Scindia Steam
Navigation Co. Ltd.15 His Lordship said: "In my judgment, this argument is fallacious, the cause of the fallacy perhaps lying in the supposition inherent in it that the rights and liabilities under the Rules attach to a period of time. I think they attach to a contract or part of contract. I say "part of a contract" because a single contract may cover both inland and sea transport; and in that case the only part of it that falls within the Rules is that which, to use the words in the definition of "contract of carriage" in Art I(b), "relates to the carriage of goods by sea"."[16] "Even if "carriage of goods by sea" were given by definition the most restricted meaning possible, for example, the period of the voyage, the loading of the goods (by which I mean the whole operation of loading in both its stages and whichever side of the ship's rail) would still relate to the carriage on the voyage and so be within the "contract of carriage".

Art.II is the crucial Article which for this purpose has to be construed. It is this Article that gives the carrier all his rights and immunities, including the right to limit his liability. He is entitled to do that "in relation to the loading" and "under every contract of carriage". Now, I shall have to consider later the meaning of "loading" in Art.II and whether it is such as to exclude what I have called the first stage, that is, the operations on the shore side of the ship's rail. For the moment I am concerned only to see whether its meaning is cut down by the definition in Art.I(e) on which Mr
Megaw relies.

The only phrase in Art II that can cut it down is the one I have quoted: "under every contract of carriage"; it is only in so far as Art.I(e) operates through the definition of "contract of carriage" that it can have any effect on Art.II. I have already sought to demonstrate that, however limited the period in Art.I(e) may be, the loading in both its stages must still relate to it and so be within the definition of contract of carriage. A precise construction of Art I(e), while not irrelevant, is in no way conclusive of the point I have to decide, which turns, I think, upon the meaning of "loading" in
Art II.

But before I try to elucidate that, let me state my view of Art.I(e). For, as
I have said, though not dominant, it is not irrelevant; in construing "loading" in Art II you must have regard to similar expressions throughout the
Rules, Art I(e) included. In my judgment, no special significance need be given to the phrase "loaded on." It is not intended to specify a precise moment of time. Of course, if the operation of the Rules began and ended with a period of time, a precise specification would be necessary. But they do not.
It is legitimate in England to look at Sect.1 of the Act, which applies the
Rules not to a period of time but "in relation to and in connection with the carriage of goods by sea." The Rules themselves show the same thing. The obligations in Art III, Rule 1, for example, to use due diligence to make the ship seaworthy and man and equip her properly, are independent of time. The operation of the Rules is determined by the limits of the contract of carriage by sea and not by any limits of time. The function of Art I(e) is, I think, only to assist in the definition of contract of carriage. As I have already pointed out, there is excluded from that definition any part of a larger contract which relates, for example, to inland transport. It is natural to divide such a contract into periods, a period of inland transport, followed perhaps by a period of sea transport and then again by a period of inland transport. Discharging from rail at the port of loading may fall into the first period; loading on to the ship into the second. The reference to "when the goods are loaded on" in Art I(e) is not, I think, intended to do more than identify the first operation in the series which constitute the carriage of goods by sea; as "when they are discharged" denotes the last. The use of the rather loose word "cover", I think, supports this view.

There is another reason for thinking that it would be wrong to stress the phrase "loaded on" in Art I(e). It is no doubt necessary for an English Court to apply the Rules as part of English law, but that is a different thing from assuming them to be drafted in the light of English law. If one is inquiring whether "loaded on" in Art I(e) has a different meaning from "loaded" or "loading" in other parts of the Rules, it would be mistaken to look for the significant distinction in the light of a conception which may be peculiar to
English law. The idea of the operation being divided at the ship's rail is certainly not a universal one. It does not, for example, apply in Scotland:
Glengarnock Iron and Steel Company, Ltd versus Henry G Cooper & Co., (1895) Sess.Cas. 672, per Lord Trayner at p.676. It is more reasonable to read the
Rules as contemplating loading and discharging as single operations. It is no doubt possible to read Art I(e) literally as defining the period as being from the completion of loading until the completion of discharging. But the literal interpretation would be absurd. Why exclude loading from the period and include discharging? How give effect to the frequent references to loading in other Rules? How reconcile it with Art VII, which allows freedom of contract "prior to the loading on and subsequent to the discharge from"? Manifestly both operations must be included. That brings me back to the view that Art
I(e) is naming the first and the last of a series of operations which include, in between loading and discharging, "handling, stowage, carriage, custody and care." This is in fact the list of operations to which Art II is by its own terms applies. In short, nothing is to be gained by looking to the terms of
Art I(e) for an interpretation of Art II.

I think, therefore, that Art I(e), which was the spearhead of Mr Megaw's argument, turns out to be an ineffective weapon. But that still leaves it necessary to consider the meaning of "loading" in Art II. Just how far does the operation of loading, to which Art II grants immunity, extend? Now, I have already given reasons against presuming that the framers of the Rules thought in terms of a divided operation, and the in absence of such a presumption the natural meaning of "loading" covers the whole operation. How far can that be pressed? Art III, Rule 2, for example, provides: "the carrier shall properly and carefully load," etc. If "load" includes both stages, does that oblige the shipowner, whether he wants to or not, to undertake the whole of the loading?
If so, it is a new idea to English lawyers, though perhaps more revolutionary in theory than in practice. But if not, and "load" includes only the second stage, then should it not be given a similar meaning in Art II, with the result that immunity extends only to the second stage? 
There is, however, a third interpretation to Art III, Rule 2, The phrase, "shall properly and carefully load" may mean that the carrier shall load and that he shall do it properly and carefully: or that he shall do whatever loading he does properly and carefully. The former interpretation perhaps fits the language more closely, but the latter may be more consistent with the object of the Rules. Their object , as it is put, I think, correctly in
Carver, 9th ed., p.186, is to define not the scope of the contract service but the terms on which that service is to be performed. The extent to which the carrier has to undertake the loading of the vessel may depend not only upon different systems of law but upon the custom and practice of the port and the nature of the cargo. It is difficult to believe that the Rules were intended to impose a universal rigidity in this respect, or to dent freedom of contract to the carrier. The carrier is practically bound to play some part in the loading and discharging, so that both operations are naturally included in those covered by the contract of carriage. But I see no reason why the Rules should not leave the parties free to determine by their contract the part which each has to play. On this view the whole contract of carriage is subject to the Rules, but the extent to which loading and discharging are brought within the carrier's obligations is left to the parties themselves to decide."[17] 
It will be apparent that the success of the first three arguments advanced by the appellant depends upon the meaning to be attached to the obligation to "properly and carefully discharge" the goods. The appellant's contention concentrated on the circumstance that the damage occurred when the goods were in the open bond store. This was said to be after discharge. Such a submission diminished the importance of the finding of Hunter J which I have previously quoted that the obligation to "properly and carefully discharge the goods" was breached by two circumstances, namely, the act of contracting for the discharge of the subject cargo into open bond storage, and putting into effect that contract.

The respondent met the appellant's submission with two substantive arguments.

The first was that by arranging for or contracting with Tex Transport to store the cargo in an open bond store there was a breach of the obligation to "properly and carefully discharge the goods" because it was plainly negligent to arrange for cargo liable to rain damage to be stored in the open. That arrangement was made prior to any "discharge" of the cargo: indeed whilst the cargo was on board and at sea. Arranging for such storage was part of the function or activity encompassed within "discharge". Thus the Hague Rules applied to the contractual obligation in both functional and time respects.

The alternative submission was that the cargo was "discharged upon storage within the Tex Transport yard as arranged by the appellant at Port Kembla". Mr
King, counsel for the respondent, agreed when it was put to him that his contention was that "discharge was complete when the goods were stored in the
Tex Transport yard".

These two submissions require resolution of three distinct questions. First, is the arranging of cartage and storage of cargo in a bond store part of the function of "discharge"? If so, the duty to "properly and carefully discharge" was breached because to arrange storage of rain damageable goods in the open was negligent.

Second, if not, is the implementation of that arrangement part of the function of "discharge"? Tex Transport was not negligent in its performance for it did what it contracted to do. However, if placing the cargo in open bond storage is part of the function of discharge, the placement would not be a performance of the duty to properly and carefully discharge because the cargo so placed was liable to damage in the event of rain.

Third, when was discharge complete? At that point of functional performance, determined by reference to a point of time, the limits of operation of the
Hague Rules was reached, leaving the carrier free to rely upon any contractual provisions negating or restricting liability in respect of any remaining obligations under the contract of carriage.

The questions overlap but it is convenient to deal primarily with the third question first.

The maritime texts speak with one voice. Professor Tetley wrote: "Tackle to Tackle 
The Hague and Hague/Visby Rules apply, accordingly to Art.II, Art I(b) and Art
I(e) taken together, "from the time when the goods are loaded on to the time when they are discharged from the ship". This classic rule is better known as "tackle to tackle".
 "Tackle to tackle" has traditionally meant from the moment when ship's tackle is hooked on at the loading port until the moment when the ship's tackle is unhooked at discharge. If shore tackle is being used, that moment has traditionally been when goods cross the ship's rail. In Pyrene Co. versus Scindia
Steam Navigation Co., cargo was attached to ship's tackle and was being loaded on board when the cargo fell outside the ship. It was held that the
Rules applied although the goods had not crossed the ship's rail. The decision was correct because (the) ship's tackle had been hooked on.

The Rules May Apply By Agreement 
Although "tackle to tackle is the classic term describing the limits of application of the Rules, the Hague and Hague/Visby Rules apply to the whole contract of carriage, including the entire loading and discharging, if the parties so agree.

In other words the application may be extended beyond tackle to tackle by the terms of the bill of lading contract. As Devlin J put it: "But I see no reason why the rules should not leave the parties free to determine by their own contract the part which each has to play. On this view the whole contract of carriage is subject to the rules, but the extent to which loading and discharging are brought within the carrier's obligations is left to the parties themselves to decide." 
What is the Agreement? 
If the Rules can be extended to cover the whole loading and discharging operation by agreement, it is proper to examine the intention of the parties in the light of the custom and practice of the port, as well as the nature of the cargo itself (eg. containers, grain, liquids, bunkers) to determine at what point the operation of loading begins and what point the operation of discharge ends. In fact Devlin J specifically referred to "custom and practice of the port and the nature of the cargo". The point therefore where loading begins will depend upon whose tackle is being used, or who supplied the tubes, pipes or other equipment and what type of equipment is being used."[18] 
Scrutton on Charter Parties,[19] in discussing the meaning of "carriage of goods" as referred to in the Hague Rules, and in particular Art I(e), states: "The function of this sub-rule is to assist in the definition of the contract of carriage by identifying the first and last operations of those which together constitute the carriage of goods by sea. The words "loaded on" do not mean that the rights and liabilities referred to in Article II apply only to that part of the operation of loading that takes place after the goods cross the ship's rail. Similarly goods are not "discharged" before they have been put into a lighter alongside. It is clear from Article III, Rules 1 and , that the carrier may have obligations before the operation of loading begins.

It has not yet been decided whether the use of the word "ship" has the effect of excluding from the "carriage of goods by sea" to which the Rules relate the lightering of goods out to a ship at the port of loading or their removal to shore by lighter at the port of discharge.

If the carrier undertakes to perform these operations it seems possible that they might be considered as part of loading and discharging respectively. If he does not, it seems probable that the Rules would have no application to these operations; the terms of Article I(e) lend some support to this view. In each case, however, it must be a question of interpreting the individual contract of carriage, to ascertain which party undertakes responsibility for the lightering." 
Carver,[20] in discussing F.i.o terms, states: "This rule presupposes that the carrier has undertaken to load and discharge the cargo. But those operations may be undertaken by the shipper or consignee.
It is submitted that such an arrangement is not prohibited by the Rules, and that a provision by which the shipper undertakes to load, or the consignee to discharge, the goods is one which defines the scope of the contract service rather than the terms on which that service is to be performed, and that it is therefore valid notwithstanding Art III, rule 8.
 "The phrase `shall properly and carefully load' may mean that the carrier shall load and that he shall do it properly and carefully: or that he shall do whatever loading he does properly and carefully. The former interpretation perhaps fits the language more closely, but the latter may be more consistent with the object of the Rules, their object as it is put, I think, correctly in
Carver's Carriage of Goods by Sea, 9th ed. (1952), p.186, is to define not the scope of the contract service but the terms on which that service is to be performed. The extent to which the carrier has to undertake the loading of the vessel may depend not only on different systems of law but upon the custom and practice of the port and the nature of the cargo. It is difficult to believe that the Rules were intended to impose a universal rigidity in this respect, or to dent freedom of contract to the carrier. The carrier is practically bound to play some part in the loading and discharging, so that both operations are naturally included in those covered by the contract of carriage. But I see no reason why the Rules should not leave the parties free to determine by their own contract the part which each has to play. On this view the whole contract of carriage is subject to the Rules, but the extent to which loading and discharging are brought within the carrier's obligations is left to the parties themselves to decide."[21] 
Devlin J, accordingly rejected an argument in Pyrene versus Scindia Navigation Co that the Rules did not apply, although the ship was responsible for loading, before the goods crossed the ship's rail." 
In Voyage Charters,[22] the following is said regarding Art I(e): "Notwithstanding the wording of Article II, the Hague Rules do not place a duty on the carrier to load and discharge. The parties are free to agree as between themselves who shall undertake the performance of the operations of loading and discharging: Pyrene versus Scindia Navigation Co [[1954] 2 QB ], in which Devlin J said (at page 416): "The function of Art I(e) is, I think, only to assist in the definition of the contract of carriage ... It is natural to divide such a contract into periods, a period of inland transport, followed perhaps by a period of sea transport and then again by a period of inland transport ... The reference to `when the goods are loaded on' in Article I(e) is not, I think, intended to do more than identify the first operation in the series which constitutes the carriage of goods by sea; as `when they are discharged' denotes the last ..." 
Therefore, when, as in that case, the carrier undertook the performance of the loading, the whole of the loading process and not just that part of it after the goods being loaded passed the ship's rail, was covered by the contract of carriage and the carrier's rights and liabilities with regard to the whole of such loading were governed by the Hague Rules. ...

Where the carrier undertakes the process of discharge into a lighter, the process of discharge is not complete until the discharge into the lighter is complete and, until that moment, the Hague Rules continue to govern.
 "A cargo of cotton yarn was discharged from the Biela into a lighter for conveying from the ship's side to the Customs House, but also discharged from the ship into the same lighter was a piece of machinery, which was dropped, so as to hole the lighter and damage the cotton yarn by the ingress of water. The carrier argued that the sea carriage of the cotton yarn was complete when it was put into the lighter and that thereafter they were not bound by the Hague
Rules so that the generous exceptions in the bill of lading excluded them from liability.

Roche J held that the Hague Rules applied because the discharge of the goods was not finished when they were put into the lighter when other goods were being discharged into the same lighter to make up the lighter load which was to start for the shore. When it was contemplated that the cotton yarn was to form part of a total lighter load, the discharge of the goods goes on so long as other goods are being raised into lighter and stowed into the lighter alongside or on top of them.
 (Goodwin, Ferreira & Co versus Lamport & Holt (1929) 34 Ll.L Rep.192.
This decision was distinguished by Talbot J, in Lindsay Blee Depots versus Motor
Union Insurance Co (1930) 37 Ll.L Rep 220, where it was held that discharge of a parcel of cargo into a lighter is complete even if more cargo is to be discharged later if there is a "substantial interruption" between the discharging of the first parcel and that of a second parcel. Devlin J in
Pyrene versus Scindia Navigation [[1954] 2 QB 402] and Brandon J in The Arawa [[1977] 2 Lloyd's Rep 416] seem to have approved the decision of Roche J)." 
It would also seem to follow that if the carrier himself undertook the performance of the lighterage, the process of the discharge from the ocean- going vessel would not be complete until the lighter herself had discharged ashore. However, as stated above, the Hague Rules did not require the carrier to undertake this function; they apply only if the particular contract obliges the carrier to do it.

Where the bill of lading is on free in and out terms, "delivery" of the cargo is effected as soon as the hatches are opened. Though "discharge from the ship" is done by the receiver as a post-delivery obligation (The Filikos [1983] 1 Lloyd's Rep.9, at pages 11-12), the owner remains responsible up to discharge: see Article VII." 
The texts which have been quoted each refer to Devlin J's judgment in
Pyrene, and discuss the decision in Goodwin, Ferreira versus Lamport &
Holt.23 The substance of those cases, and of the texts, mean that the Hague
Rules apply to operations from tackle to tackle, unless the parties to the contract of carriage have varied that arrangement to impose different obligations on the shipper, owner, or consignee in relation to loading or discharge. One looks to the particular contract to determine if that has occurred. If it has, the Hague Rules have application to the operations encompassed by that variation, but not beyond that which can properly be regarded as either loading or discharge, those terms expressing the outside functional boundaries of application of the Hague Rules because that is the scope of "carriage of goods" within the definition and meaning of the Hague
Rules.

The bill of lading constituting the contract of carriage in this instance does not purport to extend the responsibility of the carrier beyond tackle to tackle. Indeed clause 3 which provides that: "The Carrier or his Agent shall not be liable for loss or damage to the goods before the goods have passed the ship's rail in loading and after the goods leave the ship's deck in discharging port..." purport to slightly contract the period of carriers liability, and the scope of liability for functions after cargo has been taken up if ship's tackle is used on loading and prior to discharge from ship's tackle on unloading in the discharging port. It will be necessary to consider whether such a clause is invalidated by Art III, rule 8 but for present purposes it is sufficient to note that the parties have not, by their contract of carriage, sought to expand the applicability of the Hague Rules beyond the common law position by imposing functional obligations on the carrier prior to or after cargo has been handled "tackle to tackle". They have not sought to extend the usual meaning of the expressions "load" or "discharge".

The contract with Tex Transport to cart the goods into and keep them in an open bond store was made on behalf of the carrier on 24 February 1994, with an amendment concerning price on 4 March 1994. That was before any commencement of discharge of the timber. If the function of arranging for the movement of timber after unloading from the ship falls within the carrier's obligation to effect a "proper and careful discharge" of the timber, then that obligation was plainly breached because to place this timber in open storage was negligent.

There thus remains the question of what is involved in the notion of discharge apart from the physical act of unloading. In Tan Hi & Ors versus United States of America[24] Goodman J stated the obligations at common law of discharge.
His Honour said: "The duty imposed by the common law upon water carriers was merely to transport from port to port, or from wharf to wharf. The carrier was not bound to deliver at the warehouse of the consignee; it was the duty of the consignee to receive the goods at the wharf. But the carrier was duty bound to notify the consignee of the vessel's arrival and the time of discharge. The carrier was also obliged to discharge its cargo at a fit wharf, to separate each consignment so as to afford the consignee ready access for inspection and removal, and to protect the cargo until the consignee had a reasonable opportunity to remove it from the wharf. If the consignee failed to remove his goods within a reasonable time, the carrier could relieve itself from further responsibility only by depositing the goods in a warehouse for the account of the consignee.

But these were the elements of a "proper" delivery only when the custom, regulations, or law of the port did not otherwise provide." 
The reference to protecting the cargo until the consignee had a reasonable opportunity to remove it from the wharf is a reference to the "free time rule". Regarding this rule Professor Tetley wrote: "In most countries and ports there is a period of free time during which wharfage is not charged the consignee. The period may be three, five, six or more days after discharge and may be the result of usage, the carrier's tariff, port regulation or even the law of the country of discharge. During the free time period the carrier is normally responsible for the safe keeping of goods. Here again, however, it is dangerous to set down general principles.
Responsibility for goods during and after the free time period depends on the applicable law, the contract of carriage (and the after discharge conditions), the storage contract after discharge if any, and the customs and usages of the port. Free time in other words is a term affecting payment of wharfage and not a term in respect to responsibility."[25] 
Protection of goods during free time prior to delivery is not a consideration in the present case even assuming it to be an aspect of or obligation within the duty to properly and carefully discharge. Nor is the obligation to discharge on to a fit wharf, for that was done here. One issue in question in the present instance is whether the contract contained in the bill of lading has extended by agreement the operation of the Hague Rules beyond the "tackle to tackle" purview. I do not think that it has for there is no clause in the bill of lading purporting to do so. A second issue is whether, absent a common law responsibility prior to physical unloading to arrange safe storage after unloading, the bill of lading imposes by contract such an obligation with attendant liability for its breach, Again, that depends upon the terms agreed in the bill of lading, and there is no clause purporting to impose such obligation or liability.

OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE BILL OF LADING 
The receipt clause which is repeated in the body of the bill of lading acknowledges the obligation of the carrier that the cargo is "to be transported from the port of loading with liberty to proceed via any route ports within the scope of the voyage, to the port of discharge, or so near thereto as the ship can safely get and leave, always afloat at all stages and conditions of water, and weather, and there to be delivered or transhipped on payment of the charges thereon". The "port of discharge" was Sydney as nominated on the face of the bill. Freight was pre-paid. Thus there was the obligation, subject to any exclusionary or limiting clauses, to deliver the cargo in the condition in which it was received to the Port of Sydney, there to discharge it, and there to give delivery of it.

The shipper did not give delivery of the cargo in good order and condition at the Port of Sydney or elsewhere in Sydney. It gave delivery in a damaged condition. It is thus liable for that failure to deliver the cargo in good order and condition either as a carrier by sea or a bailee for reward, unless protected by valid exclusionary clauses. The conditions of the bill of lading apply to the Carrier's obligations as a carrier of goods by sea. Equally, the position of the carrier as a bailee for reward, is subject to the conditions of the contract contained in the bill of lading.

DISCHARGE AND DELIVERY 
Putting to one side for the minute the provisions of the Hague Rules, the bill of lading expresses the contractual intention of the parties that the carrier was to be responsible for the cargo after its receipt only up to the time of it leaving the ship's deck in the discharging port. That is expressly provided by the first sentence in clause 3. The second sentence assumes that the movement of cargo "from the ship ... landed or stored, or put into hulk or craft ..." is an event occurring "after discharge". That strongly implies a contractual position that discharge occurs when the goods leave the ship's deck, or at latest when they leave ship's tackle prior to forwarding from the ship or being placed in hulk or craft. Whilst the clause contemplates that the cargo may still be in the custody of the shipper at the time whilst it is being forwarded from the ship, landed, stored or put into hulk or craft, nonetheless those goods are at the sole risk of the merchant. The carrier is said not to be liable for loss or damage howsoever arising. The concept that the carrier has no liability once cargo leaves its tackle is reinforced by clause 9, not referred to in argument, which provides: "(Lighterage): Any lightering in or off ports of loading or ports of discharge to be for the risk and account of the Merchant." 
Thus contractual responsibility for loss or damage to cargo ceases when the operation of unloading removes the goods from the ship's deck.

The bill of lading uses a number of different expressions regarding discharge and delivery. On its face it nominates a "port of discharge". That was nominated as Sydney. Clause 3 speaks of goods leaving the ship's deck "in discharging port". Clause 5 recognises that the "port of destination" may be the same or different to the "port of discharge". The carrier may have contracted to deliver the goods to a "port of destination" different from the port of discharge. Clause 5 provides that in such a circumstance the liability of the carrier ceases on discharge and any transportation to an ultimate destination beyond the point of discharge is organised by the carrier as forwarding agent with no responsibility for damage unless the forward delivery is on "vessels under his management". Thus forwarding from a "port of discharge" to "a port of destination" by road is at the responsibility of the merchant.

Clause 7 speaks of the "port of discharging" when addressing a deviation by the vessel from the intended port of discharge because of nominated circumstances. In those circumstances the liability of the carrier ceases on discharge in that "port of discharging".

A question arises whether, in the present circumstances, the deviation to Port
Kembla resulted in it becoming the "port of discharge" rather than Sydney. I do not think that it did. "Port of discharge" is used by the parties in the bill of lading to refer to the port nominated as the "port of discharge". The use of the expression "discharging port" in clause 3, similar to the expression "port of discharging" used in clause 7, relates to the port at which, in fact, the cargo was discharged, as distinct from the "port of discharge", which was the intended port at which the cargo would be discharged. Putting aside for the time being the question of any responsibility of the carrier as a bailee, subject to the operation of the
Hague Rules, the provisions of clause 3 operate to exclude liability in the carrier for damage to goods after they leave the ship's deck.

This construction of the terms of the bill of lading argues strongly against the contentions of the respondent, upheld by Hunter J, that liability attached to the carrier because of arrangements made by the carrier for the transport and negligent storage in open bond store after the cargo had left the ship.
There is nothing in the bill of lading which imposed upon the carrier the contractual obligation to make those arrangements, and clause 3 contemplates that even if the cargo, after leaving the ship, remained in the custody of the carrier after landing or in storage, such goods were at the sole risk of the merchant. The contention that either the arranging prior to unloading of negligent open storage after unloading, or the effecting of that arrangement by the carrier resulted in the carrier being responsible for damage to cargo so stored is a contention which cannot stand with the express provisions of clause 3 which determines the carrier's liability at the point when the goods leave the ship's deck, and which in terms provides that even if the goods on land and in storage are in the custody of the carrier, nonetheless they are there at the sole risk of the merchant as to damage.

It follows, in my view, that unless clause 3 is struck down by the Hague Rules the carrier is not liable whether sued as a carrier of goods by sea or as a bailee for reward on terms incorporating clause 3. The "discharging port" may not be the place at which the carrier is obliged to give delivery of the goods, but nonetheless it is at the point of discharge, contractually agreed to be the point at which the goods leave the ship's deck in the discharging port, that the responsibility of the carrier for damage to the goods ceases.

THE APPLICATION OF ART III RULE 8 
The view of Devlin J in Pyrene, which I respectfully adopt, that: "the whole contract of carriage is subject to the Rules, but the extent to which loading and discharging are brought within the carrier's obligations is left to the parties themselves to decide."[26] results in there being no conflict between the Hague Rules, and in particular
Art III rule 2, and clause 3. The parties have agreed that the responsibility of the carrier in relation to discharge ceases when the goods leave the ship's deck, and that is so even if the physical function of discharge is performed by the carrier.

It follows that the Hague Rules do not strike down clause 3 and it is to be given effect according to its terms.

The consequence is, in my view, that "discharge" of the goods occurred when the cargo left the ship's deck, and the responsibility of the carrier for damage to the cargo thereafter ceased. The damaged occurred whilst the goods were stored after that discharge, and clause 3 in terms provides that at that time the cargo was at the sole risk of the merchant. If the carrier be sued as a bailee for reward pursuant to a contract incorporating clause 3, it operates to exclude liability on the same basis.

It follows that the appeal must be upheld.

CLAUSE 24, ART III RULE 6 
The appellant did not appeal from the decision of Rolfe J granting leave pursuant to Part 20, rule 4 to amend the statement of claim substituting in place of the then named defendant Far Eastern Shipping Company, the present appellant Nikolay Malakhov Shipping Co Limited. Rolfe J, in granting that leave, followed the decision of Clarke J in Lloyds Steel Co. (Aust) Pty Ltd v
Jade Shipping SA & Anor[27] and of the High Court in Bridge Shipping Pty
Ltd versus Grand Shipping S.A. & Anor.[28] However, it was contended that the grant of that leave did not negate the validity of a time bar defence based upon the failure of the respondent to sue the appellant within twelve months of delivery of the cargo. The application for and order for substitution was made after the expiration of the twelve months period referred to in Art III rule 6 and clause 24 but, by virtue of the [Supreme Court
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/), relates back to the date of the statement of claim which was issued against the wrongly named defendant within that twelve months period.

The appellant relied upon the decision in Aries Tanker Corp versus Total Transport (The Aries)[29] in which the House of Lords held that once the one year period expired the ship owners were discharged from all liability unless previously sued, and the cargo interests thereupon had no rights to sue at all because the time bar extinguished any cause of action.

Paragraphs 2 and 5 of the amended statement of claim which I have previously quoted make plain the cargo interests intended at all times to sue the carrier. The case is thus indistinguishable from that being addressed in each of Lloyds Steel and Bridge Shipping. In each instance, except for the relation back provision of the rules of the Supreme Court of New South Wales and Victoria respectively, the party sought to be substituted had a complete defence because of the time bar provided by the Hague Rules or the contract of carriage. Nonetheless Clarke J granted the substitution. In Bridge cargo interests made no mistake as to the description of the party which it wished to sue, the mistake there being to wrongly join the owner whom it intended to sue. The judgment of McHugh J, with which Brennan CJ and Deane J agreed, makes plain that had there been a mistake within the relevant rule, (namely if it had intended to sue the carrier but had wrongly named as carrier the owner) substitution would have been granted.[30] Although The Aries was not referred either in the judgment of Clarke J or the judgments in the High
Court, the concept that a time bar clause constituted an extinguishment of the cause of action conferring on the proposed defendant a vested right was before the High Court for that notion was the basis upon which Crockett J in the Full
Court of Victoria denied the right to relief.[31] The High Court in Bridge made clear that if a mistake falling within the rule is established, substitution having a relation back to the date of issue of the writ should be made. That was in the context of considering Rule 36.01 (Victoria) which by sub-rule (b) provided: "The Court may, notwithstanding the expiry of any relevant limitation period after the day of a proceeding is commenced, make an order under paragraph (1) where it is satisfied that any other party to the proceeding would not by reason of the order be prejudiced in the conduct of his claim or defence in a way that could not fairly be met by an adjournment, an award of costs, or otherwise." 
Such a substitution would be pointless if nonetheless the substituted defendant could plead an effective time bar defence. Were that the situation the rule would have no effective operation. It follows, in my view, that
Hunter J was right to reject the contentions of the appellant based upon a defence grounded on the time bar provisions of the Hague Rules and clause 24.

I also wish to record my concurrence with the anlaysis by Sheller JA under the heading "Time Bar Defence".

ORDERS
Appeal allowed.
Order and judgment of Hunter J entered 23 September 1997 be set aside and in lieu thereof judgment entered for the defendant appellant.
The respondent should pay the appellant's costs of the trial before Hunter
J and of the appeal but should have in respect of the appeal, if qualified, a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.
 [1] Appeal Book, p.623.
 [2] Appeal Book, p.639T-640P.
 [3] Appeal Book, p.626E-H.
 [4] Appeal Book, p.630M-O.
 [5] Appeal Book, p.641E.
 [6] Appeal Book, p.658L-R.
 [7] Appeal Book, p.663H-N.
 [8] See Voyage Charters p.201, 212; Scrutton on Charter Parties (19th ed), p.453. See, for example, Thiess Bros (Queensland) Pty Ltd versus Australian
Steamships Pty Ltd [(1955) Ll.L.R 459] where it was held that a deviation not for the purposes of or permitted by the contract of carriage negated the carrier's right to rely upon exclusion clauses.
 [9] Appeal Book, p.655.
 [10] Appeal Book, p.652-3.
 [11] See G H Renton & Co Ltd versus Palmyra Trading Corporation of Panama [[1957] AC 149] at 171 per Lord Morton.
 [12] Appeal Book, p.280.
 [13] See ss.2, 4.
 [14] Appeal Book, p.634.
 [(1954) 1 Ll.L.R. 321.] [16] [(1954) 1 Ll.L.R. 321] at .
 [17] [(1954) 1 Ll.L.R. 321] at -329.
 [18] Tetley W, Marine Cargo Claims (Canada: International Shipping
Publications, 3rd ed, 1988) at p.14-15.
 [19] Mocatta, A et al. Scrutton on Charter Parties and Bills of Lading (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 19th ed., 19th ed.1984 ) at p.431.
 [20] Colinvaux R, Carvers Carriage by Sea, Vol 1 (London: Stevens &
Sons, 13th ed., 1982). para 515.
 [21] See Devlin J in Pyrene versus Scandia Navigation Co [[1954] 2 QB 402], 417, 418.
 [22] Cook, J, et al, Voyage Charters (London: Lloyd's of London Press Ltd, ) at p.716-717.
 [(1929) 34 L.l.L.R. 192.] [24] [94 F. Supp 432] at 435; [1951 AMC 127] at 130-131.
 [25] Tetley W, Marine Cargo Claims (Canada: International Shipping
Publications, 3rd ed, 1988) at p.14.
 <case>; [(1991) 173 CLR 231.] [29] [[1977] 1 WLR 185] [30] (1991) 173 CLR at 260-261.
 [31] See Bridge Shipping Pty Ltd versus Grand Shipping S.A. & Anor <case>; [(1991) VR 258] at 262.
 * * * 
