

Regina versus Johnston Matter No Cca 60030/98 [1998] NSWSC 280 (31 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 August 1998 
REGINA versus BERNARD LAWRENCE JOHNSTON /98 July 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Sully J, Ireland J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus Bernard Lawrence JOHNSTON 
This appeal arises from the conviction of the appellant of sexual intercourse without consent in circumstances of aggravation under [s61J](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61j.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) .

Held: . The trial judge did not fail to properly direct the jury as to why the complainant would make false allegations 
The issue of motive to lie was not raised by the Crown. There was no basis for criticism of the conduct of the Crown or of the trial judge's summing-up.
 . The trial judge failed to properly direct the jury regarding the delay in complaint 
A trial judge should make such comments and give such warnings as will ensure that the trial is fair: Crofts <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427] at 451; Longman <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79] at 86; Bromley <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 315] at 325. A comment or warning will be required if it appears to the trial judge that a jury may not fully appreciate the effects of delay on the ability of the accused to defend himself or herself: Bromley <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 315] at 324, 325; Longman <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79] at 95-96 
The need for, and content of, any comment and any warning will depend on the circumstances of the case: M [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at -515; Crofts <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427] at 448; Spencer [(1968) 3 WLR 319] at 353, 359;
Carr <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 314] at 321;
McDonald, unreported, NSWCCA, 10 August 1993 at 8.

Where it appears that special difficulties were encountered by the accused in presenting his or her case, then the trial judge should make it clear that delay had created those difficulties: Longman <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79] at 90-91; Kenny, unreported, NSWCCA, 29 August 1997; K <case>; [(1997) 68 SASR 405]; Harvey, unreported, NSWCCA, 9 April 1998; Jones (1997) 72 ALJR 78.

A trial judge should also indicate to the jury how they should approach the task of determining whether the prosecution has proven its case beyond reasonable doubt. Although there is no universal formula, some reference should be made to additional care or caution with which they should approach the prosecution evidence. [See cases cited at (iii).] 
Where a warning that it would be "dangerous" or "unsafe" to convict is given, the reason for the warning should be given generally by relating the danger to the specific difficulties referred to in (iii).

The summing-up of the trial judge contained three defects. First, his Honour did not identify the specific difficulties for the defence which had been caused by the delay in complaint. Second, the trial judge did not indicate to the jury how they should approach their task in the light of the difficulties that had been caused by the delay. Third, the trial judge did not explain the reasons for the warning he gave by relating the "danger" to the specific difficulties for the defence.
 . The convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory 
Upon the whole of the evidence it was not open to the jury, acting reasonably and properly instructed, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. See M [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at 493;
Director of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) versus Fowler <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 627] at 630; King <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 423] at 426-427, 433.

ORDERS
Leave granted to argue Ground 2 in the Notice of Appeal.
Appeal allowed.
Convictions quashed and in lieu thereof direct judgment and verdict of acquittal.

REGINA versus Bernard Lawrence JOHNSTON 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The Appellant was convicted of three counts of sexual intercourse without consent in circumstances of aggravation under [s61J](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61j.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) . All three acts of sexual intercourse allegedly occurred on 15 February 1992. The complainant, Ms Lisa Mahy, was then fifteen years old. No complaint was made for almost five years. Her statement to the police was dated 21 January 1997. 
The alleged incidents occurred at Gladswood House in Double Bay. The complainant had accompanied the Appellant, who was a friend of the family, to that place for the purpose of assisting him to do work on the house, then under refurbishment.

As is usual in cases of this character, the basic conflict was between the version of events of the complainant, who asserted a sexual assault, and the version of the Appellant, who denied any sexual contact between himself and the complainant. Another significant witness was Mr Jamie Mula, who was the caretaker of Gladswood House and was present at the premises on the day in question.

The complainant said that on 15 February 1992 at Gladswood House she was alone with the Appellant in one of the rooms of the House which contained a bed but no other furniture. The complainant said that the Appellant took off her clothes and then his, that he took her to the bed, and that he put his penis into her vagina. Whilst intercourse was occurring she said she was grimacing because she found the act was hurting her. She said that on no occasion did she consent to it. She said that the complainant's penis was in her vagina for a minute, that he then pulled out and ejaculated on the doona. A short while later she said that the complainant started masturbating, put his penis in her vagina again, that it was in for a longer period, that he then pulled out and again ejaculated on the doona. He then masturbated and for a third time inserted his penis into her vagina and again ejaculated on the doona. The complainant said it had taken approximately half an hour from the time the first act of intercourse took place to when she put her clothes back on.

I will refer below to some other relevant evidence about the events of the day.

The complainant said that in 1996 she told a friend about having had sexual intercourse with the Appellant in 1992. She did so because the topic of child abuse was something she had just studied in a TAFE course. She explained the delay in the following terms: "I was scared and I thought it was my fault. I didn't want anyone to judge me for what I'd done. I didn't want my parents to think that I was a bad person and I didn't know what Bernie (the Appellant) would do so I just said nothing." 
She added that during the course of study: "it became clear to me that I wasn't in the wrong".

The Appellant gave evidence and was cross-examined. He denied that he had ever sexually assaulted the complainant.

Mr Mula was called by the Defence. He testified he had been living at
Gladswood House as a caretaker at the relevant time.

Some significance attaches to the overlap of the three accounts given by the three persons present at Gladswood House on the day of the alleged offences.

The complainant gave evidence that she and the Appellant worked in the garden for approximately one hour. They went into the house through the back to an upstairs room which, she originally said, was the only room in the house which she went in to. That room contained one piece of furniture, namely a bed, and it was there that the alleged offences happened over the course of half an hour. After the assaults, she said she stayed on the balcony whilst the accused went on to complete some building work in the room. Thereafter they went downstairs together. In cross-examination she agreed that Mr Mula had given her and the Appellant a guided tour of the premises, including the attic room where Mr Mula lived in which there was some furniture. It was at the conclusion of this tour, she said, that she and the Appellant went to the room where the alleged offences occurred.

The Appellant gave evidence that he worked in the garden and later had the tour of the premises, which included an inspection of the attic room. His evidence confirmed the visit to a particular room in which he did some work on the ceiling of the room. The nature of the work differed from that about which the complainant testified. The accused asserted that Mr Mula would only have left him and the complainant alone for a period of some five minutes.

It is in this last regard that the evidence of Mr Mula is of significance. He also recalls that at first the Appellant and the complainant worked outside in the garden for a period of one to one and a half hours. They then came into the house and went upstairs to the room where the Appellant did some work. He did not recall a visit to the attic room. Mr Mula testified that he was present during the period while the work was being done. This took about 45 minutes. He said that he only left the accused and the complainant alone for five to eight minutes when he went to get a ladder.

There is a second specific aspect of Mr Mula's evidence which contradicted the complainant's version of events. Mr Mula said that in February 1992, apart from the bed in his own room, there were no other beds in the house.

Mr Mula was cross-examined with the suggestion that there was furniture in one of the rooms, which belonged to Mr Joe Akasic who had earlier been in occupation. During the course of Mr Mula's cross-examination the following exchanges took place: "Q The room that Joe was living in that was the room where this work was done in the ceiling? 
A Yes.

Q See, I suggest to you Mr Mula, that Joe's double bed was still in that room on 15 February 1992? 
A No.
 ...........................

Q You can't say when Joe moved out can you? 
A Not exactly, no.

Q After he moved out you arranged for his furniture to be sent off to wherever it was going? 
A I can't remember that, I can't remember arranging his ...

Q To be fair to you Mr Mula it is very hard to cast your mind back nearly six years, isn't it? 
A It can be difficult sometimes.
 ...........................

Q And given that time delay you can't say that Joe's furniture still wasn't there in that room on 15 February can you? 
A No I can't remember.........
 ...........................

Q Look to be fair to you, I'm not criticising you, it's a long time, you can't remember whether you were living in the attic or another floor on 15
February 1992, isn't that right? 
A That's correct." 
The Appellant's wife was also called as a witness. She said that she and the
Appellant had bought Mr Akasic's furniture, including the bed. She testified that this happened shortly before the date of the alleged assaults.
Accordingly, her evidence confirmed that there was no bed in the room as alleged by the Appellant. It was suggested in cross-examination that she was reconstructing the events in the most favourable light for her husband.

A third aspect of the evidence is also of significance. On the same day as the alleged assaults, the Appellant and the complainant went to do some work on a house at North Sydney, the home of Miss Barbara Racynzki. According to her evidence the complainant "....was friendly, she seemed quite happy, there seemed to be a good relationship there between the two of them". Miss Racynzki was cross-examined with the suggestion that her recollection was "not crystal clear" and that she "didn't pay particular attention to this girl".

The wife of the Appellant also gave evidence that later on the same day, the
Appellant and the complainant came to the Appellant's house, a visit contested by the complainant. Mrs Johnston's evidence was that the complainant had told her "she had a good day, she's enjoyed herself, it had been fun". She said that the complainant's demeanour was "bright and cheerful and chatty". This was generally confirmatory of Miss Racynzki's evidence. In cross-examination, as noted above, her ability to recall the events was challenged and the suggestion was put that she was reconstructing the events in the most favourable light for her husband.

The First Ground 
The first ground of appeal is that the trial judge failed properly to direct the jury with regard to a matter, said to have been raised by the Crown
Prosecutor, as to why the complainant would make false allegations. When the matter was first listed in this Court on 23 June 1998, an adjournment was sought and granted for the purpose of obtaining a transcript of what was in fact said by the Crown Prosecutor. In the course of the summing up by the trial judge, he said: "The Crown says to you that the accused states that Lisa made this story up.
The Crown invites you to look at the history, the association the accused had with Lisa's father. This association became minimal since February 1992, that there was a lack of contact as the years went on. Lisa told herself she would not be alone with the accused and ensured that a third party was present on all occasions.

The accused says, however, he was on good terms with all the family of Lisa.
There was no cause for a falling out, why should she suddenly come out and tell her parents or police. It is a matter for you, ladies and gentlemen.

The Crown says with regard to the Victims Compensation that Lisa had not sought one cent from the accused, that she did make this whole thing up, and she said when it was put to her, "but I don't know how anyone could make that up." The Crown asks you to accept Lisa as a reliable witness." 
His Honour's reference to the Victims Compensation matter was a reference back to an earlier passage in his summing up where he was outlining the evidence given by Ms Mahy (Transcript 29 line 20) He said: "She said that she has not made a claim for Victims Compensation." 
In my opinion, it is not correct to characterise the Crown Prosecutor as having made a submission to the effect: "Why would the complainant make false allegations?" This Court has on a number of occasions emphasised the dangers involved in a Crown submission to that effect. It has the effect of requiring the accused to discharge some form of evidentiary obligation and may reverse the onus of proof. (See E [(1996) 39 NSWLR 450] @ 465;
F [(1995) 83 ACrimR 502] @ 511-512; Uhrig, unreported, NSWCCA, 24 October ,; Palmer <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 254], especially @ 257-258).

Nothing in the Crown submissions below indicate that the Crown asked a question in the crude form which was considered in this line of authorities.
The most Counsel for the Appellant could point to was a reference by the Crown
Prosecutor to the complainant "out of the blue manufacturing this horrendous allegation" and an assertion that the complainant was "an honest and reliable witness not someone who for some unknown reason has come along and fabricated allegations (Transcript 30 October 1997, p11).

The question of Victims Compensation as a motive for lying was an issue raised by counsel who appeared for the Appellant at the trial. It was in his cross- examination of Ms Mahy that she was asked whether or not she knew it was possible to make an application for Victims Compensation, and she said that she did not (Transcript 115). In re-examination, the Crown Prosecutor asked whether she had sought compensation from the Appellant, and she said no. This issue was plainly raised by counsel for the Appellant. There is no basis for any complaint against the conduct of the Crown at the trial or of the summing- up by the trial judge. In my view, there was no risk that the jury could have inferred that the onus of proof shifted. His Honour directed the jury emphatically on onus a number of times.

It was counsel who appeared for the Appellant at trial who raised the issue of motive to lie in a stark form. The trial judge said: "Mr Howen submits that you may be thinking why would Lisa come to court and tell lie after lie? He says to you that there is no evidence as to why and that you are not to guess or speculate. I again give you the direction that you are not guess or speculate. You are entitled to your opinion but you are not to give a verdict on your opinions." (Summing-up p59C) 
The transcript of the addresses makes it clear that this accurately reflects the submissions of Counsel for the Appellant. (Transcript 3 October 1997 pp16, ). He submitted, as the trial judge recounted, that the jury should not speculate. Counsel now appearing for the Appellant suggests that the submission made below - "do not speculate" - would have been understood by the jury to mean that they should accept that there was no reason why they should not accept the complainant's evidence. I do not accept that this conclusion is sufficiently likely so as to give rise to the risk of a miscarriage. The statement that the jury should not speculate about a motive does not necessarily suggest that there is no motive. The jury can have been in no doubt that Appellant's counsel submitted to them that she did lie. They would have understood his further submission - "do not speculate" - to mean that her reason for lying was irrelevant.

No direction of the character now said to be required was sought at the trial, and [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) would otherwise apply. I see no basis for giving leave. The ground of appeal is not made out.

The Second Ground 
Ground 2 is an allegation that the trial judge failed to properly direct the jury regarding the delay in complaints.

Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the directions below were adequate in terms of the relevance of delay to the complainant's credibility. (Referring to Crofts <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427] @ 447-448). Nevertheless, counsel submitted that the trial judge did not direct the jury about the significance of the delay on the evidence able to be adduced by the defence. In particular, it was said that the trial judge did not warn the jury that the delay created difficulties for the defence in obtaining unequivocal evidence tending to establish the innocence of the Appellant.

No direction of the character, the absence of which is now attacked, was sought before the trial judge. The Appellant must be given leave in accordance with [Rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) 
Delay in making complaint about sexual assault has posed difficult issues for the administration of justice. At one stage, the Courts displayed a distinct scepticism towards complainants. There was a practice of directing a jury that it was unsafe to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of an alleged victim of a sexual assault. Furthermore, it was established that as a general rule a
Court should direct a jury that a complainant's failure to complain "at the earliest reasonable opportunity" was something they could take into account in "determining whether to believe her". (Kilby <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 460] @ 465).

There is no doubt that the criminal courts do have a body of experience that is not shared by the ordinary juror. For many years it was thought that practice with respect to warnings about complainants in sexual assault cases reflected such superior experience. It is now clear that the practice in fact reflected the limitations on the experience of judges, who were almost invariably male.

The inadequacies of the practice in this regard led to legislative intervention. In New South Wales this took the form a of series of changes to the definition of sexual offences and the procedure for their trial in the
Crimes (Sexual Assault) Amendment Act 1981 . Amongst the provisions introduced at that time was s405B(2) and s405C(2): "405B(2) Where on the trial of a person for a prescribed sexual offence evidence is given or a question is asked of a witness which tends to suggest an absence of complaint in respect of the commission of the alleged offence by the person upon whom the offence is alleged to have been committed or to suggest delay by that person in making any such complaint, the Judge shall - give a warning to the jury to the effect that absence of complaint or delay in complaining does not necessarily indicate that the allegation that the offence was committed is false; and inform the jury that there may be good reasons why a victim of a sexual assault may hesitate in making, or may refrain from making, a complaint about the assault.

C(2) On the trial of a person for a prescribed sexual offence, the Judge is not required by any rule of law or practice to give, in relation to any offence of which the person is liable to be convicted on the charge for the prescribed sexual offence, a warning to the jury to the effect that it is unsafe to convict the person on the uncorroborated evidence of the person upon whom the offence is alleged to have been convicted." 
Section 405B was based on the view that sexual assaults were seriously under- reported, particularly because of the personal ordeal through which a complainant would pass during the course of police investigation and any subsequent trial. As one contemporaneous explanation put it: "The reasons for late complaint or the absence of recent complaint may be subtle and difficult to understand or express. Section 405B is designed as a compulsory warning to the jury (as well as to the judge and counsel) that even though a rape victim may have difficulty in articulating in the witness box the painful self-reflections he or she felt after the offence occurred, such difficulty should not be necessarily taken as indicating fabrication". (Woods
Sexual Assault Law Reforms in New South Wales 1981 p20).

The same author commented on s405C: "The `dangerous to convict' warning is based upon a presumption that rape or sexual assault complainants are particularly prone to lying.......The effect of s405C will be to leave it to the discretion of the judge to comment, when appropriate, upon the weight to be given to the evidence of the particular witnesses.......It is stressed that the present practice is regarded as being grossly offensive to women and is discriminatory." (Woods supra p28) 
It appears to me that a Kilby direction was originally based on the assumption that in the normal course of events, a victim of a sexual assault will complain at the first opportunity. Section 405B requires an express direction that that assumption is wrong. I would not have thought that a jury would readily comprehend why failure to complain undermines the credit of a witness, if there is no expectation that complaint should be promptly made.
Accordingly it is now important that a trial judge embarking on a direction in this regard, should explain the mechanism by which delay in complaint may affect the credit of the complainant.

It is now well established that, notwithstanding s405B, a trial judge may comment that failure or delay in complaint may be taken into account in the assessment of the complainant's credit. (Davies [(1985) 3 NSWLR 276]; Longman <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79] @ 91; Crofts supra @ 449-451; Miletic [(1997) 1 VR ] @ -606).

Each case must turn on its own facts. (See M [(1994) 181 CLR 487] @ 514-515 per Gaudron J). This is confirmed by the joint judgment in Crofts, which emphasised the word "necessarily" in s61(1)(b) of the Victorian Act, the equivalent of s405B: "Delay in complaining may not necessarily indicate that an allegation is false. But in the particular circumstances of a case, the delay may be so long, so inexplicable, or so unexplained, that the jury could properly take it into account in concluding that, in the particular case, the allegation is false." (Croft supra, 448) 
Where, as here, the complainant proffered an explanation for the delay, it was a matter for the jury whether it should be accepted. Mr S J Odgers who appeared for the Appellant in this Court, but not below, accepted that in the present case the trial Judge's directions were adequate in terms of the relevance to the complainant's credibility in the sense identified in
Crofts. However, Mr Odgers submitted that in the circumstances of the case, the direction did not go far enough.

The additional direction said to have been required is one which would have ameliorated the adverse effect of delay on the fairness of a trial. He submitted that the delay in complaining adversely affected the ability of the
Appellant to defend himself.

It is important to emphasise that what is required by way of comment or direction must depend on the whole of the circumstances. These circumstances extend to encompass any aspect of the conduct of the trial including the scope of factual disputation, whether by express contradiction or cross- examination; and the salience given to particular matters of factual disputation, including by way of emphasis in addresses.

The guiding principle on such matters is as stated by the High Court in
Longman supra @ 86: "The general law requires a warning to be given whenever a warning is necessary to avoid a perceptible risk of miscarriage of justice arising from the circumstances of the case." 
That is a specific manifestation of the proposition that: "The overriding duty of the trial judge remains to ensure that the accused secures a fair trial." (Crofts supra @ 451).

In order to intervene on appeal under [s6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) , this
Court must be satisfied that the absence of a direction meant that a miscarriage of justice did occur.

There is no fixed body of rules requiring a warning in specific circumstances or in particular terminology. As Lord Hailsham put it in Spencer [(1986) 3
WLR 319](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281986%29%203%20WLR%20319 "View LawCiteRecord" ) @ 353: "...modern cases......are reluctant to insist on any magic formula or incantation, and stress instead the need that each summing-up should be tailor-made to suit the requirements of the individual case".

The passage was quoted with approval in Carr <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 314] @ 321. See also Spencer @ 359 per Lord Ackner and
McDonald unreported, NSWCCA 10 August 1993 @ 8.

A direction which does not contain the words "dangerous" or "unsafe" to convict, is not necessarily inadequate. (See Spencer @359 per Lord Ackner,
McDonald supra @ 10-13). Terminology such as "considerable caution" will sometimes be adequate. Nor should it be assumed that the use of the word "dangerous" or "unsafe" will necessarily be adequate.

As Brennan J put it in Bromley <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 315] @ 325: "The possibility of a miscarriage of justice is both the occasion for the giving of a warning and the determinant of its content." 
His Honour went on to say @ 325: "When the danger in acting upon the evidence is real and substantial and when the conduct of the trial and evidence......are such that the jury may not have fully perceived or the jury's attention may have been diverted from the danger, a warning should be given." 
Although these comments were made in the context of dealing with evidence said to be unreliable by its nature, the reasoning is equally applicable to remedying unfairness to the ability of the accused to put his case.

The circumstances in which a warning is appropriate were further identified by
Brennan J in the following terms: "If the danger is equally obvious to the lay mind, a failure to warn of its existence is much less likely to result in a miscarriage of justice and thus much less likely to provide a ground for quashing a conviction than if the court has a special knowledge of the danger. If the danger is so obvious that the jury are fully alive to it without a warning, no warning need be given." (Bromley supra @ 324).

As Deane J put it in Longman supra @ 95-96: "[The] responsibility [of a trial judge] includes the giving of an appropriate caution or warning in circumstances where there are potential dangers in acting upon particular evidence which may not, without such a caution or warning, be appreciated by the jury." 
Cases involving alleged sexual assault are only one example of criminal proceedings in which the conduct of a defence can be adversely affected by delay. They are however cases which are characterised by a direct conflict of word against word, between a complainant and an accused. It is often the case that there will be no independent verification of the basic allegations of whether a sexual act occurred at all, and if it is conceded that it did occur, whether it was a consensual act. In order to resolve a direct conflict of oral testimony, the contextual details of the alleged conduct will often prove to be of determinative significance. However, it is precisely such contextual details which may be lost by reason of delay.

There are a number of decided authorities in which it has been found necessary to give a warning on the basis of the circumstances of the particular case, which warning extended to the impact which delay had on the ability of an accused to defend himself. Longman itself involved complaints of sexual abuse twenty to twenty-five years before the trial. In their joint judgment
Brennan, Dawson, Toohey JJ distinguished circumstances requiring "comment" from those requiring a "warning": "It would not have been surprising if these circumstances had elicited some comment from the trial judge, for it would have been proper to remind the jury of considerations relevant to the evaluation of the evidence......But there is one factor which may not have been apparent to the jury and which therefore required not merely a comment but a warning be given to them: see R versus Spencer
AC @ 141. That factor was the applicant's loss of those means of testing the complainant's allegation which would have been open to him had there been no delay in prosecution. Had the allegations been made soon after the alleged event, it would have been possible to explore in detail the alleged circumstances attendant upon its occurrence and perhaps to adduce evidence throwing doubt upon the complainant's story or confirming the applicant's denial. After more than twenty years that opportunity was gone and the applicant's recollection of them could not be fairly tested.

The fairness of the trial had necessarily been impaired by the long delay and it was imperative that a warning be given to the jury. The jury should have been told that, as the evidence of the complainant could not be adequately tested after the passage of more than twenty years, it would be dangerous to convict on that evidence alone unless the jury, scrutinizing the evidence with great care, considering the circumstances relevant to its evaluation and paying heed to the warning, were satisfied of its truth and accuracy. To leave a jury without such a full appreciation of the danger was to risk a miscarriage of justice." (Longman supra @ 90-91).

There are two features of the Longman warning which should be emphasised.
First, the jury is to be told why it is "dangerous to convict" namely, the delay meant that the evidence of the complainant could not be "adequately tested". Second, the jury is to be told how they should go about their task because of the identified danger namely, "scrutinize the evidence with great care".

In Kenny, unreported NSWCCA, 29 August 1997, allegations of sexual misconduct were made by two brothers. The offences were alleged to have occurred in 1986 when the complainants were aged nine or ten and eleven or twelve. No complaint was made for a period of approximately nine years.
Studdert J said inter alia: "When the trial judge in his summing-up briefly reviewed the competing submissions made by counsel, delay was not mentioned. At the conclusion of the summing-up counsel did not ask the trial judge to say anything about delay either in the context of the review of what had been put to the jury in counsel's address or otherwise. I am prepared therefore to assume that counsel did not focus on delay when he addressed the jury.

Nevertheless the delay was substantial and the jury was given no instruction about this feature of the case other than in the context of a direction the
Crown was confined by the dates expressed in the indictment as to when the offences occurred. The defence case raised an issue as to whether the offences could have been committed in 1986 because by then, according to the defence,
Mrs Nelson had ceased to babysit the complainant. The issue was raised as to whether, if the complainants were sexually abused, they were mistaken about who had done it and that such a mistake could have occurred by reason of the passage of time. It seems to me that the effluxion of time was a very material consideration in assessing the reliability of the complainant's evidence." (pp8-9) 
His Honour went on to refer to Crofts supra, in which there was a delay of up to six years.

Studdert J continued: "I therefore accept Mr Odgers submission that the jury should have been instructed as to delay and its possible bearing upon the credibility and the reliability of the evidence given by the complainant. I consider that Mr
Odgers is also correct in his further submission that the jury should have been alerted to the practical difficulties that arose for the Appellant in meeting the charges against him, by reason of the delay that had occurred, and the significance of this factor in evaluating the complainant's evidence." 
His Honour then quoted the passage from Longman (supra @ 91) containing the
Longman direction. Studdert J continued: "It is the fact that no appropriate direction was sought by Counsel in the present case. Moreover it is evident that the Appellant was able to gather together a considerable body of evidence to address the Crown case .........

Whilst recognising the evidence that the Appellant was able to muster, it seems to me that inevitably the Appellant was disadvantaged by the passage of time. The various witnesses called to prove the Appellant's activities in 1986 were cross-examined by the Crown as to the dependability of their evidence having regard to the time that had elapsed, as indeed was the Appellant, and the Appellant's grandmother, Mrs Nelson had become unfit to give evidence by reason of the development of dementia.

In all the circumstances in my opinion the jury should have been alerted to the difficulties confronting the Appellant in fully testing the evidence of the complainants after so many years and they should have been directed as to the requirement in consequence for added care in the scrutiny of the evidence of the complainants.

I have concluded that the absence of appropriate directions as to delay and the possible significance of it in the areas considered above gave rise to a risk of a miscarriage of justice. It is regrettable that Counsel at the trial did not seek the relevant directions but in my opinion the possible significance of the delay is such as to warrant that leave to rely upon this ground as argued should be granted." (pp11-13) 
In K <case>; [(1997) 68 SASR 405], the complainant was aged between ten and eleven at the time of the alleged offences. The first complaint was made some five or six years later. It was only made after a specific inquiry by his sister who pressed him to identify the person who may have sexually abused him. Doyle CJ concluded: "In my opinion, both the delay and the circumstances of the complaint called for clear warning by the trial judge. There were three matters to be dealt with. First, consistently with the principles referred to above, a warning that the jury should consider whether the delay reflected adversely upon the credit of B. Of course the judge would have to point out to the jury both why it might reflect adversely and why it might not. Obvious matters to consider under the latter heading are the age at the time, his relationship with the offender and the confusion and uncertainty that might affect relatively young persons. Any warning would have to be balanced. But in my opinion the delay was sufficient to call for a warning. The second aspect to be dealt with was the circumstances of the complaint. The third aspect of the warning that should be given that it must be related to the facts of the case and the reasons for the warning be explained. This is necessary to assist the jury in deciding whether in this particular circumstance of the case it will draw any inference adverse to B's credibility from the delay and from the circumstances of the complaint. In relation to the reason for the warning it would be necessary to refer to the risk of concoction and to the significance of the evidence about B's disturbed behaviour as a child." (p409) 
His Honour went on to refer to the trial judge's summing-up and concluded: ".......there was no warning about the significance of delay as such, about the reasons why delay might be significant and about the way in which the facts of this particular case were related to the principles underlying the warnings. 
It is true as Counsel for the Director of Public Prosecutions argued, that this was a short trial and that the issue should have been clear. It is also true that the delay was self-evident. The delay will be self-evident in most cases, but the law still requires a warning in appropriate circumstances, and in my opinion these were appropriate circumstances for a warning. It is also true that there was no request for a further direction on this matter. In some cases that will be significant because the absence of any complaint or request for a further direction will indicate that, in the context of a trial, in what might seem on appeal to be an error or omission, did not in fact have the significance that it appears to have. However, in the present case in my opinion there was a clear need for a warning to ensure a fair trial and the omission by Counsel at the trial to seek a warning cannot alter that fact." 
In Harvey (unreported NSWCCA 9 April 1998) the Appellant was convicted of sexual offences against the daughter of his de facto wife. The offences were said to have been committed over of a period of time between 1987 and April
The first occasion the complainant mentioned the alleged criminal conduct was in August 1995 to her mother. This was over five years after the
Appellant had left the family. In that case, as here, there was a conventional direction given pursuant to s405B of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

In Harvey, Smart J giving the decision of the Court also distinguished between a direction relating to credibility and one relating to the difficulties which delay caused to the defence: "In the present case, a direction was required that, in evaluating the evidence of the complainant and in determining whether to believe her, the jury could take into account her failure to make a complaint at the earliest reasonable opportunity as reducing her credibility. The directions given by the judge in the present case tended to reinforce her credibility. That lacked the balance for which the authorities called.

Further the judge did not point out that the delay in complaint may be difficult for the Appellant to defend himself and obtain substantial evidence in rebuttal. This was important in the present case as the evidence of the complainant varied as to the dates on which the offences had been committed.

No point was taken at the trial as to the deficiencies in the directions. The judge was not asked to give further directions which would have restored the balance. In the present case the absence of the directions as to the effect of the delay on the complainant's credibility and the difficulty of the Appellant defending himself adequately as a consequence, meant that the Appellant did not receive a fair trial and there has been a miscarriage. At least there must be an order for a new trial." (pp11-12) 
The issue of delay in making complaint was one of the factors, the cumulative effect of which lead the majority of the High Court to find that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory in Jones (1997) 72 ALJR 78. In that case, no explanation was proffered at the trial for the complainant's delay, an important difference from the present case. The joint judgment of Gaudron,
McHugh and Gummow JJ concluded: "The unexplained absence of a complaint for four years is a matter that made it essential for a reasonable jury to scrutinise the complainant's evidence with great care." 
This reflects the terms of the Longman direction. The joint judgment went on to distinguish this matter from the effect of delay on the ability of an accused to defend himself: "Furthermore, in some cases - and we thought that this was one - the delay in making a complaint may be so long that it hampers an accused person's right to defend him or herself. An innocent person's ability to recall the events which took place at the time of an alleged incident is undoubtedly impeded by any extensive delay in the making of the complaint against him or her." ............

As a result of the long delay in this case, the Appellant's opportunity to obtain evidence refuting the circumstances of each alleged offence was significantly reduced.
 ..........

Whether or not the Appellant and the complainant were ever left alone after
Saturday classes was a critical factor concerning the first count. Evidence that the Appellant was left alone with the complainant would have been highly damning. But if the complaint had been made properly, and the Appellant was innocent as he claimed to be, he may have been able to obtain evidence that, on each Saturday in February 1991, he had left the classes in the company of others. The possibility of finding a witness or witnesses with a clear recollection of the relevant days inevitably became more remote as the delay in making the complaint became greater.

The difficulty that the delay caused the Appellant is illustrated by the concession of Ms Darble, and it was possible that there had been occasions when the Appellant had not driven her home from Saturday gym classes in
February 1991. Given the time that had elapsed since the alleged incident, her concession was inevitable. While her evidence indicated that the Appellant almost invariably took her home from Saturday classes, the delay in its effect on her recollection caused her to concede that she may not have been present on one of the relevant Saturdays. As a result, the Appellant may have been deprived of a cast iron alibi that would have brought about his acquittal." (72 ALJR 78 @ 87 per Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow JJ) 
Concurring in the result, Brennan CJ referred to the evidence of Ms Darble, who was the accused's assistant at the gym classes after which the relevant offences were said to have occurred. Brennan CJ made express reference to the qualification that Ms Darble put on her evidence to the effect that the
Appellant invariably drove her home afterwards, which was that it was "possible" that on one occasion in February 1991 that had not happened.
Brennan CJ concluded that the "lapse of time ...required not only a comment but a warning about the danger of convicting without supporting evidence other than the testimony of the child" (p81). In this respect his Honour referred to Longman. Brennan CJ continued: "The jury was not directed about the danger of discounting the evidence of
Lucia Darble although she had acknowledged the possibility of her travelling home by train simply because the lapse of time precluded her ability to be certain about the subject. Had Lucia Darble been certain about her mode of transport each Saturday in February 1991, she might well have established the innocence of the appellant on the first count or at least have engendered a reasonable doubt about his guilt. As Lucia Darble's uncertainty appears to be the only ground on which the verdict of guilty on the first count can be reconciled with the acquittal of the appellant on the second count, and as the verdict on the first count was reached without an adequate warning about the difficulty of establishing the defence case after a lapse of four years, the verdict on the first count was unsafe and unsatisfactory." 
A review of those authorities suggest the following propositions relevant to the determination of this case: 
Whenever it appears to a trial judge that delay, whether occasioned by delay in reporting a crime or otherwise, may have affected the fairness of a trial, he or she should make such comments and give such warnings as will ensure that the trial is fair.

A comment or warning is required if it appears to the trial judge that a jury may not, from its own experience, fully appreciate the effects of delay on the ability of the accused to defend himself or herself whether by testing prosecution evidence or adducing evidence in his own case, to establish a reasonable doubt about his or her guilt.

The need for, and content of, any comment will depend on the circumstances of the case.

Whether or not there is a need for any, and if so what, warning will also depend on the circumstances of the case.

Where it appears from the course of evidence, including cross-examination, or the conduct of the trial, including submissions, that specific difficulties were encountered by the accused in testing the evidence of the prosecution or adducing evidence in defence, then those specific difficulties should be highlighted in the summing-up in such a way as makes it clear that delay, for which the accused had not been responsible, had created those difficulties.

Where the summing-up identifies difficulties pursuant to (v), the trial judge should indicate to the jury how they should approach their task of determining whether the prosecution has proven its case beyond reasonable doubt. There is no universally applicable formula but some reference to the additional care or caution with which they should approach the prosecution evidence is usually appropriate.

In some cases a warning which uses terminology such as "dangerous" or "unsafe" to convict will be required. The reasons for the warning must be explained, generally by relating the danger to the specific difficulties of the character referred to in (v).

These principles must now be applied to the present case. During the course of the summing-up the trial judge said: "Here there is no evidence of any complaint until 1997, some five and a half years later. The accused submits that this delay is inconsistent with what she now alleges, that if it had really happened she would have complained earlier.

The same Act of Parliament to which I have referred provides that I am required to warn you about that absence of complaint or delay in complaining.
It does not necessarily indicate that the allegation of the offence was committed was false. I am also required to inform you that there may be a good reason why a victim of sexual assault may hesitate in making or may refrain from making a complaint about the assault. You may think that that is perfectly obvious. There may of course be good reasons for delay or for not complaining at all. The question for you to consider is whether in this case the absence of complaint is consistent with the allegations or whether it throws doubt upon them. The complainant says that she was scared, and it was not until she found a topic she was studying at TAFE that she was able to tell someone about five and half years later." (Summing-up 12A) 
His Honour also gave the following direction, albeit much later in his summing-up: "The need for corroboration in sexual assault cases is, of course, a realism.
The events for which the accused stands charged are evidence given particularly by Lisa and there is no medical evidence to support the evidence of the complainant. There was no complaint made until 1996. The complainant was very young at the time of these alleged events and it would, therefore, be dangerous to convict on Miss Mahy's evidence alone. That is not to say that you cannot convict but that it would be dangerous to do so. You should look for corroboration of her account." (Summing-up 65) 
After some directions on corroboration his Honour repeated: ".......it would therefore dangerous to convict on Miss Mahy's evidence alone and that is not to say that you can't convict but that it would be dangerous to do so and you should look for corroboration of her account." (Summing-up )

The first defect in the summing-up is that his Honour did not identify in any systematic way, the specific difficulties for the defence case, which had plainly been caused by delay in the complaint.

Counsel for the Appellant took this Court in some detail to the submissions below to indicate the significant use to which the Crown put the fact of delay. The Crown Prosecutor referred to the passage of time to explain some inconsistencies in the evidence of the complainant. He submitted that the
Appellant's evidence gave details about the events of the day which reflected an "amazing recollection" and that was "simply unbelievable". However, Mr Mula was said not to be "a reliable witness because he was trying to recall routine events that happened five years ago". The Crown Prosecutor sought to cast doubts on the evidence of Miss Raczynski and Mrs Johnston on the basis that after five and a half years their memory of the complainant's demeanour could not be reliable.

The significant reliance on delay in the submissions for the Crown should have indicated to the trial judge that at least some comment on the effect of delay on the ability of the accused to defend himself was called for. There was a real risk that the jury would discount the evidence in support of the
Appellant, because of the effects of delay on that evidence. The Crown had openly invited them to do so.

In my opinion, the Crown did place such reliance on delay in attacking the witnesses for the Appellant, that some form of comment was required to redress the balance. The weaknesses alleged in the defence case were not matters for which the Appellant had any responsibility. The jury was left without any guidance from the bench on the danger of convicting on evidence which could not be adequately tested either directly, or by permissible explanation of surrounding circumstances.

Counsel for the accused did ask the jury to consider the difficulty which the defence had in dealing with allegations that were over five years old.
However, this submission did not receive any authoritative reinforcement from the Court. In view of the real difficulties for the defence, which were emphasised by the Crown submissions, some form of reinforcement was required.

The warning in this case should have referred to the Crown's attack on the evidence of Mr Mula, Mrs Raczynski and Mrs Johnston about the presence of a bed in the room and the demeanour of the complainant after the alleged assaults and emphasise the difficulties in these respects caused for the defence by delay in making complaint.

The second defect in the summing-up is that the trial judge did not indicate to the jury how they should approach their task in the light of the difficulties that had been caused by the delay. There was no reference to the need for any special care or caution, particularly in assessing the evidence of the complainant. Nothing was said along the lines of "scrutinize the evidence with great care", to use the Longman formulation.

Counsel for the accused at the trial had asked for a direction in terms of the dangers of convicting on uncorroborated evidence. He referred to s405C of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).
This had by the time of the trial been replaced in its operation by s164 of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).
No submission was made to the Court about this matter. Counsel submitted below that s405C removed any requirement for such a warning, but that it was still permissible. I proceed on the basis that the same is true under s164. The
Crown submitted to the trial judge that the use of words "dangerous" or "unsafe" was not appropriate. Although his Honour indicated that he would use neither word, in the event he did refer to "dangerous to convict".

The use of words of warning such as "dangerous to convict" may be seen to be favourable to the accused. It is nevertheless necessary to consider the probable impact of the warning on the jury, in the context of the summing-up as a whole.

The first reference to "dangerous" occurs immediately after and, as recorded, as part of the same sentence as the phrase: "The complainant was very young at the time....". If the jury understood the warning as limited to this factor, it could well have concluded that a fifteen year old was not so young as to lead them to doubt her veracity. There is no clear link between the reference to "dangerous" and the preceding sentence: "There was no complaint made until ". It is also significant that the detailed direction on delay occurs early in the summing-up. The references to "dangerous to convict" occur much later in a different context.

The terms of the summing-up suggest that there was no relevant "danger" if the jury found corroboration of the complainant's account. Although no complaint is made about the directions on what was capable of constituting corroboration, the summing-up in this regard could well have left the jury confused about what other evidence could be said to alleviate the "danger" identified by his Honour.

In my opinion, the summing-up did not relate the "danger" to the effects of delay in a sufficiently clear manner to avoid a risk of miscarriage of justice.

Nor was the jury given any instruction as to how it should proceed in the face of the identified danger. As I have indicated above, there is a need to refer in some way to the need for special care or caution in assessing the evidence of the complainant. Merely referring to the existence of a `danger' did not give the jury sufficient guidance as to how the `danger' should affect their deliberations.

As was the case in Kenny and Harvey, leave should be given under [Rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s4.html) The
Appellant should not be disadvantaged by the failure of his counsel to seek a specific direction. The ground of appeal is made out. The conviction should be quashed. In the normal course this would lead to a new trial.

The Third Ground 
Ground 3 asserts that the convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory. If this ground is made out, a verdict of acquittal would be appropriate. This ground is based on: * The implausibility of the complainant's account particularly her own conduct immediately after the alleged assaults, specific reference being made to the absence of her desire to clean up and her decision to go out onto the balcony. * The evidence of Mr Mula that there was no bed in the house other than his own and that he only left the Appellant alone with the complainant for less than ten minutes. * The evidence of Mrs Johnston that she and her husband had purchased the other bed on 17 January 1992, ie some weeks before the alleged offences. * The evidence of Mrs Johnston and Ms Raczynski that Ms Mahy was in good spirits after the alleged assault. * The delay of some five and a half years in complaint. 
In oral submissions, counsel for the Appellant placed particular reliance on the evidence of Mr Mula. He pointed out that his version of the sequence of events was similar to that of the complainant's, save in the crucial respect about the period of time the complainant was alone with the Appellant inside the house. (And, of course, the existence of a bed in the room).

The test for this ground of appeal is as stated in M supra @ 493: "The question which the Court must ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty".

The Court reiterated the test at 494-495, and indicated that it was intended to replace various formulations in earlier judgments in order to provide authoritative guidance to courts of criminal appeal. The test was reaffirmed and, as noted above, applied in Jones supra @ 85.

When applying the test the High Court has emphasised that an appellate court must have regard to the fact that the jury has "the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence" (M @ 493.8) and that the jury has had the benefit of "having seen and heard the evidence". (M @ 493.9, 494.4 , 494.6, .3). The Court concluded: "If the evidence, upon the record itself, contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the court of criminal appeal to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based on that evidence". (M @ 498) 
The significance which can be attributed to the jury's advantage in seeing the witnesses, is substantially attenuated by the failure of the trial judge to give appropriate directions as discussed under Ground 2 above. This encompassed both the failure to comment on the Crown submissions about the effects of delay and the failure to comment and provide appropriate warnings about the difficulties occasioned to the defence case by delay. This Court should approach the matter on the basis of whether or not it was open to a jury, properly instructed, to be satisfied of the Appellant's guilt beyond reasonable doubt.

In the present case, the complainant alleged that three sexual assaults occurred in a room with a double bed. The Appellant's case was that there was no bed, other than in the room occupied by the caretaker. The caretaker at first gave evidence to that effect but, as I have set out above, he had to acknowledge that he had difficulties of memory after the passage of time. His evidence was left in the state that there was a possibility that the bed of the former occupant was still on the premises on the relevant day.

The original evidence of the caretaker was reinforced by the evidence of Mrs
Johnston that she and the Appellant had bought the furniture before the date of the alleged offences. However, her evidence was also the subject of a submission that it could not be relied on, given the length of time that had elapsed. Whilst the evidence of Mrs Johnston was subject to attack on the basis that she would wish to support her husband, the independence of Mr Mula meant that his evidence was not similarly susceptible to attack. Nor was it attacked on any such basis.

The second significant body of evidence concerns the demeanour of the complainant in the hours after the alleged assaults. Once again Mrs Johnston's evidence on this matter is confirmatory of evidence given by Mrs Racynzki, an independent witness. The evidence both gave of a happy girl displaying a good relationship with the Appellant, is not consistent with the alleged assaults earlier that day.

The third matter arises from the close identity of the three versions of the movements of the complainant and the Appellant at Gladswood House. I have set these out above.

In its submissions on the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground the Crown submitted that the evidence of Mr Mula - that he only left the complainant alone for a short time - does not deny the opportunity for the assaults to have occurred during the time when he believed that the complainant and the Appellant were working outside in the garden. However, no-one gave evidence that that may have occurred. It is not the version of events which the complainant gave. Her version was very similar to that of both other participants in the events on that day, namely that the only visit to the house occurred after the extended period in the garden. The evidence of Mr Mula to the effect that the period of time that the accused and the complainant were alone together in the house was of insufficient duration to permit the three acts of sexual assault to occur, is of considerable significance. The coincidence between the three versions of the sequence of events on that day is such that the evidence of Mr Mula that the Appellant and the complainant were only together inside the house for a few minutes, cannot be reconciled with the alleged assaults.

With respect to each of these three matters, the jury must have discounted the evidence favourable to the accused, probably on the basis of the Crown submissions that none of Mr Mula, Ms Racynzki or Mrs Johnston - the last for additional reasons - should be accepted because they could not be sure of the events. However in this regard the jury was not fully instructed. The evidence of Mr Mula and Ms Racynzki was not seriously challenged on any other basis.

This case has some similarity with that of Jones in which the High Court directed a verdict of acquittal. It does not contain one significant feature of Jones, namely inconsistent verdicts, nevertheless, the difficulties for the defence case occasioned by the delay were of a similar character. In particular the evidence about the existence of a bed at Gladswood House, is of the same quality as the evidence in Jones about the practice of driving Ms
Darble home, as outlined above.

The cumulative effect of these three matters, particularly the last, has led me to the conclusion that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. Considering what order should be made the Court must have in mind the interconnection between [s6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) and s[8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s8.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) .
[Subsection (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) states that the court "shall" direct a judgment and verdict of acquittal, but this is "subject to the special provisions of the Act". Section 8 is such a "special provision" and provides that a new trial may be ordered if the miscarriage of justice "can be more adequately remedied by an order for a new trial than by any other order", relevantly, a verdict of acquittal.

As the High Court put it in Director of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) versus Fowler <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 627] @ 630: "The power to grant a new trial is a discretionary one and in deciding whether to exercise it the court which has quashed the conviction must decide whether the interests of justice require a new trial to be had. In so deciding, the court should first consider whether the admissible evidence given at the original trial was sufficiently cogent to justify a conviction, for if it was not it would be wrong by making an order for a new trial to give the prosecution an opportunity to supplement a defective case." 
See also King <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 423] @ 426-427, 433.

For the reasons I have indicated, it was not open for the jury, acting reasonably and properly instructed, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. The order of the Court should be: Leave granted to argue Ground 2 in the Notice of Appeal.
 Appeal allowed.
 The convictions are quashed and in lieu thereof direct judgment and verdict of acquittal.

REGINA versus Bernard Lawrence JOHNSTON 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice for the reasons given by his Honour. 
REGINA versus Bernard Lawrence JOHNSTON 
JUDGMENT 
IRELAND J: I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice for the reasons given by his Honour. * * * 
