

Pacific Forest Corporation versus Hunt and Anr [1996] NSWSC 133 (16 May 1996) 
PACIFIC FOREST CORPORATION LTD versus HUNT & ANR /95 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
BAINTON J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this action I am required to determine as a separate issue whether, in the phrase "the lesser of the entire Surplus or $750,000 (the "Entitlement")" in cl.5(a) of an agreement called an Operations Agreement, made on 28 April 1994 between Pacific Pine Plantations Ltd as was the then name of the plaintiff Pacific Forest Corporation Ltd, and Tri Forestry Pty Ltd (now in liquidation), the second defendant in this action, the word "entitlement" is to be read as referring to the "$750,000" or to "the lesser of the entire Surplus or $750,000". That might appear to be a simple task: but it is not. This question has been thrown up because this Court acceded to a request by both parties to determine it as a separate issue, it being thought that if determined one way it would determine the whole proceedings. So it may, but a most regrettable consequence of that order is that evidence which would have been called in a hearing on all issues which in my view, would have been admissible, relevant and important in deciding the question now separately submitted, is not available to me.

Pacific Pine Plantations Ltd ("PPPL") is a corporation which was formed for the purpose of purchasing a number of plantations of pinus radiata assumed to have reached an age appropriate for harvesting and marketing that timber and thereafter to "rehabilitate" the land area which had been so planted and presumably then to sell it. Tri Forestry Pty Ltd ("Tri Forestry") was a company which according to Recital A in the Operations Agreement "has expertise in softwood plantation management harvesting and timber export".

The "Operations" which, under the agreement, Tri Forestry, was to "implement and carry out" were the Start-up Operations, the Harvesting Operations, the
Transport Operations, the Backloading Operations, the Export Operations and the Rehabilitation Operations. The Start-up Operations were defined as "the provision of the road and such other infrastructure in and on the Plantation necessary for the purposes of carrying out the Operations" and the preparation of the Plantation generally for the Harvesting Operations. The relevant plantation was the Temples Plantation situated at Nerriga in New South Wales.
The "Harvesting Operations" were defined to mean "(a) the logging and loading of the Temples Timber; (b) the removal of the Temples Timber from the
Plantation; and (c) anything necessary or convenient to be done to enable or facilitate the carrying out of the activities referred to in paragraph (a) and ". The "Transport Operations" were defined to mean "the transport of
Temples Timber to the Port Facilities from the Plantation". (The Port
Facilities were premises retained by Tri Forestry in Port Kembla); the "Backloading Operations" were defined to mean "on the return trip after transporting Temples Timber to the Port Facilities, the transportation of soil rehabilitation materials from Sydney or Wollongong to the Plantation to implement the Rehabilitation Operations". The "Export Operations" were defined to mean "sales of Temples Timber to Lancashire Securities Ltd pursuant to the
Timber Purchase Agreement or to another Timber Merchant pursuant to an agreement approved by PPPL and everything necessary to facilitate such sales, including the obtaining of all relevant Consents, the stockpiling of the timber at the Port Facilities and the loading of the timber on ships nominated by the relevant Timber Merchant". The "Rehabilitation Operations" were defined to mean "bringing of soil rehabilitation materials on to the Plantation and the general rehabilitation of the Plantation in accordance with the operations plan and as required by all other consent authorities".

The Operation Plan referred to was one which Tri Forestry was required by cl.2.1(c)(vi), to submit to PPPL, namely "a plan setting out the steps envisaged in implementing, executing and concluding each Operation and the proposed method of and a timetable for implementation, execution and conclusion within the Budget". The Budget was one to be submitted by Tri
Forestry to PPPL "setting out the estimate expenditure for each Operation".

Apart from the recited attributes of Tri Forestry, an advantage to PPPL in entering into this Operations Agreement was that it made available to PPPL the benefit of an agreement which Tri Forestry had entered into in February 1994 with Lancashire Securities Ltd ("Lancashire") under which Lancashire agreed to purchase from Tri Forestry between 15 March 1994 and 15 March 1996 "a quantity of timber being the quantity specified in the Eighth Schedule". The Eighth
Schedule as typed, provided for quantities of timber in two categories, the first called "Korean Grade Timber" and the second called "Pulp Grade Timber".
However, the quantities are left blank in the executed document. That timber purchase agreement did, however, define the type, quality and specification for timber to be supplied under it. It was to be pinus radiata: what was called Korean Grade had to have a minimum small end diameter of 20cm and a range of small end diameters between 20cm and 26cm and be one of three stipulated lengths. The Pulp Grade was to be from much smaller logs. It required a minimum small end diameter of 10cm and an acceptable range of small end diameters of 10-18cm. Two lengths were permitted.

I return now to details of the Operations Agreement.

Cl.6, headed "Commencement of Operations", sets out conditions precedent to the commencement of "Operations" by Tri Forestry. It appears to have been intended to confer a substantial degree of control on PPPL over Tri Forestry's operations. It required that Tri Forestry would only fell so much of the plantation in one go, as it were, as would give it sufficient Temples Timber to complete a Shipment and that that felling operation would only be commenced if a Timber Merchant had agreed to purchase the relevant shipment at a price equal to or greater than the Minimum Shipment Price and had provided Tri
Forestry with an acceptable irrevocable letter of credit securing the Stumpage
Value of that shipment and if Tri Forestry had prepared and submitted to PPPL a budget and cash flow analysis for that particular operation. I do not know how the parties thought this could work because their agreement also provided that each letter of credit was to be furnished when the timber was loaded on a vessel, something rather difficult to achieve while it remains a growing tree.
Cl.7 is headed "Obligations of Tri Forestry". It is subdivided into a number of sub-clauses. Cl.7(1) is headed "Giving Notice of Material Matters" which are "any material adverse change occurring or reasonably expected to occur" to various assumptions in the Operations Plan, the Budget, the Cash Flow Analysis or the financial situation or solvency of Tri Forestry. Cl.7.2 is headed "Minimum Shipment Price" and contains a promise by Tri Forestry that it would not sell Temples Timber below the Minimum Shipment Price, defined to be "$61 per tonne, or such other amount as agreed between the parties". Cl.7.3 is headed "Reports". Cl.7.4 is headed "General Obligations (of Tri Forestry).
Cl.7.5 is headed "Specific Obligations of Tri Forestry". Those three sections contain the sort of general provision to be expected in an agreement of this general nature. They do not assist in resolving the question posed by the separate issue. Cl.7.6 is headed "Conditions of Sale - Reservation of Title and Proceeds", and imposes considerable restraints on PPPL in dealing with
Temples Timber. The purchase price for the timber in each shipment becomes payable to PPPL immediately on drawdown of the letter of credit from the timber merchant and property and ownership in the timber does not pass to Tri
Forestry until PPPL is paid in full in respect of a shipment. On the other hand risk in Temples Timber to be used for a shipment passes to Tri Forestry on harvesting.

Cl.11 deals with "Termination and Consequences". It empowered either party to terminate the Agreement "immediately", if an Administrator is appointed to either party. It is admitted in the pleadings that an administrator was appointed to Tri Forestry pursuant to Part 5.3A of the Corporations Law on 17
February 1995, but there is a dispute on the pleadings as to whether or not
PPPL has exercised its power to terminate.

There are two annexures to the Operations Agreement. That described as being
Annexure 1 is called "Step Thru Agreement". It describes the parties as being
Lancashire, Tri Forestry and PPPL. It recites the agreement of 9 February 1994 between Lancashire and Tri Forestry for the purchase of timber, that Tri
Forestry has agreed to enter into an agreement with PPPL to harvest and export the timber required to satisfy the timber purchase agreement and that "as a condition precedent to the Operations Agreement", Lancashire is required to acknowledge to PPPL that in certain circumstances Lancashire will novate the timber purchase agreement in favour of PPPL and in furtherance of that condition the parties have entered into this Deed". There follows a promise so to novate. The Operations Agreement provides, by cl.2.1(a)(iii) that the entering into the Step Thru Agreement is a condition precedent "to this
Agreement", so presumably it has been executed and can accordingly be regarded as included in the arrangements between the parties set up by or under the
Operations Agreement. Annexure Two to the Operations Agreement is simply headed "Deed Poll". It appears to be intended to require contractors to Tri
Forestry to novate to PPPL if the Operations Agreement is rescinded or terminated by PPPL. The third agreement in the Schedule is the Timber Purchase
Agreement between Tri Forestry and Lancashire, actually executed by both parties and dated 7 February 1994, but incomplete in the respects to which I have already drawn attention (tonnage to be supplied). But it does provide that shipments are to be made between 15 March 1994 and 15 March 1996, by six to eight shipments eight weeks apart, shipment to be from Port Kembla. Payment was to be by confirmed irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank on presentation of a clean bill of lading.

I return now to the operations agreement.

Cl.5 of that agreement in the form in which the document was originally typed for execution was in the following terms "5. Purchase of Temples Timber 
Subject to the terms of this Agreement, Tri Forestry agrees to purchase from
PPPL all of the Temples Timber to be included in each Shipment, and the purchase price for that timber is calculated and must be paid on the following basis: 
Notwithstanding the methods for calculation and payment set out below
PPPL must be paid by Tri Forestry as purchase price for Temples Timber included in Shipments an amount equal to the lesser of the entire Surplus of $750,000 (the 'Entitlement'), and in the event that the aggregate of amounts received by PPPL during the currency of this Agreement pursuant to paras -(d) is less than the Entitlement, Tri Forestry must promptly pay PPPL an amount equal to that shortfall. [Emphasis mine] 
For the first four Shipments, Tri Forestry is entitled to the lesser of the entire Surplus per Shipment or $100,000 per Shipment, and in the event that any of the Shipments has a Surplus in excess of $100,000, Tri Forestry must pay to PPPL an amount equal to that excess in payment for Temples Timber included in those Shipments.
 
For the fifth and all subsequent Shipments, Tri Forestry is entitled to the lesser of the entire Surplus per Shipment or $50,000 per Shipment, and in the event that any of those Shipments has a Surplus in excess of $50,000 Tri
Forestry must pay to PPPL an amount equal to that excess in payment for
Temples Timber included in those Shipments.
 
Subject : 
PPPL having received $750,000 from Tri Forestry in payment for Temples
Timber pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c); and 
Tri Forestry having received $1,500,000 from the aggregated Surplus pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c), then Tri Forestry must pay to PPPL an amount equal to one half of all of the
Surplus subsequently received as payment for all Temples Timber sold pursuant to this Agreement.
 
PPPL may at its discretion draw down on the Stumpage LC for the Stumpage
Value of Temples Timber in any Shipment upon delivery of that timber to the
Port Facilities and the payment of this amount is an Agreed Cost." 
That clause has been struck out of the Agreement as prepared for execution and replaced by a fresh clause on a separate page. That clause is in the following terms "Clause 5 
Subject to the terms of this Agreement, Tri Forestry agrees to purchase from
PPPL all of the Temples Timber to be included in each Shipment, and the purchase price for that timber is calculated and must be paid on the following basis: 
Notwithstanding the methods for calculation and payment set out below
PPPL must be paid by Tri Forestry as purchase price for Temples Timber included in Shipments an amount equal to the lesser of the entire Surplus or $750,000 (the 'Entitlement'), and in the event that the aggregate of amounts received by PPPL during the currency of this Agreement pursuant to paras -(d) is less than the Entitlement, Tri Forestry must promptly pay PPPL an amount equal to that shortfall. [Emphasis mine] 
For the first four Shipments, Tri Forestry is entitled to the lesser of the entire Surplus per Shipment or $100,000 per Shipment, and in the event that any of the Shipments has a Surplus in excess of $100,000, Tri Forestry must pay to PPPL an amount equal to that excess in payment for Temples Timber included in those Shipments.
 
Subject to (d), for the fifth and all subsequent Shipments, Tri Forestry is entitled to the lesser of the entire Surplus per Shipment or $50,000 per
Shipment, and in the event that any of those Shipments has a Surplus in excess of $50,000 Tri Forestry must pay to PPPL an amount equal to that excess in payment for Temples Timber included in those Shipments.
 
Subject to: 
PPPL having received $750,000 from Tri Forestry in payment for Temples
Timber pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c); and 
Tri Forestry having received $1,500,000 from the aggregated Surplus (for the avoidance of doubt all amounts received by Tri Forestry pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c) are included in the calculation of the aggregated
Surplus, and from the $1,500,000 Tri Forestry must pay $750,000 to PPPL in purchase of all Temples Timber included in the Shipments pursuant to this clause), then the payment structure set out in (c) shall immediately cease and Tri
Forestry must pay to PPPL an amount equal to one half of all of the Surplus subsequently received as payment for all Temples Timber sold pursuant to this
Agreement.
 
PPPL may at its discretion draw down on the Stumpage LC for the Stumpage
Value of Temples Timber in any Shipment upon delivery of that timber to the
Port Facilities and the payment of this amount is an Agreed Cost." 
Paragraph (a) of that substituted cl.5 relates to the entire shipments of
Temples Timber. The expression "Shipment" is defined to mean "each consignment of Temples Timber (and any Non-Temples Timber included with the consignment under cl.7.2) shipped to the timber merchants under and in accordance with this Agreement. Cl.7.2 provided "7.3 Minimum Shipment Price 
Tri Forestry undertakes that it shall not sell Temples Timber below the
Minimum Shipment Price and, if this price can be met or exceeded, by the inclusion of Non-Temples Timber in a Shipment, Tri Forestry may, with the approval of PPPL, include Non-Temples Timber in a Shipment, the proceeds of the Non-Temples Timber, belonging in their entirety to Tri Forestry, subject to any agreement to the contrary." "Surplus" is defined to mean "(a) in relation to the overall payment for Temples Timber during the currency of this Agreement, the amount determined after the deducting (sic) the aggregated value of all Agreed Costs required to be paid in accordance with cl.4 from the aggregated value of all Temples Proceeds; or (b) in relation to any particular Shipment, the amount determined after the deducting the value of the Agreed Costs required to be paid in accordance with cl.4 from the value of the Temples Proceeds received for that Shipment".
 in relation to any particular Shipment, the amount determined after the deducting the value of the Agreed Costs required to be paid in accordance with clause 4 from the value of the Temples Proceeds received for that Shipment" "Agreed costs" is defined to mean "the costs set out in the Operations Plan, being: costs of the Start-Up Operations; costs of the Harvest Operations, including, without limitation, roading, logging and loading costs; costs of Transport Operations and Backloading Operations, including, without limitation, haulage and road maintenance; costs of Export Operations, including, without limitation, port costs, including site leasing, receivals, loading to ship, stevedoring and wharfage costs; costs of the Rehabilitation Operations, including without limitation, placement and CALM management fees; finance costs, including bank fees, interest and insurance and any other costs and expenses attributable to the Operations (other than the acquisition costs and other agreed costs of acquiring the Plantation referred to in the definition of Stumpage Value) 
Stumpage Value of each Shipment to be paid to PPPL." 
The meaning of each of the provisions of that definition described with words beginning with a capital letter are themselves defined. The general nature of each is sufficiently obvious from the words used to describe them other than
Stumpage Value in paragraph (g). "Stumpage Value" is defined to mean "the Stumpage Value of Temples Timber in any particular Shipment as derived by the application of the following formula: 
SV = TC x TPS 
ETT 
Where: 
SV = Stumpage Value 
TC = the timber cost of all Temples Timber, being the acquisition costs and other agreed costs of acquiring the Plantation, less $500,000 (being the assessed land value of the Plantation); 
ETT = is the estimated total number of tonnes of Temples Timber on the
Plantation at the Commencement Date; and 
TPS = means the tonnes of Temples Timber in any particular Shipment." 
Notwithstanding that this contract subsisted and was carried out for some period before it terminated (not fully implemented) presumably on or shortly after the appointment of a administrator to Tri Forestry, the parties to this litigation have not provided me with any information, beyond what I will shortly mention, as to the dollar figures involved in any of the definitions which I must construe and consider for the purpose of understanding what the parties were proposing to do so that the overall distribution provisions in cl.5 can be properly understood.

Those negotiating this agreement must have exchanged their knowledge or at least beliefs and views as to the cost to PPPL of Temples Plantation; the quantity of marketable pinus radiata timber in it; the cost of access roads, felling, transport, shipping and rehabilitation operations; the export value of this type of timber and accordingly the value of the
Lancashire contract; from which an assessment of likely overall profitability could be made by each. To the extent that each of the parties had and exchanged views on these matters there must have existed a matrix of common beliefs which would have been relevant and helpful in construing the Operations Agreement. Had the matter proceeded to a hearing in the ordinary way, that information would, I expect, have been available to the Court.

The evidence tendered before me for the purpose of determining the separate issue falls into two groups: 
Documents tendered by the plaintiff and admitted by consent. They comprise 
The Operation Agreement of 28 April 1994.

A Deed of Guarantee also dated 28 April 1994, between the plaintiff and the first defendant, on which the plaintiff sues in this action. The first defendant is a Mr Hunt, whom I assume to be the principal shareholder in Tri
Forestry. What he guaranteed was all money which is now or may hereafter become or remain due and owing but unpaid by Tri Forestry to PPPL under the joint venture agreement dated 28 April 1994 between Tri Forestry and PPPL up to a limit of $500,000. $500,000 is the amount for which he is sued in this action.

Correspondence between the parties or their solicitors relating to the negotiation of the Operations Agreement. The authenticity of those documents was not in issue - merely their relevance. As it turned out I was not, in addresses, asked to have any regard to any of them.

A statement by Iain Lindsay Rennie, PPPL's solicitor, much of which I rejected on grounds other than relevance. Again, what remained and was admitted was not thereafter referred to.

A statement of Nigel David Hill, Tri Forestry's solicitor, admitted on the same basis. It elucidated that he believed that Temple Plantation was purchased for a sum "approximating $2m", of which PPPL attributed "approximately $500,000" to the land component. It was established in cross examination of Mr Hill that he believed (but was not really concerned) that
PPPL proposed to raise the purchase price of Temples Plantation by a public debenture issue, so that the "joint venture agreement" (semble the Operations
Agreement), needed to ensure that PPPL and thus the debenture holders "are effectively guaranteed a return on their investment".

However, the material tendered (by the defendants) included a copy of the
Prospectus issued by PPPL to raise the funds for this venture. In that document, for a reason which escapes me entirely, PPPL is referred to simply as "PNL". I consider that I am entitled to infer that certain of the assertions in this Prospectus (it is dated 6 June 1995) represent PPPL's beliefs at the time of entering into the Operations Agreement and that Tri
Forestry would have had substantially similar beliefs because they deal with matters critical to the expected outcome of the venture. What I am about to record appears on p13 of the Prospectus.

PPPL paid AUD2,005,000 for Temples Plantation: it incurred acquisition costs of approximately AUD268,000. The "land value" was AUD495,000. The commercial timber content was assessed to be 139,200 metric tonnes. The "cost" of that timber (described in the Operations Agreement as "stumpage value") was therefore AUD2,005,000 + 268,000 - 495,000 = 1,778,000. That is AUD12.77 per tonne average. The prospectus actually asserts that the stumpage value was
AUD1,763,000 calculated by the same formula as I have used. I do not know how
PPPL reached that figure, but the difference is not material. The prospectus asserts that the estimated sales value of the 139,200mt of timber is
AUD9,144,000, i.e. AUD65.69 per mt. I interpose here to repeat that the Timber
Purchase Agreement with Lancashire provided for a price of $US68 per mt for
Korean Grade Timber, which in April 1994 was over AUD94 per mt. As the pulp grade timber is obviously the less valuable of the two grades, the estimated realisable price for the Korean Grade Timber would have been higher than this figure.

The Prospectus also contained estimates for the other categories of costs involved and derived an assumed overall profit of AUD1,294,927, after, I stress, PPPL had recovered the "stumpage value" of all the marketable timber on Temples Plantation as well as shipping and other costs. That equates to an average profit per mt of AUD9.30 after recovery of stumpage value of the timber and meeting all other costs.

The Lancashire Agreement, as I have already mentioned, was executed on 7
February 1994. Each party must have known its contents on or shortly after that date. Each therefore intended that some 139,200 mt of timber was to be exported by six, seven or eight shipments over either a two year period commencing 15 March 1994 (Lancashire Agreement) or "over a period of 18-36 months from 27 May 1994 (Prospectus p13). That could extend to a year beyond the Lancashire Agreement provisions, but it obviously assumes that it could be done within the requirements of the Lancashire Agreement. Thus, if there were six shipments, each of equal qualities, there would be a loading of 23,200mt per shipment. If seven shipments, each would be of 19,885mt. If eight shipments each would be of 17,400mt. On the Prospectus estimates there would accordingly be a profit (after PPPL recovers stumpage value) if six shipments of AUD9.30 x 23,200 = AUD215,760 per shipment, if seven shipments of
AUD184,930 per shipment, and if eight shipments of AUD161,820 per shipment.

I appreciate that many exigencies could vary these figures, but they serve to illustrate the order of magnitude of what must have been the assumptions of each party to the Operations Agreement.

I return now to examine cl.5 with the above matrix of common assumptions in mind. My first observation is that logical order of the subclauses is not as written, but (b), (c), (d) and then (a). (Subcl.(e) is irrelevant for present purposes).

I will initially assume eight shipments. On the prospectus assumptions, each of those shipments would yield a profit of $161,800, after recovery of stumpage value of AUD12.77 x 17,400 = AUD222,198. There is therefore on the
Prospectus assumptions a "surplus" for each of those eight shipments, as that word is defined in the Operations Agreement, of sale price AUD9,144,007 [cedilla] 8 - agreed costs which include stumpage value and all the other matters included under the definition of that term. I do not have those other figures, but as I indicated above they yield as "surplus" what I have above calculated as "profit" (AUD161,820).

Cl.5(b) would accordingly have yielded to Tri Forestry for each of shipments -4 inclusive, the lesser per shipment of the "surplus per shipment" of
AUD161,820 and AUD100,000, i.e. AUD100,000 per shipment. The other side of the coin is that PPPL would have received, after recouping stumpage value the remaining AUD61,820 from each shipment.

Subject to cl.5(d), cl.5(c) would have yielded to Tri Forestry the lesser per shipment of the entire surplus per shipment (AUD161,820) or AUD50,000 per shipment with the balance of AUD111,820 going to PPPL.

For convenience, I repeat cl.5(d) "(d) Subject : 
PPPL having received $750,000 from Tri Forestry in payment for Temples
Timber pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c); and 
Tri Forestry having received $1,500,000 from the aggregated Surplus pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c), then Tri Forestry must pay to PPPL an amount equal to one half of all of the
Surplus subsequently received as payment for all Temples Timber sold pursuant to this Agreement." 
On the basis of the Prospectus assumption, on an eight shipment calculation,
PPPL recovers a stumpage value of AUD1,763,000 [cedilla] 8 = AUD220,375 per shipment. That is to say $881,500 for shipments 1-4 inclusive, which is more than the sum mentioned in cl.5(d)(i) as its payment for that timber.

Tri Forestry, in respect of shipments 1-4 inclusive would have received
AUD161,820 x 4 = AUD647,280 so that cl.5(d)(i) would not operate and cl.5(d) would not commence to operate at all because the "surplus" as defined in cl.1.1 of the Operations Agreement would never reach, let alone exceed, $1.5m.
On my calculations based on the prospectus figures the selling price would need to have risen substantially or the costs to have been substantially reduced for cl.5(d)(ii) ever to operate.

I turn now to cl.5(a). My first observation is that it is predicated upon an actual purchase by Tri-Forestry from PPPL of "all the Temples Timber to be included in each Shipment". Furthermore, the calculation is on a "per shipment" basis. A "surplus" as defined can only be calculated in respect of the overall payment for Temples Timber (para (a) of the definition) or "in relation to a particular shipment" (para (b) of the definition). And I repeat, it is after recovery by PPPL of stumpage value (the price PPPL paid for the timber). Paras (b) and (c) of cl.5 are, as I have shown, simple calculations.
Para (d) (the paragraph altered from the earlier cl.5 in the document, but crossed out) can only operate after all shipments are undertaken, because the entire surplus is calculated with reference to "the overall payment for
Temples Timber during the currency of this agreement". It accordingly assumes that the payments called for by paras (b), (c) and (d) have been made. It is accordingly a distribution of profit. Cl.5(d)(ii) says that if Tri Forestry has received AUD1.5m from the surplus it must pay half that amount to PPPL.
Why the clause is made, by para (1) subject to PPPL having received AUD750,000 from Tri Forestry in payment for Temples Timber from all shipments (that is less than half the Stumpage Value) is not clear to me: but cl.5(d)(ii) does seem to be directed to an interim division of profits, which is to cease and be replaced by an equal division of them.

I return now to cl.5(a). It expressly overrides paras (b), (c) and (d). It provides that Tri Forestry must pay PPPL "as purchase price for Temples Timber included in Shipments" "an amount" which is said to be the lesser of "the entire surplus" (which can only be calculated in respect of "the overall payment for Temples Timber during the currency of this agreement) or
AUD750,000". There follows a catchup provision if PPPL has not otherwise achieved its "Entitlement". The purchase price which PPPL must be paid for the
Temples Timber in my view "an amount" and that amount is then defined and thereafter described as an "entitlement". The amount is the lesser of the "entire surplus" or the AUD750,000 mentioned in cl.5(d)(i). It is thereafter described as "the Entitlement". In other words if the "entire surplus" is less than AUD750,000, PPPL is entitled to all of it.

The primary argument advanced against that construction is that the concluding words of cl.5(a) would have no work to do. I do not agree with that proposition. If the market for this timber dropped substantially or the AUD fell against the $US, the surplus per shipment which the prospectus assumed could drop dramatically: it could become negative. If it came out at
AUD749,999 then PPPL would be entitled to AUD1: if it came out at AUD75,001
PPPL would have no entitlement to payment under cl.5(a).

The conclusion which I have therefore reached I have reached solely on the basis of an examination of the structure of the Operating Agreement in the light of what I have assumed to have been the matrix of facts which would have been known to both parties and is revealed by the provisions in the prospectus to which I have referred. I have ignored the tendered documents (which included the correspondence between the parties' solicitors with the various drafts and amendments which led to the Operations Agreement, as executed) (other than the Operating Agreement) in conformity with the dictates of Prenn v Simmonds [(1971) 1 WLR 1381] per Ld
Wilberforce (with whom Lds Reid, Donovan, Pearson and Diplock agreed) who, at p1384 said "On principle, the matter is worth pursuing a little, because the present case illustrates very well the disadvantages and danger of departing from established doctrine and the virtue of the latter. There were prolonged negotiations between solicitors, with exchanges of draft clauses, ultimately emerging in clause 2 of the agreement. The reason for not admitting evidence of these exchanges is not a technical one or even mainly one of convenience, (though the attempt to admit it did greatly prolong the case and add to its expense). It is simply that such evidence is unhelpful. By the nature of things, where negotiations are difficult, the parties' positions, with each passing letter, are changing and until the final agreement, though converging, still divergent. It is only the final document which records a consensus. If the previous documents use different expressions, how does construction of those expressions, itself a doubtful process, help on the construction of the contractual words? If the same expressions are used, nothing is gained by looking back; indeed, something may be lost since the relevant surrounding circumstances may be different. At this stage there is no consensus of the parties to appeal to. It may be said that previous documents may be looked at to explain the aims of the parties. In a limited sense this is true: the commercial, or business object, of the transaction, objectively ascertained, may be a surrounding fact. Cardozo J thought so in the Utica Bank case. And if it can be shown that one interpretation completely frustrates that object, to the extent of rendering the contract futile, that may be a strong argument for an alternative interpretation, if that can reasonably be found. But beyond that it may be difficult to go: it may be a matter of degree, or of judgment, how far one interpretation, or another, gives effect to a common intention: the parties, indeed, may be pursuing that intention with differing emphasis, and hoping to achieve it to an extent which may differ, and in different ways.
The words used may, and often do, represent a formula which means different things to each side, yet may be accepted because that is the only way to get 'agreement' and in the hope that disputes will not arise. The only course then can be to try to ascertain the 'natural' meaning. Far more, and indeed, totally dangerous is it to admit evidence of one party's objective - even if this is known to the other party. However strongly pursued this may be, the other party may only be willing to give it partial recognition, and in a world of give and take men often have to be satisfied with less than they want." <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337.] See per Mason J at 347-353.

Prenn versus Simmonds considered pre-contract negotiations. What was said in it, and by the High Court in Codelfa was, however, put generally as to communications between the parties outside the contract. Logically, the same reasoning should apply to discussions about or to admissions concerning the meaning of the contract after it has been entered into. Santow J has examined this question in detail in Spunwell Pty Ltd versus BAB Pty Ltd (1994) 36 NSWL
He concluded that despite contrary views taken in another State post- contract "admissions" as to the meaning of a contract are not admissible as an aid to construction.

Were it otherwise, I could have disposed of this matter in a half page judgment in which I would have quoted the following sentence from PPPL's prospectus of 6 June 1994, where it stated "PNL's share of gross profit from the harvesting operations will be 50% of gross profit. Under the Operations
Agreement, as a minimum, PNL (PPPL) will be entitled to the lesser of the entire profit or $750,000.

The precise question the subject of the separate issue was "Whether on the proper construction of Clause 5 of the Operations Agreement between the Plaintiff and the Second Defendant dated 28 April 1994 the Second
Defendant agreed to pay to the Plaintiff as purchase price for Temples Timber included in Shipments a minimum amount of $750,000." 
I answer that question "No". I order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of that separate issue.
 * * * 
