

Thomas versus Garling and Ors Matter No 20854/95 [1998] NSWSC 485 (16 June )

Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
THOMAS versus GARLING & ORS /95 June 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The proceedings were commenced in 1995. The plaintiff's present claim is as pleaded in the Amended Statement of Claim filed on 15 March 1996. 
The plaintiff is a solicitor. On 1 September 1990, he became a partner of a firm of solicitors carrying on practice under the name of Price Brent. This firm had both a Sydney and Melbourne office. It has been referred to as the national firm. The named defendants are some of the other partners of that firm. They are Kim Adrian Garling (KAG), Timothy John Eakin (TJE), David
Sydney Abraham (DSA), Andrew David Cookes (ADC) and Richard James Hobday . This firm was dissolved on or about 30 April 1992.

During May 1992, a new partnership came into being under the name Price Brent
Sydney. The partners were at least KAG, TJE, Christopher McCaffery (CM), John
Cox (JC), the plaintiff and Stephen Crofton Uniacke (SCU) (there is an issue as to whether Philip Clay (PC) was a partner). On one view, this partnership came to an end on or about 26 June 1992 (when PC resigned). There was a further dissolution of partnership on 31 August 1992 (when the plaintiff resigned from the firm). A further new partnership was formed. It came to an end on or about 31 March 1994 (when SCU resigned). A further new partnership was formed. It came to an end on or about 30 June 1994 (when KAG resigned).

There is already a First Cross-Claim. This has been brought by TJE against
KAG, DSA, ADC and RJH. This claim has no present relevance.

It is now sought to bring a Second Cross-Claim. The proposed cross-claimants are TJE, CM and JC. The proposed cross-defendants are the plaintiff, KAG and
SCU. The relevant Notice of Motion was filed on 1 April 1998. It is brought by
TJE. Both CM and JC consent to being named as cross-claimants in the proposed process. The application is opposed by both the plaintiff and SCU.

TJE has sworn two affidavits. The plaintiff has sworn an affidavit. Mr Cuddy (the solicitor for SCU) has sworn an affidavit.

The Amended Statement of Claim is a lengthy document extending beyond 30 pages. It claims, inter alia, damages and an order pursuant to section 72 of the Fair Trading Act, 1987 (the Act), that the defendants indemnify the plaintiff against any claims made against him for liabilities incurred by
Price Brent and Price Brent Sydney. In the pleading, the expression "Price
Brent" is used to describe the partnership that came to an end on or about 14
May 1992. The expression "Price Brent Sydney" is used to describe the partnership that came to an end on 31 August 1992. The claims are founded on allegations of false representations which were said to induce, inter alia, the plaintiff becoming a partner in Price Brent and continuing as a partner in
Price Brent. There are causes of action framed in terms of breach of duty and contravention of the Act.

Since the bringing of this application, significant amendments have been made to the proposed Second Cross-Claim. It was originally in the form of annexure `A' to the affidavit sworn by TJE on 1 April 1998. Orders were then being sought for payments by way of indemnity or contribution of specific sums.

The present form of the proposed Second Cross-Claim is as set forth in annexure `TJE3' to the further affidavit sworn by TJE on 13 May 1998. It came into being after this application had been fixed for hearing. It is said that the changes in the form of the proposed Second Cross-Claim have been motivated by the belated realisation that there had not been a taking of accounts in any of the partnerships. The rule that partners are not, as regards partnership dealings, considered as debtor and creditor between themselves until the concern is wound up or until there is a binding settlement of the accounts, was looked to as a real impediment to the Second Cross-Claim in its original form.

The proposed Second Cross-Claim extends over some 11 pages. It seeks relief in respect of the partnerships that were dissolved as from 31 August 1992, 31
March 1994 and 30 June 1994. There are allegations of breach of fiduciary duty. There are allegations of failure to contribute to net liabilities. Apart from declarations concerning the dissolution of each of the partnerships, the relief sought includes a taking of accounts of all dealings and transactions of each of the partnerships and the payment of amounts found to be due upon such inquiry and taking of accounts.

It is not in dispute that the leave sought by TJE should not be granted if the requisite relationship or connection with the subject of the original proceedings is not present (see section 78 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), 1970). The connection is said to arise from the claim for relief under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s72.html) of the
Act (an indemnity). In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the applicant has demonstrated the presence of the requisite relationship or connection. However, even if a different view were to be taken on that matter, it seems to me that the application should be rejected.

The Court has a discretionary power to grant the relief sought. It is a power exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before the Court and so that justice is best served between the parties. The onus rests with the applicant to satisfy the Court that the order sought should be made. In this case, I am not satisfied that the onus has been discharged.

A hearing of the original proceedings could be expected to involve a long and complex trial. It could be expected to focus on the matters of the many allegations of false representations made by some of the partners in the national firm and entitlements to relief under the Act. The adding to the
Trial Judge's burden of the further matters involved in the proposed Second
Cross-Claim would bring about an extremely cumbersome set of proceedings (which may well border on the unmanageable). The proposed Second Cross-Claim involves, inter alia, a taking of accounts in each of the three separate partnerships. Each of these partnerships would normally be the subject of a separate set of winding up proceedings dealt with in the Equity Division of the Court. The parties would not be the same in all of such proceedings. Each partnership could well throw up a hard fought extensively litigated exercise.

It may be that it is necessary to bring about a winding up of each of the partnerships that came into being. If this is the case, it seems to me that those matters should be determined in the Division of this Court that is accustomed to handle them.

For completeness, I should add that there has been considerable delay in the making of this application and that no attempt has been made to explain the delay. If the application had been granted, it could well have seen a significant delay in the plaintiff's claim coming to trial. These matters have not been really agitated by the parties and accordingly have not been taken into account in the exercise of the Court's discretion.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The applicant is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
