

Regina versus Puke Matter No Cca 60186/97 [1997] NSWSC 399 (12 September 1997) 
Regina versus Richard PUKE 
CCA 60186/97 September 1997 
Smart J, Sully J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
CCA 60186/97 REGINA versus Richard PUKE 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Richard Charles Puke has applied for leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence comprising a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of eighteen months for cultivating 405 cannabis plants, taking into account the deemed supply of 603.4 grammes of cannabis leaf, this being in Puke's possession.

On 9 January 1996, police went to Puke's property at St George's Basin with a search warrant. At their request, Puke took the police to two rooms on the bottom floor of the house. In one room, some 405 cannabis plants were growing hydroponically. There were fourteen growing lights and an irrigation system.
The electricity meters had been interfered with to reduce the quantity of electricity shown to have been used for cost purposes and to avoid enquiries.

About 603.4 grammes of cannabis leaf were on the premises, some in an adjoining room and the balance in a place in the home pointed out by Puke.
Puke told the police that he had spent $10,000 purchasing the hydroponic equipment and $10,000 purchasing cannabis seedlings and that he intended to sell the cannabis when it was fully matured for hopefully between $350 and $450 an ounce. Puke told the police that he had been growing cannabis plants for about eight weeks and was going to harvest the crop within the next week.

This appears to have been Puke's first and only venture into drugs. It came about because he was in financial difficulties. He was a concretor and worked as a subcontractor constructing slabs for houses and other buildings. He provided the steel and the concrete and poured the slabs. As so often happens in the construction industry, builders did not pay him, or delayed paying him.
His position was made more difficult by there being a shortage of work and slender profit margins.

The amounts owed by his debtors approximately equalled the amount he owed to his creditors. He could not obtain all the money he was owed by his debtors.
This provides no excuse but an understandable explanation of a planned commercial venture to grow and sell cannabis. It does not detract from the serious criminality of the venture.

Puke is aged 45 years. Previously he had an unblemished record. He made extremely frank admissions to the police and co-operated fully with them. He pleaded guilty at an early stage; his remorse was manifest and deep. His evidence before the judge was very frank. The judge commented that he had rarely seen someone as frank. That assessment was correct.

Puke had been a hard worker and a good family man. He and his wife had three children, the youngest of whom still lives at home. The references and the pre-sentence report spoke of the high regard in which he was held, both personally and in the construction industry. He was noted for paying his bills on time and keeping his word, although his earnings were not large. It must have been galling that others did not adhere to the same standards.

The pre-sentence report reveals that shock was expressed in the community when the offences became know publicly because they were seen as totally out of character. The Probation officer spoke of the high regard in which Puke was held in the community. The judge accepted the view of the Probations officer that Puke was most unlikely to re-offend. Puke had given a great deal of his time to coaching, in an honorary capacity, a junior football team. He was held in the highest esteem by the boys, their parents and supporters for his efforts.

A telling feature is the reference organised and provided by some 33 people after they had become aware of Puke's situation via the local media. Some of the signatories hold responsible positions in the community. Neither Puke nor his solicitor had anything to do with the provision of the reference. It speaks of his extensive, unpaid and unselfish efforts on behalf of others. The regard and gratitude of the signatories to Puke is plain.

I do not think that the judge attached sufficient weight to the financial constraints under which Puke laboured including non-payment by his debtors and the wholly exceptional quality of the subjective features. Of course, these must never be allowed to overshadow the objective gravity of the offence. This is a case where a man of previously excellent character who had done much for others lost his way when he became weighed down with financial difficulties, not of his own making. He should not have yielded.

General deterrence is important in such a case. I agree with the judge that there were special circumstances. Puke had never been to prison before. It seems that this is a case where, fortunately, Puke was caught before any of the drugs were released into the community, though this was not of his own doing.

While I would not interfere with the head sentence, I regard the minimum term as excessive in the exceptional circumstances of this case. In my opinion, the minimum term should be twelve months and the additional term should be twenty- four months.

Counsel for Puke addressed an argument to this Court that the judge had relied on the prevalence of this offence and thereby overemphasised the aspect of general deterrence. Counsel complained that the judge had been procedurally unfair in not telling Puke and his solicitor that he proposed to take prevalence into account and giving Puke the opportunity to make submissions on this point. Reliance was placed on the detailed judgment of Callaway JA, with whom the other members of the Court agreed, in 
R v. Downie and Dandy, Victorian Court of Appeal, unreported, 27 June 1997.
The sentencing judge said: "This is the second such case in these sittings, both involved the hydroponic growing of cannabis. Members of this community should be aware that it is illegal to grow cannabis and it is illegal to sell it. If any of them decide that they are going to profit by the growing and selling of illegal crops and drugs, then they must know that they are going to face a term of imprisonment.
If cannabis is grown for profit, those members should expect a term of imprisonment, except in the most exceptional circumstances. If any member of the community believes that this is an easy way of making money, then they should think again. As these cases show, there is every chance that they will be caught and they will have to face up to a term of imprisonment. I am sure that anyone who is contemplating it could speak to this prisoner who would clearly tell them it is not worth it." 
I do not think that the judge is relying on prevalence. Rather, he is issuing a stern public warning to the community in an endeavour to dissuade anyone contemplating growing or selling cannabis.

I have taken into account the deemed supply of cannabis leaf. I reiterate that those involved in the cultivation of cannabis must expect to get a custodial sentence. Periodic detention was not an option in this case.

The statistics supplied did not contain sufficient detail to be of great use.
They gave a general indication of what is happening.

I propose that leave to appeal be granted, the appeal be allowed and that in lieu of the sentence imposed, the applicant be sentenced to a minimum term of twelve months commencing on 24 March 1997 and expiring on 23 March 1998 with an additional term of two years commencing on 24 March 1998. The applicant is to be released on parole on 23 March 1998.

SULLY J: I agree with the orders proposed. I agree with the reasons given by the learned presiding Judge. I add but two brief comments of my own and as follows: 
I wish specifically to join with his Honour the presiding Judge in what has fallen from his Honour on the so-called question of prevalence. The point is so important a one that I think it expedient to indicate, in terms, my entire agreement with what his Honour has said in that regard.
In my respectful opinion, the learned primary Judge was entirely justified in the circumstances presenting before his Honour, in the giving of a considered, and stern and public, warning of the kind which his Honour did give in terms of the paragraph found on pages 3 and 4 of the remarks on sentence. I think that it should be understood by everybody concerned that that warning, and the consequences entailed in the warning, enjoy the specific approbation of this Court; and that it can be expected by all concerned that, as the event might require in the future, those consequences will flow in this
Court, as, it is to be hoped, in similar primary Courts.

Subject to those comments, I agree with the orders proposed.

SMART J: The orders will be as proposed. * * * 
