

Melfort P/L versus Catean Holdings P/L; R Freeman versus Melfort P/L [2005] NSWSC (15 July 2005) 
MELFORT P/L (IN LIQN) versus CATEAN HOLDINGS P/L (IN LIQN) & 2 ORS 
ROSS FREEMAN & 1 ORS versus MELFORT P/L (IN LIQUIDATION) & 1 ORS /95 50111/95 
Thursday, 18 April 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
These proceedings have their factual background in the establishment, commencing in 1990, of several floors of barristers' chambers in a twelve storey building situated at 53 Martin Place, Sydney (53 Martin Place). At that time, levels one, five, ten and twelve were unoccupied. Barristers were on levels seven, eight, nine (in two groups) and eleven. Solicitors occupied levels two, three, four and portion of six. The position in relation to the ground floor or basement is not clear from the evidence. It is likely that half of the ground floor was occupied and that the basement area was available for leasing.

The rearrangements involved the then proprietor Melfort Pty Ltd (Melfort), now in liquidation, in major renovations, both internally and on the exterior of Martin Place, and the regrouping of barristers already in occupation of chambers in 53 Martin Place as well as an influx of other barristers interested in forming a floor of chambers (a floor). Prominent amongst the barristers active in regrouping were Ross Buchanan Freeman (Freeman), Emmanuel
Paneras (Paneras) (the cross-claimants), the late Kevin Murray QC (Murray) and
Mark Allan John Daley (Daley). Each was in occupation of chambers in 53 Martin
Place at the commencement of 1990. Paneras 'sold' his chambers about the end of March.

Murray was primarily interested in the establishment of a floor on level ten: however, if the number of barristers interested in joining him justified it, also on level eleven. The cross-claimants concentrated their interests on level twelve, although Freeman along with Daley was active in negotiations for the lease of level five. Negotiations for the lease of various levels were conducted concurrently. The legal framework for the establishment of the various floors followed a pattern of leasing to a private corporation with whom a floor was associated, that corporation in turn granting licences to the barristers constituting a floor. Catean Holdings Pty Ltd (Catean), also now in liquidation, was the corporation to whom Melfort leased level twelve by lease bearing date 16 July 1990 (the lease). The cross-claimants guaranteed performance of the lease by Catean in the following terms: "24. This lease having been granted by the Lessor relying upon the promise by
ROSS BUCHANAN FREEMAN and EMANUEL PANERAS ("the Guarantor") to guarantee the
Lessee's covenants and obligations, the Guarantor hereby, guarantees to the Lessor the due payment of all moneys hereby covenanted or agreed to be paid and the due performance, observance and fulfilment by the
Lessee of all the covenants, terms, provisions and conditions herein contained or implied and on the part of the Lessee to be performed, observed and fulfilled; indemnifies the Lessor and agrees at all times thereafter to keep the
Lessor indemnified from and against all damages and all costs, losses and expenses which the Lessor may suffer or incur consequent upon or arising directly or indirectly out of any breach or non-observance by the Lessee of any of the covenants, terms, provisions or conditions in this Lease contained or implied and on the part of the Lessee to be performed, observed or fulfilled; agrees that this guarantee and indemnity shall continue and the Guarantor shall remain liable jointly and severally to the Lessor under this indemnity notwithstanding that as a consequence of such breach or non-observance the
Lessor has exercised any of its rights hereunder including its rights of re- entry and notwithstanding that the Lessee (being a corporation) may be wound up or (being a natural person) may be declared bankrupt and notwithstanding that the guarantee hereby given may for any reason whatsoever be unenforceable either in whole or in part; agrees that the liability of the Guarantor hereunder shall not be affected by the granting of time or other indulgence or concessions to the Lessee or by the compounding, compromise, release, abandonment, waiver, variation, relinquishment or renewal of any of the rights of the Lessor against the
Lessee or by any neglect or omission to enforce such rights or by any other act, matter or thing which under the law relating to sureties would or might but for this provision release the Guarantor from his obligations hereunder or any thereof, and that the guarantee and indemnity hereby given are to continue and are to remain in full force and effect until the due performance, observance and fulfilment by the Lessee of all the covenants, terms, provisions and conditions on the part of the Lessee to be performed, observed and fulfilled in accordance with the terms hereof; agrees that if this Lease shall contain an option for a further lease and the Lessee shall exercise such option the Lessor's obligation to grant such lease shall be subject to the Guarantor guaranteeing the Lessee's obligations under such lease and indemnifying the Lessor in respect thereof in the terms as are herein given by the Guarantor to the Lessor in respect of this Lease
AND the Guarantor's liability hereunder shall extend to and continue during such future lease whether or not any further documentation is executed by the
Guarantor AND the same shall apply mutatis mutandis to any other extension of this Lease or period of holding over, occupation or liability on the part of the Lessee." (the guarantee) 
There is no dispute between the parties that the lease was terminated on 9 May , on the repossession of level twelve by Melfort. Neither is it in dispute that the unpaid rent reserved under the lease, leaving aside any issue as to abatement, amounted to $166,037.94 made up as follows: 
Rent Period 
Start End Amount Owed /04/92 30/04/92 $13,965.70 /06/92 30/06/92 $20,432.50 /07/92 31/07/92 $20,177.35 /12/93 31/12/93 $21,046.96 /01/94 31/01/94 $21,046.96 /02/94 28/02/94 $21,046.96 /03/94 31/03/94 $21,046.96 /04/94 30/04/94 $21,046.96 /05/94 09/05/94 $6,227.59 
TOTALS: $166,037.94 
The cross-claimants' interest in the lease lay in the establishment of a floor in which they would occupy chambers. They had no other commercial interest arising out of their shareholding in Catean. At the time of the lease being entered into, Catean planned to grant licences to some sixteen barristers.
While a full compliment of licensees had not been marshalled at that stage, a solid nucleus of some nine or ten licensees was in contemplation.

These proceedings are brought by Melfort against Catean for damages, principally for breach of the covenant to pay rent, and against the cross- claimants pursuant to their liability under the guarantee. Catean has entered a submitting appearance and has taken no other part in the proceedings. The cross-claimants have raised several defences to the claim against them and have cross-claimed against Melfort and Catean, seeking relief only against
Melfort.

The pleadings consist of i) a second amended statement of claim filed in Court on the commencement of the hearing on 14 February 1996; ii) a defence and cross-claim in respect of which leave was granted to amend in accordance with the document entitled `Proposed Additional Paragraphs for Defence' initialled and dated by Rolfe J on 9 February 1996; iii) Melfort's defence to the cross- claim. I was not concerned with cross-claims brought against other cross- defendants by Freeman and Paneras. Given the nature of the issues, the cross- claimants accepted the carriage of the proceedings.

The issues raised on the pleadings were narrowed during the hearing. The particular issues litigated are identified in the reasons that follow.
However, the core issue remained, namely, whether in the course of negotiations for the lease, Melfort made certain representations to Freeman and Paneras and, if so, the legal effect, if any, on the guarantee of the making of those representations. The averment of representations in the cross- claim was in the following terms:
The first cross-defendant represented to the second and third cross- claimants (sic) in or about May 1990 that a "level playing field will apply throughout the building to all leases; it's the same deal for everyone" with respect to all floors of chambers of barristers in the building at 53 Martin
Place Sydney.

Particulars 
The representation was made by David Trew orally to the second and third defendants at a meeting at the Sheraton-Wentworth Hotel, Phillip Street,
Sydney. Mr Trew was agent of the first cross-defendant with authority to make admissions on behalf of and to bind the first cross-defendant. (The Sheraton representations) ..........
The first cross-defendant represented to the second and third cross- claimants (sic) in late June or early July 1990 "Kevin Murray has taken the th Floor" and "there is a six months bank guarantee" but "Kevin Murray's
Floor is up and running" and "you [the second and third cross-claimants (sic)] must sign personal guarantees but when your Floor [level 12] is full and up and running you can convert your personal guarantees, should you take the 12th
Floor, to a six month bank guarantee" and "whatever is in place for Kevin
Murray's floor will be the same for your floor" and "you [the second and third cross-claimants (sic)] better hurry because he is interested in the 12th Floor as well." 
Particulars 
The representation was made by David Trew orally to the first and second cross-claimants, initially at a meeting at the first cross-claimant's Chambers on the 9th Floor, 53 Martin Place, Sydney, and thereafter repeated on several occasions to the first and second cross-claimants in the first cross- claimant's Chambers and at the Sheraton-Wentworth Hotel, Phillip Street,
Sydney where Mr Trew was resident at the time. Mr Trew was agent of the first cross-defendant with authority to make admissions on behalf of and to bind the first cross-defendant." (The Murray representations) (the reference to "second and third" cross-claimants should read "first and second") 
In the course of submissions, after the close of evidence, senior counsel for the cross-claimants summarised those alleged representations as follows: "i. Level playing field; no special deals; all leases identical etc.
 ii. Kevin Murray's Floor has signed a lease containing a 6 month bank guarantee.
 iii. (Subject to iv) Your floor is getting a lease which is identical to that of Kevin Murray's Floor.
 iv. The difference justifying what would otherwise be a departure from the level playing field is that his floor is full and up and running. You can convert to a 6 month bank guarantee when your floor is full and up and running." 
The six month bank guarantee was taken to refer to a bank guarantee limited in amount to the equivalent of six months rental.

It will be seen that par 5 of the cross-claim and par (iv) above are capable of, in part, being categorised as a representation as to future matter within the meaning <case> of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), in so far as the alleged representation embraces a statement that the proposed guarantors would be able to convert to a six month bank guarantee when the twelfth floor was "full and up and running". Neither in the body of the cross- claim nor in the relief sought was reliance placed upon <case>. However, in the course of final submissions, senior counsel for the cross-claimants sought to rely upon that section. Counsel for Melfort objected on the basis that <case> had not been pleaded.

In my opinion it would be sufficient to plead a representation which, on its face, was clearly a representation as to future matter and to allege that such a representation was misleading as one deemed to be made without reasonable grounds for making it. That opinion seems to be in line with the general approach adopted by French J in Western Australia versus Bond Corporation Holdings
Limited <case>; [(1991) ATPR 41-081] at 52, 279 in which his Honour expressed the view that there was a pleading onus to allege that the representor did not have reasonable grounds for making the representation which accordingly was misleading or deceptive: alternatively, to allege that the representation was misleading by virtue of <case>.

Whatever the strict pleading position may be, it is unquestionably desirable that the pleadings disclose, either expressly or by implication, reliance upon s 51A. This the cross-claimants failed to do. Par 7 of the cross-claim purports to particularise the respects in which the representations relied upon were alleged to be misleading or deceptive. Those particulars were restricted to the allegation that no guarantee was contained in the lease of level ten. No particulars were furnished that any representation was misleading by reason of the absence of reasonable grounds for making it.

Nevertheless, as I stated during the course of final submissions, the cross- claimants should be permitted to rely upon <case>. The objection taken was a strict pleading point. In the conduct of the case, Melfort's position was that any representation concerning substitution of a guarantee for the proposed personal guarantee of the cross-claimants was made subject to consent to such a substitution being given by the mortgagees of 53 Martin Place (the mortgagee). Implicit in the evidence was the assertion that Melfort could not and did not speak for the attitude of the mortgagee in making any representation as to the substitution of another guarantee for the personal guarantee required of the cross-claimants. It was not submitted on behalf of
Melfort that it may have adduced further evidence had it known that reliance was to be placed upon <case>, nor was any other prejudice raised as being likely to flow from the cross-claimants being permitted to rely upon that section.

As it happens, recourse to <case> does not assist the cross-claimants. Had it been otherwise, I would have granted leave to the cross-claimants to amend to rely upon that section.

The parties conducted the case on the basis that evidence of the negotiations of the letting of levels other than level twelve in 53 Martin Place, in addition to evidence relating to level twelve, was relevant and such evidence was lead by both parties. In this I think they were clearly correct for the reasons that immediately follow.

It is common ground that, at the end of May 1990, Melfort arranged a meeting of all interested parties at the Sheraton-Wentworth Hotel (the Sheraton meeting) to bring order into negotiations for leases. The meeting was convened by David Robert Trew (Trew) who was a consultant retained by Melfort.

Trew was assisted in the calling of the Sheraton meeting by Dennis Michael
Gleeson (Gleeson) who, as an employee of Melfort's letting agent, had the conduct of the leasing of 53 Martin Place.

At the Sheraton meeting, it is not in dispute that Trew announced a policy of equality of treatment of prospective lessees in negotiations for lease. This policy was expressed in terms that there would be a `level playing field' in negotiations of all leases and that Melfort would not strike special deals amongst the various lessees. While there was some conjecture in the proceedings as to the content of this policy, it is clear that Melfort represented to prospective lessees that all would be treated equally in the sense that one would not be advantaged over another in the "deal" made in respect of each level. Reliance by the cross-claimants on the Sheraton representations invited consideration of negotiations for lease of levels not limited to level twelve: particularly negotiations which were conducted concurrently with the negotiations for the lease.

Further, reliance upon particular representations as to the state of negotiations with Murray for the lease of level ten, the Murray representations, brought evidence in relation to that lease into focus.
Finally, the cross-claimants were also involved in varying capacities in the lease of level five in respect of which it was alleged further representations were made (the level five representations).

The conduct of Melfort in obtaining guarantees to support the various leases of levels in 53 Martin Place was the subject of interrogatories administered by consent shortly prior to the hearing and which, together with the answers, became Exhibit K. Par (a) of that exhibit was in the following terms: " INTERROGATORY a. Were any guarantees provided to the Plaintiff by any barristers practising from 53 Martin Place in respect of any lease of barristers' chambers at 53 Martin Place for the period February 1990 to 3 September 1991 or any part thereof.
 
The Plaintiff says as follows: by memorandum of lease registered no. Y466107 between Noden Pty Limited and 9th Floor Garfield Barwick Chambers Pty Limited in respect of Suite 1,
Level 9, a guarantee was provided to the "lessor" of 53 Martin Place pursuant to [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s12.html) of the lease, by memorandum of lease registered no. E25085 and made between Melfort
Pty Ltd and 9th Floor, Garfield Barwick Chambers Pty Ltd in respect of Suite of Level 9, a guarantee was provided to Melfort Pty Ltd pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s12.html) of the lease, by virtue of memorandum of lease registered no. Z246240 and made between Melfort Pty Ltd and Catean Holdings Pty Ltd in regard to the 12th
Floor of 53 Martin Place, a guarantee was provided to Melfort Pty Ltd pursuant to clause 24 of the lease. " 
According to these answers, in addition to the lease, there were two leases relating to level nine in respect of which a guarantee was obtained. Of those leases, Memorandum of Lease No. Y466107 related to part of level nine and was for a term commencing on 1 April 1988 terminating on 31 March 1992. It was a lease granted by a predecessor in title of Melfort and contained a personal guarantee by Paneras and John Hinton Tuckfield QC (Tuckfield).

Memorandum of Lease No. E25085 related to part of level nine and was dated 20
August 1991 for a term commencing on 1 February 1991. Clause 12 of that lease provided for the provision of a guarantee in the form of an unconditional bank guarantee, guaranteeing "the equivalent of six (6) months rental".

Notwithstanding those answers, the evidence in the "Agreed Bundle", Exhibit B, discloses a granting of a lease No. Z488730 bearing date 23 October 1990 of level 5 for a term commencing 1 November 1990 and terminating on 31 October
That lease contained a guarantee by Freeman and Daley. Clearly, the answers to interrogatories were inaccurate in the omission of any reference to the lease of level five.

During the course of submissions after the conclusion of evidence, counsel for
Melfort sought to tender amended answers to interrogatories to include reference to a lease of level one, which it was said contained an unlimited personal guarantee. Leaving aside the form which that tender took and treating the application as one to reopen Melfort's case to lead evidence of this fact,
I rejected the application in the face of the objection taken on behalf of the cross-claimants that they were prejudiced by this application in that they would wish to put in train enquiries as to the circumstances surrounding the giving of that guarantee and to re-open their case to give evidence of those circumstances if it assisted their case to do so. In my opinion, that objection was well founded. Given the stage of the proceedings when this application was made, I was not minded to adjourn the proceedings to enable the cross-claimants to overcome the possible prejudice to them if this application was acceded to. Indeed, neither party wanted an adjournment.

Exhibit B evidenced that leases given in respect of levels ten and eleven each bearing date 26 October 1990 were entered into without a guarantee being obtained in respect of lease covenants. These were interests associated with
Murray.

Given the evidence of the cross-claimants that they were informed by Melfort prior to the lease that the level ten lease contained a six month bank guarantee, it is not possible to treat the Sheraton representations as carrying a meaning to the cross-claimants that the conditions of the lease were identical with the conditions of the level ten lease in relation to a condition of guarantee: notwithstanding evidence of the cross-claimants suggesting otherwise. I think the relevance of the Sheraton representations may be viewed in two ways:
As appears from my later findings, at the time of the making of those representations, negotiations for the granting of the lease had reached a stage where the parties could be regarded as being in substantial agreement, with the cross-claimants being willing to provide the guarantee provided they had a right to substitute other guarantors from time to time (see cl 25 of the lease). That agreement to provide the guarantee had been reached without any suggestion that it was induced by a representation of Melfort. Indeed, this state of negotiations for the lease prompted extensive cross-examination of the cross-claimants directed at establishing that they had not been influenced by any representations of Melfort in giving the guarantee. After all, it was submitted, they had agreed to the guarantee prior to the Sheraton meeting. The importance of the Sheraton representations lay in the reliance by the cross- claimants on those representations as establishing a fresh round of negotiations upon an overriding basis of equality of treatment of intending lessees.
The cross-claimants' case was that, given the Sheraton representations, they would not have entered into the lease with the guarantee had they known at that time that Murray's floor had not signed a lease with a six month bank guarantee or, presumably, had they known that Melfort did not require a guarantee to support such a lease, or that there were no reasonable grounds for the representation that the guarantee could be replaced with a six month bank guarantee when the twelfth floor was "full and up and running". They explain their willingness to give a personal guarantee on the basis that: 
They had been informed by Trew that the level ten lease had been "signed" with a six month bank guarantee by Murray.

Although the cross-claimants were required to give a personal guarantee unlimited in quantum, this was reconciled by Trew with the Sheraton representations by the fact that licensees for the tenth floor were in place while the twelfth floor was, at that stage incomplete.

In keeping with the Sheraton representations, when the twelfth floor was also, "full and up and running", the personal guarantee could be replaced with one the same as the Murray guarantee.

I think the facts preceding the Sheraton representations may be readily elicited from the evidence. According to the evidence of Gleeson, from early , acting on the instructions of Melfort, he was responsible for negotiating leases for several floors in 53 Martin Place. There is sufficient evidence, I think, to conclude that there was submitted to prospective lessees a standard form of lease containing a form of guarantee in the terms of the guarantee. There is the letter from Melfort's solicitor to Daley of 18 June which enclosed "a copy of our standard lease for (his) perusal" (Document ).

As appears from Freeman's facsimile of 28 May 1990 to Gleeson (Document 24.1), it is clear that such a standard form of lease had been provided to him in relation to level twelve.

Similarly, the terms of the leases for levels five, nine, ten and eleven further reflect the use of standard terms. Where leases were preceded by an agreement to lease, it appears that such an agreement was drawn by reference to standard conditions. In cross-examination, Trew gave the following evidence: "BENNETT: Q. You weren't going to have different terms of leases on different floors? 
A . Melfort supplied standard documentation to each respective tenant." (T.179.1) 
He also stated that "in relation to any of the floors that were to be let, it was a standard documentation from Melfort's solicitors that would, I imagine, contain the guarantee provisions. I did not go through the leases" (T 186.57).
The evidence of Gleeson also supports a finding that a standard form of lease was used for 53 Martin Place (T166.24 - 167.10).

The significance of the use of the standard form of lease lies principally in the inclusion of condition 24 which provided for a personal guarantee in terms of the guarantee.

As stated earlier in these reasons, the cross-claimants placed particular significance upon the Sheraton meeting as being a watershed of negotiations from which point negotiations were conducted on a different plane from that prevailing prior to the Sheraton meeting. Given the state of negotiations for the lease at the time of the Sheraton meeting, this issue, I think, is in the nature of a cornerstone in the cross-claimants' case.

In relation to the leasing of 53 Martin Place, as early as 29 November 1989,
Murray had expressed to Melfort's agent an interest in a long term lease of levels ten and eleven (Document 1). In relation to level twelve, Paneras appears to have been the person who initiated negotiations for the lease of that area. About the end of the first quarter of 1990, Paneras had sold his interest in chambers on level nine and was looking for another suitable location from which to practice. His dealings were with Gleeson who wrote to him on 20 April 1990 in the following terms: "We write to confirm lease conditions for the abovementioned property.

Our client has instructed us to grant a lease under the following terms and conditions:- 
LEASE TERM: Fifteen (15) years.

OPTION: Fifteen (15) years.

AREA: 492.37 square metres.

RENTAL: $550 per square metre per annum.

RENTAL P. A.: $270,803 per annum.

COMMENCEMENT 
DATE: 1 May 1990.

As an incentive to lease within 53 Martin Place our client has instructed us to offer you a contribution equivalent to nine (9) months' rent.

Our client has also instructed us to inform you that whilst he agrees that you will arrange your own fitout he reserves the right to carry out any works that are necessary under the relevant Heritage or Statutory regulations." (Document 2) 
Murray's negotiations in relation to levels ten and eleven were conducted through Eleventh Floor Chambers Pty Ltd whose solicitor's letter to Gleeson of May 1990 described the negotiations as having "reached an advanced stage", while noting that there were a number of fundamental matters upon which agreement (had) still not been reached" (Document 4). This letter is a lengthy one concerning several aspects of the proposed lease but makes no express reference to any guarantee.

The negotiations concerning level twelve kept pace with those for levels ten and eleven. The letter of Freeman and Paneras to Gleeson of 4 May 1990 records a decision to "take up" a lease of level twelve on conditions set out in that letter which was in the following terms: "It is our intention to take up the lease of the 12th Floor, 53 Martin Place
Sydney, (subject to survey) on the following conditions:
Rental of $550 gross p. sq m, including cleaning
The lease to be in favour of 12th Floor, Garfield Barwick Chambers.
The lease to be for a period of 15 years, plus an option of 15 years, commencing 16.7.90
Rent review to be every 2 years, but this can be varied to every 3 years with landlords consent.
The landlord to contribute a sum equal to 10 months rent payable upon signing the lease to Messrs Paneras and Freeman OR to whom they direct.
The landlord is to pay all outgoings relating to the building.
Condition 5 NOT to be disclosed or appear in the lease." (Document 7.1) 
I accept the evidence of the cross-claimants that they expressed their interest in leasing level twelve in such unequivocal terms at the suggestion of Gleeson in order to position themselves favourably in relation to other expressions of interest in the leasing of that level. Comparing its contents with the letter of 3 May 1990 of the solicitor of Eleventh Floor Chambers Pty
Ltd, there were points of difference in the terms being negotiated in respect of the leases under discussion, not the least of which were a) the rate of rental expressed in dollars per square metre per annum; b) the period of rent free occupation after commencement of the lease; c) the terms upon which, and by whom, refurbishment works would be performed and d) the period of rent review.

On 7 May 1990 Gleeson replied to the cross-claimants in the following terms: "We refer to your letter of offer concerning the above tenancy and have been instructed to advise you that our client agrees on all points with the exception of the following; * Item 3 - The lease is to commence on 1 July, 1990 * Item 6 - The lessee will be responsible for a contribution to increases in outgoings over a base year.

Would you please advise us as to the name or names the lease is to be taken in and if you will be representing yourselves in relation to the lease." (Document 8) 
The reply of the cross-claimants of 8 May was as follows: "Thank you for your letter of 7th May.

We agree to (item 6) pay a contribution toward the increases in outgoings.

However we must insist that the lease commence on 16-7-90 to be in line with our accounting system." (Document 9) 
There followed an agreement under which the cross-claimants purchased from
Melfort the existing fixtures and fittings on level twelve for the sum of $20,000. The evidence of the cross-claimants was that this sum was below the value of the fixtures and fittings for which there was a ready market as evidenced by expressions of interest from builders involved in the refurbishment of 53 Martin Place. Although the cross-claimants attempted to down play the significance of that purchase, when viewed in the context of the correspondence between them and Gleeson to that point, it reflects a firm intention to lease level twelve. The negotiations were carried a step further to agreement by the "confirmation of lease" by Gleeson to Melfort of 15 May
The covering memorandum of Gleeson to Melfort contained the following statement: "The Confirmation of Lease Details does not constitute a binding Lease, and all arrangements are subject to formal documentation and your approval. Would you accordingly arrange for the preparation of the necessary documents and thereafter forward them to the lessee." 
I think the significant aspect of the confirmation is that it reflects substantial agreement between the parties and a requirement of guarantees by the cross-claimants. It appears that a "three months rent" bank guarantee was also required. The lease details were as follows: 
CONFIRMATION OF LEASE DETAILS (Subject to Formal Contract)
ADDRESS : 53 Martin Place, Sydney 
LEVEL : 12 
AREA : 445.8 square metres
LESSOR : Melfort Pty Ltd 
ADDRESS : C/- Pannell Kerr Forster Elizabeth Street, Sydney 
CONTACT : Mr Richard Cook 
C/- Managing Agents 
L J Hooker Pty Ltd 
TELEPHONE : 239 2613
LESSOR'S SOLICITOR : Mr R Freeman & Mr E Paneras 
ADDRESS : 9th Floor, 53 Martin Place, Sydney 
CONTACT : Mr R Freeman 
TELEPHONE : 231 6105
LESSEE : 12th Floor Garfield Barwick Chambers Pty Ltd 
REGISTERED ADDRESS : 12th floor, 53 Martin Place, Sydney 
CONTACT : Mr R. Freeman 
TELEPHONE : 231 6105
GUARANTORS : Mr R. Freeman & Mr E. Paneras
LESSEE'S SOLICITORS : Andrews & Backhouse 
ADDRESS : Level 16, 25 Bligh Street, Sydney 
CONTACT : Mr Michael Oates 
TELEPHONE : 233 1933
LEGAL COSTS : The Lessee will be responsible to pay all costs involved in the preparation of the lease, whether the lease proceeds or not, including stamp duty and out of pocket expenses.
LEASE TERM : Fifteen (15) years.

DATE OF COMMENCEMENT : 16 July 1990.

DATE OF EXPIRY : 15 July 2005 
OPTION : Fifteen (15) years.

RENT REVIEW : Two yearly to market values.
BASE ANNUAL RENTAL : $245,190.00 
RENT TO COMMENCE : 16 July 1990 $ 550.00 per sq. m. per annum $ 245,190.00 per annum $ 20,432.50 per calendar month 
PAYMENT PERIOD : Monthly in advance.
GROSS ANNUAL RENTAL : 245,190.00 per annum
AIR CONDITIONING : Additional charge for after hours use.
BUILDING OUTGOINGS : In addition to the base rental, the Lessee will be responsible for a percentage share of increases in the building's outgoings.

PERCENTAGE PAYABLE : 6.39% 
BASE YEAR : 30.6.90 - Water Sewerage & Drainage rates .12.89 - All other rates & taxes
USE OF PREMISES : Commercial offices.
BANK GUARANTEE : Three (3) months rent being $61,297.50." (Document 16) 
Paneras gave evidence that he had seen the confirmation of lease about the time of its date, "Certainly" in May 1990. He stated that it was the only time there had been any reference to a guarantee prior to the Sheraton meeting.

What appears to be the last word on negotiations concerning level twelve prior to the Sheraton meeting is the facsimile from Freeman to Gleeson bearing the facsimile endorsement of 28 May 1990, which was in the following terms: " AMENDMENTS 
PARAGRAPH D (a) (ii) deleted (Guarantee) Freeman and Paneras or their assigns as approved
Rent is payable on the `16th' of each month
Increase in outgoings to be 4% of increases in outgoings (the 12th floor, the smallest floor in the building)
Common area ~~around the~~ is to be deleted from the lettable floor space
Item 6 in Schedule to be amended according to new lettable floor area" (Document 24.1) 
A superficial comparison of the subject matter of that facsimile with the "standard" form of lease discloses that the "Amendments" referred to those standard terms. Note 2 is significant. It signifies acceptance of a personal guarantee by the cross-claimants with the right to substitute other guarantors for the cross-claimants.

Paneras stated that he had no knowledge either of the receipt of any standard form of lease from Gleeson, or indeed of the subject matter of Freeman's facsimile of 28 May 1990. It would be very surprising if the amendments were not the subject of discussion between Paneras and Freeman prior to the submission of the amendments to Gleeson. Presumably, Freeman was taking up the running on behalf of the proposed lessee in negotiations for the lease.

It is unnecessary, I think, to determine whether agreement had been reached by
Freeman and Paneras with Gleeson on all of the terms of the lease at the date of the Sheraton representations. It is clear that, whatever the state of negotiations, agreement in respect of the lease was subject to "formal documentation". It is also plain that both cross-claimants were fully aware of a requirement of a guarantee to support a lease of level twelve and were prepared to provide a guarantee. In the case of Paneras, this much is clear from his evidence in relation to receipt of the confirmation of lease with its provision for a guarantee. In the case of Freeman, it was his evidence that he had not seen the confirmation of lease and he denied that a guarantee was requested of him at that time (T 77.25). He thought the first time "guarantees were mentioned" was in June. However, that cannot be an accurate recollection, as I think Freeman conceded in the following cross-examination upon his facsimile of 28 May 1990: 
WHITE: Q. I suggest clause 25 was inserted in the lease after your request, as appears at .2 of the document 24.1? 
A. It is not our document, but I cannot disagree with you.

Q. As at 28 May 1990 that was the only matter that you were not in agreement with between the lessor and yourself, as far as the guarantee was concerned? 
A. Well, that would appear to be so from that document. There is two explanations possibly relevant. One, you are going by the fax date on the top of the document - it is probably right, but sometimes fax machines are wrong.
But significantly between signing the lease and this document 24.1, assuming it has the correct date on it, 28 May, we had the meeting at the Wentworth
Hotel where the previous jockeying for positions and the unwieldy nature of that stopped and we were to get a bit of order out of the chaos, if you like, and the level playing field was to apply.

Q. As at 28 May 1990 you had seen the lease that was proposed for the 12th floor? 
A. That seems to be the case.

Q. When you received it you wrote this document and sent it to Mr Gleeson? 
A. That is certainly likely, yes.

Q. You were requesting that a variation be made to clause 24 in the manner set out in the document 24.1? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew as at that date that you and Mr Paneras were being asked to give personal guarantees? 
A. Well probably, yes.

Q. And you were prepared to give personal guarantees, subject to the change as requested by you in the document 24.1? 
A. That seems to be the case.
 (T84.1-84.39)" 
I have no doubt that, before any representations were made by Melfort, both cross-claimants were aware that a guarantee was required by Melfort in support of a lease of level twelve. The evidence is clear that Freeman understood that guarantee to be a personal guarantee and the only amendment to the standard term was one entitling the proposed guarantors, the cross-claimants, to substitute others with the approval, at least, of Melfort. Although Paneras denies having received a standard form of lease prior to the Sheraton meeting, little turns on that, in my opinion. Given the fact that he had, with
Tuckfield, provided a guarantee in relation to an earlier lease of level nine and given his knowledge of a requirement of a guarantee in the confirmation of lease, I think the inference is inescapable that at the time of the Sheraton representations both he and Freeman were willing to give a personal guarantee to support the lease of level twelve provided that there was a rider that
Melfort would accept a change of guarantors during the currency of the lease.
Indeed the lease so provided (cl 25). Freeman accepted that cl 25 was inserted in response to his proposed amendment in the facsimile of 28 May 1990 (T84.1).
Cl 25 was in the following terms: "The Lessor agrees to release the Guarantors (or either of them) upon the request of the Lessee should they (or either of them) cease to be a director of the Lessee company provided new guarantors of whom the Lessor approves are substituted as guarantors." 
Given those findings, the cross-claimants faced a formidable task in mounting a case that they were influenced in giving the guarantee by actionable representations of Melfort. However, there is much to be said for the cross- claimants' contention that, from the time of the Sheraton representations, they were entitled to expect that any lease entered into by them was in conformity with the application of the principle laid down in the Sheraton representations. This would mean that the terms of any lease would have to satisfy the test of being even handed when compared with the terms of other leases: provision for a guarantee in a lease would be in no different position. That does not mean that each lease would have an identical form of guarantee to support it.

For example, if a lease was between Melfort and a group of barristers, each liable for the payment of rent under the lease, the concept of a guarantee, I think, would be otiose. Again, if the lessee was a corporation under a scheme to grant licenses to its shareholder barristers, it would be consistent, in my view, under a level playing field umbrella, for no guarantee to be required of a wealthy corporation, as distinct from requiring a guarantee to support a lease to a `two dollar company'. Again, where such a shell corporation had been formed to licence chambers to a group of the leading barristers practising at the New South Wales Bar, different considerations may arise as to the requirement of a guarantee than in the case of such a company which did not have a full complement of licensees committed to the venture and where some of those that had evinced an interest were still in the process of establishing successful practices.

Viewed in this way, and treating the Sheraton representations in isolation, I think the task of the cross-claimants, in establishing an actionable representation, would be an extremely difficult one. The position of the formation of a floor on level twelve mid-1990 was as follows. Paneras was without chambers, making informal use of 53 Martin Place to store his professional accoutrements and making occasional use of the supervisor's office for his professional activities which were conducted principally from his home. He was a barrister of some nine years experience who had been in 53
Martin Place from about 1982 initially at level 8 and then from level nine in about 1988. His practice was mainly in the criminal jurisdiction. Freeman had been admitted to practice in 1971 and had been in Chambers in 53 Martin Place since 1989 when he "purchased" chambers in level nine. As in the case of
Paneras, he had no experience in commercial litigation. Although the cross- claimants had gathered round them a group interested in occupying chambers on level twelve, as at mid-1990 that group was still well short of a full complement: it represented a little over half of the desired number of licensees. Catean had a paid up share capital of two dollars (Document 312: however this is difficult to reconcile with Documents 185 and 186 being share certificates in Catean for five hundred shares respectively in the name of
Freeman and Paneras). With those factors in mind, it would not be unreasonable to expect Melfort to require personal guarantees in support of the lease, nor would it be surprising to find that other lessees under different financial circumstances may have been required to provide no guarantee or a limited guarantee only.

Such differences in guarantees would not render the Sheraton representations misleading or deceptive without some additional ingredient. The evidence of the cross-claimants was to the effect that the Sheraton representations meant that each lease would be identical. However, as I think was conceded in cross- examination, that contention was unsustainable. Quite apart from provisions concerning a guarantee, terms could be expected to vary from one lease to another depending upon the extent of rent free occupation conferred, the financial responsibility for refitting the various levels and the rent reserved which had regard to those matters and to the lessee's obligation to contribute to outgoings.

For those reasons, the cross-claimants rely upon the combined effect of the
Sheraton representations and the Murray representations. The cross-claimant's case is that:
It was represented to them by Trew that Murray had signed a lease containing a six month bank guarantee; this at a time when they were being asked to provide an unlimited personal guarantee.
This difference in guarantees under the respective leases was justified by
Melfort as satisfying the level playing field policy on the basis that
Murray's floor was fully formed, whereas floor twelve was not.
Keeping faith with the level playing field test, Melfort assured the cross-claimants that, when the twelfth floor was "full and up and running", the guarantee could be replaced with a six month bank guarantee such as had been provided by Murray.

On the question of credibility and reliability of witnesses, I think that the evidence of Gleeson and Trew, should be approached with some caution. I think the need to do this is heightened by the fact that prior to the lease Melfort was under the control of an administrator. I think it is highly likely that
Melfort had a pressing need for an early completion of negotiations for the leasing of 53 Martin Place. This is emphasised by the fact that it was not content to rely solely upon the efforts of its letting agent to effect the subject leases, opting to have a consultant to push those negotiations along and whose remuneration was, in part, geared to the successful completion of negotiations of leases. I think this should predispose one to assume that there was pressure on them and, in turn, by them on prospective lessees to lease the various levels in 53 Martin Place as soon as possible. I think one should assume that those representatives did not miss an opportunity to advance the prospects of leasing a particular level.

Trew described his consultancy as follows: "My main brief was to oversee the refurbishment of 53 - what is known today as Martin Place, and to ensure that the agents were actively chasing up leasing in the building." (T 176.52) 
The terms of his engagement were reflected in correspondence with Melfort's parent corporation and in a letter from Trew to Alan Fisher (Fisher) of 17
July 1990 (document 144), the day after the granting of the lease. Fisher was the "representative" of Kenneth Russell who was appointed on 22 June 1990 as the administrator of the Farrow Group to which Melfort belonged. In Fisher's facsimile to Freeman of 3 August 1993, he described the role of Trew as that of "a consultant for the administrator ... primarily responsible for the letting of Martin Place". (Document 420).

The correspondence reveals that Trew was on a monthly retainer and was entitled to an incentive bonus of "$5,000 per floor as each floor (became) fully let to the acceptance of Melfort ....": that bonus applied to renegotiation of a lease to existing tenants. In addition a "sale bonus of 10% of the agents fee (was payable) upon settlement ..." and a further five per cent if the sale price of 53 Martin Place resulted in a $10 million profit to the Farrow Group. In the course of giving evidence, Trew was inclined to dismiss these incentives as comparatively insignificant, having regard to the level of his commercial success in other enterprises. While I do not doubt the level of Trew's commercial achievements, I think the presence of Trew on behalf of Melfort to promote leasing of various levels in 53 Martin Place was significant. One would expect letting agents to have sufficient financial motivation to move negotiations forward without the employment of a consultant with duties such as those of Trew. I think this aspect of Trew's role in negotiations is given some emphasis in the terms of his letter to Fisher of 17
July 1990. Trew's interest in 53 Martin Place did not stop with that of a consultant to Melfort. He was also actively engaged in negotiating for himself a lease of the basement area with the view to the establishment of a 'tavern'.
This is the point of his letter to Cutler Hughes & Harris of 10 May 1990 (document 12).

It is difficult to resist the inference that at the time of the negotiation of the lease there was some financial pressure on Melfort to expedite completion of the leasing arrangements, particularly for the vacant areas, of 53 Martin
Place. It is equally difficult to resist the inference that such a need would have been readily apparent to its representatives charged with the responsibility of arranging those leases.

In general terms, I think it likely that Trew and Gleeson would have been minded to offer assurances where prudence might have cautioned against doing that. Having said that, I think it is only fair to add that each witness gave his evidence in a reasonably forthright way and, so far as conduct in the witness box is concerned, that is not a factor to which I think any significance should be attached.

In the case of the cross-claimants, the stakes are high. In particular respects I have little doubt that their evidence is coloured by that fact. For example, the evidence of Paneras that he treated the Sheraton representations as meaning that each lease in respect of each level would be "identical" is taking that assurance beyond a sensible plane. Again, his unwillingness to concede the extent to which negotiations had advanced prior to the Sheraton representations, I think, is in conflict with the records of those negotiations.

To illustrate the point, I set out an extract from his evidence in relation to
Freeman's facsimile of 28 May 1990 (Document 24.1): "Q. What I put to you is that document 24.1 represents the matters outstanding between you and Mr Freeman and the lessor concerning the terms of the lease for the twelfth floor? 
A. I can't agree with that because I haven't signed it; there may have been other things that I wanted to discuss when I met the landlord.

Q. You say this document was sent without your knowledge or authority? 
A. I haven't signed it and it is not my document.

Q. Is that the reason why because you say you have not signed it? 
A. And it is not my document.

Q. I know that, but what I am suggesting to you is that as at 28 May 1990 these were the only matters that you and Mr Freeman took issue with in relation to the lease for the twelfth floor? 
A. I don't agree with that.

Q. What other matters do you say you took issue with in relation to the terms of the lease as at 28 May 1990? 
A. The rent free period; I had asked for ten months rent free, you will see a letter to Mr Gleeson dated 20 April 1990 and after Mr Trew addressed the meeting the whole ball game had changed.

Q. I am not asking you about the meeting that took place with Mr Trew, I am asking you what other matters were outstanding as between you and the lessor concerning the terms of the lease as at 28 May 1990? You have mentioned a rent free period, what else was outstanding? 
A. The guarantees were not resolved.

Q. Go to document 24.1 and you will see there is a reference in that document to guarantees, is there not? 
A. You are asking me to comment on someone else's document, I can't comment on that.

Q. I am suggesting to you point 2 on document 24.1 represents your intention that the only change to be made to clause 24 of the proposed standard lease was that the lessor add, "assignees as approved" or words to that effect? 
A. No, I don't agree with that.

Q. What do you say was left outstanding in relation to the guarantee as at 28
May 1990? 
A. As at 28 May? 
Q. Yes? 
A. I can't recall.

Q. There was nothing outstanding or in dispute between you and the lessor as at 28 May 1990 in relation to the guarantee other than inserting the words, "Their assignees as approved", isn't that correct? 
A. I don't agree with that.

Q. What do you say was outstanding as at 28 May 1990 in relation to the guarantee that was being proposed? 
A. I can't recall but it was certainly not just that factor." (T14.44 - 15.47) 
On 15 May 1992, Melfort, brought District Court proceedings (the District
Court proceedings) against Catean for non-payment of rent and outgoings and against the cross-claimants under the guarantee. Paneras's explanation for the absence of any allegation in the District Court proceedings concerning the
Murray representations, in my opinion, was less than satisfactory (T45.10). He was also unwilling to accept what I think were obvious facts that (a) the indebtedness of the licensees on level twelve to Catean in late 1992 into 1993 was extremely serious and worsening (T59.5), and (b) the raising with Melfort of a change to the guarantee was related to the worsening financial position of Catean (T61.1). On 15 February 1993, Freeman wrote to Mark Ranucci , an employee of Melfort's letting agent, requiring the addition of sixteen level twelve licensees as guarantors under the lease. Paneras said that he did not discuss its contents with Freeman prior to it being sent.
However, he must have been aware of the approach as he explained the strategy behind the letter in the following evidence: "HIS HONOUR: Q. I think what we are trying to find out is why weren't we looking at a letter in February 1993 saying "please advise that the substitution bank guarantee is in order as per our agreement"; can you offer any explanation as to why that wasn't the approach than the one that is set out in this letter? 
A. The two letters I sent were along those lines. Mr Freeman's letter is - 
Q. I understand? 
A. - has got a different motive behind it, and I explained that earlier in my answer, that we wanted to add these people and then litigate on a six month bank guarantee, having the floor behind us." (T64.1) 
I found that explanation quite unconvincing.

In the case of the evidence of Freeman, his explanation for the absence in the
District Court proceedings of reliance upon the Murray representations, as in the case of the evidence of Paneras, may have some logical attraction, but it is one I find less than compelling. (T105.10 - 107.1) 
This explanation has implicit in it the unwillingness of Freeman to rock the boat with Melfort over the non-payment of rent. It is difficult to reconcile this with his letter to Melfort's solicitor some few months earlier, on 19
March 1992, in which he asserted that the guarantees given in relation to the level five lease were void as having been obtained by gross misrepresentation.
It was that type of allegation that Freeman claimed he was seeking to avoid in relation to level twelve. One is left to wonder why.

I treat with some cynicism his opinion of the ease with which the financial problems besetting Catean and its licensees could have been resolved. Another example of his evidence that gave rise to reservations as to its accuracy follows: "Q. Mr Freeman, in June or July of 1990 I suggest to you that if you had been told by Mr Trew or Mr Gleeson that Mr Murray had not given a six month bank guarantee or a guarantee at all you would have still entered into the guarantee that you gave in respect of the 124? 
A. I don't know that. That's speculation. I wanted to follow Kevin Murray. On the other hand I was keeping my eyes open." (T127.1 - .10) 
That was the final question and answer in his cross-examination. Re- examination that followed did not seek to re-examine on that answer. However, the following day he was recalled for further cross-examination and counsel for the cross-claimants took the opportunity of re-examining Freeman as follows: "BENNETT: Q. (By leave) I am going to show you page 127 of the transcript in a moment, which contains the last question my learned friend asked in cross-examination. I would like you to read the question and read your answer, the top of page 127 and tell me if that is the answer you intended to give and if not, how you would now answer that question? 
A. It seems to be accurately recorded. I would now simply answer that "No", because it was my fault. I probably didn't totally hear every word of the question, which is my fault, but my answer to that is "No". " (T134.11) 
That was the only re-examination of Freeman. I have some problems in accepting that explanation.

I think these features of the cross-claimants' case draw one to the following observations of McClelland CJ in Eq. in Watson versus Foxman (Unreported, 3
August 1995): "Where, in civil proceedings, a party alleges that the conduct of another was misleading or deceptive, or likely to mislead or deceive (which I will compendiously describe as "misleading") within the meaning of [s.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (or s. 42 of the Fair Trading Act), it is ordinarily necessary for that party to prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the Court (1) what the alleged conduct was, and circumstances which rendered the conduct misleading. Where the conduct is the speaking of words in the course of a conversation, it is necessary that the words spoken be proved with a degree of precision sufficient to enable the
Court to be reasonably satisfied that they were in fact misleading in the proved circumstances. In many cases (but not all) the question whether spoken words were misleading may depend upon what, if examined at the time, may have been seen to be relatively subtle nuances flowing from the use of one word, phrase or grammatical construction rather than another, or the presence or absence of some qualifying word or phrase, or condition. Furthermore, human memory of what was said in a conversation is fallible for a variety of reasons, and ordinarily the degree of fallibility increases with the passage of time, particularly where disputes or litigation intervene, and the processes of memory are overlaid, often subconsciously, by perceptions of self-interest as well as conscious consideration of what should have been said or could have been said. All too often what is actually remembered is little more than an impression from which plausible details are then, again often subconsciously, constructed. All this is a matter of ordinary human experience.

Each element of the cause of action must be proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the Court, which means that the Court "must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence". Such satisfaction is "not ...
attained or established independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to be proved" including the "seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding" (Helton v
Allen <case>; [63 CLR 691] at 712).

Considerations of the above kinds can pose serious difficulties of proof for a party relying upon spoken words as the foundation of a cause of action based on [s. 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (or s. 42 of the Fair Trading Act), in the absence of some reliable contemporaneous record or other satisfactory corroboration." 
The reference in that passage to "the absence of some reliable contemporaneous record or other satisfactory corroboration" has particular pertinence to the facts of this case. I propose to address that question before going to the evidence of Trew's alleged representations.

The first stumbling block for the cross-claimants' case in the post representation period is the lease itself. Its provisions (clauses 24 and 25) make no reference to the substitution of the guarantee with a bank guarantee.
Instead, it contained a provision for the substitution of guarantees in terms quite different from that. Further, as admitted by Freeman, the substitution agreed upon in the lease was the outcome of his proposed amendment of standard cl 24 as set out in his facsimile of 28 May 1990 to Gleeson (Document 24.1).
One would have thought that if a representation was made by Trew prior to the signing of the lease that the guarantee could be replaced by a bank guarantee when the floor was "full and up and running", the amendment to cl 24 would have been in those terms rather than one contemplating the provision of a guarantee by other prospective members of the twelfth floor (cl 25).

Level twelve was said to be "full and up and running" by June 1991. On 14
February 1991, in relation to the level five lease, Freeman wrote to Trew in the following terms: " RE: 5th Floor, 53 MARTIN PLACE, SYDNEY 
I refer to previous discussions and confirm my understanding that we have obtained approval for the replacement of personal guarantees by barristers with a 6 month Bank guarantee.

Would you kindly confirm same and indicate the steps you wish us to take to facilitate this matter." (Document 278) 
Freeman's letter to Melfort's agent of 21 March 1991, still with level five, refers to the subject matter of replacement of personal guarantees with a limited bank guarantee in terms that are not entirely comfortable with the representations relied upon by the cross-claimants in relation to the lease.
The letter was in the following terms: "RE: 5th Floor, 53 MARTIN PLACE, SYDNEY 
I refer to previous discussions with Messrs Trew and Gleeson and confirm our agreement that we have obtained approval for the replacement of personal guarantees by barristers with a 6 month Bank guarantee as is presently being arranged for some other floors in the building.

Would you kindly indicate the steps you wish us to take to facilitate this matter." (Document 281) (Emphasis added) 
In the context of the representations relied upon by the cross-claimants, it would not have been out of order to remind Melfort in this letter of the assurances given prior to the lease.

The response of Melfort in its solicitor's letter of 20 June 1991 to the level five lessee was as follows: "As you know we act for the Lessor Melfort Pty Limited.

We understand that you have requested the release of the personal guarantees by Mr M A J Daley and Mr R B Freeman from their obligations under Lease
Z488730 in consideration of our client's accepting a banker's guarantee for six months rent.

Our client has no objection in principle and will instruct us to prepare the appropriate Deed of Variation of Lease and Release upon receiving from you a specimen form of the guarantee which you will be submitting together with your undertaking to pay our client's proper and reasonable legal costs and disbursements in relation to this matter and also those of the mortgagees who will of course have to consent.

Upon receiving your letter we shall refer the matter to the mortgagees for their consents in principle.

Prior to execution of the proposed Deed by our client it will require L J
Hooker to certify that all rent and other payments are up-to-date and there are no outstanding breaches or other matters on your part.

We should make it clear that the Deed will provide for a new banker's guarantee to be substituted on each rent review so that it at all times covers six months current rental.

Please let us hear from you at your earliest convenience. " 
No exception was taken by Freeman to the reference of "the matter to the mortgagees for their consents in principle" on the basis that Trew had not made mention of this requirement when giving the assurance that the personal guarantees could be replaced with a six month bank guarantee.

Although level twelve became fully occupied in June 1991, the correspondence of that month and of August emanating from level twelve was limited to letters from the clerk on that floor, John Victor Cole (Cole), registering complaints of interference with the use of the floor occasioned by the works carried out by Melfort and by storm damage "earlier in the year".

On 8 July 1991 Freeman submitted to Melfort's solicitor on behalf of the level five lessee a specimen of a proposed six month bank guarantee. Again one would have expected a similar movement on level twelve toward such a guarantee, given the nature of the representation relied upon by the cross-claimants and the fact that level twelve had been fully occupied by June of 1991. It was left to Paneras to take up with Melfort the matter of substituting the cross- claimants' personal guarantee with a bank guarantee. This he did by telephone conversation with Gleeson who requested Paneras to put his request in writing to Ranucci.

Paneras's evidence is that he referred to the Trew assurance on the guarantee in that telephone conversation with Gleeson. When that evidence is contrasted with the terms of his letter to Ranucci of 3 September, I am unable to be satisfied that such a reference was made by Paneras. The letter was in the following terms: "We wish to put in place a six month Bank Guarantee in lieu of the present arrangement of personal guarantees.

Will you please commence the necessary paperwork." 
There was no satisfactory evidence, in my opinion, explaining the failure of
Paneras to refer in this letter to any aspect of the Murray representations.
Ranucci failed to reply to the 3 September letter and to a "follow up letter" which Paneras said was sent in October. The October letter could not be found at the time of hearing. Paneras's evidence was that over several months he was in weekly contact with Gleeson and Ranucci concerning the substitution of the guarantees and that on each occasion the response was that they would "get back" to him. I would have expected a written complaint by Catean or by the cross-claimants of this failure on the part of Melfort over several months to respond to the repeated enquiries of Paneras. That is not the case and I am not prepared to find that there was this persistence in pursuing a substitution of a bank guarantee for a personal guarantee under the lease.

It was during this period that the financial position of Catean began to assume some significance. The financial statement for the year ending 30 June shows sundry debtors amounting to approximately $45,000. As at 22 January there was approximately $91,000 in unpaid rent and in Catean's liability for outgoings. Unpaid rent went back to October 1991. In Ranucci's letter to
Catean of 22 January 1992 demand was made for "full payment by 7 February".
The reply of Catean by letter of 24 January is dealt with later in these reasons in relation to the abatement of rent issue. It is sufficient for the moment to say that the reply attributed non-payment of rent to interference with tenant rights by Melfort. I do not accept that this unsatisfactory position in relation to unpaid rent was due wholly or substantially to the matters of complaint made in Catean's letter of 24 January 1992. I infer from the further demand of $48,500 by Ranucci in his letter to Catean of 27
February 1992 that Catean had reduced outstanding rent by a payment of approximately $43,000. Melfort went into liquidation about this time.

On 9 April 1992 the liquidator of Melfort (the liquidator) made a demand on
Catean of approximately $48,500. A like demand under the guarantee was made upon Freeman by letter of 10 April. Catean's letter to Ranucci of 10 April , repeated complaints of interference by Melfort with the use of level twelve as barristers chambers. It is not clear whether this letter was prompted by either of the last two mentioned demands. On 15 May 1992 Melfort brought the District Court proceedings claiming nearly $70,000, made up of approximately $61,000 for rent and $8,500 for outgoings.

The cross-claimants were confronted with a dynamic situation. By July 1992 the level of indebtedness to Melfort appears to have been approximately $75,000.
The evidence of floor meetings of licensees on level twelve reflect a worsening situation in the non-payment of licence fees in the following months. By the beginning of 1993 the outstanding rental was approximately $82,500, as evidenced in the memorandum to floor members of 23 February 1993.
It is, I think, significant that at that time, rather than seeking a six month bank guarantee as one would expect, Freeman wrote to Ranucci on 15 February , putting forward some sixteen names, presumably all licensees on the twelfth floor, as the names of "additional guarantors" whom it was proposed would "stand on an equal footing in guaranteeing the lease". This has more the ring of cl 25 of the lease than the assurance attributed to Trew that the personal guarantee on the lease could be replaced with a six month bank guarantee. The explanation offered by the cross-claimants for this apparent inconsistency I found unconvincing. It was said that, given the stance of
Melfort in failing over a long period to respond to requests for the substitution of a bank guarantee for the guarantee, the approach of proposing additional guarantors was adopted in order to gain some response from Melfort.
That makes no sense at all to me.

Records of the financial position under the licences on level twelve at this time reflect, as neutrally as one may express it, a serious financial predicament. The cross-claimants sought to downplay the terms adopted by the floor records to describe that financial position. It was said that use of terms such as "critical" and "insolvent", were deliberately chosen to motivate delinquent licensees to pay outstanding licence fees. However, while it is unnecessary to adopt those terms, I think when it comes to a floor of barristers threatening expulsion of members for non-payment of licence fees, the situation must be regarded as serious; particularly in the context of litigation against Catean for unpaid rent. Catean was dependent upon payment of those licence fees to meet its rental obligations to Melfort.

The response of Melfort to the offer by Freeman of additional guarantors was favourable, although, it took the opportunity in the letter of its solicitor to Freeman of 24 February 1993 to link the proposal with satisfaction of the claim in the District Court proceedings. When that letter was not responded to by Freeman, it drew a further letter from Melfort's solicitor to him of 3
March 1993 seeking a response.

Freeman's reply, I think, is significant. It was contained in Freeman's letter to Melfort's solicitor of 3 March 1993. The letter contained a suggestion that the attempts by Melfort to link satisfaction of the District Court proceedings with the provision of additional guarantors amounted to "blackmail". Of particular significance is the reference to the pre-lease "discussions" in the following terms: "I would have thought that your client would prefer to have sixteen or so guarantors rather than two.

Early discussions when we leased the Floor approved the inclusion of all owners of rooms as guarantors. Please advise me whether your client is now backing away from this position so that we can give consideration to commencing proceedings in Equity." (Document 387) 
I have difficulty in reconciling the contents of this letter with an assurance having been given by Trew prior to the signing of the lease that the cross- claimants' guarantee could be replaced by a six month bank guarantee when the floor was "full and up and running".

When the matter of a six month guarantee was next raised it was done so in terms which again fit uncomfortably beside the cross-claimants' case based on assurances attributed to Trew. In the cross-claimants' letter to the solicitor for Melfort of 7 April 1993 the matter was expressed in the following terms: "The Floor wishes to further discuss the matter and in particular consider a previously offered option of substituting a 6 months Bank Guarantee as has occurred on some of the other Floors in lieu of the present personal guarantees." (Emphasis added) 
I would have thought that if an assurance in clear and unqualified terms had been given to the cross-claimants by Trew that when the floor was "full and up and running" a six month bank guarantee could be substituted for the personal guarantee under the lease, that fact would have been clearly stated in the letter of 7 April. In my view, the terms of that letter suggest that the alleged assurance did not meet that standard. Melfort, in its solicitor's letter to Freeman of 13 April 1993, rejected the bank guarantee proposal but left open the provision of additional guarantors as had earlier been advanced.
Freeman responded to the last mentioned letter by letter of 14 April 1993 which contained the following: "Will you please advise me on what basis "the substitution of a bank guarantee is not an available option". " (Document 403) 
One asks rhetorically, why not respond with some indignation that the rejection of the bank guarantee proposal was contrary to Trew's assurance to the cross-claimants.

During the first half of 1993 the financial position of the licensees on level twelve in relation to Catean deteriorated. By mid year the amount owing by floor members to Catean was approximately $80,000.

There was a telephone conversation between Freeman and Trew on 9 June 1993 followed later that day by a facsimile from Freeman to Trew in the following terms: "Dear David, 
Re: 12th Floor Lease to Catean 
I will need to reply to Oates before lunch time today.

I need to tell him that Approval was given by the Landlord via you for the substitution of the 6 months Bank Guarantee in lieu of personal guarantees as sought by us back in 90/91 - approx about `91.

I confirm your oral advice that this is the correct position.

Please fax me by Return your written confirmation OR provide me with relevant correspondence.

Many thanks 
Kind regards, 
Ross" (Document 411) 
The reference to Oates is a reference to the solicitor for Melfort. I observe that the facsimile reflected a personal relationship between the two and attributed the time of the "Approval" by Trew of a six month bank guarantee to "approx about `91". Hardly the terminology of someone in whom the recollection of an actionable representation has been cast in stone. Although the response was required of Trew by return, it was not until 28 June 1993 that he responded in writing in the following terms: "Mr R Freeman th Floor 
Garfield Barwick Chambers Martin Place 
SYDNEY NSW 2000 
Dear Sir 
It was never Melfort's intention to retain the initial Personal Guarantees in addition to the six month Bank Guarantee once you were in a position to provide this. As I recall, Melfort's mortgagee was insisting on the Bank
Guarantee.

Mr A Fisher of Coopers & Lybrand is aware of this and it may be helpful to seek further clarification from the letting Agents responsible for your negotiations at the time.

Yours faithfully 
D TREW 
NB: I have no authority in respect of Melfort Pty Ltd (in Liquidation) - since about Mar `91. " (Document 412) 
The terms of that letter I find somewhat enigmatic. To begin with it is not a casual response. It is far more formal in tone and terms than the facsimile of June. However, I think one can extract from that letter an acceptance by
Trew that there was an understanding with the cross-claimants that at some undefined stage a six month bank guarantee could be given in lieu of the guarantee once the "cross-claimants' were in a position to provide this": far from the bank guarantee being subject to the consent of the mortgagee, it was the mortgagee who was "insisting on the Bank Guarantee".

His postscript I think makes it reasonably clear that he was speaking independently and had no authority to bind Melfort. To my mind that adds weight to the inference that Trew treated the letter with some formality. It leaves open the question as to when any discussion concerning the provision of a six month guarantee took place.

I think it is reasonable to infer from the terms of Trew's letter of 28 June that it prompted the letter of Freeman of 30 June 1993 to Gleeson and Richard
Cook (Cook) another employee of Melfort's letting agent. I think it is useful to set out that letter in full, together with the notation in handwriting at the foot of it.
 "Dear Denis & Richard 
RE: LEASE FROM MELFORT P/L TO CATEAN HOLDINGS th Floor, 53 Martin Place, Sydney 
We are currently seeking to put into place a 6 months Bank Guarantee in lieu of the personal guarantees entered into by Mr Manny Paneras and myself.

I wish to confirm with you the assurance of Mr David Trew during our discussions leading up to the signing of the lease, that we would be able to substitute the Bank Guarantee "when the floor is full (of Barristers) and up and running". At that stage of course, Manny and myself were the only two people "on the floor" though we had expressions of interest by a number of
Barristers who did of course join us.

You will recall from the very first meeting attended by a number of Barristers and your good selves, Mr Trew's assurance that a "level playing field will apply throughout the building".

As you know, the 6 months Bank Guarantee in pursuance of Mr Trew's promise was offered to Acacia Holdings regarding the 5th Floor lease and put into effect and signed by me on the 9th Floor. So the consistency is readily apparent.

I have been in recent contact with David Trew and he confirms the above as does Mr Alan Fisher, the former Administrator.

I am writing to you in view of the apparent lack of written correspondence, though I note that Manny wrote to Hookers in 1991 seeking to put the Bank
Guarantee in place at that time. As Manny is often away from Chambers for long periods and is preoccupied with his practise (sic), I am not surprised that this was not followed up. Nor of course, was the request denied.

Basically, we have been awaiting the results of the long promised, by various
Barristers on the floor, drawing up of the necessary paperwork and documentation relating to the Articles and the general running of the Floor.
It seems that we have all been preoccupied with our own practices involving constant running around for our `customers'.

Finally, Chris Stomo has apparently drawn up the required `documentation' and it seems that now is the appropriate time to bring the Bank Guarantee in place, as has occurred on other Floors.

I trust you will agree with the foregoing.

With Kind Regards, 
Yours Sincerely 
Ross Freeman 
DG advised `I recall the discussions - I can't really recall the result of those discussions, but I don't disagree with what you say - it is probably right! " (Documents 413) 
The handwritten note appears to be that of Freeman. The document forms part of
Exhibit B which was a tender of an agreed bundle of documents. Leaving aside documents which were added to the exhibit during the course of the hearing to which objection was taken, Exhibit B consisted of documents which were admitted by consent. I think it is reasonable to infer from the note that a conversation took place between Freeman and Gleeson concerning the contents of the letter. It appears from the note that Gleeson's recollection was not sound. To the extent that he recalled the subject discussions, Gleeson appears to have raised no disagreement with the correctness of the statements in the letter. The inconsistency that I find in this letter in relation to the present case of the cross-claimants is the absence of any reference to an assurance by Trew that a six month bank guarantee had been given in relation to level ten despite the reference to such a guarantee being accepted for the level five lease. While I accept that the cross-claimants were unaware at the time of this letter that no guarantee had been given to support the lease of level ten, that does not explain, in my opinion, their failure to refer to the level ten lease as one which was believed to be supported by a six month bank guarantee. The further inconsistency, I think, is to be found in the statement that there had been no follow up to the 1991 letter of Paneras to the letting agent concerning the bank guarantee, presumably referring to the letter of
Paneras to Ranucci of 3 September 1991. Paneras's evidence, which I do not accept, is that his September letter and one of October 1991 were followed up by him with frequent oral enquiries by Paneras.

A facsimile in similar terms to Freeman's letter of 30 June 1993 was sent by
Freeman to Fisher on 5 July 1993. It contained the following statement: "I am writing concerning recent discussions Mr David Trew has had with you regarding your former duties as Administrator of Melfort Pty Ltd." (Document 415) 
Similar comments are applicable to this facsimile as I have made in relation to the letter of Freeman of 30 June 1993. Fisher's response to that letter by facsimile of 3 August 1993 probably does not advance the position. It identifies Trew's role as a consultant to Melfort's Administrator and one who was primarily responsible for the letting of Martin Place. But as to the confirmation of any assurance being given, the response is circumspect, as appears from the following passage: "We do not specifically recall the arrangements in question but consider that
Mr Trew's comments appear appropriate" 
Freeman's round of correspondence continued with a letter to Melfort's solicitor of 20 July 1993 which was in the following terms: "Dear Mr Oates, 
RE: LEASE FROM MELFORT PTY LTD TO CATEAN HOLDINGS 
Premises: 12th Floor, 53 Martin Place, Sydney 
I apologise for the delay in replying to your recent letter.

I wish to confirm with you the assurance of Mr David Trew during our discussions leading up to the signing of the lease, that we would be able to substitute the Bank Guarantee "when the floor is full (of Barristers) and up and running". At that stage of course, Manny Paneras and myself were the only two people "on the floor", though we had expressions of interest by a number of Barristers who did of course join us.

I have been in recent contact with all concerned and nobody disputes this.

I understand you have seen my recent letter to Denis Gleeson and Richard Cook which sets out the position in greater details.

Mr Gleeson advises me the matter has been referred to Denis Coughlan.

Accordingly, I would like you to be aware, as it appears every one else is, of our wish to put in place the promised 6 months Bank Guarantee.

Yours faithfully 
R FREEMAN" (Document 419) 
The letter is consistent with the cross-claimants' case in its description of the assurance attributed to Trew concerning a bank guarantee and alerted the solicitor to the fact that the other involved parties had been contacted by
Freeman and had not disputed the fact of that assurance. The reference to
Coghlan is a reference to the liquidator. Although self-serving, the letter tends to corroborate the accuracy of Freeman's handwritten note of his conversation with Gleeson concerning the contents of his letter to Gleeson of June 1993. I think this inference is available from the fact that it would have been simple for Melfort's solicitor to check directly with Gleeson the accuracy of the assertion by Freeman that "nobody" disputed his version.
Indeed, one would have expected the solicitor to seek such confirmation in the face of Freeman's assertion. Yet there is no rejection of it in any reply by
Melfort's solicitor to Freeman.

There followed a facsimile from Gleeson to Freeman of 6 August 1993 confirming a telephone conversation of that date that the liquidator had rejected the proposal of a bank guarantee in substitution for the guarantee. This decision was formally conveyed to Freeman by the letter of Melfort's solicitor of 31
August 1993.

Freeman was not content with this rejection and on 21 September 1993 he wrote to the liquidator in the following terms: "WITHOUT PREJUDICE 
Dear Mr Coghlan, 
RE: LEASE BY MELFORT PTY LTD (IN LIQUIDATION) TO 
CATEAN HOLDINGS 
I am writing to you personally regarding the above and particularly our recent request for the promised bank guarantee to be effected.

I am advised that you have read my letter of 30th June 1993 to Denis Gleeson and Richard Cook of the Commercial Leasing Department of L. J. Hooker the
Managing Agents for our building.

In that letter I referred inter alia, to the verbal assurances of the owners representative Mr Trew who had full and ostensible authority that "when the floor is full (of Barristers) and up and running we'll substitute a 6 month
Bank Guarantee in lieu of the personal guarantees" of Mr Paneras and myself.

In the last couple of months I have spoken to Mr Gleeson, Mr Trew and the
Administrator at the time Mr Alan Fisher. You should be aware not one of these very relevant people disputes the foregoing.

I also wish to advise you that we have become aware in the last few days that there are no personal or bank guarantees in place on the 10th or 11th floor. Numerous Barristers recall Mr Trew's assurance at the very outset of discussions that a "level playing field" would apply to the letting of all floors in the building.
 
I am advised that you will merely refer this letter to Mr Robert Edge who will in turn reject our request. However, I respectfully request you to seriously reconsider this matter.

Now that we are aware of the lack of guarantees on the 10th and 11th floors we have no alternative to litigation (??) should you deny our request.

Our first application to the court would be for the removal of the personal guarantees and no bank guarantees and in the alternative a 6 month bank guarantee.

Thus, should we succeed on the first leg of the application, there would be no guarantee at all and the landlord would be in an inferior position to its agreeing to implement the promised bank guarantee as is now open to it. We do not seek any unfair advantage, only what was promised to us, and we can't sit around delaying any longer.

You would be aware of the Federal [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), embodied in the N.S.W. [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) that provides in [S.42(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) "A person shall not, in trade or commerce, engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive". Section 52A of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s43.html) of the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) deals with unconscionable conduct. Given that your own people do dispute our claims (our people?) I respectfully submit that a court will have no reluctance in agreeing to the orders.

In the circumstances and to avoid litigation will you please reconsider your decision.

I attach a signed letter from the administrator verifying the authority of Mr
Trew.

Yours sincerely, 
ROSS FREEMAN" (Document 431) (Bold italic emphasis added).

I think it is a crucial factor in considering the case of the cross-claimants that Freeman made no reference in that letter to an allegation that the cross- claimants had been misled or deceived into giving the guarantee by Trew's false representation that a six month bank guarantee had been given by Murray to support the level ten lease. The paragraph emphasised makes no reference to such a false representation by Trew.

The letter does repeat the assertion that Trew's alleged assurance that a bank guarantee could be substituted for the guarantee had not been disputed by
Gleeson, Trew or Fisher. Given the handwritten note "our people?" and the handwritten underlining of the words "your own people" in relation to the statement "Given that your own people do not dispute our claims", it can be inferred that the liquidator's attention had been drawn to that allegation by
Freeman. In those circumstances, the liquidator may be treated as having checked the accuracy of that assertion. The liquidator dealt with this letter in two stages. (1) By letter of 24 September 1993, he made the bare statement that he was "not prepared to grant (the) request for substitution of a bank guarantee to replace the personal guarantees provided by" the cross-claimants.
In that letter he invited the cross-claimants to travel to Melbourne to further discuss the matter. (2) Some two weeks later, by letter of 11 October to Freeman, the liquidator rejected the allegations of misleading conduct in the following terms: "I have duly considered the matters raised in your letter of 21 September .

On the information before me I do not consider that there was misleading, deceptive or unconscionable conduct in this matter. Neither do I consider that you were induced into entering into the lease on the basis of any misrepresentation" (Document 435.1) 
I think it may be said of that letter that it did not join issue with the fact that an assurance had been given by Trew but challenged the proposition that any such conduct amounted to proscribed conduct or induced the cross-claimants to enter into the lease containing the guarantee.

I draw the inference from this stance of the liquidator that, "on the information before" him, he was not in a position to deny that Trew had given the cross-claimants an assurance that a bank guarantee could be substituted for their personal guarantees. Nevertheless, he was not prepared to accede to the cross-claimants' request for such a substitution. Whether that refusal was the result of Catean's default under the lease I am unable to say. There was no direct evidence on this point, although the letter of Melfort's solicitor to the lessee of level five dated 20 June 1991, quoted above, would suggest that Catean's default under the lease played a part in the liquidator's refusal. If that was his attitude, it would be difficult to regard it as unreasonable. By the end of 1993 overdue licence fees on level twelve had grown to approximately $100,000.

There is a letter from Gleeson and Cook to the liquidator of 14 October 1993.
It refers to a letter of the liquidator of 24 September 1993. I do not think it refers to the liquidator's facsimile to Freeman. Rather, I think that
Gleeson and Cook's letter to the liquidator of 14 October 1993 is in response to a request by the liquidator to them for information concerning Freeman's allegations set out in his letter of 21 September 1993. The letter of Gleeson and Cook to the liquidator was in the following terms, omitting formal parts: "We refer to your facsimile of 24 September 1993 concerning the above subject.

As mentioned, Mr Richard Cook and I represented Hooker at a meeting convened by David Trew with barristers from various chambers within 53 Martin Place.

The meeting was held one evening at the Sheraton Wentworth Hotel and was arranged to advise the barrister (sic) of the owners intention in respect of the letting of the vacant floors and renegotiation of existing leases.

In part of Mr Trews opening statement he stated that the dealings would be on the basis of a level playing field." (Document 436) 
Given the terms of Freeman's letter of 21 September, the significance of this letter of Gleeson and Richard Cook to the liquidator lies in what is left unsaid.

However, I think it worth repeating what was asserted by Freeman in his letter to the liquidator of 21 September 1993 concerning the absence of the provision of a guarantee in respect of the level ten lease, namely: "I also wish to advise you that we have become aware in the last few days that there are no personal or bank guarantees in place on the 10th or 11th floor.
Numerous Barristers recall Mr Trew's assurance at the very outset of discussions that a "level playing field" would apply to the letting of all floors in the building." 
If ever an allegation was to be raised by the cross-claimants that Trew had falsely asserted to them that Murray had given a bank guarantee in respect of the level ten lease, surely, it should have been raised in that paragraph. I regard that failure as virtually fatal to that part of the cross-claimants' case which relies upon a representation that Murray had "signed a lease containing a six month bank guarantee".

Turning then to the evidence of the Murray representations, Paneras's evidence in his statement of 5 February 1996 (Exhibit A), referring to the period shortly after the Sheraton representations, was as follows:
Over the ensuing few weeks I met David Trew at least 2 or 3 times per week either in Trew's office at the Sheraton-Wentworth or in Freeman's Chambers on Garfield Barwick. He repeated on numerous occasions that "it will be a level playing field for everyone". During these meetings, I cannot precisely say which one, he first mentioned "You and Ross will have to sign personal guarantees". I said "gee David, I'm not happy about that, I'll have to discuss it with Ross Freeman." He said "fine". During a further meeting, during the third week, held in Ross Freeman's Chambers on 9 Garfield Barwick, in late
June 1990 attended by Freeman, Trew, Gleeson and me- 
Trew- "Kevin Murray has taken the 10th Floor" 
Paneras- "Has he signed a lease? 
Trew- "Yes" 
Paneras- "Are there any guarantees?" 
Trew- "Yes; there is a 6 month bank guarantee" 
Paneras- "David, how come you're asking Ross and me to sign unlimited personal guarantees when Kevin Murray's Floor only has to provide a bank guarantee limited to six months?" 
Trew- "Kevin Murray's Floor is full and up and running. When your Floor is full and up and running, you can convert your personal guarantees, should you take the 12th Floor, to a bank guarantee limited to six months." 
Paneras- "David, are you sure that you (sic) we'll be able to convert to the six month bank guarantee?" 
Trew- "Yes, whatever is in place fo (sic) Kevin Murray's Floor will be the same for your Floor. But you better hurry because he is interested in the 12th
Floor as well." (Par 3) 
At a time not precisely identified by Paneras, but probably in the latter part of June, he further stated in his evidence in chief that in a conversation with Trew at the Sheraton-Wentworth Hotel the latter said the following: " "You'll have the same deal as Kevin Murray" and "Make up your mind because
Kevin Murray is interested in the 12th Floor as well as the 10th Floor" and "Don't worry about the personal guarantees from you and Ross, as soon as your
Floor is full and up and running, you can convert the personal guarantees to a six month bank guarantee which is the same as Kevin Murray's Floor" " (Par 6) 
I do not accept Paneras's evidence that Trew had represented to him that
Murray had signed a lease for level ten with a six month bank guarantee. It may have been said, but in the absence of any record of such a representation, and particularly, in the absence of any statement to that effect on occasions when it should have been recorded, I am not satisfied on the probabilities that such a representation was made.

The evidence of Freeman is not significantly different. In his statement of 5
February 1996 (Exhibit C), he gave evidence of the Murray representations which included the following: "6. I recall Trew dropping in to visit me in my Chambers at 9 Garfield Barwick
Chambers probably on average once or twice a week during June and early July
Sometimes Trew was alone, at other time he was with Gleeson or Manny or with both of them. Occasionally, Manny and I met Trew during that period at the Sheraton-Wentworth Hotel. During these meetings a number of Trew's regular assurances, often repeated, stand out in my mind as important for me. These included: "level playing field"; "the same deal for everyone right through the building"; "you're getting exactly the same deal as Kevin Murray, but you better hurry, he's interested in the 12th Floor as well"; "Kevin Murray's signed a bank guarantee for six months, but his Floor is up and running; you'll have to sign a personal guarantee but when your Floor is full and up and running you can convert your personal guarantees to a six month bank guarantee, you'll have no problem with that". I said privately to Manny "I don't like the sound of personal guarantees" and Manny relied "Well, it's the same deal for everyone." " (Par 6) 
He further stated as follows: "7. I recall one occasion in June 1990 when Manny and I were talking together with another barrister, Bob Frodsham, in my Room on 9 Garfield Barwick
Chambers when Trew made an unexpected visit, as he occasionally did when he was in the building. Manny and I introduced Frodsham to Trew. During that visit, Manny asked Trew "David, are you sure this is the same deal Kevin
Murray is getting?" and Trew said "Yes it's exactly the same." " (Par 7) 
In his statement (Exhibit H), Clarence Robert Frodsham gave evidence of an occasion in the presence of the cross-claimants and Trew when the following conversation took place: ".... I can recall Mr Paneras saying to Mr Trew words to the effect "Are you sure this is the same deal Kevin Murray is getting?" and Mr Trew replied "Yes, exactly the same." (Par 3, Exhibit H) 
His cross-examination reinforced this evidence.

However, Trew's statement could not have been taken literally by the cross- claimants. The leases under discussion for level ten and level twelve respectively, on their understanding, contained different guarantee provisions.

As with the evidence of Paneras, I am unable to accept Freeman's evidence that it had been represented to him by Trew that Murray had "signed a bank guarantee for six months." 
The evidence adduced by Melfort concerning the Murray representations is equivocal.

The statement of Trew's evidence in chief does not quibble with the fact that at the end of May 1990 he called a meeting of persons interested in a lease of one or other of the floors in 53 Martin Place at which the Sheraton representations were made. His version of subsequent conversations with the cross-claimants differs from their evidence as appears from the following extract from his statement: "31. On at least one occasion after 28 May 1990 and prior to 16 July 1990
I recall having a conversation with Mr Freeman and/or Mr Paneras during which an exchange took place in words to the following effect: 
Mr Freeman/ 
Mr Paneras: "The Lease has a requirement for a personal guarantee to be given by us.

Mr Trew: "From Melfort's point of view, we're not requiring the guarantees. However, Chase wants them before they will consent to the lease." 
Mr Freeman/ 
Mr Paneras: "We'd prefer that the floor members provide a guarantee when it's full." 
Mr Trew: "As I have said, from Melfort's point of view it probably doesn't matter who guarantees the lease. It will be up to Chase to decide what form the guarantees are. If the floor gets up and running Melfort would support any application for a change of guarantors but Chase would have to make that decision." 
At the time of making the statement that : "Melfort would support any application ..." my state of mind was that barristers were considered reputable tenants and I did not expect they would be unable to pay rental as and when it fell due. " (Par 31, Exhibit 6) 
Trew accepted that he may have stated that "Kevin Murray's being offered the same terms as level twelve". He confirmed that he had on more than one occasion stated that there would be a level playing field with no special deals involved in the leasing of the various levels in 53 Martin Place. He recalled that he "made it very clear that for Melfort to obtain the consent of their mortgagee they were requiring guarantees to be put in place" (T183.29).
His cross-examination as to any conversation concerning a six month bank guarantee was as follows: "Q. I am suggesting that you were asked the question by Mr Paneras, "Why is it that Mr Murray's floor is giving a six month bank guarantee", when his floor was being asked to give an unlimited personal guarantee? 
A. I do not recall that taking place.

Q. What I suggest to you is that you answered, "Well, the difference is this:
Kevin Murray's floor is up and running and full and your floor, you are still in effect collecting people for and when your floor is full and up and running, you can convert to a six month bank guarantee"? 
A. I remember a conversation, not particularly at the meeting you are referring to, whereby there was some concern shown regarding personal guarantees and I said from Melfort's point of view that Melfort would support any change to the guarantees and, in fact, I believe I don't believe it was a six month bank guarantee that was discussed. I believe, in fact, it was what I term a "floor guarantee", whereby each member on the floor would give their guarantee and I also have said that whilst Melfort would support this, it would be the decision is up to Chase. " (T184.36 - .57) 
Q. You agree with me that your understanding of Melfort's intention at the time was that it would be content to change to a six month bank guarantee once the floor was in a position to provide that? 
A. I don't think - I must say this, I don't think Melfort would have any objection with any guarantee. Melfort was basically not interested in any guarantees, it was Chase, the bank who would not consent to the leases without a guarantee and I am very uncertain as to when the term "six month bank guarantee" came into play.

Q. Do you agree with this statement: That it was never Melfort's intention to retain the initial personal guarantees in addition to a six month bank guarantee, once the floor was in a position to provide a six month bank guarantee? 
A. Sir, that letter was written as a result of -- 
Q. Would you answer my question? I am not asking you about the letter at the moment.

A. Would you repeat the question? 
Q. My question is this statement true: It was never Melfort's intention to retain the personal guarantees in addition to the six month bank guarantees once the floor was in a position to provide a six month bank guarantee? 
A. What is the question, sir? 
Q. Is that true? 
A. I believe that is true, but the one thing I will say about that is I question whether it should be six month bank guarantee or floor guarantee, in other words I couldn't for the life of me see that Melfort would retain the initial original guarantees as well as a floor guarantee, I would have thought that it would be one or the other.

Q. You wrote a letter to Mr Freeman in 1993, didn't you, saying what I have just put to you? 
A. I did. " (T185.39 - 186.19) 
The letter last referred to in that quotation is a letter of 28 June 1993 from
Trew to Freeman, the contents of which are examined earlier in these reasons.

In re-examination he gave the following evidence: "Q. Why did you use the words, "six month bank guarantee" in that letter? 
A. This letter was written in response - I mean, this is 1993. I'm at home tending my garden or whatever and I received this fax here -- 
Q. What fax is that? 
A. It's a - it's a fax from Mr Freeman.

Q. What page? 
A. It is page 411 and this was written in response to - to that fax.

Q. Why did you use the choice of words as you have in that letter of "six month bank guarantee"? 
A. Well, sir, I think that really should refer to floor guarantee but I would say that I am prompted by the use of the term in this fax here. It refers to a six month bank guarantee.

Q. And you say, do you, that your reference to "six month bank guarantee" should have read "floor guarantee"? 
A. I believe so, sir. " (T193.5 - .27) 
I find that explanation less than convincing. Although the terms of Trew's letter of 28 June 1993 are unclear, I do not think his choice of language can be explained by any influence of the terminology adopted by Freeman in his facsimile which was sent on 9 June 1993.

On 21 September 1995 Gleeson made a statutory declaration in conference with counsel for the cross-claimants.

That declaration is set out in full below, omitting formal parts: "1. I am employed by Knight Frank Hooker Commercial Leasing Department and was so employed in June and July 1990.
I was formerly employed by L. J. Hooker Commercial Leasing Department and particularly in June and July 1990.
I was present in about May 1990 at a meeting at the Wentworth Hotel when
Mr. David Trew advised some prospective tenants `that there will be a level playing field applying to all tenants.' Mr. Paneras and Mr. Freeman were present at that meeting.
In my presence the above words were repeated by Mr. Trew to Mr. Paneras and Mr. Freeman in Mr. Freeman's Chambers on 9th Floor, 53 Martin Place, prior to the signing of the lease.
I was also present when Mr. David Trew advised Mr. Paneras and Mr.
Freeman, prior to their signing the Lease for the 12th Floor, 53 Martin Place,
Sydney, on behalf of Catean Holdings `that once the Floor is full and up and running you can change the personal guarantees to a 6 months Bank Guarantee.' "
 (Exhibit J) 
Clearly there is no room for conjecture as to the meaning or effect of that statement. So far as it goes it supports the cross-claimants' case. A glaring omission from the declaration is any reference to the cross-claimants having been informed that Murray had given a six month bank guarantee in respect of the level ten lease. As stated earlier in these reasons, I am not satisfied that the cross-claimants had been so informed by Trew.

Gleeson sought to qualify the contents of this declaration on the basis that it was a document prepared for him prior to the conference with counsel for the cross-claimants and that it was presented to him for his signing at the conference: the inference being that he had not fully considered its contents.
However, this explanation is difficult to reconcile with the solemnity of making a statutory declaration. In re-examination he gave the following evidence of the circumstances in which the declaration was made: "WHITE: Q. Mr Gleeson, what were the circumstances in which exhibit 6, the statutory declaration, was signed by you? 
A. I was requested to attend Mr Freeman's chambers where this paperwork was spread out on a table in the conference room. I was asked to have a quick look at it, to sign it, and then I left. I wasn't given a copy of it.

Q. Had it already been prepared for your signature? 
A. Yes.

Q. Had you had any discussions with anybody previously about the contents of the document? 
A. I had some brief discussion with Mr Freeman about it.

Q. Did those discussions relate to what Mr Trew had said on prior occasions? 
A. Yes.

Q. Were you given a copy to take away with you? 
A. No.

Q. You have been asked to read paragraph 5 by Mr Bennett. Was that the totality of what Mr Trew said on the occasion at which you were present when he spoke with Mr Paneras and Mr Freeman? 
A. No.

Q. What else did he say in addition to the words quoted in paragraph 5? 
A. That it would need the approval of Chase.

Q. When you signed the statutory declaration, did you spend any time reading it carefully or in detail? 
A. No, I did not." (T174.44 - 175.19) 
Gleeson was confronted with the statutory declaration in cross-examination as follows: "Q. ... What I suggest to you is that you were present on an occasion when Mr
Trew said to Mr Paneras and Mr Freeman before they signed their lease for the twelfth floor words to this effect: Once the floor is full and up and running, you can change the personal guarantee to a six month bank guarantee. What do you say to that? 
A. The same as I said before lunch. That's not my recollection.

Q. I suggest to you also that the context of Mr Trew saying that was a statement to the effect: Why are we giving a personal guarantee when Mr
Murray's floor is giving a six month bank guarantee, and that the answer was:
Their floor is full and up and running; yours isn't, and therefore you can convert when you are. Do you have any recollection of that? 
A. Not exactly, no.

Q. Is it possible that words to the effect of what I have just put to you were said by Mr Trew in your presence? 
A. It's possible.

Q. In September last year you swore a statutory declaration, did you not? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Would you have a look at this document. Is that the statutory declaration you swore? 
A. Yes.

Q. That was true, wasn't it? 
A. I can't be sure now, I'm sorry.

Q. Well, when you made it weren't you satisfied that you were swearing to the truth? 
A. I am sure that the conversation took place, but I'm not sure it was prior to the signing of the lease for the twelfth floor.

Q. Let me put it to you in two stages, then. You accept that you are satisfied that the conversation in paragraph 5 took place, although you are not certain about the time or the date? 
A. That's correct.

STATUTORY DECLARATION OF MR GLEESON DATED 21 SEPTEMBER 1995 TENDERED. OBJECTED
TO ON THE GROUNDS OF RELEVANCE AND THAT THE DOCUMENT HAD NOT BEEN DISCOVERED
ON ANY PRIOR OCCASION.

EXHIBIT #J STATUTORY DECLARATION OF MR GLEESON ADMITTED SUBJECT TO THE
FOLLOWING RULING ON OBJECTIONS.

HIS HONOUR: The statutory declaration of Dennis Michael Gleeson made 21 September 1995 will be exhibit J. It is not in dispute that the declaration should have been discovered and was not, although it was a document, had it been discovered, in respect of which privilege may have been claimed. In the circumstances I do not propose to exclude the declaration, however, counsel for the cross-defendants in my view is entitled to an adjournment at the conclusion of the cross-examination of Mr Gleeson if he so seeks it to take instructions in relation to the declaration." (T167.26 - 169.29) 
The evidence of Gleeson in relation to the declaration is unsatisfactory. In cross-examination, the only question mark he raised over the contents of the declaration was whether the statements referred to in par 5 were made prior to the signing of the lease. In re-examination, he added a further rider that the statement in par 5 was incomplete. In my opinion, Gleeson's explanation that the declaration was prepared prior to his conference with counsel and that he had insufficient time to consider it before making the declaration does not warrant a rejection of the accuracy of its contents. The situation was a formal occasion in which the declaration was made; a conference with counsel in preparation for litigation, in which Gleeson's interests were not those of the cross-claimants. Moreover, it is a statement given greater solemnity by the form it took as a statutory declaration made before a justice of the peace. I do not think it would be reasonable to find that in some way he was overborne or, due to haste, that the declaration was incomplete. In fact, when given the opportunity in cross-examination of correcting any inaccuracy he confirmed that the conversation set out in par 5 of the statutory declaration took place. He was not able to confirm that it took place prior to the signing of the lease.

Now, in my view, that statement, with or without the qualifications that were made upon it by Gleeson in his evidence, is difficult to reconcile with the evidence of Trew. Moreover, it is extremely difficult to escape the inference from Trew's letter of 28 June 1993 to Freeman that the question of a six month bank guarantee was a topic alive and well at the time of the granting of the lease. I think of greater significance is the evidence of Gleeson in cross- examination as follows: 
Q. Do you recall a meeting in Ross Freeman's chambers in late June attended by yourself, Mr Trew, Mr Freeman, and Mr Paneras? 
A. I don't specifically recall it, no.

Q. It is possible? 
A. Yes.

Q. I suggest to you at that meeting Mr Trew said: "Kevin Murray has taken the tenth floor", is that possible? 
A. I don't recall the meeting, so I am sorry, I can't comment.

Q. Do you recall any occasion around that time when Mr Trew said to Mr Freeman and Mr Paneras in your presence: "Kevin Murray has taken the tenth floor"? 
A. Not those exact words, no.

Q. And Mr Paneras asking if he had signed the lease, then told by Mr Trew, "yes"? 
A. No, I don't recall it.

Q. As between you and Mr Trew was one of you in the position of superior to the other? 
A. Yes, Mr Trew was superior to me.

Q. If he had said, yes, would you have contradicted him? 
A. I would not have known.

Q. I suggest to you that Mr Paneras asked them (sic) if there were any guarantees. He said there was a six month bank guarantee? 
A. Again, I don't recall it, I am sorry.

Q. It is possible? 
A. It is possible, yes.

Q. And that Mr Paneras said words to this effect: "Look, how come we are being asked to give an unlimited personal guarantee when Kevin Murray's floor has only to supply a six month bank guarantee?", do you recall a question like that? 
A. I do.

Q. When was that? 
A. I can't recall.

Q. Around this time? 
A. It may have been later, I am no (sic) sure.

Q. Mr Trew's answer: "Look, Kevin Murray's floor is full and up and running.
When your floor is up and running you can convert your guarantee when you take the 12th floor. It has a six month guarantee"? 
A. I don't recall that, I am sorry.

Q. I should ask that question again. I suggest that what Mr Trew said was: "Kevin Murray's floor is full and up and running. Yours is not. When yours is you can convert your guarantee", do you recall anything like that being said? 
A. I recall a conversation about transferring the guarantee to other parties as they come onto the floor.

Q. But do you recall a conversation in which Mr Trew advised Mr Paneras and
Mr Freeman before they signed the 12th floor lease that once they were full and up and running you can change the personal guarantee to a six month bank guarantee? 
A. I recall that conversation. Whether it was before or after the lease was signed I can't confirm.
 
Q. But do you recall that conversation? 
A. Yes.

Q. You do recall Mr Trew saying those words? 
A. He said something to the effect that Melfort would support that. However, it was up to Chase, because they were the ones asking for the guarantees.

Q. No, what I am suggesting to you is that nothing was said about Chase, that
Mr Trew simply said this before the signing of the lease: "Once the floor is full and up and running you can change the personal guarantees to a six month bank guarantee"? 
A. That's incorrect. " (T164.56 - 167.22) (emphasis added) (the word "their" at T165.26 should read "them") 
I am inclined to treat with a grain of salt Gleeson's qualification that the statement as to the substitution of a six month bank guarantee for a personal guarantee was subject to the qualification that such a substitution had to be approved by the mortgagee. Trew's letter to Freeman, if it does nothing else, makes it clear that a six month bank guarantee was what the mortgagee required, rather than something that depended upon the consent of the mortgagee. In the mind of Trew it could hardly have been seen as an obstacle to a six month bank guarantee being given in support of the lease. In those circumstances, it is difficult to accept that there was interposed the proposition that the substitution of a six month bank guarantee was subject to the consent of the mortgagee. If anything was said about the mortgagee it would be more likely to be in the vein that such a guarantee was precisely what the mortgagee would require. I think it is quite significant that in the statutory declaration of Gleeson and in Trew's letter of 28 June 1993 there is no suggestion that the substitution of a six month bank guarantee had any question mark over it in the form of requiring the consent of the mortgagee.

I have little doubt that Trew was the source of information to the cross- claimants that Murray was required to sign a six month bank guarantee.

I accept the evidence of Paneras that Murray declined to reveal to him details of terms of the proposed level ten lease. I think this indicates the likely source of information concerning the guarantee in respect of the level ten lease was Melfort, probably in the person of Trew. In this context, Trew conceded that he may have said to the cross-claimants that "Kevin Murray is now looking at the 10th floor and he's also been asked for a guarantee" (par (a), Exhibit 6). Again the statement of his evidence in chief contains the following: "After it became known to me about the need for the 12th Floor to provide guarantees, I recall saying to Mr Freeman and possibly Mr Paneras and/or Mr
Daley: "Even Kevin Murray's been asked to sign a guarantee" " (par 58(e)) 
I am satisfied that prior to the granting of the lease: 
The cross-claimants had been assured that the leasing policy of Melfort was such that there would be no special deals and each floor would be treated so that no one lessee would be advantaged over another. This did not involve the creation of identical leases for the reasons I have given.

In response to enquiries of Trew by the cross-claimants, they were informed by Trew that Murray was required to support the level ten lease by a six month bank guarantee. I am not satisfied that the cross-claimants were informed by Trew that Murray had given a six month bank guarantee nor that
Trew had represented to them that the level ten lease had been signed.

The different treatment of the proposed lessees of level twelve and level ten respectively was reconciled with the Sheraton representations by Trew on the basis that the tenth floor would be fully occupied from the commencement of the level ten lease whereas level twelve would not: when level twelve was fully occupied Melfort would accept a similar guarantee in respect of the lease as was required of Murray.

The evidence of the level five representations, I think, provided some corroboration of these findings, particularly in the evidence of Daley who was accepted by Melfort as a witness of truth, although challenging the reliability of his recollection.

Paneras places the time of the meeting at which the level five representations were made as occurring after the signing of the lease. So the representation could not be said to have induced the giving of the guarantee. His evidence in chief was as follows:
Later in July or in August 1990 I was present in Freeman's 9 Garfield
Barwick Chambers at a meeting with Freeman, Gleeson and Mark Daley, a barrister from 9 Garfield Barwick Chambers. I do not recall if Trew was present or not. I was there to witness an agreement for a proposed lease with respect to 5 Garfield Barwick Chambers. The parties to that Agreement were
Melfort Pty Limited as lessor. Ross Freeman and Mark Daley were the proposed lessee and personal guarantors. At that meeting, and before the agreement was signed and witnessed, Daley asked, "Is it a level playing field?" and Gleeson said "Yes". Daley asked "Will the lease be the same as Murray's on Floor 10?" and Gleeson said "Yes, no special deals." Daley asked "Is Murray being required to sign a guarantee?" and Gleeson "Yes, a bank guarantee". Daley asked "Can the personal guarantee become a bank guarantee limited to six months?" and Gleeson said "No difficulty at all down the track." " (Par 8) 
As explained later in these reasons, I am reasonably satisfied that Trew was not present at that meeting. The other observation I would make of this evidence is that it is expressed in terms suggestive of an awareness by those present that Murray was yet to sign a guarantee.

Freeman's evidence in chief of the level five representations was as follows: "8. In July 1990 Manny and I executed the lease which is the subject of these proceedings concerning the 12th Floor. At about that time, another barrister
Mark Daley and I were also negotiating with Trew concerning the 5th Floor of the same building. In respect of the 5th Floor a meeting was held in my chambers of 9 Garfield Barwick attended by Gleeson, Trew, Paneras, Daly and me. The purpose of the meeting was to sign an agreement for a lease for the th Floor. At the meeting, and prior to actually signing the lease, Mark Daley specifically asked Trew and Gleeson "Is the [5th Floor] lease the same as
Kevin Murray's [10th Floor] lease?" and Gleeson said "Yes". Daley also asked "Is there a level playing field?" and Gleeson or Trew said "Yes". Daley also asked "Is Murray signing a guarantee" and Gleeson said "Yes". Pages 5-6 of the agreement for lease, at clause 14 thereof, incorporated the personal guarantee. Daley then dictated the five numbered points which I transcribed in my handwriting at page 6 of the agreement for lease for the 5th floor." (Par 8) 
As in the case of Paneras's evidence, this passage suggests an awareness of those present that Murray was yet to sign a guarantee.

At this meeting notes were made by Freeman on the agreement for lease at the request of Daley who was concerned about being rushed into the signing of the agreement for lease. It was made in the presence of Gleeson, and contained the following term: "1. This Agreement has been signed in haste on condition the form annexed is in accordance with the general terms & conditions as signed by Levels 1, , 10 & 12." (Emphasis added) 
Somewhat at variance with the discussion which preceded the making of this note, it contains a statement that the lease of level ten had been "signed".
The note was dictated in the presence of Gleeson and although he might have been expected to correct that statement, he did not. However, it is clear from
Daley's evidence, which is referred to below and which I accept, that the discussion at the meeting proceeded on the assumption that Murray had yet to sign a lease for level ten. Another feature of the note is that the agreement for lease under consideration related to a standard form lease which contained an unlimited personal guarantee. Given the evidence of the cross-claimants of the earlier representations by Trew, the note could not have meant to them that an unlimited personal guarantee was contained in the level ten lease.

Both Trew and Gleeson deny that Trew was present at that meeting and I accept that evidence. Gleeson, I thought, evinced a clear recollection of the time of the meeting and of his activities following it in bringing the signed agreement for lease to Trew at a nearby hotel. In cross-examination Daley accepted that Trew may not have been present. In my opinion, not a great deal turns on the question of Trew's presence there.

Gleeson's evidence of the level five representations included the following: "23. On my arrival at the chambers, I was involved in a conversation with Mr
Freeman and Mr Daley, during which an exchange took place in words to the following effect: 
Mr Daley: "Has Kevin Murray signed his lease yet?" 
Mr Gleeson: "Not that I'm aware of." 
Mr Daley: "Well I'm not a commercial lawyer and I don't generally know what goes in a commercial lease. If Murray's solicitors are happy with his lease then I'll be happy with this one. I can't afford my own solicitor so I'd like to know what's going in his." 
Mr Gleeson: "My understanding is that Mr Murray's lease is based on the standard lease for the building. Negotiations are still ongoing and I can't add much more than that." 
Mr Freeman: "Mark, let's just get it signed." 
That meeting lasted for approximately one hour and although other matters were discussed in a general context, I do not recall any discussion occurring in respect of guarantee. Shortly prior to the conclusion of that meeting, both Mr
Freeman and Mr Daley executed the Agreement and I witnessed it. " (Par 23, Exhibit 4) 
In cross-examination Freeman rejected that version and repeated the substance of his evidence in his statement in chief (see for example T90.10, 91.15, .50, 92.55 and 93.10).

The evidence of Paneras in cross-examination was in line with the evidence of his statement in chief. It included the following: "Q. Do you recall that at the time, or at the commencement of the meeting, Mr
Daley was unsure about signing it. What are you looking at? 
A. I'm looking at the document.

Q. Without looking at the document? 
A. It appears it was signed in haste, I remember that.

Q. Thank you for that. But do you recall that he was unsure about signing the agreement at the time of the meeting? 
A. Yes, I agree with that.

Q. He said something along the lines, didn't he, that he wasn't sure what went into a commercial lease? 
A. Yes, I agree with that.

Q. He asked Mr Gleeson whether Kevin Murray has signed his lease yet, do you remember that? 
A. I can't remember those words, but I'm sure he asked is it the same as Kevin
Murray's lease on 10, that's the words that I recall. I can't remember if he said "Has he signed?" 
Q. Do you remember Mr Gleeson saying, "Not that I'm aware of"? 
A. No, Mr Gleeson didn't say that at all.

Q. Are you sure he didn't say that? 
A. Positive.

Q. Because he hadn't signed the lease then, had he? 
A. I didn't know that.

Q. What I'm saying to you is that you know now that Mr Murray hadn't signed the lease for level 10 at the time of this meeting? 
A. That's right.

Q. You don't recall Mr Gleeson saying, "Not that I'm aware of". In answer to a question, "Has Mr Murray signed his lease yet?" 
A. Mr Gleeson didn't give that answer., 
Q. Mr Daly said, didn't he, "I'm not a commercial lawyer and I don't generally know what goes into a commercial lease, if Mr Murray's solicitors are happy with his lease then I'll be happy with this one. I can't afford my own solicitor so I would like to know what's going into his."? 
A. I can't recall that.

Q. But he may well have said that? 
A. I don't agree with that.

Q. You don't agree? 
A. No.

Q. You have a clear recollection, do you, that he said something different? 
A. Mark Daly said "Is it a level playing field?", Dennis Gleeson said, "Yes".
Then he said. "Is this the same lease as Kevin Murray's on level 10?" Or words to that effect, I can't remember the exact words. And Dennis Gleeson said, "That's right" or words to that effect, he agreed with it.

Q. Mr Gleeson, I suggest to you, in answer to Mr Daly's query said, "My understanding is that Mr Murray's lease is based on the standard lease of the building, negotiations are still on-going and I can't add much more than that?" 
A. I don't agree with that.

Q. And Mr Freeman said, "Mark, let's just get it signed."? 
A. Mr Freeman didn't say that at all." (T35.24 - 36.37) 
To the extent that this evidence suggests that Gleeson stated that Murray had signed a lease for level ten, I do not accept it. On this point the evidence of Daley, which I do accept, is clear as noted later in these reasons.

The cross-examination of Gleeson on that evidence did not draw any significant concessions. He agreed that he had told Daley "on a number of occasions that was just about to sign" (T169.48). In relation to the level five meeting, his evidence was as follows: (The cross-examination commenced with the subject matter of note 1 on the agreement for lease to which I have earlier referred.) "Q. "With the general terms and conditions as signed by levels 1, 9, 10 and ", do you see those words? 
A. I do.

Q. That's a summary of what you had said at that meeting, isn't it? 
A. No, I don't believe it is.

Q. You saw those words being written at the time? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you say, "that's not correct", or words to that effect? 
A. No.

Q. Did you think at the time that those words were incorrect? 
A. No.

Q. It was your view at the time, was it, that the lease was in accordance with the general terms and conditions as signed by levels 1,9,10 and 12? 
A. The general terms, yes.

Q. And do you recall at that meeting Mr Daley saying to you words to this effect: "Is the fifth floor the same as Kevin Murray's lease?"? 
A. I don't recall him saying that, no.

Q. It is possible he said that? 
A. It is possible, but I don't recall it.

Q. You would have said, "yes", would you not? 
A. I would have said that it is the same standard lease that's been given to all parties in the building.

Q. Do you recall him asking if there was a level playing field - using the phrase used at this Sheraton meeting? 
A. I don't use it. It was not a phrase communicated to me.

Q. Because it was used in your new presence at that meeting by Mr Trew? 
A. Correct.

Q. Do you recall Mr Daley putting that phrase to you: "Is there a level playing field?'? 
A. No, I don't recall that.

Q. It is possible again? 
A. Again, yes.

Q. Mr Daley asked you, I suggest to you: "Is Murray signing a guarantee?", or words to that effect? 
A. I don't recall him saying that.

Q. But it is possible? 
A. It is possible, yes.

Q. You would have said that if that is so? 
A. I would have said he has been asked to sign a guarantee. Possibly, I would not know if he signed it.

Q. I suggest to you that you told them that a lease had been signed by Kevin
Murray and that it had a guarantee? 
A. That's incorrect. " (T163.48 - 164.54) 
Daley's evidence of the level five representations in his statement (Exhibit
D) was as follows: "6. I remember Trew said words in or to the effect: the future of the building at 53 Martin Place is to have it all barristers, and Melfort or Farrow (he used the terms interchangeably) had a report dealing with that; that Melfort or Farrow wanted to put everyone onto long leases, fifteen years with a fifteen year option, to give barristers security of tenure and chambers value; that it was in Melfort and Farrow's interests to keep everyone happy; that
Melfort and Farrow were spending lots of money to turn the building into a first class building for barristers chambers; that Melfort and Farrow "do not want to play one floor of barristers off against another", and "there will be no special; there will be a level playing field; what one floor gets the other floors will get". I recall that some barristers at the meeting voiced concern about different deals for different floors, and Trew reiterated a number of times "no special deals; a level playing field.". Trew also said at the meeting " we want a long-term relationship with the barristers"; "we cannot afford any ill will"; "it's in our best interests to keep you happy and we see the future of the building being for barristers, that's why we wouldn't do any special deals, it's no good for us to have unhappy tenants."
During June and July 1990 I recall I had further meetings and a number of telephone conversations with David Trew and Denis Gleeson although my diary does not record these. On many of these occasions I asked in words to the effect "will I get the same deal as Kevin Murray QC?" and David Trew or Dennis
Gleeson depending on whom I spoke always repeated the words first said to me by David Trew on 30 May 1990 namely "level playing field; no special deals; the lease you sign for Levels 1 or 5 will be the same deal Kevin Murray QC gets on level 10."
During the period from 8 June 1990 until early July 1990 I had many discussions with Gleeson, Trew & Freeman. I became interested in the possibility of leasing Level 5 rather than level 1. In June 1990, I received a covering letter dated 18 June 1990 together with a proposed lease which is produced to me and marked Exhibit `B' to this Statement. Gleeson or Trew told me that it was "the same as existing leases in the building". I had a number of telephone conversations with Gleeson during most of which I said "Has Murray signed his lease yet? I know he's got solicitors acting for him.
While I know a little bit about the law, I am not a commercial lawyer, I do not know what generally gets put in a commercial lease, and what customarily gets negotiated out. If Murray's solicitors have given it the OK I'll be happy with it. I can't afford my own solicitors". Gleeson or Trew (most of my dealings were with Gleeson) replied on some of these occasions words in or to the effect "there've been some hiccups, Murray hasn't signed yet, but your lease [for Level 5] is the same except for a few minor things." On one occasion Gleeson said Murray had signed for Level 10, but in later conversations said that Murray was about to sign or was due to sign next week.
A meeting was held late on a Friday afternoon in mid July 1990 attended by Dennis Gleeson, David Trew, Ross Freeman, Manny Paneras and me on 9
Garfield Barwick Chambers in Freeman's room. The meeting was arranged at
Gleeson's request to collect the signed agreement for lease (see Exhibit `C' next paragraph below) that I had received about this time. Shortly prior to this Gleeson had rung me and said words in or to the effect "I have instructions to come and pick up the lease unless it signed by the end of the week."
At the same meeting in mid July referred to in paragraph 12 above, but prior to signing the agreement which is produced to me and marked Exhibit `C' to this Statement, I said to Gleeson and Trew "Is this lease the same as the one Murray's about to sign for Level 10?" and Gleeson said "Yes, only some minor variations, no special deals." I then said "Level playing field?" and Gleeson or Trew (I cannot remember whom) said "Yes". I then asked "Is
Murray being required to sign a guarantee?" and Gleeson said "Yes". We then had further discussion about the guarantee. I said "We (meaning Freeman and I) will need to put the lease in a company name; I've heard other Floors in other
Chambers guarantee it by a bank guarantee; would that be possible?" Trew said "It won't be a problem later to substitute a bank guarantee." At this same meeting certain words were dictated by and transcribed by Ross Freeman in his handwriting at my request at page 6 of the agreement comprising Exhibit `C'........" (Pars. 6, 8, 10, 12 and 13, Exhibit D.) (Bold italic emphasis added) 
It is clear from this evidence that the level five representations were made in the context that Murray was yet to sign a guarantee: 
In response to Daley's statement of evidence in chief, par 8 of Trew's statement of his evidence in chief (Exhibit 6) contained the following statement: "51. I refer to paragraph 8 of Mr Daley's Statement and say as follows: 
During mid 1990 I may have met Mr Daley on only about 2 or 3 occasions, and spoken to him by telephone also. My discussions with Mr Daley were only in regard to the 5th or 9th Floor. On those occasions I have no recollection of discussing Kevin Murray's interest in any floor with Mr Daley; 
I have no recollection of Mr Daley even asking me "Will I get the same deal as Kevin Murray QC" or words to that effect; 
I do not deny I may have repeated that "no special deals would apply" and "that a level plying field will apply" as I have suggested in paragraph above; 
I had no knowledge of the need for any floor to provide a guarantee when the meeting/drinks occurred and guarantees were not raised at it; 
As at 30 May 1990 I do not recall having any knowledge whatsoever about
Kevin Murray QC. " (Par 51, Exhibit 6) 
In response to par 10 of Daley's statement of evidence in chief, Trew responded as follows:
I refer to paragraph 10 of Mr Daley's Statement and say as follows: 
I repeat that I spoke with Mr Daley on only about 3-4 occasions; 
It would be unusual for me to see any lease agreement between the parties before it was signed and I cannot recall seeing any lease for the 1st Floor; 
I have no recollection of saying the words attributed to myself or Mr
Gleeson in that paragraph. Nor do I recall Mr Gleeson saying those words in my presence; 
It is quite possible that on one occasion I may have said, in response to a query about the nature of the lease from Mr Daley, words to the following effect: "There's a standard lease which will apply to the floor. Have a read through it and see what you think." 
I do not believe that guarantees were discussed on that occasion and I do not believe the notes on "Exhibit B" to Mr Daley's Statement would have arisen from conversations from myself because I really didn't have a lot to say to him on occasions when we spoke. " (Par 52, Exhibit 6) 
As to par 13 of Daley's statement, Trew denies ever having given the assurance alleged.

The evidence of Daley in cross-examination, in one respect, is some support for Gleeson's evidence, as appears from the following: "Q. Do you remember Mr Gleeson saying, "My understanding is that Mr Murray's lease is based on the standard lease for the building. Negotiations are still ongoing and I can't add much more than that"? Do you remember him saying that? 
A. Not precisely in that context, no. It was said at some stage that there was a standard lease and that was the same lease as the existing lease in the building and I can't recall Gleeson ever saying to me that it was still being negotiated. It was always a case of, "He is about to sign" or he would say, "He is due to sign next week" except for one occasion when he in fact told me he had in fact signed.

Q. When he said that to you, when was that? 
A. That was some time after the meeting at the Wentworth and some time prior to this meeting in Freeman's chambers in July.

Q. You mean to say in that period of time Mr Gleeson told you that Mr Murray had, in fact, signed the lease? 
A. On one occasion he did in a telephone call, yes.

Q. I suggest to you, Mr Daley, that you are mistaken and that Mr Gleeson did not say that Mr Murray had, in fact, signed the lease? 
A. He told me that on one occasion, yes.

Q. Are you sure he didn't say Mr Murray was getting close to signing the lease, or words to that effect? 
A. They were words - words to that effect were used on other occasions, but there was one occasion he actually told me he had signed. " (T144.20 - .50) 
If anything, the evidence of Daley in cross-examination tended to be strengthened when compared with the statements in his evidence in chief (eg.
T140.20, 141.40, 143.45, 149.50, 150.10, 150.20 and 152.33). However, it was clear from his evidence that he "had never been told" that "Murray had signed a bank guarantee or provided a bank guarantee". (T145.39 - .46) 
I have no hesitation in accepting Daley's evidence subject to the finding that
Trew was not present when the level five representations were made in the presence of the cross-claimants. What can be drawn from the evidence of the level five representations, I think, is as follows:
At a time in July 1990 after the signing of the lease, the cross-claimants were present at the making of the level five representations.
It is reasonably clear that at the time of the making of the representations those present were acting on the understanding that Murray had yet to sign a guarantee.
It was represented that a bank guarantee could be substituted for a personal guarantee in relation to the level five lease. This representation was unrelated to a representation that Murray had given a bank guarantee in support of the level ten lease nor was it qualified by the stipulation that such a substitution was subject to the mortgagee's consent.

The cross-claimants' case has been largely founded on the alleged representation that Murray had signed a six month bank guarantee to support the level ten lease. I am not satisfied that any such representation was made.
Where does that leave the cross-claimants? The only particulars of the misleading and deceptive nature of the representations relied upon were that: "The lease for Kevin Murray QC's Floor, level 10 at 53 Martin Place, did not include any unlimited personal guarantee nor a six months bank guarantee." 
The mere fact that no guarantee was given in respect of the level ten lease may support a case based on a false representation that a guarantee had been given, but may be quite innocuous as part of a case based on a representation that Murray was required to provide a six month bank guarantee for the level ten lease.

There is no issue that the Sheraton representations were made. However, for the reasons I have outlined earlier, those bare representations are not actionable on the facts of this case. In particular, they could not mean that each lease would have identical guarantee provisions. Clearly the leases in 53
Martin Place did not have identical guarantee provisions and I have no reason to doubt that there were good reasons for those differences, consistently with adherence to the Sheraton representations.

There is no doubt in my mind that the cross-claimants were assured that a six month bank guarantee could be substituted for the guarantee when the floor was "full and up and running" and that there was no proviso that mortgagee consent was required for such a substitution.

If one treats that as a representation as to future matter attracting the provisions of <case>, I think the evidence establishes that there were reasonable grounds for saying that the provision of a six month bank guarantee would be acceptable once the twelfth floor had become fully occupied. Indeed, the letter of Trew of 29 June 1993 would have it that a bank guarantee was required by the mortgagee of 53 Martin Place. The failure of Melfort in
September 1993 to accept a six month bank guarantee when so requested by the cross-claimants is no evidence, in my opinion, of anything misleading about the 1990 representation. When the substitution was refused the financial position of Catean was such that it would be difficult to find a reasonable basis for criticising the liquidator's refusal to release the cross-claimants from the guarantee. I do not think it reasonable to treat Trew's representations as amounting to an assurance that a six month bank guarantee could be substituted for the guarantee regardless of Catean's performance of its obligations under the lease at the time of any requested substitution of guarantees.

I think it is reasonably clear from Trew's evidence that Melfort was comparatively indifferent to the requirement of a guarantee: the inference being that its main interest lay in getting 53 Martin Place fully leased and then sold. It was the mortgagee requiring a bank guarantee. That is the gist of Trew's evidence. The fact that the mortgagee was prepared to consent to a lease of levels ten and eleven without a guarantee; to consent to a lease of part of level nine with a six month bank guarantee to support it; apparently willing to consider "in principle" such a guarantee in respect of level five (see Exhibit B, letter of Melfort's solicitor to Acacia Holdings 20 June 1991) and prepared to accept a bank guarantee in respect of the basement area (document 198 Exhibit B), all lend support to the finding that there were reasonable grounds for the making of the representation.

There remains to be considered the effect of a finding that Trew had represented that Murray was about to sign the level ten lease with a requirement of a six month bank guarantee to support that lease. In my opinion, the cross-claimants have failed to make out a case based on such a representation. It was for the cross-claimants to prove that such statements were misleading or deceptive. Any statement that Murray was about to sign a lease of level ten I regard as a legitimate method of encouraging the cross- claimants to conclude an agreement for the lease. As at July 1990 Murray had been active for some time in pursuing a lease of level ten, as reflected in his letter of 29 November 1989, referred to earlier in these reasons. Apart from the fact that the level ten lease bears a date 26 October 1990, the cross-claimants have made no attempt to prove that this representation was misleading or otherwise actionable.

As to the representation that Murray was required to provide a six month bank guarantee, I think the evidence falls short of that degree of proof required to warrant a finding that the representation was misleading or otherwise actionable. Earlier in these reasons I have outlined the evidence concerning the requirement by Melfort of a guarantee to support leases in 53 Martin Place (supra pp 11, 12, 15 and 16). The cross-claimants adduced the evidence of Ian
Douglas Strathdee QC, a member of the tenth floor, that no guarantee had been given to support the level ten lease. That evidence says nothing about a requirement of a guarantee at some stage in the negotiations for the level ten lease and nothing about the circumstances leading to the dropping of that requirement or when that stage was reached other than the fact that the level ten lease bearing date 26 October 1990 contains no provision for a guarantee.
I have the letter of Trew of 28 June 1993 and his evidence (T185.39) earlier noted, from which may be inferred that in respect of all leases a guarantee was required by the mortgagee.

In the case of the lease of level ten, I think that inference may be further supported from the cross-examination of Gleeson as follows: "Q. You never asked Mr Murray for a guarantee? 
A. No.

Q. Either a bank guarantee nor a personal guarantee? 
A. No.

Q. You never asked anyone on his floor either for a bank guarantee or a personal guarantee? 
A. No.

Q. And no-one ever told you that anyone, he or she, had asked Mr Murray for a guarantee? 
A. I understood from the conversation-- 
Q. No, no. I would like you to answer my question. My question is that no-one ever told you that he or she had asked Mr Murray for a guarantee? 
A. That's not correct.

Q. Who told you that? 
A. I understand from conversation with Mr Arthur Porter from Chase that Mr
Kevin Murray had expressed some anger at being asked to give a guarantee. But that's all I know of that issue.

Q. And when did Mr Porter tell you that? 
A. Some time in 1990, I am not sure.

Q. Is that the only information you have on the subject of Mr Murray being asked for a guarantee? 
A. That I can recall, yes.

Q. The fact is this, apart from that, you don't know of any suggestion of anyone on his floor being asked for a guarantee of any kind? 
A. No.

Q. By "no" you agree with my proposition? 
A. I don't know that he was asked for a guarantee, if that's what you are asking. Yes.

HIS HONOUR: Q. And the person you just referred to was? 
A. Arthur Porter.

Q. He being? 
A. He was the representative of Chase, the mortgagee." (T160.46 - 161.32) 
The reality is, I think, that the cross-claimants have hung their litigation hat on the allegation that Trew had represented to them that Murray had signed a lease for level ten containing a six month bank guarantee, on which issue they have failed. They have made little or no attempt to support a case that a representation that Murray was about to sign a lease for level ten and was required or willing to provide a six month bank guarantee was an actionable representation.

I think that it follows from these reasons that the statutory counts and the tortious case of the cross-claimants fail. The other related issues on the cross-claim were not pressed.

It has not been necessary for me to rule upon the submission of counsel for
Melfort in reliance upon Vadasz -v Pioneer Concrete (SA) Pty Ltd (1995) 130
ALR 570 that equity required the installation of an obligation equivalent to a six month bank guarantee had the cross-claimants established some entitlement to relief. However, I do not regard Vadasz as warranting that course in these proceedings. In Vadasz, the appeal proceeded on the assumption that the guarantor had been induced to give a guarantee of the obligations of the principal debtor on the understanding that the guarantee would only relate to any increased indebtedness to that existing at the time of the guarantee. At first instance it was held that the guarantor was entitled to rescind the guarantee so far as it related to the existing debt. The question for the appeal was whether the guarantor was entitled to a rescission of the guarantee in its entirety. It was held that he was not. If anything Vadasz is authority for the proposition, so far as it touches the facts of this case, that the cross-claimants would have been entitled to have the guarantee set aside in its entirety, if one accepted the evidence that they would not have given any guarantee had they known the true position concerning the level ten lease.

The quantum issues are categorised by Melfort as follows: "(a) Base rent for various periods between 1 April 1992 and 9 May 1994 pursuant to clause 4A of Schedule Two, by reference to the base rent set out in the Reference Schedule. The amount claimed in the Second Amended Statement of Claim is the sum of $166,037.94. (the base rent) 
Interest on outstanding base rent amounts for various periods between 1
April 1992 and 9 May 1994, pursuant to clause 8 of Schedule Two, being interest at a rate of 20% per annum on moneys which are payable to Melfort under the lease and remain unpaid for 16 days calculated from the date upon which the payment fee due, being the first day of each month of the term of the lease. The amount claimed for interest, as at 20 February 1996 in the sum of $86,377.07. (interest on base rent) 
Damages for lost base rent in the period between 10 May 1994 to 30
December 1994 inclusive, following determination of the lease, calculated pursuant to clause 13(d) of Schedule Two. The amount claimed by way of damages for lost base rent is the sum of $83,500.32. (post termination damages) 
Interest on the damages claimed for lost base rent for the period between May 1994 and 30 December 1994, calculated pursuant to section 94 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) and Schedule J of the Supreme Court Rules at a rate of 10,5% per annum until and including 27 February 1995 and subsequently at the rate of 12% per annum until judgment. The sum claimed for interest on damages, as at 20 February , is the sum of $11,245.09. (interest on post termination damages) 
The sum of the claim by Melfort as at 20 February 1996 is the amount of $347,160.42. " (Pars 2(a) - (d) and 3) 
As a calculation and as to the correctness of the method of calculation there is no issue between the parties. As to the base rent, the cross-claimants contend that it is subject to abatement: as to the post-termination damages, that they are a penalty and unrecoverable. Alternatively, it is contended that there should be brought to account a benefit, said to have been derived by
Melfort on sale of 53 Martin Place derived from the offering of the building with vacant possession of level twelve. This contention arises out of the fact that, on 19 December 1994, 53 Martin Place was sold to a large banking institution which went into occupation of level twelve.

The cross-claimants led no evidence quantifying the alleged sale benefit or quantifying in dollar terms the claimed abatement of rent.

As to the sale benefit, that claim could be reasonably described as opportunistic. It arises out of an affidavit of Gleeson sworn 7 February 1996 (Exhibit 5) in support of the post-termination damages claim of Melfort. Par 5 of that affidavit is as follows: " For the period between about 10 May 1994 and 30 December 1994, the 12th floor at 53 Martin Place was listed within Knight Frank Hooker (as it was then known) as being available for rent, with myself as the consultant. However, at the same time, it was known to me that Knight Frank Hooker's property department had received instructions from Melfort to list the property for sale. In my experience as a property consultant, it is not uncommon for a multi-storey commercial building to be offered for sale with the least one vacant floor. The benefit of that situation is that it allows the vacant floor space to be offered to intending owner/occupiers and in that sense can therefore act as an incentive in the sales programme. " (Par 5) 
This statement encouraged some cross-examination of Gleeson and Trew which did little more than confirm the benefit referred to in that paragraph, I do not see the evidence relating to this issue as giving rise to a rational basis for placing any dollar figure upon this benefit. Whether the offering of 53 Martin
Place with level twelve vacant resulted in a benefit in the sense of the sale taking place earlier than one of the building fully occupied, or whether the benefit may have been reflected in a higher purchase price, than the price of the building fully occupied, one cannot say. I do not think this is a case where the court is required to do the best it can in making a monetary assessment in the face of a paucity of evidence on the subject matter. I would not make any allowance for this benefit in the quantification of post termination damages. I note that in calculating the post termination damages,
Melfort has allowed, as an adjustment against the claim for the rent payable under the lease, the market rent which it would have received had the premises been let after termination.

The cross-claimants' submissions on the penalty question were brief: of cl (d) of the lease it was said: "This would appear to have been conclusively determined against the plaintiff by the decision of the Court of Appeal in Amev Finance Limited -v- Artes
Studios Thoroughbreds Pty Ltd [(1989) 15 NSWLR 564"] 
Cl 13(d) of the lease so far as is relevant provided as follows: "It is hereby expressly agreed and declared that the covenants by the Lessee contained or implied in this Lease to pay the rent and contribution to outgoings .... are all essential and/or fundamental terms of this Lease and the breach non-observance or non-performance of any one or more of such covenants terms and conditions shall be deemed to be a fundamental breach of the provisions of this Lease on the part of the Lessee to be observed and performed PROVIDED THAT the presence of this Clause in this Lease shall not mean or be construed as meaning that there are no other fundamental and/or essential terms in this Lease. Should the Lessor terminate this Lease following any such fundamental breach or otherwise then without prejudice to any other right or remedy of the Lessor herein contained or implied IT IS
EXPRESSLY AGREED AND DECLARED that the Lessor shall be entitled to recover from the Lessee or the Guarantor as the case may be as and by way of liquidated damages for such breach the lessor's reasonable costs of re-letting together with the difference between the aggregate of the annual rent, the
Lessee's proportion .... which would have been payable by the Lessee for the unexpired residue of the term but for such determination, calculated from the date of such determination to the due date of termination of this lease LESS the aggregate of the several rentals outgoings and other moneys which the
Lessor by taking proper steps to re-let the premises shall obtain or could reasonably be expected to obtain by re-letting the premises for the unexpired residue of the term (if any) PROVIDED THAT in so doing the Lessor shall not be required or be obliged to offer or accept in respect of such re-letting terms covenants conditions or stipulations which are the same or similar to the terms covenants conditions or stipulations herein contained or implied. " (Cl 13(d)) 
In my opinion, the claim for post termination damages is a claim for damages for breach of an "essential and /or fundamental" provision of the lease as contemplated by the parties. The Court will give effect to an agreement to treat a term as having a "fundamental character", notwithstanding that in the absence of such provision the term would not be treated as essential. The position was stated by Gibbs CJ in Shevill v. The Builders Licensing Board <case>; [(1981-1982) 149 CLR 620] at in the following terms: "It is clear that a covenant to pay rent in advance at specified times would not, without more, be a fundamental or essential term having the effect that any failure, however slight, to make payment at the specified times would entitle the lessor to terminate the lease. However, the parties to a contract may stipulate that a term will be treated as having a fundamental character although in itself it may seem of little importance and effect must be given to any such agreement: Wickman Tools v. Schuler A.G. (32). In other words, a right to forfeit a lease might arise "in the case of any breach of covenant however trifling, if the parties had agreed that a breach of that covenant should create a forfeiture": Campbell v. Payne and Fitzgerald (33). " 
Consequently, the post termination damages are correctly characterised as damages for breach of an essential term of the lease and not as a loss caused by Melfort's re-entry consequent upon breach of a non-essential term as was the case in Shevill. Amev followed Shevill and I find nothing in Amev that would warrant characterising the damages payable under cl 13(d) as a penalty: quite the contrary.

On the issue of abatement, counsel for the cross-claimants expressly disavowed any claim based other than pursuant to cl 15 of the lease and expressly disavowed any separate claim for adjustment by way of damages for breach of a covenant for quiet enjoyment. Cl 15 provided as follows: "It is agreed that if during the term of this Lease the premises or any part thereof are destroyed or damaged by fire, storm or tempest or accident (not being an accident caused by or resulting from any act or omission on the part of the Lessee for which the Lessee is otherwise liable hereunder) so as to be wholly or partially unfit for occupation and use and the policy or policies effected in respect thereof shall not have been vitiated or payment of the policy moneys refused in whole or in part in consequence of some act or omission or the negligence of the Lessee then a fair proportion of the rent hereby reserved according to the nature and extent of the damage sustained shall be suspended until the premises shall be again rendered fit for occupation and use PROVIDED: the fair proportion to be so suspended shall in the first instance be assessed by the Lessor and if the Lessee disputes the Lessor's assessment the proportion shall be determined on the application of the Lessor by a member of the Australian Institute of Valuers N.S.W. Division and, unless the context otherwise requires, the provisions of Clause 4C(f) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to such determination; if the premises shall not be reinstated within six (6) calendar months from the date when such destruction or damage shall have occurred then at or after the expiration of such period and until reinstatement the tenancy hereby created may be determined at the option of either party by notice in writing to the other but such determination shall be without prejudice to the Lessor's rights in respect of any antecedent breach of the lessee's covenants herein contained or to the recovery of any unpaid rent in respect of any period prior to the date of such destruction or damage; nothing herein contained shall require the Lessor to render the premises fit for occupation and use. " (Cl 15) 
Neither party had recourse to sub-cl (a). The reference in that sub-clause to cl 4C(f) is a reference to a means of certification of value by an umpire appointed by the President of the New South Wales Division of the Australian
Institute of Valuers. Neither party has addressed submissions as to the effect, if any, of failure to implement sub-cl (a), although I think counsel for Melfort, in response to an inquiry from me, formally submitted that such a failure precluded an independent determination of quantum by the Court. I do not propose to examine that question. Melfort's case on abatement was that cl had a very limited operation on the facts of this case and that, in any event, in the absence of any evidence as to quantum, there was no basis for a determination of an abatement of rent pursuant to cl 15 of the lease.

Although the evidence adduced by the cross-claimants covered a variety of events affecting the occupation of level twelve and which were the subject of complaint to Melfort from time to time by Catean or its licensees, much of the subject matter of those complaints, in my opinion, falls outside the abatement provision of the lease. Indeed, a number of those complaints relate to matters for which the lease provided in terms which either limited or excluded
Melfort's liability therefor. For example, Schedule 1 reserved to Melfort "the right of unrestricted and uninterrupted access and egress in and through the premises to other floors and areas of the Building including the areas above level twelve and the roof area". In the case of air conditioning services, cl (d) provided that Melfort would "not be liable or responsible if at any time the plant (was) not working howsoever caused" and, in the event of air conditioning plant or the lifts not functioning for whatever reason, Catean was not "entitled to stop payment of rent ... nor (did it) have any right of action or claim for compensation or damages" (sub-cl (e)). More particularly, cl 13 contained extensive provisions giving Melfort the right to carry out works in the nature of repairs, alterations or additions. This last mentioned clause was of particular importance in the circumstances in which the lease was granted as Melfort had undertaken extensive alteration works both inside and exterior to 53 Martin Place.

The principal evidence of damage capable of falling within the meaning of "damage" in cl 15 is that of John Victor Cole (Cole) who was the clerk to the barristers on level twelve from 6 August 1990 to 11 May 1994. In his statement of evidence in chief, he described the damage as first occurring in late
January 1991. His evidence was as follows: "3. In late January 1991 about a week before the new Law Term, there were severe storms and tempests in Sydney, and I observed constant water leaks coming into the common Reception area and into a number of individual barristers' chambers on the 12th Floor via the ceiling and airconditioning ducts and around the windows of the premises at 53 Martin Place Sydney. I observed plaster bubbling around windows in Room 1; in Room 3 water was coming in under the carpet from a drain situated in the column of the premises; In
Room 5, rain seeped through windows and paintwork blistered underneath the windows; in Room 6 leaked on the desk and interior wall, and the recently painted work around one of the windows was beginning to bubble; in Room 7 the wall began to crack around the first window, and rust spots began to appear on the paintwork itself due to dampness; in Room 10, plaster began to blister around one of its two windows, and in Rooms 11 & 12, there were leaks around the windows. In the common Reception Area to the Floor, buckets were placed on the floor to try and catch water dripping down from three or four leaks in the ceiling. A total of eight of the individual barristers' chambers and the common Reception area were affected.
Barristers normally occupying the eight affected individual rooms arranged to hold their daily conferences elsewhere either in other rooms on the Floor if they were available, or off the Floor altogether.
My staff and I assisted barristers with initial cleaning up for a few days. Following this, the building manager, Hookers, arranged for repair work to be carried out on the 12th Floor and elsewhere on the premises at 53 Martin
Place. This included a lot of work on the exterior to the Building. This work was very disruptive over many months, and at the direction of the 12th Floor I wrote to Mark Ranucci of L J Hooker, the Building Manager, by letter dated 11
June 1991 (a copy of which is marked "A" and annexed below). Since the storms in January 1991 there had been a regular procession of workmen wandering through the Floor to gain access to the roof and this was disruptive and unsightly and not appropriate for the professional image that barristers' chambers should project. A common sight was the opening of lift doors out of which several workmen would emerge laden down with scaffolding and various tools of trade and tramping dust and dirt from the lift through the common areas where clients were waiting, near the fire stairs leading to the roof.
The workmen spoke loudly and colloquially in a manner inappropriate for barristers' chambers.
In addition, while work was being carried out on the building facade, an electronically operated gantry was erected at the level of the 12th Floor external windows facing Martin Place and Elizabeth Street for several months.

When workmen were working there on a daily basis over that period, they were very noisy.

There were embarrassing incidents...." (Par 3, 4, 5 and 6, Exhibit F) 
He also evidenced security lapses, inadequate cleaning and blocking of access to the building. He stated that "these difficulties in the proper occupation of the twelfth Floor as barrister chambers continued through 1991 and well into 1992". Of this evidence it may be observed that, apart from the complaint concerning cleaning services and, possibly, the security problem, most of these complaints related to the alterations both to the exterior and internally to 53 Martin Place which were carried out by Melfort and for which
Trew had been retained to oversee. The principal damage that was capable of being comprised within cl 15 was the storm damage in January 1991. I do not regard par 5 of Cole's statement as justifying a finding that the works that took place over the remainder of 1991 was work performed in rectifying storm damage. The first written complaint to Melfort was Cole's letter to Ranucci of June 1991 (Document 284). It makes no mention of storm damage other than rain entering one set of chambers as a result of a window having been left open during a storm at a preceding weekend. The letter is taken up with the building work going on throughout the building. It is not until 13 August 1991 that Cole wrote to Ranucci repeating complaints of building works and including a statement that : "During the heavy storms earlier in the year a number of the chambers on the floor received damage caused by the heavy rain. Building contractors took details of the damage and although some areas have been repaired we have had no indication of when all repair work will be completed. Can you assist us with a start date for the additional repairs please." (Document 292) 
This subject was taken up in his further letter to Ranucci of 9 October 1991 which is expressed as enclosing "a list of storm damage". In the body of the letter, the complaint is described as follows: "During heavy storms earlier in the year a number of the Chambers on the Floor received damage caused by the heavy rain.

Building Contractors took details of the damage and although some ceiling tiles had been replaced, blistering paint work and indications of cracking and rusting in the walls remains unrepaired." 
This complaint was in addition to a number of other complaints relating to building works, as well as concerns expressed as to the level of the air conditioning and cleaning services.

Earlier in these reasons I have referred to the demand for some $91,000 in rent and unpaid outgoings, made by Ranucci to Catean by letter of 22 January and the response that it drew in the form of the letter of 24 January (Document 321) which essentially said nothing about the unpaid rent but made several complaints one of which was that: "A number of rooms are water damaged and have been for about 12 months now." 
In the bundle of agreed documents there was included what appears to be a list of complaints to 6 April 1992 made by Cole from time to time to Ranucci or other employees of Melfort's agent. I think it is reasonable to describe those complaints as mainly concerned with security, cleaning services and building works.

On 10 April 1992 (Document 338) Cole forwarded a further letter of that date to Ranucci repeating the matters of complaints and identifying the "water damaged rooms" as requiring painting and repairing of "water stained ceiling tiles".

There appears to be no record of complaint after that until 17 August 1993 when Freeman wrote to Melfort's agent complaining of construction noise from the roof above his chambers. This drew an apology from the agent and efforts on the part of Melfort to control those activities to minimise noise.
Freeman's response was to write on 19 August 1993 to Melfort's agent that the rent was "hereby abated until the conclusion of these works" (Document 425). A letter of the following day on behalf of Catean took a more conciliatory approach, proposing "a modest and by no means excessive discount of approximately $500 in our August rent" (Document 426). Catean again wrote on August 1993 to the agent limiting the complaint to construction noise and other construction activities.

The statement of the evidence in chief of Sergio Martin (Exhibit 1), tendered on behalf of Melfort described in some detail the very extensive alteration works carried out on 53 Martin Place both prior to and after the granting of the lease. His role was that of "caretaker or building supervisor". The works were performed in some five stages and no good purpose is served by detailing that evidence. Apart from a "water leak" affecting the chambers of Paneras, he makes no mention of water damage to level twelve.

While his statement indicated that there were very few complaints to him concerning the occupation of level twelve, in cross-examination he accepted that Freeman "did complain a lot".

Ranucci evidenced the division of alteration works carried out at 53 Martin
Place into stages so as to minimise interference with occupiers' use of the building. In general terms, he downplayed the level of complaints received.
Although he does not deal specifically with the claimed storm damage to level twelve, his outline of construction activities in 53 Martin Place would not indicate that there was a significant problem of that nature.

Counsel for the cross-claimants submitted that it was no obstacle to a calculation of a reasonable abatement of rent, that no evidence was adduced on behalf of the cross-claimants as to quantum. In this he placed reliance on the provisions of cl 15 which called for the suspension of "a fair proportion of the rent ... according to the nature and extent of the damage sustained ...
until the premises shall be again rendered fit for occupation and use". It was submitted that I should not be deterred by the difficulty created by the absence of direct evidence as to quantum and that an abatement of some one third of the rent would be appropriate.

The view I have formed is that no abatement of rent should be brought to account in quantifying Catean's liability to Melfort and, in turn, any liability of the cross-claimants under their guarantee. I have no doubt there was some water intrusion into level twelve following a storm occurrence in
January 1991 and that there would have been some inconvenience to several licensees from storm damage as described by Cole. However, I think some measure of the nature of that interference can be gained from the absence of any recorded complaint until some several months later. I also take the view that, in evaluating the complaints of damage, it is appropriate to place those complaints in the context of Catean's worsening financial position caused by difficulties in obtaining payment of licence fees from twelfth floor members.
I also think a line can be taken as to the seriousness of the storm damage from the claim for abatement of rent of some $500 made in August 1993 without reference to the storm damage. I think the correct position is that no abatement of rent is called for, in respect of any inconvenience encountered in the use of level twelve following some water intrusion in January 1991.
Accordingly, in the plaintiff's action there should be judgment in favour of
Melfort in accordance with the calculations of quantum as presented by counsel for Melfort.

At the conclusion of submissions in this matter, I was requested not to proceed to an order for costs until the parties were given the opportunity of addressing me on that matter. In the circumstances, I invite the parties to bring in short minutes of orders in accordance with these reasons, together with any submissions on the question of costs.

MELFORT P/L (IN LIQN) -v- CATEAN HOLDINGS P/L (IN LIQN) & 2 ORS 
ROSS FREEMAN & 1 ORS -v- MELFORT PTY LIMITED (IN LIQUIDATION) & 1
ORS /95 50111/95 
Wednesday, 3 July 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
This is an application by Ross Buchanan Freeman and Emmanuel Paneras for a stay of execution of judgment entered pursuant to reasons for judgment published by me on 18 April 1996 in the principal proceedings. In the following reasons I have adopted the terminology used in the reasons for judgment in the principal proceedings.

The parties are in substantial agreement that the principles determining whether a stay should be granted on applications such as these are as expressed in Alexander versus Cambridge Credit Corp Ltd [(1985) 2 NSWLR .]
The propositions that may be drawn from that decision are that:
It is not necessary for the grant of a stay that special or exceptional circumstances should be made out. It is "sufficient that the applicant for the stay demonstrates a reason for an appropriate case to warrant the exercise of discretion in his favour" (at 694 .E)
The "onus is upon the applicant to demonstrate a proper basis for a stay that will be fair to all parties" giving weight to considerations "such as the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties before it" (at .F)
Matters relevant to the exercise of the discretion include whether: there is a risk that the applicant's assets may be disposed of during the period of the stay; there is a risk that an appeal may prove abortive if the appellant succeeds and the stay is not granted; the appellant has an arguable case or is without any real prospect of success; prejudice to the applicant if a stay is refused; prejudice to the respondent if a stay is granted
In all cases, regard should be had to the expectation of the respondent to the fruits of the judgment obtained.

It has been submitted by counsel on behalf of Melfort that, given the several adverse findings by me affecting the credibility of Freeman and Paneras that the prospects of a successful prosecution of their appeal are slim. I do not agree. While it is true that there are many such findings I do not think it is suggested in my reasons for judgment that I was assisted in any significant way by the opportunity of observing either witness during the course of his giving evidence. I endeavoured in each case of an adverse finding to expose my reasons therefor and I consider those reasons and the subject matter of my findings to be readily examinable by the Court of Appeal. Accordingly I do not regard this case as one in respect of which much assistance can be gained from the decision of Ined Pty Ltd versus Partridge Partners Pty Ltd (Court of Appeal, February 1996, unreported).

When this matter was first before me, having regard to the state of the evidence, some of which had not come to the notice of counsel for the applicants until immediately preceding the hearing, and having regard to the imprecision in the extent or nature of any undertakings that either of the applicants was prepared to offer in support of any order for a stay, the application was adjourned until 18 June 1996. On the occasion of that adjournment I directed that submissions in writing be presented by 5:00 pm 14
June 1996 and that was done. I also invited the applicants to present with those submissions any proposed form of order including undertakings which either of the applicants was prepared to offer in support of an order staying execution. They did not take advantage of that invitation. However, during the course of oral submissions it was stated from the bar table by counsel on behalf of the applicants that, in respect of the properties for which undertakings were offered in their respective affidavits, undertakings were available from the joint owners of those properties which, in effect, would preserve the whole of the equity of those joint owners pending determination of the applicants' appeal.

It has been estimated by Melfort that, if the applicants are unsuccessful on the appeal and the judgment remained unsatisfied, there would be owing to
Melfort at the end of two years from judgment the sum of approximately $550,000 in respect of judgment sum, interest and costs. The applicants worked on a basis of approximately $500,000. I do not regard this difference as significant.

In support of Freeman's application there was read his affidavit of 10 May (Freeman's May affidavit). In that affidavit Freeman offered the following undertaking: "My mother, Wilhelmina Freeman and I are the registered proprietors of our family home at 3 Plunkett Road, Mosman, NSW, 2088 registered under the [Real
Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) and described as Portion 822, Certificate of Title Volume 4667 Folio 51 being situated at Mosman with the Municipality of Mosman and the County of
Cumberland (hereinafter `the property'). A copy of certified copy of the title is annexed hereto and marked `B'. I have instructed a valuer to prepare a current market appraisal of the property which I believe to be approximately $800,000. I am expecting that the appraisal will be completed early in the week commencing Monday 13 May 1996 and when it is available I will serve a copy on the plaintiff's solicitor. The property is presently mortgaged to the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Taylor Square Branch, for $451,265. (The mortgage to Anita Little has been discharged but that discharge has not been registered.) Annexed hereto and marked `C' is evidence of the mortgage amount. My mother and I undertake to not further increase the mortgage above the present amount and we undertake to not further encumber nor sell the said property without approval of the Court. My mother consents to this proposed arrangement as set out in her own affidavit filed herein." 
The affidavit of Freeman's mother there referred to is that of Wilhelmina
Freeman sworn 10 May 1996 which was in the following terms: "1. I have taken independent legal advice.
I wish to help my son by providing security in support of his application for an extension of stay of execution of the judgment of this Honourable Court of 19 April, 1996.
I have read the second defendant's affidavit sworn 10 May 1996 and I consent to the arrangement proposed for the Court's approval in paragraph 5 of that affidavit." 
The subject mortgage has not been put in evidence and I do not know whether it is an "all moneys" mortgage capable of eroding the effectiveness of the proposed undertaking not to "further increase the mortgage above the present amount". Material evidenced in the affidavit of David Paul Cowling sworn 17
June 1996 (the Cowling June affidavit), read in opposition to the motion, lends weight to the possibility that Freeman's mortgages are "all moneys" mortgages.

In further support of that undertaking there was tendered on behalf of Freeman an opinion of the market value of the Mosman property of Miles Felstead dated May 1996 (Exhibit B). That opinion was expressed in the following terms: "Provided that the property has a good marketable title which assumes that there are no onerous covenants, easements or other impediments on title, in my opinion the open market value of the freehold interest as at 13th May, 1996 is eight hundred thousand dollars ($800,000)." 
A search of the Mosman property discloses a second mortgage which Freeman states has been discharged.

Freeman was called to give further evidence and for cross-examination. For better understanding of that evidence it is desirable, first, to refer to certain of the affidavit evidence adduced on behalf of Melfort in opposition to Freeman's application.

The affidavit of Karmen Coralie Bennett sworn 17 May 1996 (the Bennett affidavit) deposed to the real property assets of Freeman in the following terms: "7. In relation to real property assets of Mr Freeman, annexed and marked "D" are copy results of searches that I have caused to be undertaken in respect of properties currently owned by Mr Freeman, either in whole or in part. From the enquiries I have caused to be made, the following details are relevant to Mr Freeman's interests: 
Folio Identifier Purchase Price Transfer Date /SP3376 $195,000 2/6/80 /752067 $289,000 17/12/81 * also see 
FI 5/114133 /114133 Part of Purchase Price for FI 822/752067 17/12/81 /255777 $233,000 4/2/94 /SP45982 $135,000 16/12/92 /SP45982 
Total $852,000
I have also caused property searches to be undertaken in relation to real property assets formerly owned by Mr Freeman. By reference to transfer documents which have been registered at the Land Titles Office, copies of which are annexed and marked "E", Mr Freeman has disposed of real property assets for the sum of approximately: $700,000 in the period between 8 Match 1991 to 8 December 1994, with no further property sales following 8 December 1994; and $1.6 million from 21 May 1980 until 8 December 1994." 
In relation to the properties referred to in par 7 of the Bennett affidavit,
Freeman gave the following evidence: "Q. I want to ask you some questions about the properties referred to in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of Ms Bennett sworn 17 May. The first is a property purchased in 1980 for $195,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. That is I think, a property in the Eastern Suburbs? 
A. Yes.

Q. Subject to a mortgage of approximately $350,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. And the present value, in your estimation, is around $650,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. The second and third items are the Mosman property which you have referred to in your affidavit? 
A. Yes.

Q. The fourth item is a property bought in 1994 for $233,000? 
A. Yes 
Q. Where is that? 
A. That is at 41 Kerrs Road, Castle Hill 
Q. Is that subject to a mortgage of approximately $175,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. And is it your view that it is valued about $400,000? 
A. Yes. I am looking to sell that shortly.

Q. Built at your expense? 
A. Yes.

Q. And the final one is a property bought in December 1992 for $135,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. The same property in which you have a half interest? 
A. Yes.

Q. Is there a mortgage on it? 
A. Yes.

Q. Have you spent money building on that property? 
A. Yes.

Q. Is it your view that your equity is worth something around $70,000? 
A. Yes.

HIS HONOUR: Q. I think in your evidence you offered certain undertakings not to increase mortgages of further encumbrances? 
A. Yes.

Q. I also assume that you undertook not to sell? 
A. I have absolutely no intention.

Q. Do those understandings apply to the other properties you have just mentioned? 
A. No, I wasn't asked for a full list. I do want to sell the Castle Hill property, absolutely unrelated to these proceedings. That was bought for development purposes and it was approved for dual occupancy and there was a second house built, but that would go to reducing amounts of mortgages. It's just a small side interest I have.

Q. Where is the first item? 
A. It's at Rushcutters Bay.

Q. What about undertakings in relation to that? 
A. Your Honour, if I have to, I will, but I would be saying that they are covered on the Mosman property because the Mosman property is where I live.
The other is an investment property that I have held for 15 years. It was purchased in April 1980.

Q. Where is the development block? 
A. That's at Castle Hill. With a partner we built a duplex.

Q. This is where you have your interest at $70,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. What about an undertaking there? 
A. If really sought, I can, but that was part of a side interest. It was bought for the purposes of resale. We couldn't sell it at auction and we proposed to sell it after construction in 1993.

BENNETT: Q. On the assumption that the appeal comes on for hearing in two and a half years, and you are unsuccessful, and on the assumption, therefore, that the amount owing at that stage is in the order of $500,000, first of all is it your view that you would be able to pay one half of that sum in full at that time? 
A. Yes, absolutely, your Honour.

Q. And in the event that Mr Paneras was unable, at that time to contribute, is it your view that you would be able to pay the whole amount if you were obliged to do so? 
A. Well, if I have to, but I don't anticipate that.

HIS HONOUR: Q: How would you do that? 
A. Well, your Honour, through the sale of properties and, hopefully, wise investment of funds, and of course, I am keeping the Mosman property over the next couple of years and the track record would point to that course, your
Honour.

CROSS EXAMINATION 
WHITE: Q: Mr Freeman, if you were required to, would you be able to pay in full, the whole of the judgment debt now? 
A. No, not today.

Q. It is only supposition that you may be able to do so in two and a half years time? 
A. Yes, but I think it is a reliable supposition.

Q. You don't know what your financial position would be like in two and a half years? 
A. No, not precisely." (T5.28 - 7.37) 
Melfort also relied upon the affidavit of David Paul Cowling sworn 20 May 1996 (the Cowling May affidavit) which was read, subject to objection as to par 9, on the basis that it was argumentative. I made no ruling on the paragraph at the time. In my opinion, its subject matter is admissible as an expression of opinion as to the likely prospects of success of the cross-claimants' appeal.
I have dealt with that matter earlier in these reasons. While submitting that little weight should be given to the remainder of that affidavit, having regard to its form, no objection was taken as to the admissibility of that material.

The financial position of Melfort was dealt with in the Cowling May affidavit as follows: "19. In relation to Melfort, I say as follows: the company was incorporated in the State of New South Wales in or about
June 1989 and acted in the capacity of trustee for the Melfort Unit Trust; on or about 2 October 1991, Mr Anthony George Hodgson was appointed liquidator of the company.
I am informed by Mr Robert John Edge ("Mr Edge"), a chartered accountant and consultant to the Financial Institutions, and honestly believe that: there are no outstanding creditors of Melfort; the sum of $50,000 in cash is presently held on deposit in favour of
Melfort Pty Ltd; the units in the Melfort Unit Trust are 100% owned by Pyramid Building
Society (In Liquidation) ("Pyramid"); other than the sum referred to in sub-paragraph (b) above, all proceeds from assets sales of Melfort have been remitted to Pyramid; 
Pyramid is liable to indemnify Melfort for any funds which Melfort may be required to pay to a successful appellant in these proceedings, in the event that the judgment sum and/or costs and/or interest are paid, in whole or in part, by the defendants to Melfort prior to determination of any appeal.
Annexed and marked "C" is a true copy of a document titled "Report of the
Liquidator as at 30 June 1995" prepared by the Liquidator of Pyramid in
December 1995 ("the Report").
In particular, I refer to page 11 of the Report which states that the total value of the remaining loan portfolio of property secured in favour of
Pyramid is $115.7 million as at 30 June 1995, comprising $23.2 million in performing secured loans and $92.5 million in non-performing secured loans.
I am informed by Mr Edge and honestly believe that there is currently $123 million in cash in the bank account of Pyramid and that the financial position of the Financial Institutions and, in particular Pyramid, is not likely to alter materially for the period during which it may take for the foreshadowed appeal to be heard.
In the event that the defendants are successful in their foreshadowed appeal and Melfort is ordered to pay their costs, it is my view those costs will form part of the costs, charges and expenses of the winding up and they will accordingly be paid in full as a payment entitled to priority pursuant to section 441(1)(a) of the Corporations Law.
I am further informed by Mr Edge and honestly believe that there is no prospect of there being insufficient funds in the liquidation of Melfort and/or Pyramid to meet the return of the judgment debt together with interest and any costs order made against Melfort, should such an order be made by the
Court of Appeal of New South Wales." 
I infer from this evidence and from statements from the bar table that, if the applicants are required to satisfy their obligations under the judgment in the principal proceedings, the moneys so paid would be remitted to Pyramid and, in any case, held in some interest yielding investment. It has not been explained on what basis Pyramid would be liable to indemnify Melfort in the terms set out in par 20(e), nor was the basis of the opinion expressed in par 25 of that affidavit made clear. While pars 22 and 23 describe certain assets of Pyramid, these paragraphs do not expressly identify what the value of Pyramid's net assets are. The contents of the report referred to in par 21 emphasise the incomplete description in the Cowling May affidavit of the financial position of Pyramid. Of particular concern is the schedule of paid and forecast dividends to creditors set out in table form in the report which disclosed a dividend payment of 32 cents in the dollar to 30 June 1995 with forecast further dividends to "Post June 1988" totalling 49 cents in the dollar. The report outlined "Claims Which May Reduce Returns to Creditors" which included a claim described as "The State of Victoria's $900 million damages claim".
That aspect of the report concluded with a statement: "As commented upon previously pending determination of the claims of the State and the exhausting of all appeal avenues, there is uncertainty in relation to the payment of future dividends" 
The reference to previous comment, presumably, is a reference to the following statement in the report which appeared in bold type as follows: "AS STATED EARLIER IN THIS REPORT, CREDITORS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT, SHOULD
THE STATE ULTIMATELY MAKE OUT ITS $900 MILLION CLAIM IN FULL, FURTHER
DIVIDENDS WILL NOT BE ABLE TO BE PAID TO ALL EXISTING CREDITORS." 
There is nothing to suggest that since 30 June 1995 the position has materially changed so as to reconcile the contents of that report to which I have referred with the opinion expressed in par 25 of the Cowling May affidavit. This material was not the subject of cross-examination.

In those circumstances it is difficult to see how the moneys could be utilised in the ordinary course of Pyramid's affairs by distribution of such proceeds as dividends to unsecured creditors of those corporations. Consequently, as stated by counsel for Melfort, the prejudice of a stay to Melfort or Pyramid lies in their being deprived of the benefit of any interest that might be derived from the investment of proceeds of the judgment in Melfort's favour.

The Cowling June affidavit also analysed the property dealings of the applicants. In the case of Freeman, the assets identified in Bennett's affidavit were expanded to include two further properties namely a property known as 12 Bucken Street, Palm Cove Queensland valued at $550,000 subject to a mortgage of $300,000 and a property known as Unit 106, The Mirage, Darling
Harbour valued at $150,000 with no mortgage registered on the title. It appeared that the Darling Point, Palm Cove and Castle Hill properties were rental properties. In addition his assets were shown to include shares valued at $125,000. In a statement of assets and liabilities by Freeman as at 12
March 1996 he estimated his net assets to be $1,690,000 of which the Mosman property comprised approximately $500,000.

It was agreed that the Cowling June affidavit was in error in par 12 in its reference to the figure $9,000. It should read "9%". Par 13 of that affidavit evidenced that as at 17 January 1996 Freeman had on call with the Commonwealth
Bank the sum of $65,371.13. It was stated by counsel on behalf of Freeman that the account had since been closed and the proceeds applied to the further development and improvement of the Castle Hill property. This was accepted by
Melfort.

The analysis of rental income of Freeman set out in par 10 of that affidavit was demonstrated by counsel for Freeman to be erroneous. In fact the outgoings from Freeman's rental properties exceed rental receipts.

The Cowling June affidavit summarised Freeman's financial position as follows: "By reference to paragraphs 9, 10 and 13, at least as late as March 1996, Mr
Freeman appears to have held an equity share of approximately $1,755,371.10 in assets in which he has an interest." 
Annexed to Cowling's June affidavit was a loan application by Freeman on 31
January 1994. As at that date he estimated his net worth to be in excess of $2,000,000.

I think that material should be read in conjunction with the Bennett affidavit which also summarised the results of property searches caused to be carried out by her in the following terms: "8. I have also caused property searches to be undertaken in relation to real property assets formerly owned by Mr Freeman. By reference to transfer documents which have been registered at the Land Titles Office, copies of which are annexed and marked "E", Mr Freeman has disposed of real property assets for the sum of approximately: $700,000 in the period between 8 Match 1991 to 8 December 1994, with no further property sales following 8 December 1994; and $1.6 million from 21 May 1980 until 8 December 1994." 
From the foregoing I think it can be concluded that:
Without recourse to the Mosman property, Freeman is in a position to satisfy the judgment debt and interest accrued to date together with costs ordered to be paid by the applicants.
The properties acquired by Freeman consist in the main of investment properties and, at least one property, the Castle Hill property, acquired for development.
Over a period of some fourteen to fifteen years he has been engaged in property dealing in excess of $1,500,000 and, in the three years preceding
December 1994, that accounted for some $700,000 in sales. One assumes that amongst the properties presently held by Freeman are properties in respect of which he has acquired an interest through the application of proceeds of some of those sales.
Apart from the closing of his account on call, the proceeds of which went into the enhancement of the value of the Castle Hill property, there has been no suggestion of recent disposition of assets by Freeman which should concern
Melfort.

Although these properties other than the Balmoral property were not disclosed in the affidavit evidence of Freeman I do not draw any adverse inference from that fact. It has been made clear by counsel on behalf of Freeman that he had not attempted to state his asset and liability position at any time, nor had he held himself out as having done so. I accept this.

Freeman's position, it was submitted, is that he should not suffer the loss of investment or development properties through any forced sale to satisfy the subject judgment indebtedness pending the outcome of his appeal from my judgment: the value of the Mosman property when added to the agreed contribution by Paneras - they have agreed to meet any final judgment in equal proportions - is adequate to meet the applicants' liability to Melfort should the appeal be unsuccessful: there is a significant risk, attaching to the capacity of Pyramid to refund any payment of the judgment debt should the applicants' appeal be successful: the only prejudice to Melfort or Pyramid that would be occasioned by a stay was the delay in the receipt of interest on the judgment proceeds.

Freeman's May affidavit evidences the fact that Catean has brought proceedings against former barristers forming the twelfth floor to recover outstanding floor fees totalling approximately $109,000.00. It has been submitted that I should take into account the prospect of Catean successfully recovering such an amount in addition to interest which could become available in part satisfaction of Catean's debt to Melfort, so reducing the applicants' exposure to Melfort under the guarantee. I have some difficulty in finding much relevance in that evidence. I have nothing to evaluate the likely outcome of any such proceedings, whether the proceedings will be prosecuted, given the fact that Catean is in liquidation and I have no basis for evaluating how much of any such recovery of debts by Catean would be available to Melfort. What the material does infer is that the applicants are in many respects the victims of dubious commercial standards of their fellow practitioners whose defaults have played a significant role in the downfall of Catean and, ultimately, in the exposure of the applicants under the guarantee.

In response to Freeman's reliance upon Catean's actions against defaulting members of the twelfth floor, the Bennett affidavit evidenced the fact that in the principal proceedings the applicants had also proceeded against various defaulting members of the twelfth floor, seeking indemnification in respect of the applicants' liability under the guarantee: that these additional cross- claims were settled by the payment of money to the applicants. It was stated from the bar table, without objection, that the amount received by the applicants' was $4,000.00. I find little or no relevance in that material.

In support of Paneras' application, his affidavit sworn 9 May 1996 evidenced the fact that property at 38 Bruce Street, Kogarah (the Kogarah property) was jointly owned with his wife in equal shares, and was encumbered by mortgage securing repayment of borrowings of approximately $110,000. In par 5 of that affidavit he offered an undertaking not to further encumber that property.
That undertaking was further supported in the affidavit of his wife Helen
Paneras sworn 13 June 1996, in which she also agreed not to dispose of her interest, nor to further encumber it without the leave of the court. Par 9 of the Bennett affidavit evidenced the fact that, in addition to the Kogarah property, Paneras had an interest in property the purchase price of which in
February 1990 was $980,000. That property was identified in the Cowling June affidavit, as property at Maroubra which was subject to mortgage to secure repayment of the sum of approximately $660,000. Paneras was shown to be a joint owner of that property with a third party. In the case of the Kogarah property there was admitted into evidence the "market opinion" of Bill
Aslanidis that the Kogarah property had a "current retail selling price of between $400,000 - $450,000" (Exhibit A).

The applicants further read in support of their application the affidavits in reply of Freeman sworn 14 June 1996 and of Paneras sworn 13 June 1996 which do not add materially to the matters to which I have so far referred.

As in the case of Freeman's application, the undertaking offered by Paneras was extended by his counsel in submissions from the bar table to the whole of the joint owners' equity in the Kogarah property.

In relation to the affidavits read, it is noted that the affidavits of Helen
Paneras sworn 13 June 1996, of Paneras sworn 13 June 1996, of Freeman sworn 14
June 1996 and the Cowling June affidavit were handed up by counsel in Court.
Leave is granted to file the affidavits in Court.

In Jesasu Pty Ltd -v- Minister for Mineral Resources [(1987) 11 NSWLR ]
at 120 and 121 Mahony JA as he then was, in discussing the principles applicable to the granting of an injunction in the nature of a stay, admonished those charged with the application of these principles to avoid considerations such as, its granting "will do no harm", or to grant a stay would be "convenient". The discretion his Honour said was "to be exercised "not by the caprice of the judge but according to sufficient legal principles and on settled legal principles" ".

The view I have formed for the reasons that follow, is that a stay should be granted. However, I regard the undertakings offered by the applicants as inadequate.

A stay should be granted until further order or pending the determination of the applicants' appeal in the principal proceedings, subject always to the direction of the Court of Appeal pursuant to [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/index.html#p51) r of the Supreme Court Rules, upon condition that: 
Undertakings be given by each of the applicants to the Court restricting their respective dealings with properties in which they have an interest and restricting their dealings with lenders so as to ensure that the properties are not disposed of nor otherwise alienated nor further encumbered and, particularly in the case of all moneys mortgages, that existing indebtedness is not further increased, in all cases without the approval of Melfort first had and obtained; 
In the case of properties jointly held, those interested parties join in the above undertakings; 
Net profits from investment or development properties to which the applicants may be entitled be held in trust so as to be available to satisfy any indebtedness under the subject judgment; 
The applicants prosecute their appeal with reasonable expedition.

I do not regard as satisfactory the alternative of permitting execution on the judgment to proceed with some safeguards put in place to ensure that the subject funds could be returned to the cross-claimants in the event of their successful prosecution of the appeal: although I understand such safeguards could be made available by or on behalf of the liquidator of Melfort. My basic reasons for following the course outlined above are as follows:
I regard the nature of the liability as found against the applicants to be of a kind which warrants consideration of their financial position so as to ensure, as far as is fair to Melfort, that unnecessary prejudice is not occasioned to them in the event that they are successful in the prosecution of their appeal.
Consistently with the fact that I have reached my decision in the principal proceedings against the applicants with some confidence in the correctness of that judgment, there is scope for other minds to differ on that subject so as to result in a successful appeal.
The forced sale of investment, residential or development properties, I think, has the ingredient of significant prejudice to each of the applicants in the circumstances I have outlined should a stay be refused and their appeal be successful.
Given the description of the prejudice which it is said would flow from the granting of a stay, namely that Melfort or Pyramid would be deprived of the benefit of interest pending the determination of the applicants' appeal and having regard to the financial position of Pyramid in the report referred to earlier in these reasons, I am of the opinion that little or no prejudice would flow to Melfort, provided that it is adequately protected against the possibility of the stay ultimately depriving it of the fruit of the judgment which it has obtained. I consider the proposed undertakings will adequately protect Melfort.

The parties are requested to submit short minutes of order to reflect the findings reached in these reasons.

Subject to submissions on the question of costs, I propose to make an order that the costs of the application be costs in the proceedings.
 * * * 
