

W versus G No. 4607 of 1994 Equity - Estoppel [1996] NSWSC 43 (4 March 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
HODGSON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 12-14 December 1995 #DATE 2:2:1996 #ADD 4:3:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiff    Mr. M. Evans 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff   Thomas Mitchell Partners 
Counsel for the
Defendant    Mr. P. Blackburn-Hart 
Solicitors for the Defendant   Baker Love
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
HODGSON J The plaintiff and the defendant, who are both women, lived together between about March 1986 and about May 1994 in a relationship which, at least in its earlier stages, was a sexual one. In 1989, a son was born to the plaintiff as the result of an artificial conception procedure; and in 1992, a daughter was born to the plaintiff as a result of a similar procedure.
In these proceedings, commenced on 24th November 1994, the plaintiff seeks orders against the defendant under three broad headings: a constructive trust relating to a property at Salt Ash, of which the defendant was at material times the legal owner; a lump sum by way of "equitable compensation" towards the cost of maintaining the two children; and a declaration as to the plaintiff's beneficial ownership of a Toyota motor vehicle.
The defendant has cross-claimed for an order that the plaintiff deliver up possession of the Toyota vehicle.
OUTLINE OF FACTS
The plaintiff and defendant met in January 1986. They were both 23 years old. The defendant was then living with her father and brother in a house in
Baulkham Hills.
In March 1986, the plaintiff and defendant moved into a rented house at
Wollombi. It is common ground that there was then a sexual relationship between them, and that it continued for some time; although the defendant says that it had finished well before they separated in mid-1994.
At that time, the plaintiff had savings of about $200.00 and a Mazda motor vehicle estimated to be worth about $5,000.00; but she had a debt in respect of the motor vehicle to Barclays Motor Finance, which appears to have been around $6,500.00. The plaintiff was working full time with the RSPCA as a kennel hand and counter clerk; but this employment ceased in about April 1986, and the plaintiff then went on to unemployment benefits.
The defendant owned a unit in Merrylands, occupied by a paying tenant, which was later sold for $65,000.00. She also owned a Ford motor vehicle estimated to be worth $5,000.00, and a Ducati motor bike, which was later sold for around $4,000.00. She had savings of around $9,500.00, about $7,100.00 in a State Bank account, and about $2,400.00 in the St. George Building Society.
The defendant was then on unemployment benefits.
They lived in the Wollombi house until about December 1986. Both of them contributed to the rent and to household expenses.
On 14th September 1986, the defendant was injured in a motor cycle accident. She was in Cessnock Hospital for three weeks. On 15th December 1986, she was re-admitted to hospital for one day. During the time she was in hospital on that day, the plaintiff left the Wollombi house and returned to
Sydney. When the defendant returned to the house, she found that the plaintiff and her belongings were gone, and that the plaintiff had left a letter. The body of the letter was as follows: 
I'm sorry that I had to leave like this but today is the only day that I have felt strong enough to do it. I don't believe that our relationship is capable of getting any better. I'm not saying that I think you don't want it to. I just don't think that it's possible in such a short period of time. Maybe at first things would be good but slowly it would get back to how it was before I left and I honestly could not handle it anymore. I believe that we both need a long break from each other and in time if it's meant to be it will happen.

I worry about you being there by yourself but then I know that you are capable of looking after yourself and that this will make us both stronger people. Please take care of yourself as I do love you and care for you but I can no longer live in a situation like before, where it's just crazy all the time.
In about January 1987, the defendant returned to Sydney, to live with a friend in Granville. From 12th January 1987 to 4th
February 1987, she was employed by Rent-O-Kil as a driver; and it appears that during February she had some employment with Westmead
Towing. From March 1987 onwards, the defendant was on unemployment benefits again. Soon after the defendant returned to Sydney, the plaintiff and the defendant resumed contact, and in about February 1987, they began looking together for a house to purchase.
 .
In about March 1987, the plaintiff commenced working full time as a shop assistant with Franklins, and she continued in that employment until about
October 1987. From about November 1987 to February 1988, the plaintiff worked again with the RSPCA. From February 1988 to January 1990, the plaintiff was on unemployment benefits again.
In about March 1987, the defendant contracted to purchase a house at
Guildford for a price of $64,000.00. The deposit of $6,400.00 was provided partly from the sale of the defendant's Ford car for about $5,000.00. The plaintiff says that she contributed to the funds used for the balance of the deposit, and the defendant denies this. The purchase was settled in late April or early May, and the balance of the purchase money was provided by a loan to the defendant from the defendant's father. This loan was repaid in about
November 1987, from the proceeds of the sale of the defendant's
Merrylands unit for $65,000.00.
The plaintiff and the defendant commenced to live together in the
Guildford property in about
April 1987. Between then and December 1990, substantial improvements were made to the property. It seems that the defendant did most of the physical work which was not done by tradesmen, but that the plaintiff did assist in this work in various ways. There is conflict in the evidence as to how the materials and tradesmen were paid for.
Prior to July 1987, the plaintiff and the defendant each had separate accounts. The plaintiff's account was with the Advance Bank, and the defendant's account was with the St. George Bank.
A joint account was opened in July 1987, and apparently this was the only cheque account which they had.
It appears that each of the parties paid their wages or unemployment benefits into her separate account, and the household bills were paid either by cash or from the joint cheque account. It appears that some of the improvements were paid on the defendant's Custom Credit card: according to the defendant, a debt of around $10,000.00 on this card was repaid in about January 1983 out of a payment made to her by her father.
In about mid-1987, the defendant and another woman commenced a rubbish removal business. At that stage, it appears that the plaintiff made no contribution apart from some bookkeeping. However, after the plaintiff ceased employment with the RSPCA, it appears that she did work in this business with the defendant. Any cheques received in this business went into the joint cheque account.
It does not appear that this business made large amounts of money, as both the plaintiff and the defendant remained on unemployment benefits.
In September 1988, a period of separation commenced when the plaintiff left the Guildford house. The defendant alleges that, during the period of the separation in September and October 1988, the plaintiff established a relationship with a previous girlfriend: this is denied by the plaintiff, and there is no evidence to support a finding that this actually happened.
After the plaintiff returned to live with the defendant at Guildford, there was discussion between them about the plaintiff having a child.
It late , arrangements were made with a man, who had previously given sperm to an acquaintance, to provide sperm for the plaintiff.
He agreed to do this, on the basis that he would have no involvement with or responsibility for the child.
In January and
February 1989, this man attended at the Guildford house on about five to seven occasions in each month, and he provided semen which was injected into the plaintiff's vagina. According to the plaintiff, it was the defendant who performed these injections. The defendant denies this, but she admits to participating, at least to the extent of bringing the sterilised container with the semen to the plaintiff, keeping it warm under her arm.
Between about May 1989 and November 1990, the defendant was employed at
Addison Road Community
Centre as a handy person and gardener on a part-time basis. In December 1990, she again went on to unemployment benefits, until about
January 1992.
On 26th November 1989, the plaintiff's son was born. The plaintiff applied for and obtained a supporting parent's benefit. In her application for this benefit, the plaintiff told the Department of Social Security that the father had been a male on holidays from New Zealand. This was false.
In February 1990, the plaintiff traded in her Mazda motor vehicle, and purchased a Torana motor vehicle on hire purchase (which apparently she paid off over about two years).
In about late 1990, the plaintiff and the defendant discussed moving to the Port Stephens area. The initiative appears to have come from the defendant, and a substantial reason (perhaps the reason) for the defendant's wish to move to this area was to be near her father. The plaintiff and defendant selected a property at Salt Ash.
In December 1990, the Guildford house was sold for $113,000.00, and a house at Salt Ash was purchased for $145,500.00. The difference was provided from a loan of $40,000.00 to the defendant from the ANZ Bank at Raymond
Terrace.
In late 1990 and early 1991, there were discussions about the plaintiff having another child. In March and April 1991, the plaintiff went to an acquaintance's house in Sydney. The man who had previously provided semen came to the house on a number of days in each month, and again provided semen.
According to the plaintiff, the defendant came with her in March, but not in
April. The defendant denied coming to this house on either occasion. Again it appears that the plaintiff became pregnant as a result of the artificial conception procedures.
In December 1991, the defendant received $46,000.00 from the GIO in respect of her motor cycle accident, and she used it towards paying off the
ANZ loan. It appears that the loan was totally paid off shortly afterwards, with an additional sum of around $2,000.00 provided by the defendant's father.
On 12th January 1992, the plaintiff's daughter was born. The plaintiff applied for and obtained social securities benefits in relation to this child, advising the Department that the child was the result of sexual intercourse without her consent. This was false.
From February 1992 to September 1992, the defendant attended as a full-time student at Charlestown College, studying horticulture. She received
Austudy benefits during this period. At the end of this period, she went back on to unemployment benefits until May 1993. Some time during this period, it appears that the defendant started a small nursery business in the back garden of the Salt Ash house.
On 4th March 1992, the defendant consulted a local GP. The notes of that consultation are in evidence, and they indicated that she consulted the GP about pre-menstrual stress. The notes indicated, in respect of the previous week, aggression leading to violence, and continued "suicidal", "cries all day".
The defendant and a woman friend of the defendant's, H, gave evidence that, over a seven to eight month period during 1992, the defendant stayed with H at Cooranbong on many weekends, and they had a sexual relationship at this time. The defendant gave evidence that she did not tell the plaintiff about the sexual relationship, although she suggested that the plaintiff knew about it. The plaintiff denied this.
In August 1992, the defendant made a will. She appointed her father executor, gave her whole estate to the plaintiff, and if the plaintiff died within fourteen days of her death, then to the two children.
On 14th December , the defendant had a hysterectomy.
In January 1993, following a period of arguments and some violence, the plaintiff left the defendant, taking the children with her. She went to stay with her mother at Strathfield, and she also stayed for short periods with friends.
Soon after she left the defendant, according to the plaintiff, she received a card from the defendant, containing the following message: 
Today we are friends.
And thats (sic) fine by me
But I hope one day
Thal you'Will(sic) see
That all these years
I never realy (sic) knew
Just how much
I honestly do love you
For so long I've been such a fool
And I'm so sorry
For all the pain and hurt
I have caused you
Night after night
I set here alone 
Praying to God that
One day my family will come back home
Only God knows
What will be for the best
Most of all
I pray
That you'll find peace and happiness
All my Love 
In evidence, the defendant said that she did not believe that she had sent this card, and that it was not in her printing.
On 17th February 1993, the plaintiff signed an application for Housing
Assistance to the Department of Housing. This was accompanied by a letter, which stated inter alia "The reason why I left there (that is, Salt Ash) was, there was continual violence and drunkedness (sic) in the house which was affecting the children". Subsequently, the plaintiff completed a Rental
Assistance Application form which stated inter alia "I was living in a house with violence".
 .
On 16th March 1993, the defendant again consulted the same GP as previously, and the notes of that consultation indicate that the defendant was then feeling depressed and suicidal. They noted that a "lesbian relationship" with the plaintiff and two children had ended two months ago, when the plaintiff moved to Sydney. They noted a prior history of alcohol abuse, and that the defendant had ceased drinking; and that her brother had suicided. The notes indicated a provisional diagnosis of reactive depression. There was a
further consultation on 17th March, and the notes record a discussion about anti-depressant medication, and that the GP thought overdose was a possibility; and continued "frequently phones friend - wanting reassurance that they may reconcile".
It appears that the plaintiff moved into a flat at Punchbowl on about nd March 1993, because on that day, the Department of Housing contributed half of a bond of $480.00 paid to the Rental Bond Board, and half of $240.00 rent in advance. It appears that the defendant went to Sydney to help the plaintiff move into this flat.
It also appears that the defendant was with the plaintiff at the flat in
Punchbowl on 28th March 1993, when the defendant's father died. The plaintiff and the defendant returned to the Salt Ash property with the children on the next day. They continued to live together there until they decided to separate in about May 1994.
 .
The defendant's father left a substantial estate, and the defendant commenced receiving assets from it quite soon after his death.
She received $350,000.00 from the estate on 26th May 1993, and she deposited $306,649.21 from that into a St. George Flexi-Account on 28th June. She received a further $135,671.00 from her father's estate on 30th June 1993. She received a property at Shoal Bay in about mid-1993.
Meanwhile, in April 1993, the defendant had received her father's Ford station wagon from the estate, and the plaintiff was involved in a motor vehicle accident when she was driving it. The defendant says that she subsequently paid $3,000.00 to the GIO for property damage caused in this accident; whereas the plaintiff says that the amount was about $2,000.00 and paid from the joint account.
On 21st May 1993, the defendant purchased a second-hand Toyota Forerunner motor vehicle for about $25,000.00: she may have traded in her father's Ford station wagon for this. In about June 1993, the plaintiff sold her Torana motor vehicle for about $600.00. According to the plaintiff, this was because the defendant said she would buy her a car: the defendant denies this. In about October or November 1993, the defendant purchased a Ford F100 vehicle.
According to the plaintiff, the defendant at this time said she could have the
Toyota; whereas according to the defendant, she said the plaintiff could use the Toyota.
 .
There were further visits by the defendant to her GP in November and
December 1993. The visit in November noted anxiety related to fear of contracting HIV in March this year: a blood test was taken which was negative.
A note of a later consultation in November recorded that the defendant had been the victim of a sexual assault while intoxicated with alcohol in
March 1993, and had not revealed this information to anyone. The notes of a consultation on 9th December 1993 recorded that the defendant had discussed the assault with "partner", "v. mild panic attacks", and "alcohol abuse from age 10 to 30, ceased earlier this year".
In late , the plaintiff and defendant discussed the purchase of land; and in December 1993, the defendant purchased 16 acres of land at Williamtown for $107,000.00, paid for by money from her father's estate.
Between January and June 1994, the plaintiff attended technical college two days per week.
At the end of May or early June 1994, the plaintiff and defendant decided to separate.
In June 1994, the defendant applied for permanent residency in
Canada. She offered to take the plaintiff and the children for a month's holiday in Canada, and the plaintiff accepted. This holiday took place between rd June 1994 and 18th July 1994.
Between th July 1994 and 10th August 1994, the plaintiff and the defendant lived in the same house at Salt Ash, but it is common ground that they were living separately at that stage.
In early August 1994, the defendant returned to Canada. Soon after returning to Canada, the defendant met J, and began a lesbian relationship with her.
There were many telephone calls between the plaintiff and the defendant during September and October 1994. During one telephone call in September , the plaintiff asked the defendant to put half the Salt Ash property in the children's' names, and to permit the plaintiff to buy the other half from her. The defendant refused to do this.
On 2nd October 1994, the defendant made another will, this time in
British Columbia. By this will, she left her whole estate to J, except that there was a gift of $10,000.00 each to the plaintiff's son, the plaintiff's daughter, and to H.
In October 1994, the plaintiff caused a caveat to be lodged over the Salt
Ash property.
On 2nd November 1994, the defendant returned to Australia, with J, and went to the Salt Ash property. She found the Toyota motor vehicle missing, and it is common ground that it has been detained by the plaintiff. Apparently at around the time the defendant went to the Salt Ash property, the plaintiff and the children went to stay with the neighbours, R and S.
On 7th November 1994, the plaintiff handed to the police a gun belonging to the defendant which she had taken from the Salt Ash property. (It was a
Luger pistol which the defendant's father had apparently got from his grandfather). The plaintiff made a statement to the police, in which she said that, in a telephone call from Canada, the defendant had said that she would put a bullet in her head. In this statement, the plaintiff said that she had found the gun in the Salt Ash premises on 30th November, and taken it to the neighbour R. The statement did not say anything about finding bullets, but in her evidence the plaintiff said that she also found bullets in the house. The defendant denied that she had any bullets in the house. As a result of this statement, the police came to the Salt Ash property and arrested the defendant, and she was charged with a firearms offence. Later that day, the police were again at the Salt Ash property, and according to the defendant, the plaintiff shouted at her "You are going to jail for ten years for the gun, bitch. There goes your immigration. Let's see who gets the house now". The plaintiff denies having said these things. On 9th November, the firearm's charge against the defendant was dismissed under s.556A of the Crimes Act in the Raymond Terrace Local Court.
Later in November 1994, the plaintiff moved with the children to her mother's house in Strathfield, and these proceedings were commenced on 24th
November 1994.
On 22nd
December 1994, the Williamtown land was sold by the defendant for $125,000.00; and part of the proceeds of sale were used by the defendant to purchase land in British Columbia. The defendant received further money from the estate of her late father in March : $82,479.40 on 24th March, and $10,000.00 on 30th March. On 14th August 1995, the defendant made a new will, leaving all her estate to J, and if J did not survive her, to relatives of J.
Meanwhile, in February 1995, the plaintiff commenced employment at the
Advance Bank, and as at May 1995, she was earning $182.00 per week in that employment. She was also in receipt of Supporting
Parents Benefit of $99.00 per week and a family payment of $103.95 per week. As at May 1995, and at present, the plaintiff has very little assets, comprising a small amount of furniture and effects and some small savings.
The defendant is now living in Canada, and is unemployed. Her assets comprise the Salt Ash property (or proceeds thereof) worth around $200,000.00; the Shoal Bay property, which is still tenanted, worth about $150,000.00 to $200,000.00; land Crescent Valley, British Columbia purchased for $82,500.00, on which the defendant and J are erecting a house, on which something like $100,000.00 to $150,000.00 has already been spent; the
Ford motor vehicle worth about $16,000.00, a tractor worth about $6,000.00 and the Toyota motor vehicle worth about $10,000.00; and some money in bank accounts, amounting to about $60,000.00 in October 1995 but perhaps now spent.
ISSUES
The plaintiff put her claim for a constructive trust on the following basis: that her contributions, financial and otherwise, to the acquisition of the Guildford property and subsequently to the acquisition and maintenance of the Salt Ash property, the purchaser of furniture and other fittings and the making of a home for the plaintiff and the defendant and the two children, including contributions to the maintenance and improvement of both properties, gave rise to an equity in her favour in respect of the Salt Ash property.
 .
The plaintiff's claim for child support was put on the following basis.
By virtue of her statements and her conduct by way of support for the plaintiff and her participation in the actions leading to the impregnation of the plaintiff and by her silence as to any contrary view, the defendant created or encouraged in the plaintiff a belief or assumption, or otherwise could be said to have promised to the plaintiff, that she, the defendant, would accept the role of parent to each of the children, and would in so doing accept responsibility for the material and general welfare of both children, and would support the plaintiff in providing for the needs of both children and of the plaintiff as their mother. In reliance on that promise or assumption, the plaintiff acted to her detriment by going about the actions which led to her conceiving each child and carrying each child to term. The defendant knew or intended that the plaintiff would act in reliance on the assumption; and the plaintiff's action in so relying will occasion detriment if the assumption or expectation is not fulfilled, in that the plaintiff will be left to bear the costs of providing for the material welfare of both children until they reach adulthood, and otherwise the plaintiff will suffer detriment in the form of income and opportunities foregone by virtue of her pregnancies, and also by virtue of the obligation she bears towards both children in terms of parenting and the provision of care. The defendant had failed to act to avoid that detriment, her action was unconscionable, and it was appropriate for the Court to give effect to the resulting estoppel by ordering payment of an appropriate lump sum by the defendant to the plaintiff in respect of child support.
On this matter, as well as disputing the plaintiff's allegations, the defendant seeks to answer the claim by relying on the primary liability of the sperm donor, as biological father, to support the children, public policy, and lack of clean hands.
In relation to the Toyota motor vehicle, the plaintiff's case is essentially one of gift.
I will consider the issues raised by these allegations in the following order: first, questions of credit; second, the main factual issues in the case, in particular the nature of the relationships between the defendant and the plaintiff and the children, the discussions and other transactions between the defendant and the plaintiff in relation to the plaintiff having the children, and the financial and other contributions made by the plaintiff in relation to the Guildford and Salt Ash properties; thirdly, the plaintiff's entitlement to the Toyota motor vehicle; fourthly, whether the plaintiff has made out a case for a constructive trust in relation to the Salt
Ash property; fifthly, whether the plaintiff has made out a case for an order for support of the children, this involving consideration particularly of the position of the biological father, reliance and reasonableness in relation to the plaintiff, and public policy; and finally, the conclusions which follow.
CREDIT
Mr. Evans for the plaintiff and Mr. Blackburn-Hart for the defendant have provided extensive written submissions in relation to all issues, and I will not repeat all of those submissions in this judgment.
It is unnecessary to reproduce their submissions in relation to credit.
 
Plaintiff
As regards the plaintiff's credit, it is clear that, in order to obtain the supporting parents benefit from the Department of Social Security, she deliberately misrepresented to the Department the position in relation to the father of each child; and indeed that she also made a false representation to obtain rental assistance. Mr. Evans submitted that I should take into account on this matter, in assessing the credit of the plaintiff, the difficulties faced by the parties in a lesbian relationship in society generally. However, even taking account of those difficulties, and of the plaintiff's wish to protect the biological father from liability, the fact that the plaintiff was prepared to tell deliberate lies to the Department must weigh against her credit. In my opinion also, the plaintiff somewhat exaggerated her role in the work done on the Guildford property, although I accept that she did give assistance, which was by no means negligible, in relation to this work. I accept the evidence of the defendant and two of the defendant's witnesses that, on 7th November 1994, the plaintiff did say words substantially as alleged by the defendant; and the plaintiff's outright denial of saying those words is another matter which affects her credit: there were no doubt a lot of words said in heat on that occasion, but I do not think that justifies or explains the plaintiff's outright denial of saying the words.
Other matters relied on by the defendant seem to me to be of less significance. It was submitted for the defendant that the plaintiff exaggerated by claiming that she would have been in employment but for the births; but I think this is substantially answered by the circumstance that the plaintiff did prejudice her chances of employment by going to Wollombi and then to Salt Ash with the defendant, in the second case, at least, on the initiative of the defendant.
Next, in my opinion, there was a threat to shoot the plaintiff made over the telephone, though whether it was reasonable for the plaintiff to take it seriously I cannot be certain; and I cannot find one way or the other what is the truth about the bullets which the plaintiff claims to have found. Having regard to the nature of the relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant, I do not find any inconsistency between the plaintiff's statement about violence to the Department of Housing made on 17th
February 1993 and the plaintiff's statement that she showed the defendant a card received on about 10th February 1993 shortly after it was received.
I accept the plaintiff's evidence that she did not know about the defendant having a sexual relationship with H.
However, the earlier matters to which I have referred mean that I cannot be confident of the plaintiff's evidence; although, for reasons I will give, I believe her evidence of the nature of the relationship between her and the defendant and of the conversations and transactions between them is closer to the truth than that of the defendant.
 
Defendant
As regards the defendant, there is in evidence a recent psychiatric report to the effect that the defendant suffers from an anxiety disorder, and that as a result she is likely not to perform at the optimum level in giving evidence; and I do make allowances for that. However, even making such allowances, in my opinion the defendant's credit is severely affected by her evidence that her relationship with the plaintiff was substantially one of convenience, that they were substantially just room-mates or flatmates, and that the reason why they did so much together was essentially so that the plaintiff could assist her with her psychological difficulties in dealing with the outside world. In my opinion, a number of matters make it clear that this evidence is a long way from the truth.
In my opinion, birthday, Christmas and other cards written by the defendant to the plaintiff indicate a close and loving relationship: although
I accept that it was the plaintiff who placed great importance on the exchange of cards, the defendant went along with the plaintiff on this matter, and
I do not believe the defendant was being dishonest in the very affectionate sentiments expressed by her on these cards. The defendant denied writing some of the cards, and in particular that containing the message of January or
February 1993 which I set out earlier; but in my opinion, the writing and printing on these cards is consistent, and I am sure that the plaintiff did not fabricate any of these cards, and that no-one else wrote them. The closeness and importance of the relationship to the defendant is also supported by the statements made to her doctor in March 1993, which, together with the message of January or February 1993, make it clear that the defendant, at that time, did regard the plaintiff and the children as her family, and had a very strong emotional attachment to them. Another factor pointing to the same conclusion is the defendant's will of August 1992, made at a time when, according to the defendant, she was having a sexual relationship with H about which she did not tell the plaintiff. If that evidence is true, the fact that, during the currency of such a relationship, the defendant made a will leaving everything to the plaintiff or the children, supports the view that it was to the plaintiff that the defendant felt thoroughly committed, and that, at the time, she regarded her relationship with H as something of a betrayal of the plaintiff.
Accordingly, even allowing for the psychiatric report,
I have to conclude that the defendant's evidence, particularly relating to her relationship and dealings with the plaintiff, is not reliable. The picture painted by the defendant of the relationship and dealings is very far from the truth. This does not necessarily mean that the evidence was given dishonestly: it may be that the defendant cannot now bring herself to believe that she did have such a strong relationship with the plaintiff, or that she did or said things reflecting such a relationship.
There is some further support for this view of the defendant in the defendant's denial of assurances given about the children to the plaintiff's mother, and statements about her intentions in relation to the plaintiff and the children made to R and S. In my opinion, none of the other witnesses in the case set out to give false evidence: there were defects of recollection, and reconstructions affected by their sympathies; but on the whole, I believe their evidence is reasonably accurate, and I substantially accept the evidence of the plaintiff's mother and of R and S about assurances and statements made by the defendant. other matters relied on by the plaintiff are of less significance: I do not think the defendant's evidence about separate accounts, the plaintiff giving little assistance in the rubbish removal business, or the defendant's alleged evasion concerning questions on her role as a parent or as part of a family, take the matter very much further.
FACTUAL ISSUES
I have already indicated my view that the relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant was a very strong emotional attachment on both sides. However, it is also clear that the relationship was in some respects a dysfunctional one, involving, at times, frequent severe arguments, some physical violence, and periods of separation. The plaintiff's evidence was to the effect that this was largely due to the defendant's drinking and psychological problems, and that on a number of occasions there were reconciliations when the defendant promised to change her conduct; and I substantially accept this evidence. It is supported by the GP's notes and the defendant's message of January or February 1993. I do not accept the defendant's evidence that she told the plaintiff that she did not love the plaintiff, or that she warned the plaintiff that the relationship was not a permanent one. It may be that the nature of the relationship was not such as to inspire confidence in a dispassionate person that the relationship was permanent; but during the years 1989 to 1992, at least, neither the plaintiff nor the defendant was dispassionate concerning this relationship.
As regards the circumstances in which the children were conceived, I accept that the initiative for this came very much from the plaintiff, and it may be that the plaintiff has to some extent exaggerated the enthusiasm of the defendant for her having children. I cannot find the exact conversations, but
I think the plaintiff's version is closer to the truth than the defendant's: the defendant did not say words to the effect that the plaintiff would or could be on her own in relation to the children or that the relationship was not permanent; but the defendant did say words to the effect that the first child (at least) would be "our baby" and that the plaintiff and the defendant and the child would be "a family". The defendant did participate in the artificial conception procedure, at least to the extent of using her body to keep the sperm warm while being taken to the plaintiff. I am not able to be sure whether the defendant did go to Sydney in connection with the conception of the second child, but I am satisfied that the defendant did agree to the plaintiff having a second child, in circumstances such as to indicate that the defendant's relationship with this child would be the same as with the first child.
Accordingly, I accept that, although the initiative came from the plaintiff, the defendant did by her words and actions convey to the plaintiff that the defendant would act with the plaintiff as a parent of the children, and would assist and contribute to the raising of the children, so long as this was necessary.
I have already indicated that I substantially accept evidence from the plaintiff's mother and from R and S concerning assurances given by the defendant. These include statements made in about 1993 to the plaintiff's mother to the effect that, if anything happened to the defendant, the children would be well provided for; and similar statements to the plaintiff's mother in about the middle of 1994. I accept that in about the middle of 1994, the defendant said to R words to the effect that she would get the plaintiff a house, and to S words to the effect that the plaintiff could have "the house", meaning the Salt
Ash property. I accept that the defendant said words to the plaintiff's mother in about September 1994 to the effect that the plaintiff could have the furniture and the four-wheel drive (meaning the Toyota) and that she would always see that the children had a secure roof over their heads. I accept that in telephone conversations to the plaintiff in about
September 1994, the defendant at first expressed interest in having the children over to Canada from time to time, and that she said words to the effect that she would never see the children go without. I also accept that later, the defendant said to the plaintiff words to the effect that, if the plaintiff had not pressured her, she would have given her the Williamtown property, the motor vehicle and furniture. In my opinion, this confirms the views that I reached on the nature of the relationship and the dealings in relation to the children.
As regards the financial and other contributions said to have been made by the plaintiff, Mr. Evans submitted that, in the period of the relationship, the defendant had income of just over $54,000.00 while the plaintiff's income amounted to well over $83,000.00, in each case leaving aside income from the rubbish removal and nursery businesses. He submitted that there were contributions by the plaintiff in the form of labour and money towards improvements to the Guildford property, including knocking out walls, landscaping the backyard, employing tradespersons to hang doors and replace windows, painting the house, re-roofing the house, renovating the bathroom, replacing light fittings, and making curtains. Mr. Evans also relied on the plaintiff's participation in the rubbish removal business, foregone income in carrying and caring for the children, contributing to the painting of the Salt
Ash property, contributing to the joint account which was used to make payments due on the loan secured on the Salt Ash property, and by non-financial contributions in household work.
Mr. Blackburn-Hart submitted that the Guildford house was acquired from funds of the defendant and by a loan from her father, interest free. The only possible monetary contribution by the plaintiff was towards $1,400.00 of the deposit of $6,400.00. There was no evidence of common intention, and no financing from pooled earnings. The vast majority of work in renovating
Guildford was done by the defendant. As regards Salt Ash, there were no instalments made under the ANZ mortgage. Household expenses were shared, but this was not in relation to the provision of accommodation.
In my opinion, the evidence does justify a finding that the plaintiff's income over the period of the relationship, and her contribution to living expenses, were greater than that of the defendant, and I think it is probable that she made some unquantifiable financial contribution to improvements to the Guildford property. In my opinion also, she did contribute work to these improvements, which was substantial although substantially less than the work done by the defendant. The only other financial contribution which the evidence could support is a contribution of up to about one half of the $1,400.00 of the deposit on Guildford which is not otherwise accounted for.
Paragraph 4 of the statement of claim alleges that the plaintiff and the defendant together contributed the sum of $1,000.00 to the purchase price of the Guildford property; and I am satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the plaintiff did make a contribution to that purchase price which is appropriately assessed at $500.00.
TOYOTA MOTOR VEHICLE
The plaintiff's evidence was to the effect that, in about
December 1993, the defendant said to her words to the effect "You can have the Forerunner.
You get the papers and I'll sign the back to put it in your name". Thereafter, the plaintiff used the Toyota, while the defendant used the Ford which she purchased at around that time. Nothing was done to transfer the registration of the Toyota to the plaintiff. The defendant denies making any such statement.
Because of my reservations about the plaintiff's credibility, I cannot be sure that there was a conversation precisely as claimed by the plaintiff. In any event, without a delivery of the vehicle or of keys, I do not believe that the statement could amount to a gift; and it does not amount to a declaration of trust. In my opinion, the plaintiff has not made out a case of ownership of the Toyota.
CONSTRUCTIVE TRUST
Mr. Evans for the plaintiff relied on the pooling of resources and the contributions referred to earlier; and he referred to Baumgartner v.
Baumgartner <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 137], per Kirby, P, and Green v. Green [(1989) 17 NSWLR 343.]
Mr. Blackburn-Hart submitted that, if there was any pooling at all, it was merely to pay household and living expenses, not accommodation. There was no evidence that the plaintiff acted in reliance on any expectation of an interest in property.
In my opinion, in circumstances where accommodation was almost entirely provided by the defendant, the plaintiff's somewhat greater contribution to living expenses does not suggest any inequity, much less provide any basis for a constructive trust. In my opinion, the unquantifiable financial contributions and the work done by the plaintiff in relation to improvements likewise does not, as the law stands, support the finding of a constructive trust; nor does the plaintiff's contribution in looking after the children.
The contribution by the plaintiff of $500.00 out of a total purchase price of $64,000.00 could possibly give rise to a resulting trust of a 1/128th share of the Guildford property, which, when traced through to the Salt Ash property, could perhaps translate to an interest of about $1,000.00 in the Salt Ash property. The statement of claim did not refer to a resulting trust, and there might in any event be some doubt whether the presumption of intention which is the basis of resulting trust would arise from such a relatively small contribution. If this was the only basis for the plaintiff's claim, it could possibly be regarded as de minimus. However, as will be seen, I do think the plaintiff is entitled to relief in relation to child support, and I will take this matter generally into account in formulating my ultimate orders, rather than giving any relief on the basis of constructive trust.
CHILD SUPPORT
Position of the Biological Father [Sections 66A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66a.html) and [66B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66b.html) of the [Family Law Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cwlth) make it clear that the "parents of a child" have "the primary duty to maintain the child".
[Section 60E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s60e.html) of that Act makes it clear that this provision extends to New
South Wales. The only applicable definition of "parent" in the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) is in s.60 of the Act, which relates only to a child who has been adopted.
There is provision in [s.60B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s60b.html) in relation to children born as a result of an artificial conception procedure, but for reasons I will come to, that provision is not applicable to this case. However, that still leaves the ordinary meaning of "parent" as possibly caught by [s.66A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66a.html) and s.[66B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66b.html), and it may be that the biological father of a child born by artificial conception procedure is within that ordinary meaning.
 .
However, s.6 of the Artificial Conception Act 1984 provides as follows: .(1) Where a woman becomes pregnant by means of - artificial insemination; or the procedure of implanting in her womb an ovum (whether or not produced by her) fertilised outside her body, any man (not being, in the case of a married woman, her husband) who produced semen used for the artificial insemination of the procedure shall, for all purposes, be presumed not to have caused the pregnancy and not to be the father of any child born as a result of the pregnancy.

The presumption of law that arises by virtue of subsection is irrebuttable.
There is no definition of "artificial insemination", but there seems no doubt, and it seems to be common ground, that the procedure adopted in this case does amount to artificial insemination. The plaintiff's evidence that the donor's semen was inserted in her vagina by means of a syringe is corroborated by the defendant in relation to the first child; and, even though I have reservations about the plaintiff's credibility and there is no corroboration in relation to the second child, I find on the balance of probabilities that this procedure was adopted also for the second child.
Mr. Blackburn-Hart submitted that s.6 did not apply to this case. He submitted that there was no "husband" within the meaning of s.6 in this case, and there was no legislative intention that the term should apply to a same-sex partner. He referred to CM v. CC [377 A 2d 821] (1977) New Jersey for the proposition that a known donor of sperm should be considered the child's father, and that the courts showed a policy that a child have a father as well as a mother. He submitted that the Artificial Conception Act should not apply where the donor of the sperm is known, so as to give effect to the parties' attempt to evade the provisions of the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) in order to limit or abrogate the responsibility of one of the parents to support the child. He submitted that the purpose of the
Artificial Conception Act was not directed to facilitate an unmarried woman to conceive and bear a child without sexual intercourse, so as to relieve the biological father from liability for support: see People v. Sorensen [68 Cal 2d 280] (1985), KS v. GS [182 NJ
Super 102], 440A 2d 64 (1981).
Mr. Blackburn-Hart also referred to [s.21C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/s21c.html) of the [Human Tissue Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/) , which requires the recipient of any donor's semen, intended for use for the artificial insemination of a woman, to obtain a certificate from the donor relating to the medical suitability of the donor, in the prescribed form and witnessed by a prescribed person or a person of the prescribed class. Under
Regulation 8, the prescribed person is a medical practitioner, a nurse, or a person nominated by the person's employer whose nomination is approved by the
Secretary, who is employed at the place at which the semen is to be obtained or received. There is a penalty of $200.00 for non-compliance.
In my opinion, the words of s.6 are too clear to be read down in the way suggested by Mr. Blackburn-Hart. It does appear that there were in this case breaches of [s.21C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/s21c.html) of the [Human Tissue Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/), because its provisions can only be complied with where semen is obtained or received at a place employing a medical practitioner, a nurse, or a person whose nomination as witness is approved by the Secretary.
However, there is nothing in s.6 of the Artificial
Conception Act which says that it does not apply when the artificial insemination takes place in breach of [s.21C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/s21c.html) of the [Human Tissue Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/). Nor do the words of [s.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/s6.html) permit it being restricted to a case where the woman concerned has a husband.
Accordingly, I do not think that any public policy argument can prevent the application of [s.6.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/s6.html) There may be a real question as to whether this is a desirable situation: in general terms, it does seem desirable that, where possible, a child who is born should have the benefit of a commitment to support by two people and a legal liability to support undertaken by these two people. It appears that the effect of [s.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/s6.html) in such as case as this is to take away from a child the benefit of a right to support from the biological father, without substituting a right to support from some other person.
Although this was not submitted directly by Mr. Blackburn-Hart, there does seem to me to be a question whether [ss.66A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66a.html) and [66B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66b.html) of the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) might override s.6 of the Artificial Conception Act pursuant to [s.109](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s109.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/). Were I to take the view that, prima facie, that is the position, it could be necessary to re-list the matter for further submissions, and possibly notify the Crown Law authorities that such a submission is to be considered. However, I have come to the view that this is not the case. I have already noted that [s.60B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s60b.html) of the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) deals with children born as a result of artificial conception procedures. [Section 60B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s60b.html) is in the following terms: 
B.(1) Where: a child is born to a woman as a result of the carrying out of an artificial conception while the woman was married to a man; and either of the following paragraphs apply: the procedure was carried out with their consent; under a prescribed law of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory, the child is a child of the woman and of the man; then, whether or not the child is biologically a child of the woman and of the man, the child is their child.

Where: a child is born to a woman as a result of the carrying out of an artificial conception procedure; and under a prescribed law of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory, the child is a child of the woman; then, whether or not the child is biologically a child of the woman, the child is her child.
 
Where: a child is born to a woman as a result of the carrying out of an artificial conception procedure; and under a prescribed law of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory, the child is a child of a man; then, whether or not the child is biologically a child of the man, the child is his child.

Where a person lives with another person as the husband or wife of the first-mentioned person on a bona fide domestic basis although not legally married to that person, subsection applies in relation to them as if: they were married to each other; and neither person were married to any other person.

For the purposes of subsection (1), a person shall be presumed to have consented to an artificial conception procedure being carried out unless it is proved, on the balance of probabilities, that the person did not consent.
 .
Under Regulation 12C, the New South Wales Artificial Conception Act is a prescribed law for the purposes of s.60B(1). However, there is no prescribed law of the State of New South Wales in relation to s.60B(2) or (3); and accordingly s.60B has no application to this case.
That does not itself exclude the possibility that a sperm donor is, in the circumstances of this case, a "parent" within [ss.66A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66a.html) and [66B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66b.html) of the [Family
Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/). However, it is necessary to note the [Child Support (Assessment) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/csa1989294/) (Cwlth), which made provision for determining the financial support payable by parents for their children, and which amended the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/), including Pt.VII of that Act. Under [s.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/csa1989294/s7.html) of the [Child Support (Assessment) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/csa1989294/), unless the contrary intention appears, expressions used in that Act, and in
Pt.VII of the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) are to have the same respective meanings as in that Part; and ss.60, [60B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s60b.html), [66A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66a.html) and [66B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66b.html) are all in Pt.VII of the [Family Law
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/). In s.5 of the Child Support Assessment Act 1989, the word "parent" is defined as follows: "Parent" means: when used in relation to a child who has been adopted - an adoptive parent of the child; and when used in relation to a child born because of the carrying out of an artificial conception procedure - a person who is a parent of the child under [section 60B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s60b.html) of the [Family Law Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/).
In my opinion, that definition (by using the word "means" rather than "includes") makes it clear that, in relation to a child born in the carrying out of an artificial conception procedure, the only person or persons who satisfy the definition of parent in the Child Support Assessment Act will (so far as New South Wales is concerned) be persons who come within s.60B(1). A biological parent, who donated sperm, will not be a parent, unless caught by s.60B(1).
In all those circumstances, particularly having regard to s.7 of the
Child Support Assessment Act 1989 and the fact that that Act made amendments to Pt.VII of the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/), I do not believe I could find an intention in [ss.66A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66a.html) and [66B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66b.html) of the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) to override s.6 of the Artificial
Conception Act. Again, there may be a question as to whether it was really intended by the definition of "parent" in [s.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/csa1989294/s5.html) of the [Child Support
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/csa1989294/) in effect to deprive a child of a right to support from a biological parent, without substituting anyone else; but that is the clear effect of the words.
Before leaving this topic, I should note that Mr. Blackburn-Hart also referred to the Children (Equality of Status) Act 1976, and he placed reliance on s.6 of that Act as ensuring that the biological father is to be treated as the father of the child; and he referred to Youngman v. Lawson [(1981) FLC -105.] However, I do not think that this can qualify the effect of s.6 of the
Artificial Conception Act.
 
Public Policy and Clean Hands
Mr. Blackburn-Hart submitted that the plaintiff had participated in an agreement which attempted to exclude the known biological father from supporting and assisting to rear his own children; see Nancy S. v. Michael G.
[279 Cal.Rptr. 212] at 219. The plaintiff in effect was seeking specific performance of an agreement which has this consequence. He submitted that the paramount consideration in the practice of artificial insemination is the protection of public health and the welfare of the child.
He submitted that the formation of stable families is a socially desirable necessary aim; and to visit legal obligations upon non-parents to support a child in a homosexual or lesbian relationship is contrary to public policy in that: it will encourage the conception of children by artificial insemination in the absence of a father; will present as "normal" a relationship which is not recognised by the child maintenance legislation; it will encourage the evasion of provisions of the [Human Tissue Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hta1983160/); and will encourage the bringing into the world of children without a father. See Re Marriage of AJN and JMN [144 WIS 2d 99] (1987). Furthermore, he submitted, the plaintiff has unclean hands and cannot rely on the defendant's alleged unconscionable conduct to obtain financial support for the children, because of her own part in making the agreement and forming it.
I note that the defence in this case does not contain any pleading of a defence of public policy or unclean hands, and it is questionable whether such defences could be relied on without an amendment. In any event, I do not believe it is contrary to public policy for a court to find that a person who is living in a lesbian relationship with the mother of a child, conceived by artificial insemination, and who also participates in the act of conception and acts as a parent to the child or children thereby conceived, is liable to provide material support for that child. If it is thought desirable to discourage the use of artificial conception procedures in circumstances where there are not two people who undertake to be the parents of the child, then that would need to be addressed by the legislature.
 
Elements of Estoppel
Mr. Evans relied on the principles of equitable estoppel laid down by the
High Court in Waltons Stores
Ltd. v. Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] as applied, for instance, in S. and E. Promotions Pty. Limited v. Tobin Bros.
 <case>; [(1994) 122 ALR 637.] at,615-616, and Austral Standard Cables Pty. Limited v. Walker Nominees [(1992) NSWLR 524] at 540. I summarised how Mr. Evans sought to apply these principles to the present case under the heading "Issues" above.

Mr. Blackburn-Hart submitted that I should not accept that the plaintiff had relied on any assumption created by the defendant, and that, if there was any reliance, such reliance was unreasonable. He noted that neither the donor of the semen nor the plaintiff's acquaintance who introduced him were called as witnesses. He submitted that any reliance would have been unreasonable, because it was highly unlikely that the relationship would endure (in that the plaintiff was bisexual, there were constant fights and arguments, there were separations of a total of seven months during the relationship, the relationship was "just crazy all the time"). Furthermore, he submitted, in the context of this relationship having children was not a detriment: it was contrary to public policy to hold that a woman has acted to her detriment in allowing a normal pregnancy to continue: cf. Cook v. Cook (1986) DFC 95-039 at p 75,433, and the authorities cited by Kirby, P in CES v. Superclinics, Court of Appeal, 22nd September 1995, unreported. Mr. Blackburn-Hart also relied on obiter comments by Deane, J. in Commonwealth v. Verwaven (1990) 170 CLR 394 at -5, to the effect that estoppel may be used as a sword only where the claim is based on an independent cause of action arising under ordinary principles of law. Further, there had to be proportionality between the remedy and the detriment, and there could be no proportionality where no claim was made against the biological father.
In my opinion, there was in this case the creation or encouragement by the defendant in the plaintiff of an assumption that a promise by the defendant would be performed, namely a promise that the defendant would act with the plaintiff as parents of the two children, and would assist and contribute to the raising of these children, for so long as this was necessary. In my opinion, the plaintiff did rely on this assumption in deciding to have each of the children, and the defendant knew or intended that she would do so. I do not understand it to be an independent part of the plaintiff's cause of action that she establish that her reliance was reasonable, and I do not consider it necessary for me to make a positive finding that the plaintiff's conduct was reasonable. However, I do not consider that there was any such element of unreasonableness as to prejudice the finding that there was reliance, and that this was intended by the defendant.
On the question of detriment, I do not believe that it is necessary in this case to find that the plaintiff is worse off having had the children than she would have been if she had not had them, all things considered; thereby raising both difficult public policy issues as well as difficult issues of balancing benefits and detriments. In my opinion, it is sufficient that the plaintiff is now faced with the expensive and onerous task of bringing up two children on her own, as a result of her reliance on an assumption encouraged by the defendant; whereas if the defendant had acted in accordance with that assumption, the plaintiff would have had the defendant's assistance in this task. In my opinion, that is a sufficient detriment. In my opinion also, it is unconscionable for the defendant now to seek to make no contribution whatsoever to the upbringing of the children. Accordingly, in my opinion, the plaintiff is entitled to relief on the basis of equitable estoppel.
QUANTIFICATION
The plaintiff relied on a report by Professor Peter McDonald as to the cost of raising children from the end of May 1994 to each child's 18th birthday. Based on what he calls the Expenditure Survey approach, Professor
McDonald produced a table showing this cost, relative to various levels of parental gross income: 
Joint Gross Incomes of    Costs of Children plaintiff and defendant $25,000          $202,703 $35,000          $236,333 $45,000          $266,947 $55,000          $294,778 $65,000 $319,594
Professor McDonald assumed that the return on the defendant's inheritance from her father meant that the combined gross income would be at least $65,000.00; and he applied the formula under the [Child Support
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/csa1989294/) to the apportionment of these costs between the parents (assuming an 8% return on the defendant's inheritance) to arrive at a share to be borne by the defendant of about $190,000.00 out of the total of just under $320,000.00 - or up to about $210,000.00 if the defendant were to have additional income from paid work.
Professor McDonald also calculated the indirect cost of the children to the plaintiff as mother (that is, lost wages less social security payments) amounting to $100,000.00 - so that if the defendant were to bear half of this loss, the defendant's total liability should be around $250,000.00.
Mr. Blackburn-Hart for the defendant submitted there were the following deficiencies in this approach: the income of the defendant was far less than
Professor McDonald assumed; no indirect cost should be allowed, because the plaintiff's wish was to have children; there should be discounts for vicissitudes (at least 10%) and for the present receipt of future costs (on at least the 3% basis); the support should only be to age 16; and there should be allowance for contribution from the biological father.
In my opinion, in relation to (1), as submitted by Mr. Evans for the plaintiff, choices by the defendant which reduced her income from that which might reasonably have been expected from the inheritance and from work should not reduce her liability. I think it is reasonable to proceed on the basis of anticipated joint income in the order of $65,000.00, and thus to put the costs of the children at around $320,000.00; and to put the defendant's share at $200,000.00. As regards (2), in my opinion the indirect costs should not be allowed, both because it was primarily the plaintiff's wish to have children (so that fairness does not require that the defendant share indirect costs), and also because this would raise the almost impossible question of balancing the benefits and burdens to the plaintiff of having children. As regards (3), in my opinion there should be no discount for vicissitudes, because vicissitudes could equally increase the costs. In my opinion, however, the lump sum should be discounted on the 3% basis to allow for the present receipt of future costs. I will adopt the defendant's calculation of $48,775.00 deductions from the defendant's contribution, unless some other figure is justified prior to my giving final judgment. As regards (4), in my opinion the support should be calculated to age 18. As regards (5), I have already given my reasons for disregarding any liability or contribution from the biological father.
Accordingly, in my opinion, there should be lump sum support ordered in the sum of $151,125.00.
CONCLUSION
For the reasons I have given, I propose to order that the defendant provide just over $150,000.00 towards the costs of raising the children.
I would not propose that this be made by way of outright payment to the plaintiff. The payment is not to the plaintiff for her benefit, but must strictly be used for the benefit of the children. Furthermore, it is necessary to protect the interests of the community, which has already paid substantial child support to the plaintiff and no doubt will continue to do so, by ensuring that this award is used appropriately and that continuing child support is provided at an appropriate level and on an appropriate basis. In my opinion, the most appropriate application of this money would be to buy annuities for each child, providing for monthly payments to the plaintiff for the benefit of the children, in equal amounts, to run out when each child attains 18 years. Until that happens, the money should be placed in an interest bearing account in the names of both solicitors, with interest being credited monthly, if that can be arranged, and immediately paid out to the plaintiff for the benefit of the children.
A copy of this judgment should be given to the
Department of Social
Security, and if the Department wishes to support some other application of the money, then it will be open to the Department to seek that this happen. It may even be that the Department may allege that money has been paid to the plaintiff, for the benefit of the children, which would not have been paid but for misrepresentations by the plaintiff and/or lack of support from the defendant, which the Department claims should be refunded from the amount provided as a result of this judgment. I am very doubtful if that would be an appropriate course, but I cannot exclude it as a possibility.
For those reasons, as I have foreshadowed, my order will provide initially for the payment of the money into an interest-bearing account, and I will hear submissions as to how it should be dealt with thereafter.
It also follows from my reasons that the plaintiff should be ordered to return the
Toyota vehicle to the defendant, and I will make such an order.
As regards costs, my present view is that the plaintiff has been substantially successful, and that there should be an order that the defendant pay her costs. However, I will hear further submissions on this.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/43.html  
