

Regina versus Glenda Lillian Lock [1996] NSWSC 360 (19 August 1996) `REGINA versus GLENDA LILLIAN LOCK ` `70022/95` `WEDNESDAY 14 AUGUST 1996` `THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION` `SMART J` ` ` `JUDGMENT` `(On the admissibility of certain material sought to be lead by the
Crown)` ` ` `HIS HONOUR: After the arraignment of the accused on a charge of murdering
John Hugh McCahon on 1 October 1994 and her plea of not guilty but prior to the jury being empanelled the admissibility of certain material which the
Crown wished to lead was argued.` ` The deceased died from blood loss as the result of a stab wound inflicted by the accused. She denies that she intended to inflict grievous bodily harm.
While she does not dispute that she took hold of a kitchen knife and pointed it at the deceased, she says this was to ward him off and that the actual insertion of the knife was accidental. She did not intend to stab him. She relies strongly on self defence.` ` For a number of years the deceased and the accused lived in premises he owned at 129 Abbott Road, Seven Hills in a de facto relationship. That relationship ceased about 18 months prior to his death. From that time the accused continued, with some breaks, to live in his home but slept in a different room. They kept each other's company and went out together socially.
The relationship seems to have been characterized by violent conduct on the part of each towards the other. Excessive drinking often triggered the incidents.` ` In her record of interview she asserted that he had frequently been violent towards her. She instanced two broken collarbones, two broken ankles and many black eyes. She said that she had, "stabbed him once before in the arm, to get him away from me, because he's hurt me before." She said, "I forewarn (?forearm) myself, if I know that he's going to be violent and I - I take care of myself first." She claimed that she knew that he was going to be violent because, "I saw how angry he was when he came in the door." She said that she was being screamed at and felt threatened and that she remembered him coming at her.` ` She agreed that she had not been struck by him on the night of the incident and had received no injuries. Her case of self defence, perhaps anticipatory self defence, was based in large part on his conduct on previous occasions and the signs that she claimed she detected on the night.` ` There is a considerable body of admissible evidence as to the injuries inflicted on the deceased and the troubled relationship between them.` ` For example, the deceased's daughter said in her statement that over the last three years she had seen lacerations and bruising over her father's face.
The nextdoor neighbour Mr C.E. Bush said that the accused and the deceased seemed to fight about four or five times a week. He heard fighting, yelling and screaming. He heard the accused most. He had also seen the deceased with a few facial cuts. He had also seen the accused with a few black eyes.` ` Miss K.M. Summerill, who lived with Mr Bush, also heard loud arguments from
They became more aggressive. She could hear objects being thrown and windows being smashed. Mostly the accused's voice was the louder. Most of the arguments were alcohol related. Over the years she saw lacerations to the deceased's face, arm and chest area. She saw the accused with a broken left leg and a broken left foot. Around Christmas 1993 the accused had her right arm in a sling. Shortly after that the accused had an injured left arm. Miss
Summerill saw the accused with many black eyes. The accused was frequently intoxicated.` ` Mr S. Skorniakoff, a nextdoor neighbour, had known the deceased all his life. He too was aware of arguments between the deceased and the accused and of them becoming more violent with objects being thrown. Over the last 12 months the arguments became more frequent. The police and the ambulance visited the deceased's house on occasions after midnight.` ` Counsel for the accused stated that he did not object to the general evidence describing the relationship between the accused and the deceased.` ` Counsel also relied on her four admissions to hospital on 4 May 1989 (attempted suicide using gas oven), on 2 October 1990 (overdose of tablets), June 1993 (overdose of tablets) and 15 March 1994 (turning on gas). On each occasion she gave a history to the hospital of prior domestic violence of some intensity. Reliance was also placed on an occasion in June 1992 and February , when she called the police to the house.` ` The Crown relied on the accused stabbing the deceased on 19 October 1990 in the left arm with a 30cm carving knife and her subsequent conviction of malicious wounding following a plea of guilty. The Crown also relied on the accused receiving a laceration to the left side of the chest and being in hospital from 29 to 31 August 1993 and being off work for two weeks. The Crown contended that she injured the deceased with a knife.` ` The Crown contends that when the accused becomes heavily intoxicated, she loses her self control and becomes very aggressive.` ` The accused strongly objected to the admission of any evidence relating to incidents involving a knife, to the deceased hiding knives from the accused and generally as to the use by her of knives.` ` The accused submitted that evidence as to knives was not relationship evidence but tendency evidence and that it failed to meet the standard required by [s97](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) for the admission of tendency evidence.` ` The knife evidence broadly divides into two parts. The first part relates to incidents in which either the accused has admitted that a knife was used, or there is other admissible evidence of a knife being used. There is also the evidence of the daughter and the neighbours as to lacerations seen on the deceased.` ` The second part relates to statements made by the deceased as to hiding knives in the house in fear of her stabbing him and his generally stated fear that she would stab him or kill him.` ` As earlier stated, the issues of accident and intent to inflict grievous bodily harm and self defence arise. As to self defence, the Crown has to establish either:` `` that the accused did not believe it was necessary to stab the deceased with the intention of inflicting grievous bodily harm; or there were no reasonable grounds for forming that belief.

Reasonable grounds include the reasonable apprehension on the part of the accused that unless she acted she would face death or injury.

In R versus Taylor CCA unreported 18 April 1995, Hunt CJ at CL at pp 4-5 emphasised the difference between relationship and propensity evidence. In R v Frawley [69 ACrimR 208], Gleeson CJ at 217-223 analysed relationship evidence in considerable detail.

The relationship in this case was a most unusual one. It was argumentative and violent and characterized by intoxication, especially on her part. She seems to become very strident, if some of the evidence is accepted. In their more placid moments there seems to have been affection between them. They seemed to provide each other with companionship and to have gone out together. There is material suggesting a love-hate relationship.

There is material suggesting that one feature of the relationship was her interest in and his fear of knives and her use of them during arguments. To leave this out would be to give an incomplete and unbalanced view of the relationship. I think that this is a feature of some weight where there are questions whether the stabbing, as distinct from holding the knife to warn off, was deliberate and where the Crown seeks to establish that she did not believe that it was necessary to protect herself, to stab the deceased with the intention of inflicting grievous bodily harm.

On one view of her record of interview she seemed to be suggesting that if she believed that he was angry and an argument occurred, she took hold of a knife to keep him away.

I am unable to accept the arguments of counsel for the accused that the relationship is relevantly sufficiently described omitting the knife evidence.
She gave an account of their relationship. The objective evidence and his view of the position are of consequence. There is material that she behaved aggressively towards him on occasions for no apparent, or understandable reason except liquor. The whole picture is needed.

I turn to deal with the individual items. I propose to deal with both the accused's objections (often as to relevance) and the hearsay aspect.

Item 1 
Asserted Fact: The accused stabbed the deceased in the right side rib area between about 6 October and 13 October 1990.

The Crown seeks to lead evidence from a police officer (Constable Gligorevic), that she told the police on 20 October 1990, "I stabbed him (the deceased) a week ago." She does not give the context but it would be open to her to do so.
She will be able to lead evidence of an overdose of tablets on 2 October 1990, of his conduct on or prior to that date and the statements which she made to the hospital authorities on that date. It is possible that the stabbing was related to, or arose out of, or was part of the incident of 2 October 1990. I regard this material as forming part of the relationship. I would admit the evidence of what she told the police.

The Crown seeks to have admitted what the deceased said to the police at
Blacktown Hospital on 20 October 1990, as contained in his written statement of that date. He said, "About two weeks ago she stabbed me in the right side rib area and police were also called then. She is alright without the grog. She had tried to overdose on my tablets twice. She just needs help. When I get home I have to hide the knives and ashtrays from Glenda." 
I think that this representation was made in circumstances that make it highly probable that the representation is reliable. She had tried to overdose twice, according to the hospital records. She admitted that she had earlier stabbed him. She estimated that it was about one week prior to 20 October 1990, while he thought it was about two weeks. The stabbing occurred and the slight difference in time estimates is inconsequential. I would admit this evidence under [s65(2)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). There is no good discretionary reason to exclude it.

Item 2 
Asserted Fact: On 19 October 1990 the accused stabbed the deceased in his left arm with a knife from the kitchen. They had had an argument in a hotel about one to one and a half hours previously. When the deceased returned home the accused was in bed. She then attacked him, unprovoked, one minute after the deceased has sat down alone in the kitchen.

Material to this effect appears in the statement made by the deceased to the police (Constable Gligorevic) on 20 October 1990 at Blacktown Hospital.

When the police attended at the home they saw a 30cm long black handled carving knife, with what appeared to be blood on the blade. When she spoke to the police she used wild, even ferocious language. She was very agitated and disturbed. She stated that she could not remember the details of what happened after she arrived home and yelled at the deceased. She did plead guilty at some stage and was convicted of malicious wounding.

For the reasons given earlier, I would admit what she said in relation to the incident of the night of 19 October 1990 and the formal documents, as to the conviction.

I would also admit what the deceased told the police pursuant to [s65(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), because that representation was made shortly after the asserted fact occurred and the circumstance made it unlikely that the representation was a fabrication. The representation was also made in circumstances that make it highly probable that the representation was reliable.

Item 3 
Asserted Fact: (1) Around late 1993 the accused stabbed the deceased on the left side of his chest and the deceased had lied to hospital staff to protect the accused and 
After being stabbed he laid for three hours before ringing a friend to take him to hospital.

These statements were allegedly made to J.F. Paget at the Seven Hills RSL
Club. She said in her statement of 10 September 1994, that it was earlier in
She stated that he said that he had been in hospital for a fortnight and that 'Madam' had stabbed him in the chest. He opened his shirt and showed her a scar about half an inch long on his left breast. Mrs Paget said that the deceased had asked her and Dene Nelson, not to say anything about his being stabbed, as he had told the staff at the hospital that he had had an accident at a barbecue and had fallen on a knife. Mrs Paget continued that the deceased had told her that after he had been stabbed he laid there for three hours with a bed sheet wrapped around him but then he rang a friend to take him to hospital and he had nearly bled to death.

The hospital notes show that the deceased was in hospital for two days for a laceration to the left side of the chest wall. The wound was sutured and he received treatment There was some oozing from the chest wall. The note of the private referring doctor contains the words, "he was stabbed in L chest wall."
At the hospital he told the staff that he was under the influence of alcohol and fell on a knife at a barbecue. The hospital notes record, "no alleged violent (sic) involved." It seems that the incident happened at 2.00am, that he attended at his doctor's clinic, was referred to Blacktown Hospital and arrived there about 2.25pm.

The deceased could have remained at home in bed and when the problem did not subside he saw the doctor. The suggestion that he nearly bled to death seems farfetched.

Mr M.A. Lalic, in his statement of 7 October 1994, records that the deceased lifted up his shirt and showed him some bandages on his left side and on being asked what had happened responded that Glenda (The Accused), had cut him up but that he had told the hospital staff that he had fallen on a knife during a barbecue, to protect Glenda.

It is probable that there is some exaggeration in what the deceased said, although there was an incident in which a wound that was other than minimal was inflicted. I would not admit the statement that after he had been stabbed he lay there for three hours with a bed sheet wrapped around him before ringing a friend to take him to hospital, nor the statement that he nearly bled to death. Falling on a knife so that it causes a wound to the chest that requires suturing, hospitalization and treatment for two days is possible but not probable. However, this was the story the deceased gave the hospital. The prior note of the referring doctor that, "he was stabbed in the L chest wall" is more probable.

I am satisfied that the statement by the deceased to Paget and to Lalic around late 1993 to the effect that the accused stabbed the deceased on the left side of the chest and that the deceased had lied to the hospital staff to protect the accused, were made in circumstances that make it highly probable that the representation was reliable. I would admit such statements.

I interpolate that I have found the article by Mr A. Palmer on The
Reliability-Based Approach to Hearsay, The Sydney Law Review, Vol.17 No.4 Pg most helpful. I have looked beyond the circumstances in which the statements were made to the creditworthiness of the declarant and the person to whom the statements were allegedly made and to material capable of supporting, or detracting from the truth of the statements allegedly made. It would be imprudent not to do so.

The Deceased's Handwritten Document 
Both as to items 1 and 3, the Crown seeks to tender a statement which is in the handwriting of the deceased and found in a briefcase in the house. The note is headed: "1987-1994 Damage done to house by Glenda Lock in last seven years." 
A list of the damage done to various windows in the house, fittings, furniture and rooms follows.

This is followed by the heading "Car" and there is a list of damage done to the car.

Next is the heading "Personal" under which are listed: 
Stabbed with carving fork once 
Stabbed with carving knife in arm (charged) 
Stabbed with carving knife (1993 Act) spent time in hospital (serious) in chest near Heart left side weeks off work 
Before that facial scratches numerous times 
Hit with copper kettle (illegible word may be flex or left) ear half hanging off 
Reading glasses broken purpously (sic) beyond repair replacement 3 times, last time cost $140 
Other Items 
Vases, plates, saucepans, 1 casserole dishes etc.

We know relatively little of the circumstances in which this note was made. It is apparent however, that the deceased has made a summary of the destructive activities of the accused and of the attacks made upon his person. There is other evidence of major personal attacks. The fact the deceased made such a list indicates the stage their relationship had reached and that the deceased was close to the end of his tether. The nextdoor neighbours have spoken of damage to objects and windows.

The dictionary to the Act provides that, "previous representation means a representation made otherwise than in the course of giving evidence in the proceeding in which evidence of the representation is sought to be adduced." 
The dictionary provides that, "representation includes: an express, or implied representation (whether oral or in writing) or a representation to be inferred from conduct or a representation not intended by its maker to be communicated to or seen by another person or a representation that for any reason is not communicated." 
Under cl 6 [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p2) of the dictionary, "a representation contained in a document is taken to have been made by a person if the document was written, made or otherwise produced by the person." 
Where the person making the document is unavailable and it has not been communicated, there is likely to be a limited amount of material available as to the circumstances in which the document or representation was made. In such cases the contents of any document may be especially useful, as may be evidence supporting the truth of the statements made in the document. The contents of the document, especially when viewed in the light of the supporting evidence, strongly point to the accused making a list, or summary of salient occurrences. I am persuaded that the representations in the document and the document, were made in circumstances to make it highly probable that the representations contained in the document were reliable.

I would admit the document. Couched in succinct terms, it throws light on the relationship between the parties.

Item 4 
This was not pressed.

Item 5 
Asserted Fact: That the accused had inflicted injuries to the deceased during their relationship.

I have earlier summarized what Miss Summerill, Mr Bush and Mrs Phillips had observed about the injuries inflicted on the deceased. Because of what Mr Bush and Miss Summerill heard and saw over a lengthy period, the inference is available that the accused inflicted lacerations to the face, arms and chest of the deceased.

Mrs Phillips stated that when, over the three years prior to her father's death she saw lacerations and bruising over her father's face, she inquired as to what had happened and her father replied, "We had an argument." That was understating the position.

I am satisfied that the representation was made in circumstances that make it highly probable that the representation is reliable.

Item 6 
Asserted Fact: That the deceased had hidden knives in the house in fear of her stabbing him.

The Crown seeks to lead part of par 9 of the statement of K.M. Summerill to the effect that the deceased said that he would hide the knives in the house, because he was scared that the accused was going to hurt him with one of them.

The Crown also seeks to lead evidence from Mrs Phillips of the knives she found hidden around the house on each of the two occasions after the accused had moved out of the house.

The deceased also told his daughter that he had to hide the knives away from the accused and that he was frightened that the accused would, "Do it again."
She went to the house on the day of her father's death and found 10 or more knives in a bottom drawer in the third bedroom.

If the charge was attempted murder and the deceased was alive and giving oral evidence, he would not be allowed to make the statements in question. He would however, be able to give the primary facts as to her use of knives and what she said about using knives. He could probably say what she did with the knives. Inferences may be able to be drawn.

In some circumstances the terms of [s72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s72.html) may permit him to give evidence of actual fear. Frequently representations will have an element of summary or conclusion within them. They are not likely to be in admissible form as for affidavit or oral evidence, nor is this required under the section.

Counsel for the Crown relied not only on [s65(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) and (c) but also on [s72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s72.html) of the Act which provides that the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a representation made by a person that was a contemporaneous representation about the person's health, feelings, sensations, intentions, knowledge, or state of mind.

In the present case, I do not think that the deceased's state of mind is relevant. It may be relevant if there were sufficient facts from which the deceased could have feared the accused would stab him and that led him to hide the knives.

It is highly probable that the daughter found the knives as she stated and that the deceased made the remarks attributed to him by Miss Summerill and Mrs
Phillips.

However, for the reasons given, I do not think that this evidence is admissible.

Items 7 and 8 
Asserted Fact 7: For a few years until his death the deceased feared the accused would kill him.

Asserted Fact 8: The deceased feared the accused would stab him again with a knife.

The Crown seeks to lead evidence as to item 7 from J.F. Paget to the effect that the deceased said to her on a number of occasions, "One day she's going to do me in." That appears to be a prediction.

I do not think that this is admissible in the absence of adequate material from which the deceased could have entertained such a fear. For this reason I would also not admit the evidence of Mrs Phillips mentioned in Item 6.

In both instances it is highly probable that the statements were made and that they represented the deceased's forebodings but on the present material I do not think they are admissible.

Evidence of Mr Bush Removing Knife 
The accused objected to evidence being led from Mr Bush and Miss Summerill, that just before Christmas 1993 there was an occasion on which the deceased called out to the accused to leave the knife behind. She was clutching a big kitchen type knife in both hands, up near her chest area. Mr Bush told her that she could not take the knife with her. Mr Bush walked over to the accused and she gave him the knife. The Crown contends that this reveals her preoccupation with knives in the relationship with the deceased. I think that this material is admissible.

I have considered [s137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), which provides that in a criminal proceeding the court must refuse to admit evidence adduced by the prosecution, if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.

In respect of each of the matters that I have earlier indicated should be admitted, I am of the view that the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused does not outweigh the probative value of the evidence. The position can adequately and clearly be explained to the jury.

I have also considered whether in the exercise of my discretion I should reject any of the evidence which I may have indicated I would admit but it is my opinion that my discretion should not be exercised to exclude any of that evidence.
 
REGINA V GLENDA LILLIAN LOCK /95 
MONDAY 19 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT (On the application by the Crown to cross-examine Mr Stephen Lock about his earlier convictions) 
HIS HONOUR: Application has been made by the Crown to cross-examine Mr Stephen Lock about his earlier convictions. The evidence of Mr Stephen Lock is to the effect that there were a great many arguments between his mother and the deceased. Sometimes Mr Stephen Lock was present when the arguments commenced and sometimes he was not.

As I understood him, he indicated that sometimes an argument arose in his presence when the deceased was unhappy about a particular matter, or something that his mother had done. On other occasions the arguments seemed to arise out of the excessive drinking of his mother.

The Crown submits that while that may be so in relation to arguments, the position which developed was that Mr Stephen Lock was maintaining that serious physical aggression was initiated by the deceased and he has referred to some specific incidents and also to having observed particular injuries upon his mother. As I understood Mr Lock, he was saying that arguments and violence were the currency of this marriage very frequently.

During the course of cross-examination of Mr Allen (who contended that the deceased was always the instigator of the verbal abuse) it was put by the
Crown that the deceased mentioned Stephen Lock and Mr Allen agreed. Mr Allen also stated that possibly the deceased spoke about Colin Lock.

The milieu was that Stephen had been in trouble. Mr Allen could not remember specifically what the deceased said about them. His general recollection was that the deceased called the accused's family no hopers. Mr Allen did not seem to have a memory about the question of the son being in trouble and I think it would be fair to say, there appeared to be a little reluctance on his part, to deal with the subject matter, although he was pressed by the Crown. That was a legitimate matter for cross-examination, because references to Mrs Lock about her son's problems would provoke her naturally and were almost certain to give rise to argument.

In those circumstances, when the son was next called, Mr Molomby lead evidence from Stephen Lock, that he had been in trouble with the law, that they were all juvenile matters, that is, matters when he was under 18, and that since he turned 18 the only offence with which he had been charged was offensive language.

The matter having been exposed, the evidence is now in a relatively unsatisfactory situation. The materials disclose that the son had convictions for dishonesty in respect of the period 1984 to 1987. They included stealing, receiving, unlawfully using a conveyance and break enter and steal. The last matters appear to have been conspiracy to break enter and steal and larceny.
On those matters he was, on 28 October 1987, committed for sentence before the
Sydney Western District Court. For reasons which do not appear, he was not dealt with on those matters until 29 May 1989 by the District Court at
Parramatta when sentencing was deferred on him entering into a recognisance.

The son turned 18 on 4 July 1987 and in the absence of the date of the offences, it is hard to know whether they were committed before or after he turned 18. There is an unfortunate gap in the evidence in that regard. Mr
Lock's record between the ages of 14 and 18 is not good, and I have noted that there have also been a number of traffic offences.

I think that some cross-examination ought to be permitted, to elucidate the situation and not leave it in its present unsatisfactory situation and for my part, I would think that that would require no more than it be put to the son that he had had a series of convictions for dishonesty, the number being given and a broad outline only of the offences. That would put the evidence given into context. I do not think that detailed and sustained cross-examination on this is warranted. The matters cannot just be dismissed as juvenile matters but they should not assume undue proportion. The offences appear for the most part, if not entirely, to be committed while the son was a juvenile.

The limited cross-examination that I am prepared to permit would have substantial probative value, as putting the matter into context but it is not appropriate for there to be a detailed conviction-by-conviction cross- examination.
 * * * 
