

Regina versus Spiridonov Matter No Cca 60369/97 [1998] NSWSC 761 (1 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
REGINA versus OLEG SPIRIDONOV 
CCA 60369/97 May 1998 
McInerney J, Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY, J: I will ask Greg James, J. to give the first judgment. 
GREG JAMES, J: Application is made for leave to appeal against sentences imposed by his Honour Judge Mitchelmore in the District Court of New South Wales sitting at Sydney in respect of 11 counts of use false instrument with intent to induce person to accept it as genuine (s.300(2) [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)) together with 12 similar offences on a Form One. The offences were committed between 15 July 1996 and 30 September 1996. When the applicant came forward for sentence he had a previous record for minor offences of dishonesty in Queensland and one matter relating to counterfeit cheques in Canada. 
His Honour imposed on the applicant a sentence of four years penal servitude taking into account the matters on the Form One, comprising a minimum term of three years penal servitude to commence on the applicant's going into custody, that is 10 November 1996 and expiring on 9 November 1999, together with an additional term of 12 months commencing 10 November 1999 and expiring on 9
November 2000.

The offences were all committed in a similar way and his Honour found that the facts in relation to the offences were as follows:- "Between 1 June 1996 and 30 September 1996 the prisoner and his co-accused,
Dmitry Kiselev, constructed a number of false identification documents in the name of Michail Berlogin using a computer and a printer. These false instruments included a New South Wales interim driver's license; the UTS student card with the prisoner's photograph; Australian tax office receipt and an Energy Australia receipt.

On 26 July of last year the prisoner attended the ANZ Bank at Alexandria and completed an application form for an ANZ Visa card. He used the false identification documents for this application. He signed the application M.
Berlogin; he was subsequently issued with an ANZ Visa card.

The prisoner then used that card for cash advances and transactions totalling $10,205.90.

In relation to count two in this 51A document the methodology of deception was much the same; there was a UTS student card with the offender's photograph. On this occasion there was a Ukrainian driver's license with the offender's photograph; there was an Australian tax office receipt. The application was to the National Bank. Ultimately a Visa card was issued and cash advances totalling $10,025.90 were undertaken.

Count three relates to the ANZ Bank at Bondi. The card issued was used for cash advances and transactions totalling $2,000.

The methodology in each of the subsequent charges was basically the same.

The matters on the Form Two are virtually identical. False documents were generated. Credit cards - Visa cards or Mastercard - were generated. The cards were used for cash advances and transactions." 
We were informed on the hearing of the appeal that an apparent typographical error had crept into his Honour's judgment in relation to the sum involved in count two and that the appropriate figure should have been reflected in the judgment, that being $2,025.90.

Although the facts sheets tendered before his Honour asserted the police investigations had identified $189,797.86 as fraudulently obtained by the applicant and his co-accused, the proceedings before his Honour went forward on the basis that the applicant obtained the benefit of some $45,000 of that amount. The co-accused, having been arrested, had absconded on bail and has not been located. The applicant was arrested at the international airport leaving for Los Angeles some time subsequent to the absconding of his co- accused. On his arrest, money and property were seized from him that became the subject of a forfeiture application. In the upshot, that forfeiture application was abandoned in the light of assertions by the applicant that a substantial proportion of the money in travellers cheques was his own property, not derived from the commission of the crimes, but that he would make it available by way of compensation. In the upshot, the monies were such as to enable the compensation to the various banks to be paid to the extent of about 70% of the banks' losses to this applicant. In this regard it is apparent that the applicant has paid by way of compensation all that he can.

The charges were punishable by a maximum penalty of 10 years penal servitude.
His Honour held that:- "There was nothing spontaneous about the dishonesty. Indeed it was elaborately planned. Modern computer items were used. A large number of banks and financial institutions were deceived.

The efficacy of credit cards must be preserved. Non-cash transactions by way of credit card are an important part of our commercial life; there is a need to deter assaults on that system.

The amount of money involved in this deception is significant.

There are quite a number of events which occurred over a period of time.
 ...

The gravity of the offence can be ascertained by reference to the maximum penalty set out by the legislature, namely 10 years. Here there is serious objective criminality. I accept that the prisoner did not construct the items.
His photograph however was used. The offender on his own admission made considerable use of the finished products." 
The plea had been entered at an early time and the matters dealt with by way of s.51A of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/). His Honour gave discount for the plea of guilty and accepted it as evidence of contrition. He correctly referred to the statutory requirement that the plea be taken into account and that the time of it also be considered and further gave weight to the plea for the pragmatic reasons set out by Justice Hunt, the Chief Judge at
Common Law in Regina v. Winchester [58 A. Crim. R. 345.] Nonetheless his
Honour observed that that plea had to be assessed in the knowledge that there was a strong Crown case.

His Honour adverted to the personal circumstances of the applicant and concluded that he was not assisted by the record I have referred to earlier.
It was noted that he was a person who had not been in custody previously, presented well and was articulate. The applicant had qualified in medicine and psychiatry in the Ukraine and upon immigration to Australia was unable to achieve registration, failing the relevant exams on two occasions developing, it was put, as a consequence, depression and an alcohol problem. Particularly, his personal circumstances were affected by the deep regard he held for his grandmother and mother who live in Kiev in poor health. Evidence was tendered and accepted by his Honour that the applicant was doing well in gaol and had attained the regard of medical practitioners in his work life in Queensland and in New South Wales.

The applicant gave evidence of his personal circumstances, including suffering from the alcohol problem and depression, falling under the malign influence of the co-accused who he said had induced him to commit these crimes to obtain the capital to market medical software in the expectation that the proceeds would enable repayment of the victims. He further gave evidence of contrition.
His Honour appears to have generally accepted the applicant's account.

His Honour had regard to the pre-sentence report in evidence which set out that the applicant had an unfortunate early life in the Ukraine having been brought up by his mother and grandmother after his father and grandfather had disappeared from the family as political prisoners; the applicant had emigrated to Australia and married; this marriage had ended in divorce in
The report had also referred to the influence of the co-accused who appeared to the applicant to be a rich and successful businessman and the expressed fears of the applicant that he may now become the scapegoat in these matters, his co-offender having absconded. His Honour was of the view that he should give weight to these matters. He commented that:- "It is a great pity the prisoner's skills, his attention to detail, his intelligence and educational background were not channelled into productive and legitimate pursuits." 
His Honour concluded that without the plea of guilty he would have passed a more severe sentence and that notwithstanding that this was the first sentence of full time custody to be undertaken by the prisoner, there were no special circumstances.

It is submitted on the applicant's behalf by Mr. Norrish QC. that the sentence is manifestly excessive having regard to the totality of criminality and did not adequately reflect the combination of the following factors: the lesser role played by the applicant; the influence of the co-accused; the early plea of guilty; contrition; the saving of the cost and difficulty of a trial; the payment of compensation; and the fact that it was a first sentence of imprisonment for a person whose prior record may not have assisted him but which did not disqualify him from leniency. Further it is submitted that there is a real need for a longer than usual period of supervision on release to adjust to life in the community, particularly because of the effects of the applicant's accepted depression and abuse of alcohol in circumstances where the applicant, without professional qualifications in Australia and without family support, would be particularly vulnerable and in the light of this being his first long term custodial sentence. In an additional aspect of that submission, Mr. Norrish pointed out that it was common ground that the circumstances in which the applicant had been held in custody had been more severe than those in which others had been so held. And that there were real prospects for rehabilitation. In response, the Crown has drawn our attention to various cases in which this and other courts have referred to the level of criminality in fraud cases and the requisite stern punishment.

It is trite to note that no case is precisely similar. Nonetheless, in my view we are not assisted on this question by the submissions put on behalf of the
Crown which refer to cases involving Crown appeals and on occasions massive commercial frauds. Often enough one sees on a general review of fraud cases, sentences of considerable gravity involving minimum terms of the order of three to six years or more for crimes of massive dishonesty or accompanied by circumstances of breach of trust and aggravation such as in the case of employees, directors, solicitors and trustees. This is not one of those cases.
Even where there has been a course of frauds and, as here, substantial total sums involved, there may be for special reason, sentences including minimum terms in the range around two years.

However, as the Crown points out, the applicant's motivation for committing the offences was greed and no case of need was put forward. His Honour concluded the false instruments were produced by elaborate means over an extended period of time in a context where a lot more money was taken from the victims than the applicant himself received. There was here resort to complex technology and a cunning course of continued deceit to which the applicant was a willing party. Nonetheless, the sophistication of this activity and the length of time over which it was carried on do not approach those involved in some of the massive frauds which received lengthy sentences of imprisonment to which the Crown has referred.

To my mind having regard to the matters adverted to by Mr. Norrish in combination and in particular having regard to the applicant's role, the early plea, the payment of compensation and the circumstances of depression under which the applicant laboured at the time he fell under the influence of his co-accused, it appears that the sentences as imposed and structured in the way in which they were in their total effect exceeded that which was appropriate.
I consider that in this case error is shown when the proportion of maximum to minimum terms is examined in the light of matters established by the evidence which would call for an extended period for supervision on parole. It is not merely a matter, as the Crown submissions seem to suggest, of taking for the raw offence the statistics for sentences imposed in respect of crimes of that general category. That does not establish the appropriate discretionary range.
It merely establishes that sentences of that kind have been passed for offences of that kind. It is always necessary to consider the total effect of the sentence in the light of all the proved circumstances. As I have indicated, Mr. Norrish's related second criticism, too, it seems to me, is well founded, particularly in the light of the Crown's concession that there are from the applicant's prior life, indications that he has good prospects of rehabilitation and that concession is in the context of his accepted abuse of alcohol and depression.

In my view an appropriate sentence for the applicant would take account on re- sentencing of the matters to which Mr. Norrish had adverted as special circumstances and would provide a longer than normal additional term.

After careful consideration of what his Honour has said, in particular in regard to the objective circumstances of this criminality which could not be categorised as other than serious, and having regard to the pattern of sentencing, crude though it is in relation to fraud offences, I have come to the view that his Honour has fallen into error and that the sentence exceeds that which is required. I would find, as I have indicated, special circumstances.

I would propose this court re-sentence the applicant to a period of two years, three months minimum term to commence on 10 November 1996 and to expire on 9
February 1999 together with an additional term of 15 months to commence on 10
February 1999 and expiring on 9 May 2000.

To that intent I would propose that leave to appeal be granted, the appeal upheld and the applicant re-sentenced accordingly.

McINERNEY, J: I agree. The orders of the court, therefore, will be as proposed by Justice Greg James. * * * 
