

Ricardo Pty Limited versus Toppi (No. 2) Matter No 1730/98 [1998] NSWSC 576 (16
October 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 December 1998 
RICARDO PTY LIMITED versus TOPPI (NO. 2) /98 October 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT `HIS HONOUR: This is a trial of a cross-claim under <case> of the Fair
Trading Act or alternatively for breach of warranty of authority. The cross- claimant is a person who thought she was the purchaser of a property at Coogee against the person who appeared to be the solicitor for the vendor of that property.` ` Although the cross-claim came into the list today as a contested matter, Mr
Weber who appeared for the cross-defendant conceded that on the evidence I could do nothing but find a verdict for the cross-claimant so the only question before me was one of quantum.` 
The cross-claimant thought that she had entered into a contract on 24 February to buy the subject property for $550,000 from a mortgagee exercising power of sale and paid a 5% deposit, $27,500. She signed a standard form of contract which was then signed on behalf of the vendor by the cross-defendant.
The cross-defendant is a young employed solicitor of a Double Bay firm.

What then happened was that the vendor was made a higher offer of $710,000 which it accepted and, in due course, transferred the property to that other purchaser for that price.

The purported vendor then commenced proceedings for a declaration that there was no contract with Mrs Toppi and this case came into my expedition list on March 1998. On 17 March the cross-defendant had filed an affidavit which was read in these proceedings in which he virtually said that he was a solicitor of little experience in conveyancing matters and had mainly been concerned on the litigation side of the firm where it would seem this matter, being a mortgagee sale, had some connection. He acknowledged that he had made a serious mistake in signing the contract on behalf of the mortgagee without authority.

The case came on before me on 3 April 1998 and I made a declaration that there was no contract. The cross-claim was postponed and in due course, after further evidence was filed, it came on for hearing.

As I have said the cross-claimant sues on two separate causes of action. Today
Mr Evatt and Mr Rollinson for the cross-claimant, pressed both causes of action. Mr Weber submitted that the measure of damages was different with each cause of action. He cited High Court authority that ordinarily the damages under <case> of the Fair Trading Act are tortious damages. He submitted that the same applied to an action for breach of warranty of authority but that because of a decision of the Court of Appeal, Rummery versus Dorsman [(1996) NSW Conv
R 55-780], which he respectfully submitted was quite wrong, but was binding on me, I would be bound to award damages on the contractual basis in proceedings for breach of warranty of authority. I am sure Mr Weber is right in that last statement. I do not consider it is useful to say anything as to whether the Court of Appeal did or did not correctly decide the Rummery case. Mr Evatt and Mr
Rollinson did not disagree with the statement that I was bound to apply the contractual measure of damages in a count for breach of warranty of authority.
I assume Mr Weber's submission just reserves his client's right to make the submission to the High Court. I should add that Mr Evatt and Mr Rollinson said nothing about the submission that the tortious rule applied under <case> and so
I will accept that as being so.

The problem that is thrown up in this case is what a court should do when a plaintiff presses two counts which give rise to different methods of assessing damages.

It seems to me there are three different types of case. The first is where the principle of waiver of tort applies. This is an obscure principle which gradually grew up in history. Essentially it is that if a tort has been committed by which X obtained a benefit then the plaintiff can take the position that he or she adopts the tortious action of X and then claim that X is bound to account to him or her for the profit made as a result of the tortious act. Traditionally, that claim was made by pleading the indebitatus count of money had and received, but more latterly the unjust enrichment principle. The waiver or adoption of the tort rule has various restrictions.
For instance, the person in the position of X must have actually made a profit. Thus, in Patterson versus Prior [(1862) 18 Ind 440] where indebitatus for money had and received was brought by a person wrongfully imprisoned to recover payment for his forced labour. The plaintiff sued the gaoler and the person to whom he had been assigned. He failed against the former as that person had not received money for the service, but succeeded against the latter.

Furthermore, there are limitations on the types of torts that may be waived (see for instance the 12th Edition of Winfield & Jolowicz on Tort (Sweet & Maxwell, London 1984) pp 730-731).

The second class of case is where two claims are made by the plaintiff and the basis of one claim is inconsistent with the existence of the other. In that situation the cross-claimant must elect which claim will be pursued before the
Judge or jury gives a verdict (see British Railway Traffic & Electric Co
Ltd versus Roper [(1939) 162 LT 217] at 220).

The third class of case is where there is no inconsistency in the allegations, but that the case is one where the law has developed along different lines depending on the cause of action that is selected. The classic example is a case where, in respect to loss of the same personal chattels the plaintiff sues in both detinue and conversion. With detinue, the damages are the value of the property at the date of judgment because the Court hopes that the property will be returned as a result of its judgment whereas, in conversion, the value is as at the date of the wrongful taking. This can make a very big difference in the damages award (see eg Sachs versus Miklos [[1948] 2 KB 23).] 
In a case falling into the third category, the Court takes the verdict of the jury on all counts (or in the case of a bench trial the Judge gives his or her opinion), but then there is only liberty to sign judgment after the plaintiff has made an election. The Court cannot make an election for the plaintiff, as I understand it, and, if the plaintiff failed to make an election then I assume that the Court merely declines to give leave to enter judgment. However I do not know of any case where this has happened.

Both sets of counsel more or less agree with the categorisation that I have noted and concur that this case falls into the third category.

I turn my attention then to the measure of damages in tort. This focuses on what is the loss of the cross-claimant. The evidence is not strong and leaves quite a lot to inference. However, so long as there is some evidence of damage then the matter of quantum really becomes a question for the jury or, as in this case, a Judge in place of the jury. He or she just has to do the best he or she can. The evidence does not disclose that any conveyancing costs were incurred by the cross-claimant in her signing the contract. However, she did get a bill from her own legal advisors for $12,775 in respect of the summons in this matter. There is no material at all to show that the bill has been paid or that there is any costs agreement and, accordingly, the amount is really just indicative.

The cross-claimant also received a bill from the plaintiff in the proceedings for $9,388.60. Again there is no evidence that this has been paid or assessed. However, the cross-claimant put in a bill for $3,000 more, even though the plaintiff had the running of the case and the burden of proving it. Viewed in the light of the bill for $12,775, the plaintiff's bill is close to the mark. It would have been much better if there had been a bit more evidence.

However, as a jury I have to do the best I can.

The only approach that I can take on the figures is to add them together and assess $22,163 for those two bills. I should apply some discount rate because, first, the bills have not been assessed and the cross-claimant's bill seems too high; and secondly, the solicitor cross-defendant confessed to his mistake on 17 March 1998 before the matter had been set down for trial and authorities such as Godwin versus Francis (1870) LR 5 CP 295 show that the cross-claimant is only entitled to her costs of defending the previous proceedings up until the time when it was clear that she was not entitled to succeed on the contract against the third party.

Mr Rollinson submits that in the instant case it was reasonable for the cross- claimant to proceed to trial and to cross-examine the solicitor concerned to be one hundred per cent sure. I think that this is probably right, although I am only fifty-one per cent convinced, but that is sufficient for present purposes. There is a rather convoluted background to this case and a person in the position of the cross-claimant may have reasonably decided that she needed to sort the matter out at a trial. In any event, we do not know when counsel's brief was delivered in the proceedings, in particular whether it was before or after the directions hearing. As to that, it should be said that the onus is on the cross-claimant to prove it, but on the other hand the consideration of the point in Godwin's case only came up in the heel of the hunt. If I took fifteen per cent off what was claimed, that would bring the verdict down to $19,000.

That is slightly more than twice what the plaintiff claimed and so I think that is a bit high. I should discount it by $1,000.

Accordingly doing the best I can I will find a verdict of $18,000 for the cross-claimant on the tort count.

So far as contract is concerned the cross-claimant gave evidence that she at all times intended to sell the property at a profit and that she knew who the potential purchaser would be. It seems to me that it follows from this evidence that, first, one does not take estate agents' commission into account in the total calculation because it is more likely than not that there would be no estate agent and, secondly, even if damages were available either in tort or contract for frustration and disappointment et cetera, none has been established. All that we have is the case of a business woman who was putting through a deal and a business woman who cannot stand the heat of a little business deal will not stay in business for very long. It is quite a different case from, for instance, the trauma of having one's family disappointed through failing to acquire the house that they had their hearts set on.
Accordingly, I do not think I should allow any amount for frustration and disappointment et cetera. Thus, one takes the profit that the cross-claimant would have made but for the wrongful warranty of authority.

To do that one has to take the real costs of the property and subtract that from the net sale price.

The evidence again is rather thin but doing the best I can the calculation works out as follows: 
Contract price $550,000 
But costs: 
Stamp duty $20,240 Legals 5,466 
Bank interest 9,625 Bank fees 2,000 Total 37,331 
Real Cost $587,331 
Sale price $710,000 
Less: 
Legals $5,060 
Rates and insurance 1,000 Total 6,060 
Net sale price $703,940 
Less real cost $587,331 
Loss $116,609 
Interest for three months at the Court rate of 9.5 per cent 2,780 
Total $119,389 
Add damages in tort 18,000 
Verdict for the cross-claimant $137,389 
I should briefly explain some of this calculation. As to the difference between the contract price and the real cost, I have taken the figures for stamp duty and legal expenses from
Butterworth's Conveyancing Service and Butterworths Costs Service even though the conveyancing costs are only the Law Society's guideline. I consider that it is appropriate to refer to this material as in conveyancing cases, judges can use their own knowledge as to conveyancing practice including costs. I have included the bank interest because the evidence was that the cross- claimant would have to borrow the whole amount to finance the property.
Although there was no evidence as to how long the gap was between contract and conveyance, I have to assume a seven per cent bank interest rate for three months. The figure of $2,000 for bank fees is on the basis that banks always charge application fees, valuation fees and the like.

On the sale side, again I have taken the same approach with legal expenses and
I have taken a round figure for rates and insurance because during the period the cross-claimant held the property she would have had to pay for it to be insured and something towards rates and other taxes. The other figures speak for themselves.

Having heard what I have just said, upon me asking Mr Rollinson for his election as to how judgment be entered, he elected it be entered for the breach of warranty count and accordingly there is judgment for the cross- claimant for $137,389.

As to costs, although the cross-claimant has only received an amount under the usual $250,000 minimum, as this case is not in the Common Law Division and as costs were saved by bringing this matter as a cross-claim to the original proceedings and the evidence on the claim could be taken as read, it is appropriate that the cross-defendant pay the cross-claimant's costs of the cross-claim. Exhibits may be retained for 28 days or until further order.
 * * * 
