

Regina versus Rowe Matter No 60408/97 [1997] NSWSC 633 (10 December 1997) 
Regina versus Paul Rowe /97 December 1997 
Grove J, James J, Simpson J 
Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Taylor DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60408/97 
DELIVERED: Wednesday 10 December 1997 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday 10 December 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus PAUL ROWE 
JUDGMENT OF: GROVE J, JAMES J, SIMPSON J 
COUNSEL: * APPELLANT: In person * RESPONDENT: P G Berman 
SOLICITORS: * APPELLANT: - * RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: APPEAL DISMISSED 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - MALICIOUS WOUNDING - CONVICTION AND SENTENCE - NO SPECIAL POINT OF PRINCIPLE 
NO OF PAGES: 11 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: The appellant was convicted on a count of malicious wounding at a trial before Judge Taylor and a jury at Sydney District Court. Taking into account some presentence custody resulted in his Honour's imposition of a sentence comprising a minimum term of one year and 355 days penal servitude together with an additional term of one year and 10 days. 
The appellant was represented by counsel at the trial but appears for himself in this court.

The victim was a security officer working at the York Tavern in Sydney on the evening of 9-10 February 1996. At about 11 pm he noticed the appellant arrive at the Tavern carrying a stick covered with bottle tops. He had seen the appellant on other occasions with this implement which he used in a percussive fashion to accompany a musical group.

At about 3 am the security officer's attention was drawn to the appellant about an incident with a female patron and he spoke to him whereafter he commenced to guide him towards a stairwell which led out onto the street. Upon reaching the bottom of the stairs the appellant was informed that he could not take a bottle of beer which he was holding and finish drinking it in the street. He put the bottle in his back pocket and drew a knife stabbing the victim in the left side of the lower abdomen.

The victim retaliated by punching the appellant and then grasping him by the throat. In response to this the appellant then stabbed the victim underneath the left armpit. Other persons came to the scene and restrained the appellant.

The victim was taken to hospital and underwent emergency surgery. Police gave evidence that the appellant said that he stabbed the bouncer "to just get him out of the way".

The appellant gave no evidence at trial. Counsel put to the victim that the first stabbing did not occur until after the appellant had been punched and grabbed by the throat. The jury rejected a claim of self defence.

In response to the Registrar's directions concerning grounds of appeal the appellant lodged a document on 13 October last. It raised three matters.

The first matter raised is a complaint of prejudice emanating from the
Telegraph newspaper. This morning the appellant has tendered a copy of an extract of that newspaper. On the face of it, it is a report of the evidence given at committal proceedings. Although the exhibit is not dated, Mr Rowe informed the Court that it would have been published in 1996. That would be consistent with the date of the offence and the conduct of the trial in approximately May 1997.

There is nothing in the publication that gives rise to a matter germane to the outcome of this appeal. The thrust of Mr Rowe's complaint is that the evidence is related as it was apparently given and that the journalist has not described the evidence as being "allegations".

The matter can only really be judged on the face of the document, but it appears to be a conventional report by a journalist on material given at committal proceedings. It is difficult to imagine that a jury empanelled more than a year later would have been affected by the publication of that material.

The second matter complained of defamation of the appellant, and abuse of legal procedure by the Director of Public Prosecutions. No particulars are provided, but it can be observed that in the conduct of the trial it was the
Crown Prosecutor who reminded the presiding judge that appropriate directions needed to be given to the jury concerning the exercise of the right of silence by the appellant. Nothing in the transcript of proceedings suggests other than a fairness in the conduct of the trial. The allegation of defamation is obscure although of course it can be remarked that every charge inheres within it an assertion that an accused has been guilty of crime.

The third matter referred to two jurors, who are described as appearing to the appellant "to be substance affected and not at all perspicacious". There is nothing to support the appellant's bald assertion. It might be remarked in passing that the presiding judge felt compelled to draw to attention a gesture later made towards the jury by the appellant which he interpreted as an expression of some dissatisfaction with the verdict.

In the routine course the Registrar requested detailed written submissions from the appellant and a further document dated 20 October 1997 was presented.

This document raised two matters.

The first alleged ineptitude and professional negligence on the part of counsel who appeared at trial, to which is added a complaint of his failure to appear. The transcript shows that counsel was present at the trial up until the return of the jury's verdict and he was present to look to the interests of the appellant when the trial judge raised the matter of the gesture to the jury which I have mentioned. From the point of view of this Court we can only rely upon the transcript which shows the pattern that I have indicated.
Nothing in the record of proceedings shows that the complaint of dereliction of counsel by absence or otherwise can be sustained. According to the record trial counsel did not appear on subsequent occasions when the matter was listed for sentence. There is nothing to indicate how the appellant was induced to alter his position disadvantageously as he claims in the document.
He was represented by other counsel in the sentence proceedings and he was not left unrepresented on any occasion.

The second matter raised in this document is again the publication in the
Telegraph newspaper but there is nothing to be added to what I have already said.

The penultimate submission written by the appellant is in these terms: "It is said, the poison comes before the antidote and mischief may be wrought before it can be undone. In my case I find that to be true, for the injury to my credit was done before I had a chance to dispel the false imputations which had improperly maligned me from the inception." 
It is difficult to imagine a basis upon which this submission could be sustained when the appellant exercised his right of silence. The jury could not test his credibility by hearing testimony from him.

In oral submissions today the appellant referred to the absence of viva voce testimony from Dr Lord. Dr Lord was the surgeon on casualty duty who attended to the injured victim. The appellant suggests that he would have wished to cross-examine Dr Lord about the presence in the victim of any drugs.

The question of Dr Lord's personal attendance was canvassed at the trial. It appears from the transcript that those representing the then accused had been informed in advance that as at the trial date Dr Lord would not be in the
State of New South Wales. There was some discussion about the matters wishing to be canvassed, the significant one of which would then appear to have been whether or not on the second occasion the victim had been stabbed two or three times.

There is a record in the proceedings noting that counsel indicated that the defence wished to wait and see what Dr Moss another doctor, had to say, and there is a note which adds - I concede somewhat cryptically - "her evidence has turned out to be inconclusive".

Be that as it may, it is to be noted that by consent there was tendered in evidence, and therefore before the jury, a letter to Dr Lord together with the doctor's notes and a short statement and other material. In my view there was nothing irregular about the absence of Dr Lord, and the matter now proposed by the appellant does not give rise to a conclusion that there has been a miscarriage.

In the pro forma notice of appeal the appellant has ticked the box indicating that he wishes to appeal against both conviction and sentence. No written submission was advanced in relation to the matter of sentence. The appellant does not have a clear prior record. Omitting appearances before Children's courts, which I would regard it as appropriate to ignore, the appellant nevertheless has a record including no less than ten counts of assault. It is true that the majority of these involve assaulting police, but I would not regard that circumstance as insignificant when what is alleged is resistance against a person exercising authority to remove the appellant from premises upon which he was misconducting himself.

In my view the sentence imposed was well within the range of the sound exercise of discretion, and having regard to the extent of injury as described the imposition could even be classified as mild.

I propose the appeal be dismissed. The application for leave to appeal against sentence should be granted and that appeal also dismissed.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the presiding Judge and the orders proposed by his Honour. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree. 
GROVE J: The orders of the court will be as I proposed. * * * 
