

Souhel Kanafani versus Martin Kanafani & Anor [2013] NSWSC 240 (27 March )

Last Updated: 28 March 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Souhel Kanafani versus Martin Kanafani & Anor  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): .03.13  
Decision Date: March 2013  
Before: 
Nicholas J  
Decision: 
Par 18  
Catchwords: 
WILLS PROBATE AND ADMINISTRATION - construction of will - testatrix and son co-owners of house - whether sum to be paid to son from proceeds of sale of the house intended to be taken from his share or hers - no question of principle  
Cases Cited: 
Fell versus Fell <case>; [(1922) 31 CLR 268]  
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Souhel Kanafani - plaintiff 
Martin Kanafani - first defendant 
NSW Trustee & Guardian - second defendant  
Representation - Counsel: 
Counsel: 
G P McNally SC - plaintiff 
L Ellison SC - first defendant 
Submitting appearance - second defendant  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors: 
Johnsons Solicitors - plaintiff 
Marsdens Law Group - first defendant 
NSW Trustee & Guardian - second defendant  
File Number(s): /181676  
JUDGMENT
Najla Kanafani Fahd (the testatrix) died on 28 June 2010. She made a will on 17 May 2000 (the will) which was prepared by her solicitor. Letters of administration with the will annexed were granted to the NSW Trustee & Guardian, the second defendant, on 26 July 2011.
By his amended summons filed 7 March 2013 the plaintiff seeks a declaration as to the proper construction of the terms of the will for the distribution of the proceeds of sale of the property situated at Granville (the house).
The testatrix had seven children, to whom I refer by their first names, namely Souhel (the plaintiff), Martin (the first defendant), Ralph (now deceased), Rafat, Gazwa, Faten, and Lamis.
A summary of the relevant background is as follows. In 1980 the deceased and Martin became the registered proprietors of the house as tenants in common, in which the testatrix held an interest of three quarters, and Martin held an interest of one quarter. The testatrix lived in the house continuously until her death. It was regarded by her and her family as her home, and occasionally her children resided there for various periods of time.
Souhel gave evidence that, on occasions at family gatherings before and after she made the will, the testatrix referred to the fact that Martin owned a one quarter interest in the house. She said that when she died she wanted the house to be sold, Martin to be paid out his share, and the balance of the proceeds to be divided equally between all the children. Gazwa gave evidence to the same effect.
On 17 April 2000 the testatrix gave instructions for the preparation of her will to her solicitor, apparently Mr Allan Bolster, of the firm Bolster Wager, Parramatta. The handwritten file note of her instructions recorded her intention to leave jewellery and clothing to her three daughters, the contents of the house to Martin, and the Arabic library to be distributed among her children at the discretion of the executor. Also included was a note in these terms: "R & R of estate to seven children".
On 17 May 2000 the will was executed. Mr Bolster was one of the witnesses.
By her will the deceased gave to Faten, Gazwa and Lamis her jewellery and her personal clothing, the contents of the house to Martin, and the Arabic library was to be distributed among her children at the discretion of her trustees.
Relevantly, the will included the following: "... I GIVE DEVISE AND BEQUEATH the rest and residue of my estate both real and personal ... TO my Trustees UPON TRUST to sell call in and convert into money my said real and personal estate ... and as to the monies to arise from such sale calling in and conversion PAY my funeral testamentary expenses and debts I DIRECT that my Trustees DISTRIBUTE the balance thereafter in the following manner TO my son MARTIN KANAFANI a sum being ONE QUARTER of the proceeds of the sale of the house known as 12 Hewlett
Street, Granville (after payment of agents commission and legal expenses associated with the sale) and as to the balance of the estate TO my children
FATEN, GAZWA, SOUHEL, RALPH, MARTIN, RAFAT and LAMIS as joint tenants ..."
The plaintiff's claim concerns the proper construction of the following passage of the will.
 "...I DIRECT that my Trustees DISTRIBUTE the balance thereafter in the following manner TO my son MARTIN KANAFANI a sum being ONE QUARTER of the proceeds of the sale of the house known as ... and as to the balance of the estate TO my children ..."
The plaintiff contended that these words should be understood to reflect the testatrix's intention that from the net proceeds of the sale of the house upon her death Martin was to be paid out his one quarter share, leaving her three quarter share for distribution equally between the seven children. It was put that such a construction would reflect the intention of the testatrix expressed on the occasions referred to in evidence, and was consistent with the instructions of 17 April 2000 that the rest and residue of her estate be left equally to the seven children. Further, it was put that it would be inconsistent with her wish that the residue of her estate to be left equally to the children would consist only of so much as remained after Martin had taken one quarter of the proceeds of the sale of her interest in the house. Thus it was put that it was intended that Martin be paid the amount attributable to his interest in the house as a co-owner, and the balance, being the whole amount attributable to her three quarter interest be distributed equally among the children. It was submitted that, according to the usual principles of construction, the meaning sought by the plaintiff was supported by the terms of the will considered as a whole and, to the extent necessary to refer to it, by the evidence of Souhel, Gazwa, and the file note.
On behalf of the first defendant it was submitted that the language of the will was unambiguous, and resort to extrinsic evidence was unjustified. His case was that the will provided that from his mother's estate he would be given a sum equivalent to one quarter of the proceeds of sale of her interest in the house, after payment of agent's commission and associated legal expenses, as well as an equal share with his siblings in the residue of her estate. It was put that provision for the gift to Martin from the proceeds of sale evidenced a change of the testatrix's intentions since she gave instructions to her solicitor on 17 April 2000.
The principles of construction are well known. The task is to ascertain the intention of the testatrix from the words of the will. Resort to extrinsic evidence is limited. It is open to a court to supply by implication an omission which would give effect to the testamentary intention disclosed by consideration of the will as a whole. Helpful guidance in the present case may be taken from the principles stated to be incontestable, by Isaacs J in Fell versus Fell <case>; [(1922) 31 CLR 268], pp 273, 274 in particular, the following: "(2) 'The instrument ... must receive a construction according to the plain meaning of the words and sentences therein contained. But ... you must look at the whole instrument, and, inasmuch as there may be inaccuracy and inconsistency, you must, if you can, ascertain what is the meaning of the instrument taken as a whole in order to give effect, if it be possible to do so, to the intention of the framer of it' (Lord Halsbury L.C. in Leader v.
Duffey; Ward v. Brown; Buckley L.J. in Kirby-Smith v. Parnell).
 'If the will shows that the testator must necessarily have intended an interest to be given which there are no words in the will expressly to devise, the Court is to supply the defect by implication, and thus to mould the language of the testator, so as to carry into effect, as far as possible, the intention which it is of opinion that the testator has on the whole will, sufficiently declared' (Towns v. Wentworth; Hawkins on Wills, 2nd ed., at p.
).
 ...

If the contents of a will show that a word has been undesignedly omitted or undesignedly inserted, and demonstrate what addition by construction or what rejection by construction will fulfil the intention with which the document was written, the addition or rejection will by construction be made' (Knight Bruce L.J. in Pride v. Fooks)." 
Determination
In my opinion, the language of the will is straightforward and unambiguous. It was drafted by a solicitor. The use of the word "my" where appearing, in its natural and ordinary meaning, refers to the interest of the testatrix in the real and personal property which comprised her estate.
The terms of the bequest of the residue to her trustees upon a trust for sale embraces residue both real and personal. The direction to the trustees "... as to the monies to arise from such sale" is plainly intended to be in respect of the proceeds of the sale of the residue, including her real estate. The will then specifies the manner in which the trustees must distribute the balance of the monies arising from sale after payment of funeral, testamentary expenses and debts. The first direction is that Martin be given a sum equivalent to one quarter of the proceeds of the sale of house after payment of specified items.
The pool of funds from which the payment to Martin is to be made is, in terms, identified as the balance arising from the sale of the residue after the specified expenses have been paid. The expression "one quarter of the proceeds of the sale of the house" is used to quantify the sum to be paid to Martin. In my opinion, the phrase "... of the proceeds of the sale of the house", read in context, is to be properly understood to refer only to that portion of the proceeds to which the testatrix was entitled. Furthermore, in my opinion, that it was intended that the payment to Martin be paid out of her interest in the proceeds of sale is consistent with the terms of the will taken as a whole. Without accepting that to give effect to such intention it is necessary to include by implication the words "my interest in" it is appropriate to supply them so as to mould the language of the will to read "... a sum being one quarter of my interest in the proceeds of the sale of the house" (Fell p 274).
Contrary to the plaintiff's submissions, I find nothing in the will which indicates the testatrix intended to deal with both Martin's share and her own in the proceeds of the sale of the house or to specify how Martin's interest was to be accommodated after sale. It follows that I reject the proposition that the sum to be paid to Martin represents his one quarter interest in the house. Accordingly, I find that upon the proper construction of the will, Martin is to receive a sum equivalent to one quarter of the three quarter interest of the testatrix in the net proceeds of the sale of the house, with the balance of the estate to be shared equally between the children as provided. 
Conclusion
For the above reasons I propose to order that the amended summons be dismissed. The question of costs remains outstanding. Failing agreement, I will afford the parties the opportunity to address me on this issue. Arrangements should be made with my associate by 4pm 16 April 2013 for the re-listing of the matter.
 * * * 
