

Elias and Anor t/as Elias Gates and Associates versus Strange Matter No /97 [1997] NSWSC 377 (5 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Elias & Anor trading as Elias Gates & Associates versus Strange /97 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Elias & Anor trading as Elias Gates & Associates versus Strange 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The defendant suffered personal injury in a motor vehicle accident in 1985. The plaintiffs are solicitors. The defendant retained them to act for her in relation to her claim for damages. The plaintiffs acted for the defendant between about 1989 and 1995. The limitation period expired in July 1991. Proceedings on the claim were commenced in the District Court after the relevant limitation period had expired (in February 1992). The defendant was unsuccessful in obtaining an extension of the limitation period. 
Presumably, these proceedings were brought to an end (without the recovery of any damages) and the retainer was terminated. In May 1996, the plaintiffs rendered a bill of costs to the defendant.

In June 1996, the defendant sued the plaintiffs for professional negligence.
Those proceedings were also brought in the District Court. The plaintiffs did not bring a Cross-Claim for costs. The proceedings were resolved by compromise in 1997. Damages were recovered without any admission of liability.

There were objections taken to the bill and responses were made to the objections. An application was made for a costs assessment. The bill was referred to a Costs Assessor for assessment. The assessment was adjourned for some months to abide the resolution of the defendant's professional negligence claim. The Costs Assessor issued a Certificate As To Determination Of Costs.
He determined that there were no costs payable by the defendant to the plaintiffs.

The plaintiffs have brought these proceedings by way of Summons filed on 28
May 1997. By this process, the plaintiffs bring an appeal against the decision of the Costs Assessor. Relief is sought pursuant to section 208L of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the
Act).

Section 208L provides a restricted avenue of appeal. It is limited to a matter of law. The onus rests with the plaintiffs to demonstrate an entitlement to relief (see Cachia versus St George Bank Limited (unreported, 26 October 1995)).

The Costs Assessor did not deliver reasons for his determination. This approach was consistent with what was then a well established line of authority to the effect that a Costs Assessor is not obliged to give reasons for his determination.

The plaintiffs say that there has been an error of law made by the Costs
Assessor. The bill of costs was in the order of $44,000. It is not disputed that the bill claims significant costs and disbursements in respect of work that had been performed as a consequence of negligence on the part of the plaintiffs. The retainer had been futile in the sense that the defendant had not recovered any damages because proceedings had not been brought within the limitation period. The plaintiffs say that some of the work performed was untainted by their negligence and was of benefit to the plaintiff. The amount claimed in respect of this work has not been calculated with any precision and has been, at best, briefly identified with a bare minimum of detail.

It is said that the Costs Assessor made a finding of negligence and therefore erroneously took the view that there was a total failure of consideration. The
Court was referred to certain decided cases (including Cachia versus Isaacs &
Ors [(1985) 3 NSWLR 366).] Specific reference was made to the observations of
Kirby P (as he then was) and Hope JA, including what was said by Kirby P at p :- "The result of the authorities (which are reviewed by Hope JA) and of the principles of contract law of which this is but a special species is that a solicitor, who has been found to be negligent, may nonetheless recover from his client those costs which are severable, untainted by negligence and which relate to matters distinct from those upon which the solicitor has been found negligent. He may not recover fees in respect of the very proceedings in which he has been found negligent, unless he can show (the onus being on him) that, despite the negligence, some real advantage has accrued to the client from those services, or some of them, which would render it unjust for the client to escape liability for those fees or part of those fees.

Thus, if a solicitor were acting both in a damages action and in proceedings in the Family Court, negligence in the former would not disentitle the solicitor to his fees in respect of the latter. Similarly in the case of a separate retainer to act in the conveyance of real property. But where the whole point of the retention of the solicitors has been the conduct of a particular legal proceeding, the mere fact that the solicitor has acted courteously and correctly will not entitle him to fees him to fees in respect of that proceeding if he fundamentally misadvises the client or overlooks a limitation period or is otherwise negligent, thereby making his courtesy and attendances entirely futile from the point of view of his client's relevant interests." 
The Act requires the Costs Assessor to make an assessment of costs. The
Assessor performed that process. Largely, the means by which he reached his determination is a matter for speculation. In correspondence with the parties, he did raise the matter of total failure of consideration. The parties then made submissions concerning this matter.

He had a considerable volume of material before him. I shall briefly refer to certain of the matters demonstrated by it. There was a retainer to act in respect of a claim for damages arising out of personal injury suffered in a motor vehicle accident. There were abortive proceedings brought for the recovery of damages. The proceedings had been brought after the expiry of the limitation period. This was due to the negligence of the plaintiffs.
Subsequently, damages were recovered by the defendant in the professional negligence proceedings brought against the plaintiffs.

In my view, the Costs Assessor made a determination which was open to him having regard to the material that was placed before him. It is consistent with an application of the relevant principles of law. I am not satisfied that any basis has been demonstrated for disturbing his determination.

Counsel for the defendant has raised other considerations (including a submission founded on the decision in Port of Melbourne Authority versus Anshun
Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 589).] I need not specifically deal with any of these matters. If they have application to the circumstances of this case, they would supply additional reason to justify the determination made by the Costs Assessor.

Some specific submissions were made concerning the particular matter of disbursements incurred in obtaining medical reports and associated costs incurred in the obtaining of the reports. It was said that these would have been of benefit to the defendant. A concession was made on behalf of the defendant. It was conceded that this material was of use to the defendant in the professional negligence proceedings brought against the plaintiffs.
However, it was also mentioned that the defendant had paid moneys to the plaintiffs. These being moneys which she may now be entitled to recover from the plaintiffs. It was said that these moneys would balance out the disbursements and costs associated with the medical reports. These were matters which the Costs Assessor could have taken into account in making his determination. His determination was consistent with that having been done.

Also, it has to be remembered that the authorities suggest that it needs to be demonstrated that the services conferred real advantages which would render it unjust for the client to escape liability for the fees.

During the preliminary correspondence that passed between the parties and the
Costs Assessor, the plaintiffs did raise for his consideration the question of whether or not he should disqualify himself from proceeding with the determination. It was suggested that he may have prejudged the issue of total failure of consideration. This matter was not pursued by the plaintiffs and the Costs Assessor was allowed to proceed with the assessment and make his determination.

The Court was informed that the plaintiffs were making a formal submission only concerning this matter. Nothing was said in support of the submission. It seems to me that the submission has no merit. If it had been a matter of real concern to the plaintiffs, appropriate action should have been taken in the other proceedings (the proceedings in which the referral for assessment was made). I should add that it was not submitted that the Costs Assessor had failed to afford procedural fairness to all parties.

Before finally disposing of this appeal, I should digress to briefly deal with another matter that arose after the reserving of my judgment.

Sometime after the completion of the hearing in this matter, Counsel for the plaintiffs drew the attention of the Court to a judgment delivered by Sperling
J in Kennedy Miller Television Pty Ltd versus Lancken & Anor (unreported, 1
August 1997). In that judgment, Sperling J expressed views on the subject "Reasons required".

Counsel for the plaintiffs has merely brought the Court's attention to the judgment. No further submissions were made by reason of what was said in the judgment. Presumably, this would be because it was accepted that the views of
Sperling J would not have been determinative of the issues raised in the present case. I should add that some further brief submissions were made by
Counsel for the defendant.

I understand that the judgment of Sperling J may well be the subject of appeal. The views expressed in the judgment are in conflict with a consistent line of practice followed by this Court for some years. The practice has had the unanimous support of many judgments of this Court.

In the absence of full submissions on the matter, it is not appropriate to dwell on the views expressed by Sperling J. However, it might be said that they do not sit comfortably with, inter alia, the new statutory scheme introduced by the provisions of the Act. The old system of taxation has been replaced by a new process of assessment. This is a process which requires the forming of an opinion as to what is fair and reasonable. When the determination is made, a "Certificate As To Determination" is to be issued.
The determination is binding on all parties. It seems to be contemplated that the function of a costs assessor comes to an end when he issues the
Certificate.

In my view, the appeal fails. I affirm the Costs Assessor's decision. The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of the assessment.

It was submitted that the costs of the defendant should be paid on an indemnity basis. I have given this question careful consideration. After some deliberation, I have come to the view that the circumstances of this case are not such as to justify the ordering of costs on an indemnity basis.

The Summons is dismissed. The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of the Summons.
 * * * 
