

Regina versus G A Matter No 60588/96 [1997] NSWSC 263 (17 July 1997) 
Regina versus G A /96 July 1997 
Gleeson CJ, James J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus G A 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Following a trial before his Honour Judge Kirkham and a jury at the District Court at Coffs Harbour, the appellant was convicted of two offences of carnal knowledge of a girl under the age of 17 years and one offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. In each case the complainant was the appellant's daughter, R. The complainant was born in 1962, and was aged 33 at the time of the trial. She was aged 12 at the time of the alleged offences of carnal knowledge, which were said to have occurred in 1975. She was aged 19 at the time of the alleged assault. 
The appellant, in respect of each of the offences of carnal knowledge, was sentenced to penal servitude involving concurrent minimum terms of five years and additional terms of one year eight months. He was sentenced to a fixed term of twelve months in relation to the assault. He appeals against the convictions.

The complainant alleged that she was subjected to a long history of sexual abuse by the appellant. There was evidence that the first complaint of sexual abuse made by R occurred in August 1987. She was at the time working at a police station, and told a police officer, in a general way, and without specifying the wrongdoer, that she had been subjected to sexual abuse as a child. The officer to whom she made that statement confirmed her evidence about it. In October 1988 R joined the police force. In September 1993 she made a comprehensive statement to the police following which the appellant was arrested and charged. His reaction to the allegations was an important part of the Crown case against him.

The evidence of the complainant in relation to the first two counts in the indictment may be summarised as follows. In relation to the first count, R said that, towards the end of the school term in 1975, on a date which she could not specifically recall, the appellant came into her bedroom while she was sleeping. He rolled on top of her on the bed and had penile vaginal intercourse. In relation to the second count she said that, one night in
November 1975, while she was sleeping in the same bedroom as her younger sister J, she woke up to find the appellant next to her in bed. He removed his underpants and inserted his penis into her vagina. She said that these were two instances of a prolonged history of sexual activity. The evidence as to the assault was that one day, between September and November 1982, whilst R was working in the dairy area of her house, she and the appellant became involved in an argument concerning a cat. The appellant obtained a rifle, pushed it into the appellant's stomach and punched her in the mouth, causing her teeth to puncture her bottom lip.

The appellant and his former wife, R's mother, were divorced in February 1986.
They separated in 1983, and in that year there was a dispute concerning the custody of the daughter J. More will be said about that later. The appellant's former wife gave evidence that she had seen him behave violently towards R.
She said that she remembered an incident around October 1982 when she saw R come in, crying, from the dairy area, with blood on her lip.

There was an issue at the trial, which manifested itself in a variety of ways, and which was the subject of expert evidence, concerning the appellant's memory for past events. It was common ground that the appellant suffered some degree of impairment of memory, apparently resulting from a fall in early childhood and possibly also from a subsequent episode of electrocution. One of the ways in which the question became important concerned a record of interview conducted by the police with the appellant in November 1993. The interview was electronically recorded, and the manner in which the appellant responded to questions put to him was of considerable significance.

This court has seen the video tape of the interview. It is very powerful evidence against the appellant. Whilst the appellant said that, in a number of respects, his memory was defective, he fully acknowledged his guilt of having had sexual relations, over a period of years, with R. Indeed, he appeared to speak very frankly about the subject. He said his relationship with his wife had broken down, and he and R (who was only 18 years younger than her father) became extremely close. He said that he was aware that society drew a line which a relationship between a father and daughter should not cross and that he and R had crossed that line. That, he said, had placed him under a burden of guilt. He expressed remorse.

Although the jury did not see it, there was a second interview, conducted immediately after the interview mentioned above, concerning similar allegations made against the appellant by another daughter, L. The second interview was tendered on a voir dire hearing in relation to the admissibility of the first, and was seen by the trial judge. We also viewed it. The contrast with the first interview is striking. The appellant repeatedly said that, whilst he could entirely understand the allegations made against him by R, of which he acknowledged his guilt, he was perplexed by the allegations made by
L, with whom he had no relationship comparable with his relationship with R.

The appellant gave sworn evidence at the trial in which he said he did not have a memory covering the relevant events, but that he believed in his heart that sexual intercourse did not occur.

The reliability of the confessional statements made by the appellant in his record of interview was the subject of expert psychiatric evidence, Dr
Westmore gave evidence for the Crown, and Dr Lucire gave evidence for the defence.

I turn now to the grounds of appeal.

Ground 1: "The trial miscarried because his Honour the trial judge refused to permit the defence to inspect documents produced to the court by Lismore and District
Women's Health Centre Inc. The documents were produced pursuant to a subpoena issued by the defence. In the circumstances of the case it is likely they would have assisted the appellant in the conduct of his defence and it was unjust to deny his counsel access to the documents." 
It is necessary to examine precisely what occurred about this matter at the trial. The Crown does not accept that the trial judge made the ruling attributed to him.

Some months before the commencement of the trial the Crown notified the lawyers for the appellant that R had made an application for compensation under the Victims Compensation Act. The Crown provided the defence lawyers with copies of reports made in support of that application. One of the reports was made by a counsellor with the Lismore and District Women's Health Centre
Inc. Dr Lucire, the psychiatrist retained by the defence to deal with issues arising out of the appellant's memory deficit, having read the counsellor's report, observed that it used certain terms which made Dr Lucire suspect, or infer, that therapeutic treatment had been received by R which might have corrupted her evidence and, in particular, that this might have been a case of what is sometimes called repressed or recovered memory syndrome.

It was not the Crown case, and was never suggested by the complainant, that this was a case involving repressed or recovered memory. The complainant never suggested, in her evidence, that she had forgotten any of the relevant events and only regained her memory of them at some later time.

The appellant was represented at the trial by a very experienced barrister. He raised with the trial judge, in the absence of the jury, a concern that this might be a repressed memory case. Kirkham DCJ responded by suggesting that, in that event, the defence might care to explore the question by conducting a voir dire examination, and that Dr Lucire might be in a position to give evidence relevant to such an examination. Those suggestions were not taken up by defence counsel. However, a subpoena was issued to the Lismore and District
Women's Health Centre calling for the production of the clinical notes and other records relating to counselling and treatment received by R. Those documents were produced to the court. Defence counsel made an application to inspect them. That application was opposed by a representative of the Centre.
After hearing argument on the matter, and after himself examining the documents produced on subpoena, Kirkham DCJ made a statement which is recorded in the transcript as follows: "His Honour informed Mr St John that at this stage he was not inclined to make the order sought but the application could be renewed at a later stage." 
It is agreed that what is recorded in the transcript is an accurate summary of what the judge said. This occurred before the complainant commenced to give her evidence in chief. Her evidence, including her cross-examination, extended over two days.

No further application was made by Mr St John for access to the documents. No application was made for a voir dire examination of the kind that had been suggested by the trial judge. No cross-examination was addressed to the complainant to suggest that this was a case that had anything to do with repressed or recovered memory or which involved a false memory.

In those circumstances I would accept the submission of the Crown that the factual basis upon which the first ground of appeal proceeds has not been made out. The issue that was raised by trial counsel was not pursued, and there was no error or irregularity in the trial.

At the request of senior counsel for the appellant, and without objection by the Crown, this court examined for itself the documents which were produced by the Centre on subpoena. That examination did not lead to the conclusion that there has been any injustice to the appellant arising out of what occurred at the trial.

Ground 2: "His Honour the trial judge failed to determine according to law the admissibility of the electronically recorded interviews with the accused." 
It is not clear why this ground refers to interviews in the plural. There were, it is true, two interviews, and both of them were tendered in the course of a voir dire examination as to the admissibility in evidence in the trial of one of them. However, it was only the interview in relation to R that was admitted in evidence at the trial.

Once again, in dealing with this ground of appeal it is important to note the course of events at the trial.

The first issue that was raised for decision by Kirkham DCJ, arising out of the appellant's state of memory impairment, was whether the appellant was fit to plead. That issue was resolved, following a hearing in the absence of the jury. Evidence on that hearing was given by the two psychiatrists, Dr Westmore and Dr Lucire, and also by a psychologist, Mr McCombie. The evidence of Dr
Lucire was that, in her opinion, the appellant had virtually no memory at all, due to organic brain damage, and that any admissions he made in the record of interview were the result of an adoption by him of the idea that he must have done something simply because authority figures, such as police and loved ones, were accusing him. In her opinion the appellant was unfit to stand trial by reason of the same problems as made his record of interview unreliable. He had no independent recollection of the events with which he was charged and was therefore unable to instruct his solicitors. He would be unable to challenge a witness or to challenge evidence that might be led. Dr Lucire explained a lot of information about past events that the appellant gave to police, and others, by reference to a process which she described as "introjection", meaning that a person adopts as true things that people claim are his characteristics. This, she said, is the neurotic response of a person trying to make sense of a world in which others are unkind to him.

Dr Westmore, on the other hand, whilst accepting that the appellant had a certain degree of memory deficit, rejected the opinion of Dr Lucire as to the extent of that deficit. He pointed out that, at about the time he was interviewed by the police, the appellant was working in a responsible position and had twenty men directly under his charge on a day to day basis. He referred to the substantial body of information which the appellant had given various people about past events, and upon which people were evidently prepared to rely. Most significantly, in Dr Westmore's opinion, the appellant, in both of the electronically recorded interviews, was able to give the police much detailed information as to past events. He knew his birthday, his address, and his occupation. He knew R's date of birth to be 26 December 1963.
He knew the name of R's mother. He knew that he and R's mother had separated in 1983. He knew that R had gone away for a short time thereafter. He gave a coherent and plausible account of his relationship with R. He was able to give substantial detail concerning the incident involving an argument about a cat.
When the alleged assault was first raised with him, he volunteered the information that the argument arose over a cat. His response to questions asked about the alleged physical assault revealed substantial memory.
Similarly, in relation to the second record of interview, the appellant gave a substantial amount of detail in answer to questions from the police and that detail was evidently based upon his memory. This, according to Dr Westmore, made it impossible to accept Dr Lucire's opinion that the appellant had virtually no functioning memory at all. It might be added, in passing, that when, in a later voir dire examination, counsel for the appellant called the appellant to give evidence, counsel began with a series of questions about events which had happened long ago, and which the appellant appeared to have no difficulty remembering.

A viewing of the records of interview was of substantial assistance in dealing with this ground of appeal.

Kirkham DCJ examined, in detail, the medical evidence and concluded: "Accepting that the accused on and off has suffered from periods of depression which at least, since he was charged with these offences, were largely reactive in origin, and accepting some intellectual drawbacks probably caused by head injury when he was very young, I find myself quite unable to accept Dr Lucire's pronouncement that the accused has no memory at all, and for this reason, does not understand the nature of the proceedings brought against him so he can instruct counsel, formulate his plea to these charges, and follow what will take place at his trial.

A reading of the records of interview reveals that he is quite aware of the nature of the charges against him, and that he is able to distinguish those charges between (R) and (L). There is no doubt in my mind that both of these records of interview contain passages which may be seen as admissions in respect to his culpability concerning the charges relating to (R), and denials, in respect to the second record of interview, concerning the charges relating to (L). This, in my opinion, effectively excludes the notion of introjection suggested by Dr Lucire." 
Like Kirkham DCJ, I was struck by the difference between the appellant's response to the allegations concerning R and his response to the allegations concerning L. Dr Lucire gave no plausible explanation of why, if the appellant's admissions concerning R were merely the result of a readiness to accept accusations made by people in authority, he reacted so differently to accusations concerning L.

Kirkham DCJ found the appellant fit to be tried. There is no appeal against that finding.

That finding was followed by an application, made by trial counsel for the appellant, that Kirkham DCJ should disqualify himself from sitting in the remainder of the trial. The basis of that application was that the findings that had been made in relation to the fitness to plead issue in effect predetermined the outcome of an application that was going to be made under [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) to exclude the record of interview. It was recognised by counsel for the appellant that the basis upon which he was going to apply to have the record of interview excluded under [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) was substantially the same as the basis upon which he contended that the appellant was unfit to be tried, and was related to the appellant's memory deficit, and
Dr Lucire's opinion as to the extent of that deficit. Kirkham DCJ refused to disqualify himself. There is no appeal against that refusal.

Subsequently, following a further voir dire examination, the question arose as to the admissibility of the record of interview relating to the allegations made by R, in the light of [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Although there was some further evidence given, the issue turned principally upon the competing opinions of Dr Westmore and Dr Lucire. Once again, the opinion of Dr
Westmore was to a significant extent related to the performance of the appellant in the interview itself.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) provides as follows: "(1) This section applies only in a criminal proceeding and only to evidence of an admission made by a defendant: in the course of official questioning, or as a result of an act of another person who is capable of influencing the decision whether a prosecution of the defendant should be brought or should be continued.

Evidence of the admission is not admissible unless the circumstances in which the admission was made were such as to make it unlikely that the truth of the admission was adversely affected.

Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for the purposes of subsection (2), it is to take into account: any relevant condition or characteristic of the person who made the admission, including age, personality and education and any mental, intellectual or physical disability to which the person is or appears to be subject, and if the admission was made in respect to questioning: the nature of the questions and the manner in which they were put, and the nature of any threat, promise or other inducement made to the person questioned." 
For presently relevant purposes, the argument for the appellant was based upon [s85(3)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) and, in particular, what was said to be the mental or intellectual disability to which the appellant was subject at the time of the interview. Relying on the evidence of Dr Lucire, counsel argued that the appellant had no substantial memory of the events about which he was being questioned and, therefore, the circumstances in which the interview was conducted, and the admissions were made, were such (ignoring questions of onus of proof) that the reliability of those issues was adversely affected. The Crown it was said, had not established that it was unlikely that the truth of the admissions was adversely affected.

The reasons for judgment given by Kirkham DCJ in deciding not to exclude the record of interview commenced with the following statement: "I shall not traverse the facts of this case again for the purposes of this judgment ... " 
His Honour was obviously referring to the judgment he had already given in relation to the issue as to the appellant's fitness to plead. It was the findings he had made in that judgment which formed the basis of the application that he should disqualify himself. The ground of the application that he should disqualify himself was that he had substantially predetermined the factual issues likely to arise in relation to [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

The argument advanced for the appellant in support of ground 2 of the grounds of appeal turns principally upon the suggestion that the reasons advanced by
Kirkham DCJ for not excluding the evidence under [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) indicated that his Honour did not address the correct issue. That argument should be rejected. His Honour formulated, with precision, the issue he had to decide on the second page of his reasons. What he said thereafter has to be read in the light of the opening statement of his reasons, quoted above. It is true that, in giving his reasons, he went on to consider wider issues than those raised by [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html), but there is no basis for suggesting that he lost sight of the [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) issue. He ultimately expressed the conclusion that to admit the record of interview would not infringe [s85.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) He had already given, in his judgment on the fitness to plead question, the principal reasons for that conclusion. There is nothing to suggest that he had not kept an open mind on the matter when he heard the additional evidence relevant to the [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) argument, but the principal evidence relevant to that argument was that of Dr
Westmore and Dr Lucire to which reference has already been made.

There is no justification for holding that Kirkham DCJ did not deal with the [s85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) question according to law. Indeed, the argument in support of that proposition appears to depend almost entirely upon an artificial severance of the two interlocutory judgments mentioned above, and a disregard of the course of events at the trial.

This ground of appeal has not been made out.

Ground 3: "The verdicts were each unsafe and unsatisfactory." 
The ground is based upon what is said to have been the weakness of the Crown case against the appellant, and is to be determined by reference to principles discussed in cases such as M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] 
The principal evidence relied upon by the Crown was the evidence of R, and the admissions made by the appellant in his electronically recorded interview.

A matter strongly relied upon by the defence concerned an affidavit that had been sworn by the complainant in 1983, in support of the appellant, in a contest that occurred between the appellant and his first wife over the custody of the child J. The complainant took the side of the appellant in that dispute, and swore an affidavit, prepared by a solicitor, in answer to an affidavit that had been filed by the appellant's former wife.

In response to what appears to have been an allegation of physical maltreatment, the complainant said, in her affidavit: "My father has never assaulted me and although we have had heated arguments these are of a verbal and not a physical nature." 
She also said: "On about 30th September 1983 (sic) I had an argument with my father whilst we were in the dairy milking. The argument was over a cat which I liked which had been killing birds. My father said that he would get the gun and get rid of the cat. During our argument the gun was not pointed at any person and my father did not assault me in any way nor did I say `I am leaving home', and my father did not shoot the cat nor as I discovered later was the gun loaded." 
She also said that her father had been a loving and caring parent.

It is not entirely clear whether that is a reference to the incident the subject of the fourth count in the indictment against the appellant but it appears to be so. The absence from evidence of the affidavit to which the complainant was responding causes some difficulty in that regard.

It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that, at the least, what was sworn in the affidavit contradicted the allegation in count 4 of the indictment.
Perhaps more importantly, it is submitted that the whole tenor of the affidavit was inconsistent with the allegations of sexual abuse later made by the complainant against her father. In that connection it is noted that it was an affidavit in support of an application by the father for custody of one of his other daughters.

Naturally, much was made of that affidavit in cross-examination of the complainant at the trial. She responded by saying that the context in which the affidavit was made was that she was living at home with her father, that her mother had left the home, that she was hostile towards her mother, and that she was anxious to assist her father to obtain custody of her sister. She said that at the time she made the affidavit she was aged 20, very naive and emotionally extremely immature. She said that her mother had been very nasty to her and that she had nobody to turn to except her father. She said that although her father had done terrible things to her she still loved him. She had a strong desire to please her father and to be loved by him.

Much would have depended upon the jury's assessment of the manner in which the complainant dealt with the cross-examination concerning the affidavit. A reading of the transcript suggests that she was articulate and capable of giving a good account of herself.

The appellant places reliance upon the antiquity of the allegations against him, and points out that his family appeared to stay together as a happy family until 1983. It is also observed that the complainant left school in in order to work fulltime on her parent's farm. Her allegations of sexual misconduct by her father were not corroborated by members of her family.

Ultimately the jury had before them the evidence of Dr Westmore and Dr Lucire, but in determining what to make of the record of interview they also had to take into account their observations of the appellant himself, both as they saw him in the interview, and as they saw him in the witness box. He denied on oath the allegations against him.

The assessment made by the jury of the appellant would have been affected by the view they took of the expert evidence in the case, but it was well open to them to make the same assessment as that made by Kirkham DCJ.

The jury, acting reasonably, could well have discounted the importance of the affidavit upon which the defence placed such reliance. They obviously accepted the complainant as an honest and reliable witness. It was also well open to the jury, acting reasonably, and paying full regard to the expert evidence, to treat the admissions made by the appellant in his record of interview as reliable. Once again, the viewing of the video tape was of substantial assistance in dealing with this ground of appeal.

It has not been demonstrated that the verdicts were unsafe or unsatisfactory.

Ground 4: "His Honour the trial judge misdirected the jury in a manner causing a substantial miscarriage of justice by directing the jury, in response to a question by the jury, that they should ignore the complainant's claim and award of victims compensation." 
Kirkham DCJ directed the jury that the only material they could regard as possible corroboration of R, if they accepted them as reliable, were the admissions made by the appellant in his record of interview. There is no complaint about that direction. He then went on to say that, if they did not regard the admissions as reliable, the evidence of R was uncorroborated, and he gave the jury a warning about the need to exercise considerable caution before convicting on the uncorroborated evidence of R. There is no complaint about that.

Having done that, Kirkham DCJ then reviewed a series of matters reflecting on the credibility of R. In that connection, and after referring again to the need for caution, he said: "The other thing you would have to take into account is the Victim's
Compensation Tribunal application in considering her evidence and in scrutinising it with great care as you must." 
Subsequently he read to the jury extracts of the cross-examination of R about her application, including an allegation that she made her complaints in order to found a claim for compensation.

Later, the jury asked the following (rather astute) question: "Can you explain to us how victim's compensation can be awarded prior to a verdict by trial?" 
There was a discussion in the absence of the jury as to how that question should be answered. Defence counsel asked for a direction that the appellant had not appeared before, or been represented before, the Tribunal, and that the civil standard of proof applied. The judge directed the jury as he had been requested by defence counsel.

There was then further discussion in the absence of the jury. Defence counsel said: "The direction I seek is that there has been a finding in favour of the complainant (R) it should not have any effect on their deliberations in the case. They don't take it into account one way or the other. The fact that she's made the application is a different matter." 
The judge then recalled the jury, having indicated that he accepted defence counsel's submission. He said to the jury that he wanted to add something about the Victim's Compensation claim and award. He then said: "That is really of no consequence in these proceedings and I want you to just put that right out of your minds. The result, one way or the other, is of no consequence, so please, you should just ignore that altogether and write it out of your memory and do not consider it as part of the matters you have to consider. It does not matter one way or the other." 
Something may have turned upon the inflexion used by the judge. However, defence counsel expressed no problem about what was said, and sought no further direction. Discussion moved on to a different subject.

In the context, and especially bearing in mind the question the jury had asked, it is reasonably clear that Kirkham DCJ was addressing the significance of the award of compensation, not the claim. That, it appears, is how trial counsel understood what was said, and it is obviously what the judge meant to convey. It was generally accepted that the judge was doing what defence counsel had requested. He was not intending to withdraw the earlier part of his summing-up. It is unfortunate that he mentioned the "claim and award" but the context, and the absence of complaint by trial counsel, indicate that it was the award that was, and was understood to be, the focus of attention at that stage.

This ground of appeal is not made out.

Ground 5: "His Honour the trial judge erred in not directing the jury that if the contents of the affidavit of (R) were true, her evidence at the trial could not be accepted beyond reasonable doubt." 
Reference has been made above to the affidavit which is referred to in this ground of appeal.

There is much to be said for the view that the direction which Kirkham DCJ gave to the jury in relation to the affidavit was less favourable to the defence than it might properly have been. His Honour said: "I also want to say to you that, when assessing the credibility of (R) you may wish to take into account the fact that when she was aged 20 she swore an affidavit which she knew to be false. The affidavit concerned the question of custody of her younger sister J, then aged 12, and at this time some two or three years had passed since any alleged acts of sexual intercourse had taken place. Now the accused submits to you that you would look to these factors in assessing the truthfulness of her answers." 
Senior counsel for the appellant has pointed out that Kirkham DCJ might fairly have invited the jury to consider the possibility that the affidavit was true, rather than putting the matter to them on the basis that the complainant had sworn a false affidavit.

The difficulty confronting the appellant in relation to this ground of appeal is that the direction which Kirkham DCJ gave to this matter was substantially the direction which he was invited to give by trial counsel for the appellant, and no complaint was made about the direction. It is acknowledged that leave is required to argue this ground, and in my view leave should be refused. On the point in question, the trial judge summed-up to the jury in the manner in which the case was put and argued at the trial on behalf of the appellant. The appellant should not now be permitted to take a different approach and complain about the fact that the trial judge directed the jury as he was requested to do by trial counsel.

Conclusion: 
The appeal should be dismissed.

REGINA versus G A 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: I agree that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed for the reasons given by the Chief Justice.

REGINA versus G A 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: I have read the reasons for judgment of Gleeson CJ in this matter. I agree with the order proposed and with his reasons.

REGINA versus G A 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - Documents relating to psychiatric counselling of complainant produced on subpoena - trial judge defers decision on application to give counsel leave to inspect - no renewal of application - argument on appeal that the documents might have shown there to be a case of repressed memory - no such case suggested by either side in evidence or cross-examination at trial - HELD - no error or miscarriage shown. 
CRIMINAL LAW - Electronically recorded interview - argued that appellant's psychiatric condition made admissions unreliable - conflict of expert evidence at trial - HELD - trial judge was entitled to accept and act on evidence of Crown psychiatrist and had not erred in admitting the interview. 
O R D E R 
Appeal dismissed. * * * 
