

The Application of an Application by Dezarnaulds and the Legal Profession
Act 1987 Matter No 11091/97 [1997] NSWSC 417 (18 September 1997) 
The Application of an Application by Camille Edouard Dezarnaulds and The [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) /97 September 1997 
Graham A-J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 The Application of an Application by Camille Edouard Dezarnaulds and The [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The applicant Camille Edouard Dezarnaulds has applied for admission as a legal practitioner in accordance with rule 103 of the Legal Practitioners Transitional Admission Rules 1994. 
Under section 11 of the Legal Professional Act 1987 a candidate, however qualified in other respects, must not be admitted as a legal practitioner unless the Legal Practitioners Admission Board is satisfied that the candidate is of good fame and character and is otherwise suitable for admission.

Under rule 107 of the rules the Admission Board may approve an applicant as a suitable candidate for admission and issue a Certificate of Approval for
Admission in accordance with form 13 to the Rules. Rule 107(2) provides as follows:- "107(2) The Board may: withhold approval until it has received further certificates, evidence or undertakings; or give approval, and issue a Certificate of Approval for 
Admission, either unconditionally or subject to any conditions it considers appropriate." 
Under section 12 of the Act when the Admission Board considers an application for admission, it must consider whether it is satisfied that the candidate is of good fame and character and is otherwise suitable for admission. Unless the
Admission Board declares that it is satisfied that the candidate is of good fame and character and is otherwise suitable for admission, it must refuse to approve of the application for admission.

Section 13A of the Act permits the Admission Board to refer to the Court any application for admission if, in the opinion of the Admission Board, it will be more practical in the circumstances of the case for the Supreme Court to consider whether or not the candidate is of good fame and character or is otherwise suitable for admission.

Upon an inquiry under section 13A the Council of the Law Society of New South
Wales is entitled to be represented and heard, as is the applicant.

In respect of an inquiry by the Court, section 13A relevantly provides as follows:- "13A ...

The Supreme Court has the same powers as the Admission 
Board to deal with an application and its decision on an application is taken to be a decision of the Admission Board.

On a referral under this section, the Supreme Court may make such order or declaration as it thinks fit.
 ..." 
The application of Mr. Dezarnaulds of 16 July 1996 was referred to the Court on 14 April 1997.

Pursuant to Part 65C rule 8 of the Supreme Court Rules the Law Society of New
South Wales has been joined as a party to this application.

I should add that with his application Mr. Dezarnaulds lodged a statutory declaration made 16 July 1996 bringing to the attention of the Admission Board certain facts and circumstances, to which I will hereafter refer, which are relevant to a determination on his fame and character.

Mr. Dezarnaulds was born on 27 August 1934 and is now 63 years of age. He graduated from the University of Sydney with Bachelor Degrees in Arts and Law on 27 April 1955 and 7 May 1959 respectively. He was admitted as an Attorney,
Solicitor and Proctor of the Court on 29 July 1960. In September 1992 the Law
Society cancelled his Practising Certificate and on 17 August 1994 the Legal
Profession Disciplinary Tribunal ordered that his name be removed from the roll of solicitors.

On 23 February 1995 Mr. Dezarnaulds applied to the Law Society for approval to become an associate of Mr. Stephen Wawn, solicitor within the meaning of [section
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s48k.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/). That application was refused by the Law Society by its Joint Professional Conduct
Committee whereupon Mr. Dezarnaulds and Mr. Wawn appealed against the decision of the Law Society pursuant to section 48K(3) of the Act. The appeal was heard by Mr. Acting-Justice Spender who allowed the appeal and approved Mr.
Dezarnaulds becoming an associate of Messrs. Stephen Wawn & Associates on certain conditions and upon Mr. Dezarnaulds giving to the Court an undertaking that he would abide by all of the conditions. Those conditions were as follows:- "(a) Mr. Dezarnaulds is not to attend the offices of Stephen Wawn & 
Associates, (`the firm'): 
Before the arrival of Mr. Stephen Wawn at those offices; and 
After the departure of Mr Stephen Wawn from those offices; and 
During any time that Mr Wawn is absent from those offices for purposes other than pursuing his personal or professional commitments.

Mr Dezarnaulds shall not be entitled to nor shall he use any business card identifying him with the practice of Stephen Wawn & Associates.

Mr Dezarnaulds shall not open any correspondence addressed to the firm or him at the firm's offices, and all outgoing mail originated by Mr 
Dezarnaulds shall be referred to Mr Wawn for his approval, before despatch (sic).

All work performed by Mr Dezarnaulds for the firm shall be performed under Mr Wawn's general supervision.

Mr Dezarnaulds shall not be a signatory to any account in Mr Wawn's name or conducted by the firm.

Unless Mr Wawn shall give specific and express authority, Mr 
Dezarnaulds shall not have any meeting of a professional nature with clients of the firm outside normal hours of the firm.

Mr Dezarnaulds shall not have or operate more than two personal bank accounts, one a cheque or current account, the other a savings or investment account.

Mr Dezarnaulds shall refer the printed ledgers or statements issued to him periodically by the financial institution(s) each fortnight to Mr 
Wawn and he shall send copies to the Law Society of New South Wales monthly, together with explanations sufficient to identify the nature of the transactions affecting these accounts.

Mr Dezarnaulds is to continue to be medically reviewed by Associate 
Professor Clifton-Bligh each quarter, and to undergo such testing and to take such medication as he may be requested to undertake or as may be prescribed, respectively.

Mr Dezarnaulds is to request and authorise Mr. Clifton-Bligh to furnish to him quarterly, a report concerning his opinion on Mr Dezarnauld's condition as observed and any recommendations for changed future management.

Mr Dezarnaulds shall supply a copy of that report to both Mr Wawn and the Law Society of New South Wales within 7 days of receiving it.

Mr Wawn shall report briefly in writing to the Law Society of New 
South Wales every 3 months, setting out his opinion as to Mr 
Dezarnauld's (sic) application and performance." 
The required undertaking to the Court was duly given in writing by Mr.
Dezarnaulds on 12 July 1995, which undertaking was apparently filed in Court on 13 July 1995.

When making the said orders Mr. Acting-Justice Spender noted that Mr.
Dezarnaulds was to be employed initially as a clerk, working three days per week under the Clerks' (Solicitors) State Award for three months. Subject to satisfactory performance, it was open to Mr. Wawn to vary the hours and remuneration after the initial period subject to the said conditions and Mr.
Wawn notifying the Law Society of any changes made.

Mr. Dezarnaulds worked as a law clerk for Mr. Wawn between July 1995 and 26
June 1996. During the course of his employment he worked on average three days per week and was involved in the management of personal injury cases, conveyancing matters, general commercial matters, wills, probate, litigation and family law matters. He conducted the matters assigned to him on a satisfactory basis. He had regular contact with clients of the practice and clients introduced by him to the practice.

On 3 October 1996 the Council of the Law Society resolved to approve Mr.
Dezarnaulds as an associate of Messrs. Peter R. Murphy & Co., solicitors, subject to 14 conditions as follows:- "1. Mr. Dezarnaulds will be remunerated upon the basis of the Clerks' (State)
Award:
Mr. Dezarnaulds will not attend the offices of Peter R. Murphy & Co.
 ("the firm"): before the arrival of Mr. P R Murphy at those offices: and after the departure of Mr. P R Murphy from those offices: and during any time that Mr P R Murphy is absent from those offices for purposes other than pursuing his personal or professional commitments.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall not be entitled to nor shall he use any business card identifying him with the practice of Peter R Murphy & Co.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall not open any correspondence addressed to the firm or to him at the firm's offices and all outgoing mail originated by 
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall be referred to Mr P R Murphy for his approval, before dispatch.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall not have an office key, security entry card or similar device permitting entry into the offices of the firm without Mr P 
R Murphy's express authorisation and for a particular occasion or purpose.
All work performed by Mr. Dezarnaulds for the firm shall be performed under the general supervision of Mr P R Murphy.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall not be a signatory to any account within or conducted by the firm.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall not have any business contact with clients of the firm after office hours except on prior notice to Mr. P R Murphy and with Mr P R Murphy's specific authorisation.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall not maintain more than one personal bank account.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall refer the printed ledgers or statements issued to him periodically by financial institutions each fortnight to Mr P R 
Murphy and Mr. Dezarnaulds shall send copies to the Law Society of 
New South Wales monthly, together with explanation sufficient to identify the nature of the transactions affecting those accounts.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall continue to be medically reviewed by Associate 
Professor Clifton-Bligh each quarter and undergo such testing and take such medication as he may be requested to undertake or as may be prescribed respectively.
Mr. Dezarnaulds is to request and authorise Mr. Clifton-Bligh to furnish him quarterly with a report concerning Mr. Clifton-Bligh's opinion with regard to Mr. Dezarnaulds condition as observed and any recommendations for change in future management.
Mr. Dezarnaulds shall supply a copy of that report of Mr. Clifton-Bligh to both Mr P R Murphy and the Law Society of New South Wales within days of receiving it.
Mr P R Murphy shall report briefly in writing to the Law Society of New 
South Wales every three months, setting out his opinion as to Mr.

Dezarnaulds' application and performance.

Following the making of Mr. Dezarnaulds' current application for admission as a legal practitioner the Professional Conduct Committees of the Law Society sitting in joint session resolved on 8 August 1996 to recommend to the Council of the Law Society that the application be opposed and, on the same day, the
Council resolved to oppose the application.

No resolution has apparently been passed by the Council of the Law Society indicating that it has reconsidered its opposition to Mr. Dezarnaulds application in the light of the passage of a further 13 months since it was first addressed. Mr. D.P. Robinson of Counsel who appears for the Law Society submits that it should be inferred that the Law Society is familiar with the subsequent evidence which has been filed in the application and conscious of the time which has elapsed and that its position remains unchanged. I am not sure that that inference necessarily follows but, for the purposes of the application, I will assume it to be the case.

In relation to the application the Law Society has indicated that the only issue so far as it is concerned is whether the Court can be satisfied that Mr.
Dezarnaulds is of good fame and character.

In the proceedings before the Legal Professional Disciplinary Tribunal Mr.
Dezarnaulds conceded that he was guilty of professional misconduct but urged the view that his conduct could be excused, at least in part, by virtue of a medical condition from which he suffered. The Tribunal did not accept this submission. It said "the Tribunal does not consider that the thyroid problem manipulated his mind to the extent that he did not know that what he was doing was wrong. It seems strange that the Solicitor's practice and his personal life was otherwise relatively unaffected by this condition. He was able to engage in sporting activities with distinction and the balance of his practice and personal life seems to be unaffected".

A strong body of character evidence was tendered in support of the solicitor but did not dissuade the Tribunal from ordering that Mr. Dezarnaulds' name be removed from the roll. The Tribunal said:- "Although the character evidence tendered on behalf of the Solicitor is as is often the case, impressive, the Tribunal, feels that in these particular tragic circumstances, it has no alternative than to make the orders sought by the Society." 
The specific professional misconduct consisted of wilful contraventions of [sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html) and [62](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s62.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) and misappropriation of moneys received on behalf of his clients. [Sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html) and [62](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s62.html) relate to a solicitor's responsibilities in respect of moneys received on behalf of a client.

Clients' moneys which were misused by Mr. Dezarnaulds totalled $75,631.09 as listed on page 3 of a report of Jean Sayer, Chartered Accountant, to the Law
Society of 29 July 1993. The misappropriations affected some 12 clients with the total amounts misappropriated varying from $500.00 to $18,895.00.

Before the Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal Mr. Dezarnaulds was unwilling to concede that he endeavoured to conceal the steps taken by him in respect of each transaction. The Tribunal found that he did in fact actively endeavour to conceal the misappropriations and that any suggestion to the contrary was completely without foundation.

The relevant misappropriations occurred over a period of four and a half years between about February 1988 and September 1992. The misappropriations were discovered when, in September 1992, one of the affected clients was unable to obtain his funds.

Mr. Dezarnaulds caused full restitution to be made in respect of the moneys misappropriated with payments totalling $105,455.00 being the amount of the moneys misappropriated together with interest. In effecting this restitution he did so in part with the assistance of his father who contributed $37,373.00.

Mr. Dezarnaulds senior had himself practised as a solicitor and was at one time Chairman of the Statutory Committee of the Law Society of New South
Wales. He is now 91 years of age and living in a nursing home. One of the reasons advanced by the applicant for his current application is his fervent wish that before his father dies he will know that a finding has been made by the Court that his character has been restored and that the Court is satisfied, once again, that he is of good fame and character.

The applicant presently works as a clerk for Peter R. Murphy & Co. for $480.00 per week which, after tax, yields $382.00. About $290.00 per week out of this net amount is used by Mr. Dezarnaulds to pay rent ($240.00 per week) outstanding arrears on a Visa card and overdraft account with National
Australia Bank Limited dating back to 1992 ($60.00 per month) and Miss Sayer's costs and expenses as the Law Society's receiver of his former practice ($150.00 per month).

With respect to the receiver's costs of $12,756.95, Mr. Dezarnaulds made an initial payment of $5,000.00 and, since 8 November 1994, he has been paying the said amount of $150.00 per month. Repayments to the Law Society to date total approximately $9,800.00.

Another reason advanced by Mr. Dezarnaulds for his application, apart from re- establishing his own credit, is his desire to re-establish himself in better paid employment which will permit him to better survive personally and also make financial contributions directed at assisting his three daughters.

The unchallenged evidence of Mr. Dezarnaulds is that since he ceased to practice on 25 September 1992 he has lectured on a part-time basis with TAFE in conveyancing and real property. He has tutored in the French language in which he is fluent, translated commercial and legal documents from the French language into the English language and worked as a part-time tennis coach.

Since 17 July 1995 Mr. Dezarnaulds has worked as a law clerk with Stephen Wawn & Associates Solicitors and later Peter R Murphy & Co. Solicitors. It is clear that in handling legal matters Mr. Dezarnaulds has considerable experience and competence in a wide range of areas.

Mr. Dezarnaulds has kept himself up-to-date with current legal developments and assisted in researching various complex matters being handled by his employers.

He has from time to time attended the library of the Law Society with a view to undertaking studies of practice papers published by the College of Law and other legal organisations to ensure that he keeps up-to-date.

Apart from giving evidence of Mr. Dezarnaulds compliance with the conditions imposed upon his employment as an associate, Mr. Murphy says that he has found
Mr. Dezarnaulds to be "reliable, capable and efficient and to be possessed of very good interpersonal skills". His observations of Mr. Dezarnaulds have convinced him that "he has made a real effort to establish himself and to redeem his reputation in the eyes of the profession. He has shown a very keen interest in the law and values the opportunity to work on legal matters. At the time of seeking employment with me he made a full disclosure to me of his past and the actions taken. He has subsequently expressed to me what appears to be genuine contrition for his past actions and the shame he has brought upon the profession and members of the family".

Mr. Murphy had no hesitation in supporting Mr. Dezarnaulds' application for re-admission as a legal practitioner.

The current medical evidence establishes that Mr. Dezarnaulds' thyroid problem has been stabilised and that he should continue to be able to function in a competent and responsible manner in a professional context provided that he conscientiously takes the presently prescribed drugs for thyrotoxicosis or any revision of that regime indicated by future observation and tests and reports regularly for review of his condition approximately every three months.

Apart from enjoying the support of Mr. Wawn and Mr. Murphy it may be noted that a number of distinguished lawyers have been prepared to speak well of Mr.
Dezarnaulds both at the time of the proceedings before the Legal Profession
Disciplinary Tribunal and since. His current application is supported by certificates of character from Mr. C.R. Callaway Q.C. and the Honourable Mr.
Justice J.E. Ellis of the Family Court of Australia. Mr. Callaway has written of Mr. Dezarnaulds fame and character as follows:- "The proceedings associated with his being struck from the roll obviously have effected his fame but in the social and professional areas in which I move it remains good and so does my opinion of his character." 
Mr. Justice Ellis wrote:- "I am aware of the matters referred to in the chronology annexed to the application of the applicant and of the remorse shown by the applicant for his conduct. Notwithstanding that conduct, in my judgment the applicant is now of good fame and character and a fit & proper person to be re-admitted as a legal practitioner." 
Others who have spoken favourably of Mr. Dezarnaulds include Mr. P.J. Anicich solicitor of Sparke Helmore, Newcastle, Mr. Malcolm Ramage Q.C., Mr. Rupert G.
Rosenblum of M. Rosenblum & Co. Solicitors of Sydney, Mr. P.G. Sheldon,
Barrister-at-Law, Mr. Michael Saunders solicitor of Michael Saunders &
Associates of Sydney, his brother Mr. Peter Dezarnaulds solicitor of
Dezarnaulds Basten and his brother-in-law Mr. Michael Robinson Barrister-at-
Law. A number of these persons have gone to the trouble of restating their commendations of Mr. Dezarnaulds this year. Added to these recommendations, the Court has fresh evidence from other practitioners who again speak well of the applicant. Mr. Michael Bula a Barrister and Solicitor of Victoria has had a close working relationship with Mr. Dezarnaulds for some years. He says:- "In my dealings with Camille Dezarnaulds I have found him to be ethical and professional and experienced in handling a wide variety of matters.

I have no hesitation in expressing the opinion that Camille Dezarnaulds is a fit and proper person to practise in the profession." 
Mr. Eric Petersen, Barrister, has sworn that he has had recent contact with
Mr. Dezarnaulds as a clerk in Mr. Murphy's employ. He swears:- "I believe that Mr. Camille Dezarnaulds is a person who fulfils the requiresments (sic) of fitness and propriety to practice as a solicitor." 
In its submissions the Law Society has conceded that there are a number of facts that may be found in the applicant's favour as follows:-
His medical condition is able to be monitored and is under control.
He is ashamed of his past conduct.
His work as a clerk from July 1995 has been very satisfactory.
He has not transgressed since September 1992.
He is in poor financial circumstances.
He has made or has caused to be made on his behalf restitution and is making payments towards other expenses of the receiver.
Character witnesses speak highly of him knowing of his striking off and the circumstances of it.
He has complied exactly with the undertakings that he gave to the Court in support of his application to be employed as a clerk.
He has kept his legal knowledge up-to-date.

Notwithstanding these matters, all of which I find in the applicant's favour, the Law Society submits that the recent conduct of the applicant is not sufficient to enable the Court to be satisfied that the applicant is of good fame and character.

In putting this submission the Law Society does not contend that a finding that an applicant has, in the past, not been of good fame and character precludes the Court from being satisfied that a candidate is, at a later point in time, of good fame and character and otherwise suitable for admission.

Mr. Conti of Queen's Counsel who appears for the applicant submits that regard should be had not only to the more recent evidence of good fame and character but also the findings of Mr. Acting-Justice Spender contained in his reasons for judgment of 11 July 1995 in the [section
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s48k.html) appeal. Mr. Conti draws attention to the matters enumerated above upon which I have made findings in Mr. Dezarnaulds' favour and also his age, now 63, his stress, humiliation and shame, his long career in the law which was without blemish until 1988, that he is deeply remorseful and contrite and that the legislation gives an opportunity for rehabilitation and redemption. Mr. Conti draws attention to Mr. Acting-Justice Spender's observations (Judgment page 6) as follows:- "(Mr. Dezarnaulds) gave evidence and was cross-examined before me. I watched him carefully and closely while he gave evidence and I formed a very strong view that he was deeply ashamed of and contrite about his past conduct." 
It may be noted that Mr. Dezarnaulds was not required for cross-examination on the current application.

In reaching his conclusions Mr. Acting-Justice Spender said (Judgment pages -11):- "Mr. Dezarnaulds has offended. He has offended significantly. I take account of the Tribunal's findings but I do not think that the Court should deny the opportunity for Mr. Dezarnaulds to work under restricted conditions in his former profession and by that means to seek rehabilitation in the profession's eyes, and in his own. He is a talented man, and it is a pity if those talents cannot be put to some use. He has reached the stage of life when work opportunities outside of his profession are sparse or non-existent. It is not socially useful to confine a human-being to a state of virtual unemployability, when he would then have recourse only to the social welfare system. This is not good for society, nor for the individual. In saying this one must always take account of the circumstances of the individual case.

I have reached the view that Mr. Dezarnaulds should be given an opportunity to work as an associate. In doing so, I take account of what has been put by the
Law Society, and the concerns expressed that he might misappropriate again. I think that his age and shame and contrition militates strongly against that, but I take it into account in the conditions I impose." 
Even though the Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal ordered that Mr.
Dezarnaulds' name be removed from the roll it did not intend to preclude him from seeking readmission. In the concluding sentence of the Tribunal's reasons for judgment the members said:- "If in fact the Solicitor, at a later stage, seeks readmission then these things (glowing tributes from his professional brethren, assertions that he has learnt his lesson and will not offend again and the tragic consequences for his family and himself of being struck off) can be taken into account, provided a track record of appropriate behaviour is established by that time." (The words in parenthesis are mine) 
As I see it the process of rehabilitation upon which Mr. Dezarnaulds has embarked and the success which that rehabilitation has enjoyed provide a useful backdrop for the determination of the question presently before the
Court.

The parties are agreed that the relevant principles to be applied are to be found in the judgment of the Queensland Court of Appeal in Re Taylor (1997) 1
Qd.R.533 and in the judgment of Kirby P in Dawson versus Law Society of New South
Wales (unreported 21 December 1989) at pages 9-16. In Re Taylor Pincus J.A.
and Byrne J said at page 536:- "The applicant's fitness must be judged, having regard of course to the misappropriations of which he was admittedly guilty, but having regard also to what on the evidence appear to be other characteristics, ones of an admirable kind." 
Before leaving that case I should drawn attention to the question of whether or not in relation to an approval of an applicant as a suitable candidate for admission conditions may be imposed under [Rule (2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s107.html) where the issue is the candidate's good fame and character. Mr. Robinson submits that conditions are only relevant to matters other than good fame and character. However I note that Pincus J.A. and Byrne J addressed such a matter in Re Taylor and said at pages 535-6:- "Mr. Perry submits that it is inappropriate to establish different grades of fitness and propriety, that an appellant is either fit and proper or his is not, and that admission subject to the conditions suggested (that the applicant would not practise on his own account or in partnership) would place this applicant in a suspect category.

These submissions have some attraction, but in our opinion they over-simplify the problem. There are plainly degrees of fitness: it is not as if there is a sharp gulf between the least fit solicitors on the roll and all of those who, like the applicant, have been judged unfit to practice. Experience suggest that solicitors, like members of other professions, vary considerably in their fitness to practice. That is of course not merely a matter of refraining from misappropriation, but being dependent upon possession of various qualities: devotion to the clients' interests; competence and thoroughness in doing the work; being careful not to involve a client unnecessarily in litigation; ensuring that, where the solicitor is acting for people whose interests conflict, that situation is resolved in a way which does not involve subordinating one person's interest to those of another; being careful not to mislead other practitioners or the Court; refraining from charging unjustifiable fees. It is unnecessary to give other examples, for the point is plain enough: the fitness of legal practitioners depends on the degree to which they possess a considerable range of qualities. Generally speaking, when the ultimate professional penalty of striking off is applied, that is because of misappropriations, a breach of a solicitor's duty which is `cut and dried' and tends to be easily proved." (The words in parenthesis are mine) 
Whilst the Queensland Court appears to have been concerned with whether or not the applicant in that case was a "fit and proper person", their Honours' remarks appear to me to be apposite in relation to the question of whether or not the Court can be satisfied that a candidate is of good fame and character.
"Good fame and character" can no doubt be contrasted with "excellent fame and character" and if an applicant just satisfies the test it would always be open to the Court or the Admission Board to impose conditions directed at (say) keeping the applicant free of unnecessary temptation.

I will not take the time in this judgment to set out in detail the ten relevant principles succinctly stated by Mr. Justice Kirby in the case to which I have referred. It is sufficient for present purposes to note that the onus of proving his case falls upon the applicant, he must in effect displace the decision which has been made against him resulting in his removal from the roll, presumptions of fitness which might otherwise arise cannot advantage an applicant such as Mr. Dezarnaulds because of the removal of his name from the roll on the basis of unfitness, there is no simple formula which can be applied, each case turning on its own facts, the opinion of the Law Society should be taken into account as an indication of the opinion of the applicant's potential "peers" but not so as to usurp the role of the Court, the ultimate issue is whether the Court can conclude, on the basis of all the evidence, that the claimant is now a fit and proper person to join other members of an honourable profession in the responsible and trusted activities which are involved in the work of the legal profession, community activities in which an applicant has engaged are relevant to the decision (and I interpolate that the applicant in this case has engaged in such worthwhile activities), the importance of the public interest in the matter and that there is no public interest in denying forever the chance of redemption and rehabilitation to former practitioners.

Inter alia, Kirby P said (Judgment pages 15 and 14):- "... removal from the roll of Solicitors is not necessarily intended to be permanent in fact." and "It is plainly important to have regard to any dealings which the claimant has had, since removal, with the public, in so far as these may demonstrate such a change as converts the claimant from an unfit person to a person fit to have his or her name restored to the roll." 
I am conscious of the need to show respect for the decision of the Legal
Profession Disciplinary Tribunal. It is not and should not be the function of the Court in a case such as this to, in effect, conduct an appeal from the
Tribunal's decision. When the applicant's name was removed from the roll of solicitors, one of the Tribunal's objects was, no doubt, to protect the public by introducing an element of deterrence as an assurance to the public that serious lapses in the conduct of legal practitioners will not be passed over or lightly put aside, but will be appropriately dealt with (see Law Society of New South Wales v. Foreman [(1994) 34 NSWLR 408] at -471).

The evidence suggests that there is no likelihood of the applicant re- offending in the manner in which he did in 1988-1992 if he were to be re- admitted.

In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the applicant is presently of good fame and character and is otherwise suitable for admission.

The orders which I propose to make are as follows:-
Declare that the Court is satisfied that Camille Edouard Dezarnaulds is of good fame and character and is otherwise suitable for admission as a legal practitioner.
Grant the applicant an exemption from attending the Practical Legal
Training Course as required by Rule 94(3) of the Legal Practitioners
Transitional Admission Rules 1994.
Order that the applicant be approved as a suitable candidate for admission as a legal practitioner and that a Certificate of Approval for Admission be issued in respect of the applicant in accordance with Form 13 to the Legal
Practitioners Transitional Admission Rules 1994 subject to the condition that the applicant give to the Court an undertaking in writing as follows (as yet I have not formulated the precise form of the undertaking which should be required of the applicant. I have invited the parties to consider certain matters raised by me in the course of argument and also the conditions applicable to Mr. Dezarnaulds' earlier work as a clerk. If agreement can be reached on a form of undertaking which is acceptable to the parties and to me
I will stipulate that undertaking. If not I will specify the undertaking which
I will require).
There should be no order as to costs.
 * * * 
