

Regina versus Rcp; Regina versus Mcp Matter Nos Cca 60293/98; Cca 60230/98 [1998]
NSWSC 541 (16 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 November 1998 `REGINA versus RCP` `REGINA versus MCP` `CCA 60293/98` `CCA 60230/98` `16 September 1998` `Grove J, Kirby J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: These are two applications for leave to appeal against sentence which appeals, for reasons which will appear, it has been convenient to hear together. 
The applicants are brothers. The elder, MCP, now being aged forty-three years and the younger, RPP, aged forty years. They appeared together for sentence before his Honour Judge Freeman at the Sydney District Court in respect of offences committed by each of them against a female victim who was their cousin.

At the time of the offences the victim was a young girl. She is now a mature woman aged in her mid-thirties. The conclusion that I have reached in respect of these applications is such that it is unnecessary for me to elaborate to any great extent.

The applicant, MCP, was charged with five offences, each of indecent assault, contrary to section 76 of the Crimes Act as it appropriately existed at the time of the alleged offences, the span of which was between 1971 and 1976. He pleaded guilty to all counts and on four of the counts was released upon recognizance under section 558 of the Crimes Act upon certain conditions which
I do not need to recite. On the fifth count, which in fact was number 2 in the indictment, the sentencing judge imposed a term of penal servitude of a total of twelve months divided into minimum and additional terms of nine months and three months respectively. It should be observed that in this case, as in the case of the other applicant, the charges were described as "representative" charges reflecting conduct over a span of time towards the victim.

The younger applicant, RPP, was charged on three counts for offences also charged against section 76 of the Crimes Act occurring in a span of time between February 1975 and June 1976. In parallel with his co-applicant brother, he was placed on a recognisance in similar terms to his brother on two of the counts and on the remaining count, also number two, he was sentenced identically to a total term of twelve months, divided into minimum and additional terms of nine and three months respectively.

As the matters that I have recounted to date demonstrate, the offences occurred more than twenty years before the applicants appeared for sentence.
All of the offences involved what might be described as either illicit touching by the offender of a young girl or persuading her to illicitly and sexually touch him. In the latter cases there are occasions where masturbation to the point of ejaculation took place.

It can be observed, however, that as the law stood at the relevant time, conduct cognizable within the terms of section 76 of the Crimes Act ranged across a far more extensive range of sexual misconduct than the more detailed provisions later legislated. The consequence of this is that it is appropriate to contemplate, as indeed it is in every case, the seriousness of the particular acts when gauged against more serious conduct that can be dealt with under the same provision and in respect of which the same maximum penalty is prescribed. In relation to these matters, the maximum penalty stood at six years of penal servitude.

The victim did not complain about the conduct of her cousins for many years it appears, and the sentencing judge accepted that, over a considerable period of time and in a continuing sense, the depredations upon her had had a deleterious effect. In about 1993 she wrote to the applicants. It is significant that each of them replied in effect confessing the past misconduct and apologising for it. The sincerity of apology was a matter analysed at some length by the sentencing judge. There is no need for me to recapitulate that analysis. It can be observed that whatever else may be said the responses were, in each case, confessional. I am conscious that the disclosure of the letter from the complainant was, in one case, virtually accidental when it was opened by a family member, but I do not regard that as of any present significance.

Both of the applicants have led substantially trouble-free lives. Some matters upon the record of one applicant were treated by the sentencing judge as irrelevant and in my view he was correct so to do.

His Honour found as a matter of fact that there was little likelihood of re- offending in the way in which these offences were committed and, for my part,
I would regard that as a manifestly correct assessment.

Senior counsel representing each of the applicants made it clear that the real challenge sought to be made was against the sentence upon the respective counts involving full time custody. No challenge was made to the orders which required the applicants respectively to enter into recognizances. It is convenient to observe that the conditions in each case involved twelve months supervision by the Probation and Parole Service and, to the extent that out of the total term on the other count there was specified a three month additional term, it is perceptible that there is a practical redundancy.

In the course of exchange with senior counsel for the Crown it was observed that, in practical terms, the issue before this Court is, effectively, whether the applicants should remain in custody until the expiry of nine months, or whether some lesser period is appropriate. In so saying I am not suggesting that this is a court of review as distinct from a court of error.

The thrust of the arguments advanced on behalf of the applicants centred upon these matters to which it is only necessary to make brief reference.

In the case of RPP, two of the three counts charged against him involved offences which were committed by him when he was, in law, a juvenile. There was nothing apparent in the remarks on sentence to indicate that this circumstance was either drawn to his Honour's attention or that he paid heed to it. The well-known principles applicable to juvenile offenders would inevitably, in my view have at least in respect of those counts been likely to have led to a non-custodial sentence being imposed upon RPP. Nevertheless, his
Honour was dealing with matters of totality and, as I have already observed, the charges were described as "representative".

Some submission was also made on behalf of RPP concerning the question of parity with the other applicant. It was conceded that at the hearing below the sentencing Judge was invited to deal with the matter on the basis that the accused brother standing for sentence should be dealt with equivalently. For my part I see no error in his Honour's acceding to that invitation.

It would, however, in my view, have been appropriate for his Honour to take into account the long period that passed from the time when the letters were received until they were ultimately dealt with. There is ample authority that it does not benefit an accused person that he has committed offences against a child who does not reveal them until many years later.

Co-ordinate with that approach, little comfort can be gained by the applicants in respect of the seventeen years approximately which passed between the general time of the offences and the matter being raised by the victim. There was, however, other significant later delay. It was only three years after the confessional letters were written that they were approached by the police. It was nearly one and a half years after that that the matters were dealt with in
Court. It is true that formal pleas of guilty were not entered until some time during the last-mentioned span of one and a half years but it seems to me that it would have been appropriate to take into account a considerable portion of the nearly four and a half years in the sense that I have indicated.

These offences were undoubtedly serious. Conduct involving sexual depredation by older males upon a young girl merits both punishment and denunciation. In my view the needs of denunciation were such that it cannot be concluded that his Honour erred in determining that some imposition of penal servitude ought be made. I am, however, of the view that, the span of time divided in the senses that I have referred to, the absence of any need for rehabilitation having regard to what has occurred in years since and the absence of any likelihood of further offences, produces a situation where a relatively short period in gaol would have been the appropriate sentence.

In the present cases, as a matter of practicality, each of the applicants has served more than half the minimum term component of sentence imposed in the
Court below. The conclusion that I have reaches is that all the ends of justice would be fulfilled by orders made in this Court which would see the entry into the recognisances required on the counts to which I have made reference and the imposition of a fixed term of penal servitude which would lead to the virtual immediate release of each of the applicants.

I propose the following orders. In the case of MCP, I propose that the application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted, the appeal allowed, and the sentence imposed upon count two quashed. In lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced to a fixed term of penal servitude of five months and one day commencing on 17 April 1998 and expiring on 17 September 1998. I would specify the reason for the imposition of the fixed term, being the absence of necessity for any period of parole and for the reasons that I have already given. The impositions on counts 1, 3, 4 and 5 are confirmed.

In relation to the case of RPP, the application for leave to appeal against sentence is granted and the appeal is allowed. On count 2 the sentence imposed in the District Court is quashed. In lieu thereof the applicant is sentenced to penal servitude for a fixed term of five months and one day, commencing on April 1998 and expiring on 17 September 1998. In respect of counts 1 and 3, those impositions are confirmed.

KIRBY J: In each case I agree with the reasons given by Grove J and with the orders proposed. 
GROVE J: Those will be the orders of the Court. * * * 
