

Hill versus Hill Matter No 2668/95 [1997] NSWSC 203 (19 May 1997) ` 
Hill versus Hill` ` 2668/95` `19 May 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /95 - HILL V HILL 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The present proceedings were put into the short notice list, the sheet handed to the Registrar summarizing the dispute as "Separate question to be determined (Part 31 rule 2(a):- 'Do the benefits payable under the State Authorities 
Superannuation Act 1987 form part of the estate or the notional estate of the late Dianne Joan Hill pursuant to the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).'" 
In fact no Judge or Master had ever ordered that any such question be determined as a separate question, and indeed, I dare say no Judge would have made such an order. The reason for this is that in order to designate property as notional estate the court has to find four things:- 
That there is a prescribed transaction; 
That an order for family provision ought to be made for the applicant; 
That designation of particular property as notional estate is necessary to make the proposed order for family provision; and 
That it must be reasonable in the circumstances so to designate it.

Because of this, it is almost impossible to make a determination in isolation that something ought to be considered as notional estate.

No-one noticed that there was no order to decide a separate question and the matter came into the list for hearing on 13 March 1997. At that hearing, Mr
Wales of counsel for the defendant, informed the court that there were no actual assets in the estate. I was informed that there was approximately $47,000 due to the deceased's widower, from the State Superannuation
Investment and Management Corporation. Mr Wales said that the defendant was quite prepared to have the court deal with that $47,000 as if it were part of the estate of his deceased wife. As will later appear, the Superannuation
Corporation in fact held $74,610 being $46,385 capital plus $28,225 interest from the date of death.

The deceased died on 20 November, 1993. The plaintiffs made this application by summons filed on 23 June, 1995. They are thus out of time. However, the only administration that has been granted was a limited grant for the purpose of these proceedings which was made on 20 November, 1995. The defendant does not oppose an order that the time for making the application be extended.

Mr Wales also made an open offer on behalf of the defendant that the nett estate should be distributed, two-thirds to the plaintiffs and one-third to himself.

Mr Burchett of counsel for the plaintiffs, was not prepared to deal with this offer. He did not have either of his clients either in court or within communication distance. I have assumed that during the adjournment I have mentioned later in these reasons, the offer was rejected.

As there was a very great fear that even more of the estate would be used in costs, I concurred in a suggestion made by Mr Wales with which Mr Burchett also concurred, that I should read the evidence, there should be no cross examination and that then I would make my decision. As things turned out, the evidence presented by the plaintiffs was so deficient that I could not do so, so the arrangement was adjusted so that the plaintiffs would file further affidavits updating the evidence to give me details as to their current situation and then I would deliver my reasons by post.

The plaintiffs are the two children of the defendant and the deceased. The deceased had no assets and her only family was the defendant whom she had married in 1976, the first plaintiff, Robyn Dianne Hill, who was born on 22
March 1977, so is now 20 years of age, and the second plaintiff, Craig Brian
Hill, who was born on 18 August 1980, and so is now 16 years of age.

When he was four years of age, the defendant was hit on the head with a golf ball. He lost consciousness for a period of three weeks and underwent brain surgery. He sued and the proceedings were settled with the result that the defendant received $14,000 from the Public Trustee on his twenty-first birthday. This money, together with a loan from the ANZ Bank which was later paid out by the defendant's mother, secured his home at Sutherland. This property, currently valued at $180,000, furniture and a 1989 Commodore motor vehicle and a credit of $500 in the bank, is all the defendant has by way of capital assets. He earns income as a Production Assistant and receives $387 per week net, his weekly outgoings being $262. Accordingly it can be seen that the defendant, without any dependants, is able to support himself, but has no reserves. He is currently aged 48. This last fact was not in the affidavits but was told to me from the bar table.

The affidavits of the plaintiffs are full of reasons why they are very angry with their father, but unfortunately contain very little else. There appears to be no dispute that the defendant was addicted to alcohol and that he would ill-treat his wife and that there were regular arguments in the house. There were also arguments between the father and the children. There is no doubt at all that many of these unhappy incidents were caused by the defendant, but one can also believe that he was, to a degree, affected not only by his disability, but also because he was concerned that his wife was dying of cancer and felt unable to cope. The children, of course, were more concerned with their own well-being than with what might be causing their father's behaviour, and would not appear to have made any effort to understand his problems, nor he theirs.

The affidavit of the female plaintiff was sworn on 2 August 1995. She was then a student. She was living at her boyfriend's parent's house and was taking an office administration course at the Gymea College of TAFE.

When I drew attention to the fact that the female plaintiff's situation must have changed since then, I got the impression that she was now working for the firm of solicitors who were representing her in this application. I was also told from the bar table that she was pregnant to her boyfriend.

The male plaintiff's affidavit was also sworn in 1995. He was then in Year 9 at school and working for the sum of $25 a night on Sunday nights with the local pizza shop.

There may be some excuse for not presenting all the facts to the court in the instant case because the plaintiffs' lawyers had deluded themselves into thinking the court would deal with the separate questions. Masters mainly deal with these [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) matters these days, but I continue to be amazed and annoyed by the number of cases that come up into my court under this Act where there has been not the slightest endeavour to present to the Judge an up-to-date list of the assets and liabilities of the estate, the current circumstances of the plaintiff and a detailed and reasoned list of the plaintiff's wants and needs. I do not think that an endeavour to save costs is the reason for this failure. Up to date, Judges and Masters have attempted to cover the problem by allowing further time to permit the proper evidence to be filed, but the time must shortly come when a case that is inadequately presented will just be dismissed with costs leaving plaintiffs to any remedy they may have against the solicitor and his or her insurer.

There has always been a high duty on lawyers in this type of application to put before the court all relevant factors. Although, in practice, the court appears to be getting less and less material, it should be observed that the trend of the law on a lawyer's duty to assist the court is towards greater disclosure rather than less, see Vernon versus Bosley (No 2) [[1997] 1 All ER ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1997%5d%201%20All%20ER%20614 "View LawCiteRecord" ).

In fairness, it should be said that the defendant's case was also not completely presented. It was only in very recent correspondence that the court was appraised of the fact that the gross estate is about 50% more than the figure originally given, the defendant's costs have only been noted at $26,000 in correspondence between the solicitors and the income tax position is still unclear. As the defendant is not an administrator and there is no actual estate, the Rules as to executors and the like giving the court an accurate picture of the estate are not directly applicable, but, nonetheless, it must have been appreciated that this information had to be placed before the court.

There was another problem in this case in that Mr Burchett was appearing for two plaintiffs. I asked whether he considered that the estate should be divided equally between his clients or not. After getting instructions Mr
Burchett suggested that two-thirds to the male plaintiff and one-third to the female plaintiff would be a fair adjustment.

Mr Burchett submitted that in any event, the defendant should pay the whole of the costs of the proceedings out of his own pocket. It was put that the defendant throughout had been most unreasonable in not accompanying the plaintiffs' representative to a community justice centre to mediate the matter and he should have recognized that the children were entitled morally to the whole of the estate. The defendant agrees that he did not go to the community justice centre with the plaintiffs because he understood that the plaintiffs were going with their lawyers and that he would be there alone at a disadvantage. This is quite understandable. Furthermore, the situation is that the defendant was entitled to the whole of the moneys because they were due to be paid to him by the Superannuation Board as his. The plaintiffs would have had to overcome not only the fact that their application was out of time, but also substantial hurdles to have the property designated as notional estate.
They have been spared this by the defendant agreeing that time be extended and that the superannuation moneys might be considered as part of the estate.
Despite this concession, and despite the open offer, Mr Burchett still claims that his clients are entitled to the whole of the estate with the costs to be paid by the defendant personally.

Mr Wales submitted that either there should be no order as to anyone's costs and the estate split evenly, or alternatively, the costs be paid out of the estate and then the estate be split one-third to each plaintiff and a third to his client.

At that stage I adjourned the proceedings in order for the plaintiffs to file updating affidavits. A further affidavit was filed on behalf of the female plaintiff. She swore that affidavit on 11 April, 1997 after she had changed solicitors. This affidavit contained a great deal of inadmissible material which I rejected. However, the affidavit gave the following additional details: 
The total benefits from the superannuation trustee including interest to
March, 1997 is $74,610; 
The female plaintiff is living at Illawong with one Elgood in the latter's parents' home. She gives no information as to Elgood's financial position; 
The female plaintiff has a position as a legal secretary at $27,000 per annum gross; 
The female plaintiff is currently on maternity leave; 
Elgood and the female plaintiff are purchasing a house and land package at
Camden Fields for a total outlay of $157,800. Of this sum, the female plaintiff will contribute $1,000, Elgood $16,250 and the balance will be borrowed from a bank; 
The female plaintiff's only other asset is a bank account of about $3,000; 
The male plaintiff obtained his School Certificate and is currently working as an apprentice carpenter with his uncle (that is his father's brother) at a wage of $180 per week after tax. He has no assets or liabilities, but pays $40 per week board; 
The male plaintiff will complete his course and apprenticeship in 1999; 
The plaintiffs have had some pro bono legal assistance, but their costs and disbursements will be in the order of $1,800.

The information provided by the further affidavit is valuable, but it still does not go as far as I would have liked. In particular, there is still uncertainty as to the defendant's costs or whether there is any tax liability on the interest that has been earned on the superannuation monies whilst the present dispute has been current.

However, in view of the smallness of the estate, I will just have to do the best I can with inadequate material.

There is no doubt that both plaintiffs are Eligible Persons under the Act.
Such a person is entitled to an order under <case> of the Act if the court is satisfied that the deceased ought, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to have made provision for their maintenance, education or advancement in life. There is no dispute that this barrier has been surmounted by each plaintiff. The only question is the quantum of the provision that the deceased, and hence the court ought to have made or should make.

Each of the plaintiffs has wisely secured a career which is likely to be permanent and productive of good though not top income. They are both able- bodied and well able to fare well in the community. However, neither, as yet, has any assets and each is or is about to enter the expensive phase of life of acquiring a family and a home.

The vital question is what obligation would the community consider a lady in her forties have to provide, after her death, for her widower of 48 and children in their late teens where she left a gross estate of $74,000, nett estate of $50,000? To be more explicit, where she had a husband for 17 years who had a problem with alcohol and would assault her from time to time and two children in their late teens who had achieved secure positions, but had no assets. This question slightly oversimplifies the position, but it contains sub limine the matters which I need to consider.

So far as the defendant's conduct is concerned, had he been an applicant for relief under the Act, the court would have been obliged to take the conduct into account pursuant to <case>(b). However, as the defendant is not an applicant for relief, that paragraph is inapplicable. However, his conduct is still relevant to the question I have recently stated for the reasons that will appear below.

Section 7 of the Act requires the court to assess the deceased's duty or obligation to the plaintiffs having regard to the circumstances at the time of hearing. The assessment is not made in isolation, but with regard to all the claimants on the deceased, except those whose claim the court need not consider because of <case>.

Thus in Re Bourke [[1968] 2 NSWR 453], a woman died leaving a husband and nine children. She gave her husband a life estate and left the balance to a religious organization. The husband for personal reasons did not make an application under the TFM Act, but a needy adult daughter did. LW Street, J held that as the testatrix's obligation in the circumstances was to leave the whole of her estate to her husband, she had no duty to make any provision for the plaintiff daughter. Thus, even though the husband had not applied, the daughter's claim must fail. This is the precise situation to which <case> is directed.

However, <case> has no wider operation. It does not deal with the situation where the deceased makes adequate provision for a person to whom she owed an obligation by her will or by operation of law, Luciano versus Rosenblum [(1985) 2 NSWLR 65], 69. It will often be the case that the deceased's obligation to his or her spouse will be so great that any claim by a meritorious child applicant will fail; see eg King versus Foster (NSWCA 7.12.1995, unreported).

Thus the court needs to consider the deceased's obligation to the defendant and his needs when assessing the plaintiffs' claims.

Moreover, it must always be remembered that a plaintiff cannot make out a positive case for relief under this Act merely by attacking the worthiness of the person to whom the deceased's property has passed by will or by operation of law. This is clearly brought out by a number of judgments of Master
McLaughlin given under the Act commencing with Field versus Inglis (8.11.1993).
The Master most fully dealt with the point in his recent judgment in Cook v
Liversidge (15.10.1996) where he said, "It can not be too strongly emphasised that each of the plaintiffs must establish her or his case upon that plaintiff's own merits. The case of the plaintiff can not be improved by attempting to establish that Lawrence, who is the chosen object of the testamentary beneficence of the deceased, would not be able to succeed in a claim brought by him under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) if no testamentary provision had been made for him by the will of the deceased.
Lawrence does not have to prove anything. Irrespective of what either plaintiff might think of Lawrence's conduct, the deceased considered that it was appropriate that Lawrence should receive the entirety of her estate.
 "However, the Court in considering the claims of each plaintiff, must have regard to any competing claims on the bounty of the deceased, and to any persons to whom the deceased considered herself as owing a testamentary obligation. In the instant case the only such person is Lawrence. That the deceased considered that she owed an obligation to make testamentary provision for Lawrence is established by the very terms of her will. The significance of the situation of Lawrence, and of his financial and material circumstances, is that those circumstances may have the effect of reducing, or even extinguishing, any provision the entitlement which the Court might otherwise regard one or both the plaintiffs as having established. But otherwise, the financial and material circumstances of Lawrence and anecdotal evidence concerning various incidents in the relationship between Lawrence and the deceased or between Lawrence and either of the plaintiffs, can have no bearing upon the claim of either plaintiff." 
However, even if all that was said about the defendant by his children was completely correct, the deceased may still have had an obligation to provide for a husband of 17 years. Fortunately our relations do still love us despite our manifold imperfections. A spouse who has cared for the deceased or contributed to the amassing of the deceased's fortune is to be given credit for those activities. However, a spouse who has wasted the deceased's fortune by alcohol or other expensive addictions is not to be completely disregarded.

In the instant case, the defendant has no reserves. His health is not the best. He is currently able to take care of himself and his day to day needs.
However, a wise and just testatrix would have foreseen that she had to provide some monies for emergencies and to help the defendant in the crises of life.
With only $74,000 gross or $50,000 nett, it would seem to me that the one third of the estate that the defendant in his open offer has said he intends to retain, would be the least provision that the deceased should have made for him. One third of the nett estate would probably be a sum of about $17,000 which is I believe a little less than the minimum required to provide for the defendant's needs. Doubtless he was willing to take a little less to settle the litigation, but his offer was rejected. I consider that $20,000 is the minimum figure.

Assuming that the costs will be paid out of the fund, this then would leave approximately $30,000 for the children. Mr Burchett suggests that the male plaintiff should receive two-thirds of the order and the female plaintiff one- third. I think, with respect that this submission, made in reply to a question from the Bench was given too quickly. In view of the immediate needs of the female plaintiff and the fact that she may have a family to care for which will affect her earning capacity, I would consider a split of 5/12ths for
Robyn and 7/12ths for Craig more equitable.

As to costs, I'm appalled to think that the costs of one side of what should have been a simple statutory application are anything near $26,000. However, there have been cases in this court where it has been claimed that costs in simple cases are as high as $62,000. It may well be that the costs of $26,000 include costs of representing the defendant in other family disputes. Indeed it may include costs incurred in the mediation processes which were suggested by the plaintiffs which often quickly run up billable hours.

Strictly speaking, as the plaintiffs have received less than the open offer, they should pay the defendant's costs from that time onwards. As the open offer was made at the oral hearing, the cost of working out any apportionment is not worth the effort. However, this factor is one I take into consideration as to what order for costs I should make.

Section 33 of the Act deals with costs. It provides that the court may make an order for costs out of the estate or notional estate, but is not bound to do so even if the plaintiff is successful. As I have said, Mr Burchett submitted that the defendant should pay the whole of the costs out of his own pocket, because he had acted unreasonably. This submission must fail. The relationship between the parties was not good, but, the defendant did not argue, as he could well have done, that time should not be extended and that the superannuation moneys were not notional estate. Further, he made an open offer.

I consider that the costs should come out of the fund. By costs I mean not only the assessed costs of the application under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), but also costs incurred by the parties before the litigation commenced as to the fate of the superannuation funds. I have made my calculation as to what should pass to the defendant and what is left over for the children on this basis. If there is any dispute, the parties may come back to court under the liberty to apply, but in view of the small amount involved, they are to be discouraged from doing this.

The Court thus orders:-
That the time for the plaintiffs making an application under the [Family
Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) be extended up to 23 June, 1995.
The receipt of monies from the State Superannuation Management and
Investment Corporation pursuant to the death of Dianne Joan Hill (hereinafter called "the Monies") be designated as notional estate for the purposes of the [Family Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).
That the costs of the plaintiffs and the defendant of this application including costs incurred before 23 June, 1995 be paid out of the Monies. The amount remaining after such payment and after deduction of any income tax is designated "the Nett Monies".
That the plaintiff Robyn Dianne Hill receive 25 per cent of the Nett
Monies;
That the plaintiff Craig Brian Hill receive 35 per cent of the Nett
Monies;
Liberty to Apply;
Otherwise usual order.
 * * * 
