

Re Charter Travel Co Ltd; Re Ctc Package Holidays Pty Ltd Matter Nos /97 [1997] NSWSC 518 (28 October 1997) 
Re Charter Travel Co Ltd /97 
Re CTC Package Holidays Pty Ltd /97 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - RE CHARTER TRAVEL CO LTD /97 - RE CTC PACKAGE HOLIDAYS PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I heard motions in each of these matters brought by the respective liquidators on 22 September 1997 and made orders that a combined meeting of known creditors of each of the companies be convened together with the appropriate administrative directions to ensure that a fair meeting was held. 
The two companies have separate liquidators, Mr Richard Grellman is the liquidator of Charter Travel Co Ltd and Mr Brian Silvia is the liquidator of
CTC Package Holidays Pty Ltd. The proposal to be put to the joint meeting is essentially as follows: 
A. The liquidators open a joint account with recoveries from both companies be paid into the joint account.

B. Claims entitled to priority in the winding up of either company are to be treated pari passu.

C. Other creditors are to be treated equally regardless as to whether they might in law be creditors of one company rather than the other.

D. The two liquidators would co-operate together into reporting to the
Australian Securities Commission if need be.

The order convening the meeting provided that if the creditors unanimously approved the proposal, then the liquidators would be justified in implementing them; but if there was any dissent, then the matter would be dealt with by the
Court on 7 November 1997 or such later date as might then be fixed. I indicated I would give my reasons in due course.

As I indicated in my judgment in Dean-Willcocks versus Soluble Solution
Hydroponics Pty Ltd [(1997) 24 ACSR 79], administration of two companies in insolvency conjointly is something that can occur only in exceptional cases. As I said at p 85, this normally means a scheme of arrangement, but if no creditor objects and it is impracticable to keep the assets and liabilities of different companies separate, and the consolidation is for the benefit of creditors generally, then the Court might advise the liquidators concerned that they would be justified in consolidating the administration. Again, there would be cases where the consolidation could be considered as a compromise between the two liquidators and the various creditors of the companies under <case>(c) of the Corporations Law 
Both the windings up with which I am here concerned are court windings up so that both liquidators are officers of the Court. Thus, one of the problems that occurred in the Dean-Willcocks case does not occur in the instant case.

Although at first sight there are problems about the consolidation, it is obviously on the evidence a most sensible one.

Charter Travel Co Ltd is a company incorporated in the United Kingdom and registered in Australia as a foreign company. It conducted business in
Australia organizing cruise ships for the purpose of cruising holidays from various ports in Australia. It chartered ships for that purpose. CTC Package
Holidays Pty Ltd, which also traded under the Business Name CTC Cruise Lines, acted as booking agent for the English company. This in itself caused confusion, because the Business Name CTC Cruise Lines was formerly owned by the English company. The English company is the holding company of the NSW company, but the ultimate parent of both is Black Sea Shipping Co Ltd of
Odessa in the Ukraine.

Mr Somerset, the solicitor for both liquidators, submitted that the present case fell within the exceptional principles referred to in the Dean-
Willcocks case. He submitted, and I would agree with these submissions, that commercially the evidence shows that it is virtually impossible to conduct the two liquidations separately. This is because (a) it is virtually impossible to define which creditor belongs to which company; (b) even if it were possible, there would be a tremendous waste of time and effort in rejecting proofs which the liquidator thought were lodged against the wrong company only to have them admitted against the other company; (c) the pooling arrangement obviates the potential for expensive and useless litigation; (d) both liquidators agree that it will be necessary for them to conduct litigation in the United Kingdom and co-operation between them needs to be at a high level in order to conduct that litigation efficiently; (e) the pooling does not merge the liquidations in any way and it is consistent with the approach taken in the
BCCI litigation; see eg Re Bank of Credit & Commerce International SA (No 10) [[1977] 2 WLR 172], 182; (f) no creditor can be disadvantaged. If there is a single dissenting voice, then the matter comes back to the Court so that it can be further considered.

So long as there is a power under the Corporations Law or otherwise available to the Court, the Court is anxious to see that liquidations are conducted with commercial efficiency and will not allow any technical rules to frustrate that attempt. It seems to me that the instant case does, as Mr Somerset suggests, come within the exceptions. However, if any creditor wishes to object, then the matter will need to be examined in far more detail.

I should note that whilst the courts can continue to deal with these sort of problems on a case to case basis, the time may shortly be coming where it would be a great saving for the Corporations Law itself to make provision for liquidators to consolidate in appropriate cases. One can see, both from the
BCCI litigation and from the Maxwell corporate collapse, that it is not uncommon for people of commerce to be involved in a group of companies incorporated in different places with little care taken to document which company is contracting with whom. A good illustration is the recent decision in New York which Mr Somerset cited dealing with the Maxwell group of companies, In re Maxwell Communications Corp plc 170 Bankr (US) 800 and on appeal 186 Bankr (US) 807 (1995) (USDC) (SDNY).

These then are the reasons for the making of the orders in each matter on 22
September last.
 * * * 
