

Director-General Department of Community Services versus Crombie and Ors Matter
No 14355/96 [1997] NSWSC 367 (3 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
Director-General Department of Community Services versus Cheryl Disa Crombie & Ors` ` 14355/96` `3 September 1997` `Graham AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division` /96 - DIRECTOR-GENERAL DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES versus CHERYL DISA CROMBIE & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: It would appear that Wayne Peter Melohn was born on 11 May 1979 and died on 11 January 1982. An inquest into his death was held in May and June of 1984 and the Coroner's finding was handed down on 14 June 1984. 
At some stage the child had been placed in the care of the defendants who, I assume, were then married and are presently separated from one another.

It would appear that the plaintiff, the Director General of the New South
Wales Department of Community Services, made a request to the New South Wales
State Coroner to hold a fresh inquest on 5 December 1995 and this application was refused on 13 December 1995, the coroner indicating that section 23A did not operate to require the holding of a fresh inquest in respect of one completed prior to 1 February 1994. The Coroner indicated that it would be necessary for an application to be brought in the Supreme Court to quash the finding handed down on 14 June 1984 and for a direction to be given that a fresh inquest be held.

These proceedings were commenced by summons filed 1 November 1996 in which relief along the lines proposed by the Coroner on 13 December 1995 was sought.

The evidence which has been filed in the proceedings presently consists of an affidavit of Roslyn Williams sworn 27 September 1996 and an affidavit of
Stephanie Posniak sworn 5 February 1997. The latter affidavit has been read as part of the evidence in the present application.

The application now before the court seeks an order that the hearing of this matter today be vacated and the plaintiff/applicant has moved upon the affidavit of Stuart Gordon Robinson sworn this day. I should indicate that the matter is presently listed in the progressive list of matters fixed for hearing today and in the normal course the hearing of the matter could start at any time today or until some time, I think 2.30 pm, tomorrow afternoon. The court papers record that the estimated hearing time is one day plus.

The evidence on the application establishes that the court sent notices of call up of the matter to each of the first and second defendants' solicitors by letter dated 30 June 1997 indicating that the matter would be called up with a view to fixing a date for hearing on 1 August last. Mr Robinson, as the solicitor within the Crown Solicitor's office having the carriage of the matter, did not have any such notice of call-up reach him. Accordingly, he did not attend when the matter was called up or arrange for any other party to attend. It would appear that the list of matters was marked with an indication that Mr Temby QC would be appearing for the plaintiff but he apparently did not appear when the matter was called.

At the call-up Miss Gillies appeared along with Mr Jackson of counsel. Miss
Gillies is a solicitor in the employ of the first defendant's solicitors,
Geoffrey Edwards & Co. Mr Jackson was appearing to mention the matter on behalf of Mr Scragg of counsel who appears for the second defendant.

The court papers were marked erroneously with an indication that Miss Gillies appeared for the defendant and Mr Jackson for the plaintiff. In truth, Mr
Jackson appeared for the second defendant and Miss Gillies for the first defendant and as I have said, there was no appearance for the plaintiff which is understandable, given that Mr Robinson had not received any notice of call- up. I am unable to say how it came about that Mr Temby's name was mentioned on the court papers but it is of no moment so far as the present application is concerned.

The list Judge, Simpson J, fixed the matter for hearing as a one day plus matter for today. She also directed the plaintiff to notify the defendant of the hearing date. This was something of an impossibility for the plaintiff to comply with, given that the plaintiff was not represented, although the court may have understood Mr Jackson to be appearing for the plaintiff. In any event, notification to the missing party did occur when, by facsimile dated 21
August 1997, Geoffrey Edwards & Co advised the Crown solicitor, "We confirm this matter is listed for hearing on 3 September next". That communication formed part of a longer message which concluded with the words, "We await your urgent reply".

Mr Robinson has sworn that he assumed that the matter was listed for callover on 3 September 1997. He did not take the words of Geoffrey Edwards & Co's letter literally in the context where he had not received any notice of call- up. He did not apparently make any enquiries as to what the true position was until 1.05pm on Monday of this week, 1 September, when he telephoned the
Supreme Court Registry and spoke to the Enquiries Clerk regarding the status of the matter. At that time he established that the matter had been called over on 1 August and fixed for hearing on 3 September. The catalyst for his enquiry appears to have been a communication between himself and Mr Scragg of counsel for the second defendant when Mr Scragg enquired as to whether Mr
Robinson would be instructing up at Newcastle. Mr Scragg apparently had some understanding that the matter was fixed for hearing in Newcastle and not in
Sydney.

Since 1.05 pm on Monday, the action taken by Mr Robinson with a view to preparing the matter for hearing would appear to be to establish that the counsel briefed in the matter for the plaintiff, namely, Mr Buchanan, was unavailable to appear today as he was involved in a trial and to establish that a psychologist, Miss Single or Dr Single, who was required for cross- examination by the second defendant, was not available to attend a hearing today "due to other commitments".

The evidence does not indicate the nature of these commitments, nor does it indicate the position so far as Miss Single's availability tomorrow is concerned. I should indicate that Miss Single has not sworn any affidavit which could not be read in the absence of her attendance, following receipt of a notice to attend for cross-examination.

It is unfortunate indeed that the misunderstanding has occurred which has led to the plaintiff not being made firmly aware of the fact that the matter was fixed for hearing today until 1.05 pm last Monday.

Mr Lakatos of counsel who appears for the plaintiff/applicant on this application submits that the question of whether or not there should be a new inquest into the death of Wayne Peter Melohn is an important one in the public interest and one which this court should consider. He submits that the matter should be adjourned on the basis that any detriment caused to the defendants could be cured in the ordinary way and he further submits that there has been no lack of due diligence on the plaintiff's behalf.

Whilst it would be unfair to be unduly critical of Mr Robinson's attention to the matter in the circumstances, I do have some doubt as to whether or not it was open to him to construe the message contained in Geoffrey Edward &
Co's facsimile of 21 August 1997 simply as an indication that the matter was to be listed for callover on 3 September 1997. Be that as it may, I have some difficulty in understanding why between 1.05 pm on Monday and now, the matter has not been made ready for hearing by the retention of other counsel. The only matter that impresses me as of particular importance is the apparent unavailability of Miss Single, at least today.

The application for adjournment is vigorously opposed by Dr Woods Q.C. who appears for the first defendant and Mr Scragg of Counsel who appears for the second defendant.

In relation to the issue as to whether any detriment can be cured in the ordinary way, Dr Woods has referred me to the judgment of Samuels JA in GSA
Industries Pty Limited versus NT Gas Limited [(1990) 24 NSWLR 710] at 716 where his Honour said, "I might interpolate that in that more leisured age an order for costs was generally regarded as complete compensation for delay occasioned either by the grant of an amendment or the grant of an adjournment. However the emollient effect of an order for costs as a panacea may now be consigned to the
Aladdin's cave which Lord Reid rejected as one of the fairy tales in which we no longer believe...

In my view, it is correct for a Judge to take into account as a significant factor in the exercise of discretion...matters of general import such as the state of his list and the pressures exerted upon the court by the increasing flow of litigation..." 
The matters urged by Dr Woods and Mr Scragg in support of the application for adjournment include issues as to the lapse of time which has occurred since the death of the child on 11 January 1982, the emotional trauma which this application causes to the defendants, the problems associated with securing counsel who are prepared to make time available to assist the defendants secure proper representation and the burden of costs which would be imposed if the matter were to be adjourned as proposed.

In my opinion, this is a matter which, on the face of it, can be made ready for hearing in a short space of time. It is one which could have been made ready for hearing today if appropriate steps had been taken at least by 2.00 pm last Monday. However, given the evidence as to the unavailability today of
Miss Single whom I understand practices as a psychologist in Newcastle, I do not think it appropriate that the hearing of the matter should commence today.
However, I see no reason why the matter should not be made ready for hearing if allocated a start at some stage tomorrow, 4 September.

Accordingly the order which I propose is that the hearing of the matter should not commence prior to 10.00 am on 4 September 1997 but otherwise the listing of the matter in the progressive list for today should stand and I so order.

I order the plaintiff/applicant to pay the defendants/respondents' costs of the application and two sets of costs should be allowed.
 * * * 
