

Kempsey Shire Council versus Lawrence Nos. Ca 40310/95; Ed 3429/86 Local
Government - Nuisance - Damages [1996] NSWSC 38 (4 March 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), CLARKE(2) AND SHELLER(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 5 and 13 December #DATE 2:2:1996 #ADD 4:3:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant:    S B Austin QC with M F F Murphy 
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Sly and Weigall 
Counsel for the Respondent:   N A Cotman 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Garrett and Warmsley
ORDER
Appeal and cross-appeal dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
KIRBY P I agree with Clarke JA.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA Ronald James Lawrence (the respondent) is the owner of four lots of land on the outskirts of Kempsey in New South Wales which he uses for grazing cattle. He purchased two of these lots in November 1979 and the remaining two during the next ten months. This statement does not tell the whole story for in fact the respondent acquired the first two lots pursuant to his Mother's will on the death of his father in 1973. Unfortunately, errors were made in carrying out the directions of that will and caused a lengthy delay. Those lands have, however, been owned by members of the respondent's family since, at least, December 1919. His land fronts and is to the north of Christmas
Creek.

Kempsey Shire Council (the appellant) conducts sewerage treatment works, known as the North Street Sewerage Works, south of, but relatively close to,
Christmas Creek. These works are operated pursuant to licences issued by the
State Pollution Control Commission.
Effluent from residential properties is treated in these works and, after spending a period in maturation ponds, is released and flows into Christmas Creek. Prior to 1976 the released effluent flowed across land owned by two brothers, Messrs G J and A Griffin.
In the main the effluent flowed along a natural water course but towards the Creek it was diverted into two cut drains which entered the Creek opposite the lands owned by the respondent. In 1976 an effluent channel was cut along a road reserve which divided the lands of Mr G J Griffin and which was to the north and West of the sewerage treatment works. Once that channel was completed the effluent flowed along it to Christmas Creek. The new point of entry was almost opposite the western boundary of the respondent's land. Once the effluent was released into Christmas Creek it flowed down stream underneath a low level bridge further to the east where the creek meets floodgates which control water coming from the Macleay River.
In September 1976, when consideration was being given by the appellant to the construction of the effluent channel, Mr Davidson, the Shire Engineer, discussed the proposed works with the respondent. In a memorandum to Council dated 3 September he said: "On the northern side of the Creek the land is owned by R J
Lawrence. It should be noted that titles of these properties extend to the centre of the Creek. Mr Lawrence has previously objected to the discharge of effluent and has recently approached the Minister for Public Works, through the
Local
Member, about the nuisance.

Mr Lawrence has recently been interviewed and has objected to the proposed pipeline on the following grounds:
The Creek is a natural watercourse which should not be polluted by sewerage effluent.
Sewerage effluent contributes to noxious weed growth.
Effluent may cause build up of certain chemicals in the soil which could be transferred to beasts leading to Department of Agriculture quarantine of the property.
Continual discharge of effluent into the creek creates wet conditions which will trap weak stock. (In time of drought the property is used for his up-river stock.) ..."
In the years following there were negotiations between the appellant and the respondent but nothing came of these. The channel was constructed and the effluent released into it. Thereafter, the effluent flowed into Christmas
Creek via the channel despite the respondent's objections. Finally, in
September 1986 the respondent commenced proceedings against the appellant seeking injunctions to restrain the release of the effluent into the Creek and an inquiry as to damages.
In his amended statement of claim he alleged that in addition to the works
I have already mentioned the appellant had carried out stream clearing works along Christmas Creek (a matter to which I will return) and that the appellant's actions (which I have assumed referred to both sets of work) had created a nuisance which caused damage to the respondent's property and was continuing to cause damage.
The appellant denied that it had created a nuisance and that it had caused damage to the respondent's land. In addition it asserted that in carrying out the works it did so in accordance with its statutory powers and that the works were carried out without negligence.
It also asserted that any damage had been caused as an inevitable consequence of the exercise by the appellant of its statutory powers and raised statutory and discretionary defences.
The case was heard by Young J at Wauchope and Sydney, commencing on 20
March (or eight and a half years after the institution of the proceedings). His Honour found that the water in the Creek was deleteriously affected by the introduction of the effluent and that it caused damage to the respondent's land. In short he accepted the respondent's case that the water was enriched with nutrients which promoted the growth of water hyacinth and smartweed on the respondent's land and that it destroyed other pastures which previously had been on the land. His Honour dealt with a number of other issues and rejected the statutory and discretionary defences relied upon. He declined, however, to grant an injunction. That was because in 1993 the appellant changed the method of effluent dispersal from the North Street
Treatment Works. No longer did it discharge the effluent into the Creek via the channel. The new method was described in his Honour's judgment as land irrigation: "That is the effluent, after various biological matter has been destroyed by sunlight in a holding pond for three weeks, is sprayed out over the surface of land now owned by the Council, until it eventually flows in or over that land before entering
Christmas Creek."
These works, according to his Honour's findings, removed the nuisance and the need for the grant of an injunction. On the other hand Young J accepted that the respondent had established that his land had been damaged by the nuisance created by the flow of effluent into the creek between 1980 (the period prior to that was disregarded because of the Statute of Limitations) and the time of the change of the method of effluent disposal in 1993. His
Honour assessed the damages, including interest, in the sum of $84,677.03.
The appellant appealed and in its amended notice of appeal raised 36 separate grounds which ranged far and wide. In the way the appeal was argued some of those grounds were not pressed or were merely incidental to the substantive issues raised. In order conveniently to deal with the arguments on which the appellant relied it is convenient to divide the judgment into the following sub-headings: 
Did the appellant deleteriously affect the respondent's land between 1980 and by releasing effluent into Christmas
Creek via the channel?
This was the primary issue argued in the appeal. The appellant accepted that, subject to statutory and discretionary defences, if his Honour was correct to conclude in the respondent's favour on this issue then it was liable in damages.
It submitted, however, that his Honour was in error for two basic reasons: "(a) There was no evidence upon which the trial judge could have concluded that the release of the effluent deleteriously affected the respondent's land. Alternatively it contended that even if there was some evidence to support the conclusion the countervailing evidence was so preponderant that his 
Honour was wrong to find in the respondent's favour.

Even if the water in Christmas Creek was affected by the inclusion of nutrients as a result of the release of the effluent there was no evidence, or alternatively, insufficient evidence to establish that the affected water caused damage to the respondent's land."
The appellant also contended that the evidence demonstrated that any damage to the respondent's land had been caused by poor husbandry and that it could not be liable for that.
This issue is intimately tied up with issue (a) which I have set out above and can conveniently be dealt with when considering that issue.
In his judgment his Honour observed that the answer to the question as to whether the effluent detrimentally affected the respondent's land could only be answered after assessing the validity and credibility of the evidence. He also noted that the evidence of Mr Davidson, the appellant's Shire Engineer, and that of Mr Lawrence was diametrically opposed as was the evidence of the experts (Miss Vincent for the respondent and Mr Mackenzie for the appellant) who were called for the parties. His Honour also recorded that he had carried out a view of the relevant areas on the second day of the hearing and that it was agreed between the parties that his Honour should be able to use what he saw on the view as evidence and not merely as a means of understanding the evidence. I should also say that his Honour expressly indicated that it was necessary for him to exercise caution in his use of his observations as evidence for reasons which are obvious and which he recorded in his judgment.
His Honour then recorded the gravamen of the respondent's complaint in these terms: "... the work done in 1976 had the effect of forcing nutrient enriched fluid into Christmas Creek which detrimentally affected him. In particular, the plaintiff says the following has occurred: 
Bogging of cattle became severe at least up until the plaintiff connected some troughs to the town water supply in ;
Water hyacinth exploded from covering 50 per cent of the plaintiffs creek frontage to 100 per cent;
The amount of feed that the land produced fell off dramatically;
Smartweed began to replace native pasture up to the high water flood level."
His Honour also recorded the fact that a number of neighbouring land holders gave evidence and concluded that this evidence generally (although not all of it) reinforced the respondent's assertions. In the end, after considering the evidence of the various witnesses and recording his impressions of that evidence, his Honour concluded that he should basically accept the evidence of the respondent and of Miss Vincent that there was a deleterious effect to the respondent's land which was not as serious as the respondent suggested. It was because of this conclusion that he awarded the respondent damages.
Mr S Austin QC, senior counsel for the appellant, submitted that his
Honour was in error in his acceptance of that evidence. He contended that there was no scientific evidence upon which a conclusion could properly be based that the soil on the respondents land had been deleteriously affected by the discharge of the effluent and that his Honour, in accepting Miss Vincent's evidence to the contrary, failed to appreciate that her opinions were not based on sound scientific data. Mr Austin recognised that his Honour had a considerable advantage insofar as he saw and heard Miss Vincent give her evidence but he pointed out that his Honour recognised that she was not especially highly qualified, that she was reliant to a degree on an unreliable history given by the respondent and that she based her opinion to a large extent on a very limited number of soil samples only one of which was taken from upstream of the point of entry of the effluent into the Creek.
According to Miss Vincent (as appears from her reports of 9 September and 23 December 1994): "The bulk of the flats (that is, the low lying areas of the respondent's land) are effected (sic) by excess phosphorous, magnesium, sodium, sulphur, zinc, iron, boron and aluminium, in comparison with the soil from the area unaffected by sewerage effluent.

While these levels, in some instances, may be beneficial to the growth of exotic pasture species, those from outside this area specifically from other countries, the levels are toxic to the pasture species native to the Subject Land and have caused their demise."
Mr Austin pointed out that Miss Vincent in expressing her conclusions, relied essentially on the results obtained by the soil samples which had been taken by the respondent in her presence and under her supervision between May and September 1993. He contended that when those samples, which were very small in number, were considered in conjunction with soil samples taken by
Mr Mackenzie at a later time it was clear that there was not, as Miss Vincent suggested, a significant difference between the upstream and downstream lands.
According to the appellant his Honour should have found that the soil analyses showed natural variations from sample to sample but that the range of nutrients in the soil upstream was similar to the range on the respondent's land; the soil analyses showed that there had been no accumulation of nutrients on the respondent's land; Mr Mackenzie's conclusion from 22 samples was to be preferred to Miss Vincent's conclusions from 4 samples and that Miss
Vincent's inability to convert the units of measurement used by Incitec
Laboratories (those used by her) to the units of measurement used by Conmac
Laboratories (those used by Mr Mackenzie) or vice versa show her inexperience and lack of expertise in interpreting a soil analysis.
What, in essence, Mr Austin was saying was that the totality of the scientific evidence, that is, of soil testing, far from supporting the
Vincent theory destroyed it. He also submitted that the reasons given by his Honour for rejecting the substance of Mr Mackenzie's evidence were flawed and that this was a factor which supported his primary argument.
It is necessary at this stage to refer in more detail to the case put by the respondent at the trial. A significant portion of the respondent's land was low lying so that in times of flooding creek waters were carried onto the respondent's land and pooled there. This feature of the land distinguished it from that of Mr Brady, a neighbouring owner, who gave evidence that he had managed to keep down infestations of smartweed by slashing and other means.
(It was the evidence of Mr Brady which provided the cornerstone of the appellant's case that the damage to the respondent's land resulted from poor husbandry.) Further there was to be seen on Mr Griffin's land infestations of smartweed and other weeds in those areas over which the effluent had previously run similar to the infestations seen in low lying sections of the respondent's land. The respondent also relied upon the evidence of, in the first instance, Messrs Thornton, Crossingham and Prior, neighbouring owners, to the effect that there had been a great deterioration in the respondent's land and that it was significantly affected by smartweed and water hyacinth and, in the second instance, by the evidence of the respondents son who said that he had abandoned a programme of slashing because it proved useless in dealing with the problem of noxious weeds. This I would understand to be the evidence which his Honour considered generally supported the respondent's case.
It was, in my opinion, in these circumstances, open to his Honour to conclude that in the years following 1980 there had been a great reduction in the carrying capacity of the respondent's land because of the loss of good pastures such as water couch, which had been there for many years, and its replacement by weeds such as smartweed. The possible causes for this reduction in capacity appear to have been either the deleterious effect of the nutrient enriched water in the Creek which ponded on the respondent's land after times of flooding or poor husbandry. Having regard to the fact that the sections of the respondent's land which were adversely affected were low lying, as opposed to the land of Mr Brady, and the evidence of the respondent's son that slashing had not been effective it was open to his Honour, subject to the scientific evidence, to conclude that it was more likely to have resulted from the deleterious water in the Creek.
This lay evidence forms the background for the consideration of the appellant's submission. That is based almost exclusively on a table which the court was advised during oral submissions expressed ranges of nutrients found in the soil both upstream and on the respondent's land. According to this table there was no significant difference between the two. The table is set out in a document provided to the court during the appeal and described as the 'Appellant's statement of facts that should have been found at first instance'. We were informed during argument that the compilation involved the conversion of units of measurement so that the Conmac Laboratories and Incitec
Laboratories tests could be set side by side. Once that had been done both sets of figures were used to come up with a final table which showed, so we were informed, that there was no significant difference between the soil upstream and the soil on the respondent's land.
I do not, however, understand this table to have been admitted into evidence. It is, on my understanding, something produced either by or for counsel for use on the appeal. Its accuracy has not, so far as I am aware, been accepted by the respondent nor established in evidence which was capable of being challenged in cross-examination. In these circumstances it does not seem permissible to me for this Court to rely upon the unproven table. Quite apart from that problem there are other difficulties with the appellant's submissions. Miss Vincent's opinion was based in large part upon her own soil samples. They were never shown to be erroneous although
Miss Vincent did concede that a single sample of land above the site of entry of the effluent was not likely to be as convincing as a number of samples. Nonetheless, having been cross-examined at great length and in great detail, she adhered to the opinions, the effect of which I have given. Nothing appears from her evidence which would provide a reason for rejecting her theory. She was not, however, shown the table on which the appellant relies and confronted with the lack of significant difference between upstream land and the respondent's land shown there and given an opportunity to explain how in these circumstances her theory could survive.
She was shown a number of the Conmac test results and she gave varying explanations for the possible differences between those results and those coming from Incitec. Her explanations were, no doubt, considered by his Honour in determining that he should accept her evidence.
In my opinion the appellant is confined by the way that the trial was, conducted to a consideration of the tables produced in evidence and the evidence of the expert witnesses given in the light of those tables. It is not open to this Court to rely on an unproven and untested document to conclude that his Honour was wrong to accept the evidence of a particular expert witness.
That conclusion does not dispose of this ground of complaint for the appellant asserts that his Honour gave flawed reasons for rejecting Mr
Mackenzie's evidence. The first of those reasons was expressed in these terms: "it was clear to me from the view that the plaintiff's property near the Creek was far more deleteriously affected by bogging smartweed and rushes than surrounding properties". It is not contended that his Honour was not entitled to have regard to the view in determining the acceptability of
Mr Mackenzie's evidence but quite apart from that the evidence which his Honour clearly accepted, and to which I have already adverted, supported the view that the respondent's property was far more affected by smartweed and rushes than adjoining properties with the exception of Mr Griffin's over which the effluent had previously run. The second reason was that "the scientific analysis of the water samples from Judell Platt show that the substances which were pouring into the Creek are substances which the SPCC branded as being harmful to domestic and recreational uses of the creek and to cattle which might graze upon it". I find it difficult to be sure exactly what it was that his Honour had in mind. Having regard to the report of Judell Platt Thomas and
Associates Pty Limited dated 8 February 1985 (in which there are analyses of water samples) and a letter of 26 June 1985 from the State Pollution Control
Commission to the appellant it would seem to me that his Honour was referring to the fact that in some respects the water sampled below the effluent discharge was different from the water sampled above that discharge and the
SPCC's statement that "as the creek carries a considerable volume of sewerage effluent the Commission advises against its recreational use or for domestic supply...".
Even so I have considerable reservation as to whether the combination of these two documents presented as a reason for rejecting
Mr
Mackenzie's evidence. The third reason given was that "the warnings of the
SPCC would seem to have been otiose if nothing harmful was happening". The warnings are those to which I have already referred and I am not convinced that they provide solid support for the view his Honour took in relation to Mr
Mackenzie's evidence.
Notwithstanding it seems to me that his Honour felt that there was a much more fundamental reason for rejecting Mr Mackenzie's views. That was Mr
Mackenzie's evidence that conditions on the respondents land near the creek were just the same as on similar land in the vicinity with the consequence that the effluent had nil effect. His Honour found that proposition impossible to accept and said: "The plaintiff's land is good drought fodder land which has to the naked eye been affected by the smart weed and the growing of rushes in the area where ponding has taken place after minor flooding."
If, as is implicit in the judgment, his Honour rejected poor husbandry as a cause of the proven deterioration in the carrying capacity of the low lying sections of the respondent's land then there was, as it seems to me, strong support for Miss Vincent's theory and an equally strong reason for rejecting
Mr Mackenzie's views. There was evidence upon which his Honour could properly reject the poor husbandry argument and in these circumstances the lay evidence, coupled with his
Honour's own view of the property, provided a sound reason for rejecting the view that the effluent affected water had caused no problems to the respondent's land.
The second limb to the appellant's argument was that his Honour "should have found that the appellant's waste water, even if it ponded on the respondent's land, was beneficial and not toxic to the introduced species which were dominant on that land". The essence of this submission was that there were no native pastures on the respondent's land which might be deleteriously affected by nutrient enriched water and that insofar as all the pastures on the land were introduced to it there was no basis for finding that pastures which had been there were damaged by the affected water. Again Mr
Austin directed attention to the scientific evidence and was highly critical of Miss Vincent's evidence which, according to the submission, was shown to be markedly inferior to that of the real expert Mr Mackenzie.
His Honour referred to the debate between the parties as to what was and what was not a native Australian grass but went on to say that he did not think that whether the pastures on the property met that description mattered very much. What was important in his Honour's view was that "a significant amount of good fodder grass had been destroyed by the effect of effluent polluted water overflowing onto the grasslands".
There was, as I have earlier pointed out, a considerable body of evidence to the effect that in years before 1980 the low lying parts of the respondents land had good pastures of water couch and buffalo and that they had disappeared and been replaced by weeds such as smartweed. In that way the pastures had been deleteriously affected. Miss Vincent's explanation for this phenomenon was that while many exotic pastures would benefit from the nutrient enriched water others would suffer deleterious affects and, inferentially, the introduction of the effluent affected water led to prolific growths of noxious weeds at the expense of the good pastures which had previously been there.
There is, in my opinion, nothing in the evidence of Mr Mackenzie which required his Honour to reject the lay evidence or to conclude that he must find that poor husbandry was the cause of the deterioration in the carrying capacity of the property. The opposing theory was too soundly based in lay evidence both as to deterioration and the lack of benefit of slashing to justify a conclusion that his
Honour erred.
Before leaving this sub heading I should make it clear that, although the respondent said that the activities of the appellant had led to a high incidence of bogging of his cattle and although his Honour made reference to this complaint, it does not seem to me that bogging had any consequence in the ultimate determination nor in the assessment of damages. For my part
I cannot see how, apart from considerations of general damages which arise in the cross-appeal, the bogging of the cattle had any serious consequence.
I would reject this particular challenge to his Honour's judgment.
 
Was the appellant protected by s of the Drainage Act 1939 or [s 733](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s733.html) of the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) (or the section it replaced a 582A of the Local
Government Act 1919)?
It is necessary at this stage to refer to some other facts.
In about 1922 the Glenrock Tennessee Drainage Union (the Union) was formed under the provisions of the then legislation which was later replaced by the Drainage
Act 1939. Under the provisions of that Act the Union had authority and responsibility in relation to flood mitigation and drainage in the Glenrock
Tennessee prescribed area. The respondent's four blocks of land and most of the flood sections of Christmas Creek are within the Union's area.
In October 1981 negotiations commenced between the appellant and the
Union concerning the carrying out of flood mitigation and additional drainage works in the area. Ultimately the Union decided that it only wished to proceed with that part of the original proposal being the excavation of a deeper drainage channel in Christmas
Creek. In June 1982 the Union and the appellant entered into a written agreement for the appellant to carry out the work in
Christmas
Creek which involved the cutting of a channel approximately 3 metres wide and half a metre deep into the bed of Christmas Creek.
The natural channel of Christmas Creek, adjacent to the respondent's property, is approximately 15 metres wide and 1.5 metres deep from bank to bed. In dry times creek waters ceased to flow and some water holes retained water. In wet times water would extend from bank to bank. The effect of the flood mitigation additional channel was mostly to confine water flows to the new deeper channel and to expose the old bed of the Creek.
This work was done in three stages and was completed in January 1985 by which time Christmas
Creek was tidal, at least as far as the respondent's land.
Earlier I referred to the amended statement of claim in which the respondent alleged that he had been damaged as a consequence of the nuisance created by the appellant. The statement of claim does not expressly identify the nuisance but it does refer to the release of effluent into the Creek and the works undertaken to improve the waste discharge. Although it is not entirely clear to me it seems to have been assumed by the parties that the latter works referred to were those I have just described. Be that as it may it is necessary in considering the statutory defences to consider those in the context of each separate activity said to constitute a nuisance. Very different considerations obviously apply to the release of effluent which his
Honour found to be actionable and the widening of the channel in respect of which no such finding was made.
His Honour's finding on nuisance was based upon the release of effluent into the Creek and while it may be that the construction of the channel in the creek has had some effect on the dispersal of water in times of flood and also led to some bogging of cattle
I do not understand on what basis it was said that that work constituted a nuisance.
Certainly it was not one of the matters which formed the subject of the respondent's long term complaints, nor was there a finding that a nuisance was caused by that construction.
As it seems to me his Honour based his decision solely on his finding that the respondent was receiving water which was enriched with nutrients which promoted the growth of water hyacinth and smartweed. In these circumstances it is unnecessary to consider the operation of either <case> of the Drainage Act 1939 or [s 733](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s733.html) of the [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/). upon the channel construction works and I will confine my consideration to the question whether the appellant was exempted from liability in respect of the nuisance created by the release of the effluent by [s 733](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s733.html) of the [Local
Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/). That section, so far as it is relevant, reads: "733(1) A Council does not incur any liability in respect of: ...

Anything done or omitted to be done in good faith by the
Council insofar as it relates to the likelihood of land being flooded or the nature or extent of any such flooding.

A Council does not incur any liability in respect of: ...
Anything done or omitted to be done in good faith by the
Council insofar as it relates to the likelihood of land being so affected.

Without limiting sub-sections (1) and (2), those sub-sections apply to: ...

Any other thing done or omitted to be done in exercise of a Council's function under this or any other Act." (It may be that in strictness s 582A of the Local Government Act 1919 is more relevant than <case> of the Locol Government Act 1993 but as they do not differ in substance I have taken the latter Statute.)
On Young J's construction of the section the appellant was not exempt for liability from its actionable nuisance. His Honour's construction cannot, however, be supported in the light of the later decision in Attrill and Ors v
Richmond River Shire Council (NSW Court of Appeal, 21 December 1995, unreported). That conclusion does not lead to the conclusion that the appellant is entitled to the protection of the section. Indeed I would reach the same conclusion as his Honour but by a different course of reasoning.
The point under consideration involves two stages. The first is to identify for what conduct the appellant, in the absence of <case>, would be liable and, the second, whether that conduct falls within sub-sections (1) and of <case> (sub-section (3) is merely explanatory of the earlier sub-sections).
The action of the Council which, this section apart, renders the appellant liable to damages is easily identified - the release of the effluent into the Creek in such a condition that it increased the nutrients in the water and damaged the respondent's land.
Under <case> that conduct will be exempt from liability if (a) it was done in good faith; and (b) it related to the likelihood of land being flooded or the nature or extent of any such flooding.
I am prepared to assume that the appellant acted in good faith. Indeed upon the facts of this case it seems to me relatively clear that it did but it is unnecessary to express a concluded opinion on the ambit of that expression and I refrain from doing so. The reason that I adopt this approach is that the appellant has not shown that the second condition was satisfied. In my opinion it is clear beyond argument that the conduct of the appellant in releasing the effluent was not shown to "relate to the likelihood of land being flooded or the nature or extent of any such flooding". The activity of the appellant which led to the adverse finding related solely to the disposal of the effluent. Nothing in the evidence suggests that it was concerned with, or in any way related to, the likelihood of land being flooded and the section has no application.
I should add that if his Honour had found that the construction of the channel constituted an actionable nuisance then it may well be, given the width of the words used, that <case> would have applied to that activity. But insofar as his Honour did not reach that conclusion the section has not, in my opinion, any relevance to the present case.
 
Damages
Despite the fact that the amended notice of appeal does not include a challenge to the amount of damages awarded in its 36 grounds the appellant's written submissions include a paragraph which does mount such a challenge.
That paragraph is, however, expressed in such general terms as to be completely incapable of supporting any such challenge. In particular it does not point to any error made by his Honour. In his oral submissions Mr Austin submitted that if the respondent had connected to town water, as he could have, a number of years earlier his problems would have been much less. The problems to which he was adverting were those of bogging and, he submitted, they could have been avoided if the step which he suggested had been taken.
In his assessment his Honour did not accept the whole of, but substantially rejected parts of, the respondent's claim. His ultimate award was made up as follows: 
Reinstatement               $20,000.00 
General Damages              $10,000.00 
Decrease of carrying capacity over the period the land was affected (calculated at 23 animals lost per year)                 $26,190.42 
Total $56,190.42
His Honour then added interest in an amount of $28,486.61 giving a grand total of $84,677.03. Although the general damages could possibly have included a component in respect of bogging of animals that is not entirely clear and the figure is supportable, in my view, upon the basis that that claim was properly excluded. Neither the diminution in value nor the loss of carrying capacity during the affected years is in any way tied up with the connection of the property to town water and in my opinion there is no substance in the challenge by the appellant to the award of damages.

The respondent, however, cross-appeals upon the ground that the damages were inadequate. Mr Cotman, who appeared for the respondent, submitted that his Honour was in error in excluding from the damages an item of $4,000 for connection to the town water supply on the ground that it was too remote from the nuisance. Not only do I think it was too remote I regard it as having nothing to do with the nuisance of which the respondent was entitled to complain and his Honour was correct to exclude it. He then challenged the amount allowed for the reduced use of the property during the period that the land was affected upon the basis that his Honour had failed to take into account the restoration period. In my opinion his Honour had to take a broad view of this claim particularly having regard to the way it was put before him. The respondent sought $42,432 calculated at the rate of loss of 32 animals per year. His
Honour merely reduced the rate of loss of animals per year. If, as seems clear from his Honour's judgment, his Honour otherwise accepted the claim it is too late now to complain that the period adopted by his Honour was too short. I would also reject this claim. The third challenge concerned the award of $10,000 for general damages. According to Mr Cotman a fair figure was $30,000. No doubt that is one view but to support it Mr Cotman had to rely on the bogging claim which, as I have earlier indicated, seems to me to be far removed from the nuisance proved. I am far from convinced that his Honour was in error in his award of general damages and I see no reason to interfere with it.
 
Miscellaneous
In his judgment his Honour dealt with the riparian rights of the respondent but concluded that the respondent suffered damage through the alteration in the quality of the water. The precise relevance of the finding on riparian rights is, in the context of the way of the manner in which a case was conducted in this Court, somewhat obscure to me. Nor do the appellant's written submissions assist. They do not direct attention to those matters dealt with by his Honour but rather relate to the widening of the channel and incidental matters. In oral submissions nothing was put to the Court to suggest that anything said by his Honour on this issue could have led, in the way he decided the case, to an erroneous result. I do not propose in these circumstances to take further time with it.
The appellant also submitted, somewhat tersely, in paragraph 16 of its written submissions that it was protected from the respondent's claim for nuisance because it was operating the works as a result of exercising its statutory powers: See Rudd versus Hornsby Shire Council  <case>; [(1934) 52 CLR 134], at -4. Young J considered this submission and referred to the judgment of
Powell J in York Bros versus Commissioner for Main Roads NSWLR 391, at , where his Honour said that: "A nuisance may be justified by statute if that nuisance is 'the inevitable consequence' of the performance of statutory duties or the exercise of statutory powers or authorities."
Applying the principles there set out Young J concluded that, as the altered methods of disposal effected after 1993 demonstrated, it could not be said that the damage caused in this case was the inevitable consequence of the carrying out by the appellant of its statutory powers. In circumstances where the appellant has not sought to argue that the approach adopted by Young J, or by Powell J in York
Bros was wrong, and having regard to the fact that the respondent complained of the disposal of effluent into the Creek from 1976 at the latest I am unable to say that Young J erred. I should emphasise, however, that while I presently see no reason to disagree with the approach adopted in the cases I have mentioned, I do not propose to examine whether it is correct in the circumstance that no submission was made to suggest that it was not.
In my opinion the appellant has failed to demonstrate that his Honour was in error in his conclusion. Likewise the respondent has failed to make good his cross-appeal. Before concluding I would wish to make two observations. The first is that the written submissions of the appellant, and indeed the suggested correct findings of fact, invited an examination of the facts by this Court as though it were a trial court. They did not direct attention to findings made by the trial judge which were asserted to be erroneous and make submissions in support of the assertion of error. As a result they were very general and in many instances did not relate to the judgment under appeal.
Secondly, that because of exigencies of time and other court commitments the second day of the hearing of the appeal proceeded (with the consent of the parties) in my absence.
I was therefore required to work substantially from the written submissions and the transcript of argument in writing this judgment.
Because of the approach taken by the appellants I have found this a difficult task.
I would propose that the appeal and cross-appeal be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
SHELLER JA I agree with Clarke JA.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/38.html  
