

Chapmans Ltd versus Davey and Ors Matter No 2856/93 [1998] NSWSC 148 (27 April )

Last Updated: 22 May 1998 
CHAPMANS LTD versus DAVEY & ORS /93 April 1998 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
The Litigation, the Parties: 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff has appealed from the order made by Master McLaughlin on 1 April 1997 by which the proceedings were dismissed for want of prosecution; with costs. I heard the appeal on 14 and 15 April 1998. The right of appeal is conferred by Part 60 rule 10 of the Supreme Court Rules and regulated by rules 9 to 15A. That the appeal is a true appeal appears by the judgment of Cross J at first instance in Do Carmo versus Ford Excavations Pty Ltd [[1981] 1 NSWLR 409], which has established the practice which has been followed since. 
The proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 31 May 1993, to which the defendants appeared on 11 June 1993. The learned Master said of the
Statement of Claim, "Essentially it asserts a cause of action in what might compendiously be described as professional negligence against the defendants, who are a firm of solicitors. The defendants acted, according to the statement of claim, as solicitors for the plaintiff for several years from 1985 to 1988 in proceedings 4254/83". In counsel's submissions it was agreed that the date of termination of the retainer was 16 February 1989, but the Master's statement was based on the allegations in the Statement of Claim. Steps in the litigation on which the Master made findings were these.

On 11 June 1993 the defendants requested further and better particulars of the
Statement of Claim.

On 16 July 1993 the plaintiff foreshadowed an intention to file an Amended
Statement of Claim.

No Amended Statement of Claim has ever been filed.

On 16 February 1994 the defendants enquired whether the plaintiff intended to proceed with the claim. No response was forthcoming to that enquiry.

On 9 July 1996 the defendants gave notice by letter that they would be making an application to strike out the proceedings for want of prosecution.

On 16 November 1996 the defendants filed a Notice of Motion seeking an order that the Statement of Claim be dismissed for want of prosecution and an order for costs.

On 11 February 1997 the Court, by consent, made directions concerning the filing of affidavits and adjourned the Notice of Motion to 1 April 1997.

On 1 April 1997 Master McLaughlin heard the Notice of Motion and made the order under appeal for reasons then stated.

Under Part 20 rule 2(1) there was an opportunity to amend once without leave but since that opportunity closed, apparently early in July 1993, there has always been a need for leave if there is to be an amendment. The plaintiff has never applied for leave to amend or put forward any proposed 
Amended Statement of Claim. The defendants' application was made under Part 33 rule 6(2) which is in these terms: "Where a plaintiff makes default in complying with any order or direction as to the conduct of the proceedings, or does not prosecute the proceedings with due despatch, the court may, on application of any party or of its own motion, stay or dismiss the proceedings." 
The application is founded in particular on the plaintiff's not prosecuting the proceedings with due despatch, and presents two questions: Whether in fact the plaintiff, at the time of the Notice of Motion, prosecutes the proceedings with due despatch.
 Whether the Court, in the exercise of its discretion, will stay or dismiss the proceedings.

Affidavit of Boris Ganke 31 March 1997.

After some reference to the history of the litigation and the Notice of Motion the Master dealt with events before him relating to the question whether an affidavit of Boris Ganke sworn the previous day 31 March 1997 should be read.
Grounds 2 and 3 in the Notice of Appeal challenged the Master's refusal to allow that affidavit to be filed in Court and read, and his not allowing Mr
Ganke to give oral evidence. It was contended that other means than finally closing the door were within the armoury of the Court to deal with non- compliance with the directions relating to time for filing affidavits. Counsel suggested that a short timetable for filing the affidavits, an adjournment, and an award of costs was the appropriate dealing with the late production of the affidavit and that the Master gave undue weight to securing the effective despatch of the Court's business. Counsel submitted that when the Master was told that production of the Amended Statement of Claim would take four weeks it would have been open to the Master to criticise severely the failure to comply with directions about time for affidavits, to grant an adjournment and to direct the plaintiffs to file and serve a draft Amended Statement of Claim within seven days, and to indicate that failure to do so would result in dismissal of the proceedings. My attempt to deal with this led me to ask whether the affidavit of 31 March 1997 had itself been filed; to understand what was involved I needed to see it. Directions by the Registrar fixed times for filing and serving affidavits to be relied on at the hearing of the appeal, so that the affidavit which the Master declined to allow to be filed in Court during the hearing should itself have been filed and served as part of the process of preparing to hear the appeal. The fact that it was not filed was an indication of a kind that the plaintiff did not intend to rely on it.
About twelve months have been available for it to be filed since the Master's decision. The plaintiff's counsel asked me to allow the affidavit to be filed in Court before myself; but when I asked to see it so that I could consider that application, the affidavit itself was not forthcoming, and no evidence was given of any explanation for its not being available. In the circumstances, consideration of counsel's attack on the Master's decision not to allow it to be filed could not take place in any effective way. On the material which is before me it was reasonably open to the Master to act as he did, in the exercise of discretionary control over procedure.

At the hearing of the appeal, plaintiff's counsel also sought to read paragraphs 6 and 7 of Mr Boris Ganke's affidavit of 9 December 1997; the defendant's counsel objected to these paragraphs and I rejected them. The draft amended statement of claim annexed to that affidavit was not put forward as the document on which the plaintiff wished to rely and I was not asked to read it.

Findings and challenges - due despatch, limitations, what the defendant wished to assert.

The Master found that the plaintiff had chosen not to prosecute the proceedings with due despatch. This finding was, the Master said, abundantly obvious; plainly this was correct and the finding was not challenged on appeal. Most considerations in the Master's judgment related to the exercise of the discretion in Pt33 r.6(2). If the plaintiff is to succeed in the appeal it must be established that the Master's exercise of the discretion miscarried in some way; if this is established the discretion will be before me for exercise, and the plaintiff will succeed unless it is exercised to dismiss the proceedings.

As the Master said, the parties were in agreement that the limitation period had expired and that if the present proceedings were to be dismissed the plaintiff would not be able to institute any fresh proceedings on that cause of action. Agreement on this subject was no more than recognition that more than six years had expired since the retainer was terminated. The allegation that the retainer continued until 1988, no date in that year having been stated, suggests that six years expired at some time in 1994. It would have been useful had the Master been furnished, by evidence or agreement, with the date of termination of the retainer; he was not, and I was told by both counsel that that date was 17 February 1989, although this was not established by evidence.

The Master also said that the plaintiff's solicitor had stated that she was instructed "that the plaintiff wished to pursue the present proceedings and that the plaintiff was desirous of having a period of four weeks in which to prepare and file an amended statement of claim". The Master's judgment went on to refer to the Rules of Court and to the decisions in Calvert versus Stollznow, noted among the practice decisions in Ritchie's Supreme Court Procedure NSW
Volume 2 [13,022] and State of Queensland versus JL Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 146.] The Master then made findings about the history of the conduct of the proceedings. The Master found (at 4) "the Court is entitled to infer that the plaintiff, by mid-July 1993, knew, at least in general terms, what it wished to assert against the defendants". This finding is challenged and it is said that the evidence furnished no grounds for it, but in my view there was an evidential basis for inference of those facts in that the plaintiff had filed a Statement of Claim on 31 May 1993 relating to events in a retainer which was alleged to have terminated in 1988, and that the plaintiff on 16 July 1993 foreshadowed an intention to file an Amended
Statement of Claim. Although the Statement of Claim on the file does not contain appropriate particulars or identify in any specific way what complaints are made, or give dates to events, its existence, and the plaintiff's statement in its solicitors' letter of 16 July 1993 that it was to be amended, together with the absence of any evidence of significance from the plaintiff on the Notice of Motion, ground the inference.

Findings and challenges - experienced litigant, defendant's intentions.

The Master went on to refer to the explanations sought to be put forward in Mr
Ganke's affidavit of 1 April 1997 for the plaintiff's not having filed any affidavit within the time directed, and (at 5) to find to the effect that it was not explained why the plaintiffs had neither amended the Statement of
Claim nor produced any draft amendment. The Master then said: "I recognise that it is necessary for me, in an application such as this, to do justice between both parties. On the other hand there is the plaintiff company, which appears to be directed by Mr Boris Ganke who is a very experienced litigant. On the other hand there is a firm of solicitors.

It is all very well for the plaintiff to give to its solicitor instructions that the plaintiff is desirous of pursuing the present proceedings and will need four weeks (or perhaps even less if the Court is minded so to direct) in which to prepare an amended statement of claim. But the Court would be much more favourably disposed to accept the genuineness of such instructions if, during the last 33/4 years, there had been produced at least a draft of the amended statement of claim." 
The plaintiff's counsel submitted that the finding that Mr Ganke is a very experienced litigant was in error and not based on any evidence, and further that it was erroneous to have regard, if it were the fact, to Mr Ganke's being a very experienced litigant; it is said that there is no such category. The suggestion that the finding was factually wrong was rather surprising, as counsel had shortly earlier told me that the main proceedings, the conduct of which gives rise to the claim against the solicitors, had been reported at ten different stages, and that there had been a hearing before Mr Justice Waddell of 97 days and a later hearing of over 40 days, while the only evidence of Mr
Ganke which was read sought to excuse his recent inattention by showing how busy he had been with other legal business. It could not be doubted that Mr
Ganke is in fact a very experienced litigant, and in the context in which the
Master was evaluating a stated intention to amend the Statement of Claim in the near future in the light of past inactivity, Mr Ganke's experience was relevant to the evaluation and to carrying to some specific conclusion the necessity, to which the Master referred, to do justice between the parties, the opposite party being a firm of solicitors also experienced in litigation: it was relevant to have in view that it would be an advantage to have experience in litigation when addressing the preparation of an Amended
Statement of Claim in the course of 33/4 years. There is no sign in the expressed reasoning or in the result that any great significance was attached to Mr Ganke's experience, that he was placed in any special category or that his experience was in any significant way reckoned against him adversely, but the fact had an appropriate part in the considerations which the Master was then addressing.

The Master was addressing whether the plaintiff intended to go on with the proceedings, in support of which was a wish to pursue the proceedings voiced to the Court from the Bar table by the solicitor representing the plaintiff, accompanied by the statement that the plaintiff wished to have four weeks in which to prepare and file an Amended Statement of Claim, that intention and wish not being supported by any evidence, and against which was the recognition on 16 July 1993 of the need for an Amended Statement of Claim followed by there being no amendment or application to amend up to the filing of the Notice of Motion on 16 December 1996 and continuing at all times until the hearing on 1 April 1997. The Master's observations (at the foot of page 5 and on page 6) show that he did not accept the genuineness of the instructions narrated by the plaintiff's solicitor, for reasons the more important of which was "the total lack of interest of the plaintiff in doing anything in the proceedings from 16 July 1993 (when it foreshadowed that it was going to file an Amended Statement of Claim) until the defendants made the present application by notice of motion filed on 16 December 1996".

In my reading of the Master's reasons the principal ground for the exercise of the discretion adversely to the plaintiff was that he did not accept that the plaintiff genuinely wished to pursue the proceedings, and did not accept that the plaintiff desired to have four weeks within which to prepare and file the
Amended Statement of Claim. All the circumstances of inaction over some years suggested that the plaintiff did not genuinely wish to pursue the proceedings; the only contrary indications were statements in letters that there was to be an amendment, never acted on and renewed from the Bar table. The view that it should not be accepted that the plaintiff genuinely wished to pursue the proceedings was a view of the facts which it was open to the Master to find, and open to the Master to have regard to on the discretionary question.

Findings and challenges - death of Anthony Bastion - [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) s.75 
Other considerations to which the Master had regard in his discretionary decision appear from the following passage (at 6): "The defendants, in addition, rely upon the prejudice which has resulted from the death on 15 August 1994 of Mr Anthony Bastion, a solicitor who apparently was an in-house lawyer of the plaintiff and participated in the 1983 proceedings. He was alive both at the time when the statement of claim was filed and at the time when the amended statement of claim was first foreshadowed. It was more than a year thereafter when he died. It would appear that his evidence would be relevant in the proceedings. If the plaintiff had indicated the nature of the cause of action which it proposed to assert at the time when it foreshadowed the amended statement of claim, or even for a year thereafter, presumably some attempt would have been made to obtain a statement from Mr Bastion concerning those assertions. That can not now be done." 
This passage was the subject of two grounds in the notice of appeal as follows: "13 The Master erred in holding that the defendants were prejudiced as a result of the death on 15 August 1994 of Mr Anthony Bastion, a solicitor who apparently was in-house lawyer of the plaintiff and participated in the 1983 proceedings.
 The Master erred in holding that Anthony Bastion's evidence would appear to be relevant in the proceedings." 
The plaintiff's counsel said that the matter relating to Mr Bastion's death was central to the submissions on the appeal. He first contended that there was no basis for the finding of prejudice in the paragraph which I have set out.

The basis in the evidence for the finding is paragraph 14 of the affidavit of
Marianne Nicolle sworn 10 December 1996 and read on behalf of the defendants.
The whole paragraph was objected to. In the face of the objection some words in the paragraph were not read, so that as admitted in evidence the paragraph was thus: "I am informed by Richard Watson that he was assisted by Anthony Bastion in the conduct of the main proceedings. Anthony Bastion ... [words not read] passed away in 1993. Attached and marked annexure `I' is a copy of Anthony
Bastion's death certificate dated 26 August 1986." 
The death certificate shows that Mr Anthony Lewis Bastion of Roselands, solicitor, who had lived in Australia all his life, died on 15 August 1994 at his home, and that the cause of death and duration of last illness were: "metastatic carcinoma 9 months adenocarcinoma of bowel 9 months" 
Richard Watson is the second defendant and is a solicitor, and Mr Bastion was a solicitor at the time of his death in 1993.

The passage in the transcript relating to paragraph 14 of the affidavit is as follows: "Conomos: Paragraph 14, the whole of that paragraph in that form, that is hearsay.

Master: Is there any genuine dispute as to what is contained in the paragraph,
Ms Conomos? 
Conomos: Yes, there is a dispute as to what is contained in that paragraph.

DISCUSSION ENSUED 
Master: The plaintiff objects to paragraph 14. The defendant does not read the passage in the second sentence of the paragraph, "Was a solicitor employed by the defendant at the relevant time". I admit the balance of the paragraph." 
It was contended that the whole of paragraph 14 ought to have been rejected because it consists of hearsay statements and does not comply with the provisions of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/index.html#p36) [rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s4.html) enabling hearsay material to be admitted. There was no ground in the notice of appeal relating to wrongful reception of this evidence.

The reasons for the Master's decision to admit the part of the paragraph which was read were not stated and were not required to be stated. On its face paragraph 14 as read is admissible under [s.75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s75.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) : "75 In an interlocutory proceeding, the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence if the party who adduces it also adduces evidence of its source." 
In my opinion the application is interlocutory because it relates to practice and procedure and the dismissal of the proceedings for want of prosecution would not be based on or involve any decision on the rights of the parties, and would not act as res judicata. The order does not prevent the plaintiff from bringing fresh proceedings, having regard to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p40) [rule 8.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s8.html)
The practical result of preventing the plaintiff from advancing its claim would be produced by the operation of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) and not by any characteristic of the application or of the order. It could not be right that the character of an application for an order dismissing proceedings for want of prosecution differs according to the time at which the order is made and the operation of a limitation statute. Orders for summary dismissal are usually characterised as interlocutory and the example of summary dismissal on the ground of failure to show any triable issue was given in the judgment of Handley and Cripps JJA in Wickstead versus Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR ] at
The order under appeal in Port of Melbourne Authority versus Anshun Pty Ltd [No 1] [(1980) 147 CLR 35] was an order staying the proceedings, but was based on a determination of the rights of the parties as it was decided by McGarvie J at first instance that res judicata in a wide sense operated and made it an abuse of process to raise matters which could have been litigated in earlier proceedings; see pp 37-38 per Gibbs J. Case law almost always relates to the characterisation of an order, as when testing a right of appeal, not of the application as in [s.75.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s75.html)
The Anshun [No 1] case seems to show that a final order may be made in an interlocutory application, if the grounds on which it is made and the statutory context of the right of appeal warrant that conclusion. I have acted on the view that it is the legal effect of an order and not its practical result which governs its characterisation as interlocutory or final, and that in this case, where the application is based on [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/index.html#p33) rule 4 and no ground on which the merits could be considered or disposed of is put forward by either party, the terms of the order sought establish that the application is interlocutory. I act on the view of the effect of the High
Court decisions expressed in the judgment of Kirby P in Southern Cross
Explorations NL & Ors versus Fire and All Risks Insurance Co Ltd & Ors [No ] [(1990) 21 NSWLR 200] at 209. See too Brouwer versus Titan Corporation Ltd [(1997) 73 FCR 241.] 
I am unaware of any earlier judicial consideration of the interaction of [s.75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s75.html) and [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/index.html#p36) rule 4, but a markedly similar subject was considered by McLelland CJ in Eq in
Lane versus Jurd & Anor [No 2] [(1995) 40 NSWLR 708]; at 709 his Honour reviewed the provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) which bear on interaction with the Supreme Court Rules. In my opinion, although the
Supreme Court Rules have statutory force, s.75 in terms authorises the admission of evidence and in my opinion should be understood to govern the subject with which it deals, notwithstanding any earlier legislation or other legal rule which dealt with the same subject. This is so even though Part 36 rule 4 is unrepealed and, if complied with, would also authorise the admission of hearsay evidence: cf Protective Commissioner versus B & Anor (Hodgson J, June 1997, unreported).

The Master's enquiry as to whether there was a genuine dispute suggests he may have given attention, as was well warranted, to the question whether the material although hearsay should be admitted under s.82(1)(a) of the [Supreme
Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) .

In my opinion the passage was rightly admitted in evidence.

It will be seen that in his finding the Master said that Mr Bastion apparently was an in-house lawyer of the plaintiff whereas the affidavit is to the effect that one of the defendants was assisted by Mr Bastion in the conduct of the main proceedings. This led me to say during argument that in the light of the evidence the Master's associating Mr Bastion with the plaintiff was an obvious slip and the judgment should be read as saying that he apparently was an in- house lawyer of the defendants. Certainly there was no evidence that he was associated with the plaintiff. At a later point in the hearing the plaintiff's counsel sought to read an affidavit, sworn during the hearing, which he said would show direct evidence of the position of Mr Bastion, and would recount what had transpired before the Court during argument relating to the admission of paragraph 14 at the point recorded in the transcript as "DISCUSSION
ENSUED". When I asked the plaintiff's counsel, "Are you suggesting that there was some agreed fact which was part of the evidence?" he replied "Yes, it was in a sense an agreed fact that Mr Bastion was the in-house solicitor of the plaintiff". When I asked, "Is there evidence that there was some agreed fact?"
I received no clear reply. If the evidence of Marianne Nicolle in the opening words of paragraph 14 that Mr Watson was assisted by Mr Bastion in the conduct of the main proceedings was incorrect and could be met by other evidence, there was ample opportunity to meet it before 1 April 1997, as that affidavit was filed with the Notice of Motion. If there were to be evidence that some agreed fact was in evidence before the Master but not recorded in the transcript, that evidence should have appeared on affidavit in the appeal and there should have been an application for leave to read it, as prescribed by [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p60) [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s15.html); there were Registrar's directions fixing times for affidavits, and the plaintiff did not file any affidavit dealing with this subject at any time. No matter of excuse was suggested to me for failing to bring forward at the proper time any evidence relating to what took place at the point marked "DISCUSSION ENSUED". It appeared to me to be markedly unlikely that the Master would have admitted in evidence, or that the defendants would have persisted in asking him to admit in evidence a hearsay statement that Mr Watson was assisted by Mr Bastion immediately after it had been established as an agreed fact that he had been an in-house lawyer of the plaintiff; the two propositions are not inconsistent in logic but if such an unlikely thing were true that they both stood together, it could hardly be supposed that there would not be more evidence explaining how that was. In the circumstances I was not prepared to allow the further evidence to be read.

I understand the reference to the plaintiff as a slip and the finding was that
Mr Bastion was associated with the defendants, the only association which the evidence would support.

The plaintiff's counsel contended that the finding "It would appear that his evidence would be relevant in the proceedings" was not supported by any evidence. In my view the circumstances in evidence make it probable that Mr
Bastion could, had he been alive, have given evidence relevant in the proceedings; it is not possible to develop in detail what that evidence would have been, as there was no evidence that would establish in detail what part he took in events, or what proof of evidence he could have given about them, and the absence of a Statement of Claim on which the plaintiff was prepared to rely made it next to impossible to embark on any useful enquiry to establish what Mr Bastion might have said about relevant facts during his lifetime.
There was no particularity about any of the allegations in the Statement of
Claim, and the plaintiff's solicitors indicated that it should not be relied on.

The plaintiff's counsel said that it appeared from his death certificate that the illness of which Mr Bastion died was protracted for some nine months and that if the defendants were to rely on any prejudice arising from the absence of his evidence, they would have to explain in evidence that they did not know of Mr Bastion's evidence and explain why they had not taken steps to perpetuate his testimony. In relation to these contentions counsel submitted that Mr Bastion knew in late 1993 that he was going to die. In my opinion however there is no basis for this submission, and the shreds of information in the death certificate do not tend to establish either that Mr Bastion knew at any particular stage that his lifespan was to be as short as it was, or that the defendants knew or should have known that fact, even if they had been told sufficient details about what the plaintiff's claim against them was to enable them to advert to any need which it raised to speak to Mr Bastion or to perpetuate his testimony. Contentions to the effect that the defendants had or should have had foreknowledge of Mr Bastion's death and perpetuated his testimony are not supported by evidence, and if they were, that fact would have no force adverse to the defendants because the plaintiff had not equipped them with a statement of its claim. All in all, the absence of Mr Bastion was plainly a relevant consideration to the exercise of the discretion which was under the Master's consideration. The circumstances are such that it is not possible to see in any detail what adverse impact has been produced by his death; yet the absence through death of one of the professional persons who participated in the relevant events is clearly a likely source of prejudice to the defendants even though the workings of that prejudice cannot be seen, and the prejudice cannot be expressed in any clearer manner than the Master's words "It would appear that his evidence would be relevant in the proceedings". In my opinion there was a reasonable basis for this finding, and for the finding that the defendants can rely upon prejudice which has resulted from his death.

Mr Bastion's death illustrates forcefully the reality that where allegations about events in a period from 1983 to 1988 (or it may be to 17 February 1989) are to be examined in litigation more than eight years after that period closed, difficulties arise in attaining justice through information becoming unavailable, as persons die, pass out of contact, as memories fade and as records become unavailable, and for other reasons which cannot be discerned after they have operated; nobody can prove that something has been forgotten.
In my opinion it was not an error for the Master to have regard to the particular exemplification of difficulties of these kinds which was proved.

Even if the true position were that Mr Bastion were an in-house lawyer of the plaintiff and not a person assisting Mr Watson, it would still be true that it would appear that his evidence would be relevant in the proceedings, and his absence as a source of evidence, and also of information which may be material in preparatory stages relating to discovery, interrogatories or otherwise is a prejudicial circumstance; prejudicial, it seems to me, to both parties. This consideration was not disposed of by the plaintiff's counsel's observation that it would be expected that a solicitor would be well-armed with file-notes and written instructions, while the accompanying contention that this case to a large extent would be a documentary case is unsupportable in view of the slight information available about what the plaintiff's case is to be. There is an obvious likelihood that oral as well as written communication about what in detail was to have been done under a retainer may be relevant. The unavailability of information from a person identified with one party could very well work to the prejudice of the other party, or of both. To think that if Mr Bastion had been an in-house lawyer for the plaintiff no information in his mind could work favourably to the defendant is to take an unduly tribal view of society. The terms of instructions to the defendants and advice and communications from them would relate closely to the issues in the litigation and would be outside the range of client legal privilege.

In my opinion grounds 13 and 14 in the notice of appeal are not made out.

Findings and challenges - Lord Salmon's dog.

The plaintiff's counsel made contentions to the effect that the defendants were disentitled to rely on any prejudice arising from delay because of what counsel called the Stollznow rule, a reference to Calvert versus Stollznow . At 8,539 Cross J dealt with a contention "... that to allow a case to go ahead after great delay will so severely prejudice a defendant that justice cannot possibly be done". The contention was rather highly stated and may be contrasted with the present case where there is no reason to think that the Master treated the death of Mr Bastion as a conclusive element for the exercise of discretion. After referring to possible prejudice to a defendant
Cross J said: "And the defendant in such a case is not blameless. I realise that Lord Salmon has at least twice said that the defendant is entitled to let a sleeping dog lie in the hope that it will expire. Yes he is. But in my respectful opinion the defendant cannot - or should not - have it both ways. A defendant faced with litigation which the plaintiff is not actively pursuing has an election.
He can either press the plaintiff to get on with the action; ie he may cause a letter to be sent to the plaintiff's solicitors to that effect or he may approach the court in a proper case - and if it is a proper case he can do so at no cost to himself - for an order that the plaintiff take the next necessary procedural step reasonably quickly; or he may allow the matter to lie. But if he chooses silently to acquiesce in the delay in the hope that it will eventually result to his financial advantage, in the sense that the matter will "die", ie if he seeks and hopes to advantage himself by that delay, is he then entitled to point to that delay, which he could have taken steps to prevent, as prejudicial to him - though in some fashion not prejudicial to the plaintiff - and seek to achieve by a court order striking the matter out what he hoped, wrongly as it turned out, to achieve by deliberately lying silent himself? In my opinion, no.

Considerations of justice transcend all other considerations in these matters.
Of course justice is best done if an action is brought on while the memory of the witnesses is fresh. But surely imperfect justice is better than no justice at all. Circumstances often delay litigation and the system tolerates it. A plaintiff's physical condition may take so long to stabilize [sic] that, acting responsibly, his solicitors would seek to prevent the case going to trial for some period (though in such cases they should keep the defendant's camp informed of the reason for the delay). Further, as I have said, a plaintiff is entitled to commence an action almost six years after an accident and in the ordinary course of events the trial well may not be heard for another two years, ie eight years after the accident; and a defendant would have no right to have that action struck out merely because of the cause of action's antiquity. If, however, the action is brought promptly after the accident and then there is delay (against the plaintiff's wishes and instructions) the defendant then claims a right - based on possible prejudice to him - to have the plaintiff's action dismissed without a hearing.

Litigation is not a game. It seems to me that if a defendant feels that he may be in any way prejudiced by the delay he has a simple remedy. He may approach the court and set out the facts which give rise to possible prejudice against himself and ask for an order that the plaintiff promptly take the remaining necessary steps to bring the matter on for hearing. As I say, if the defendant's application has merit, the court's directive will be accompanied by a favourable order as to costs. Such procedures enable justice to be done - reasonably promptly. They remove the possible prejudice of any delay caused by a plaintiff's camp and acquiesced in by the defendant's camp." 
It will be seen that Cross J accepted that "... a defendant is entitled to let a sleeping dog lie in the hope that it will expire", but pointed out that a defendant may lose an entitlement to point to delay if he does so. Cross J drew a contrast between the opportunity to press the plaintiff to get on with the action and the choice to acquiesce silently in the delay in the hope that it will eventually result to the defendant's financial advantage.

In the present case the defendants did press the plaintiff to get on with the action; the defendants' solicitors wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors on 16
February 1994 enquiring whether the plaintiff intended to proceed with the claim. They received no reply which, in the circumstances, made it superfluous for them to press further for a time; they had the plaintiff's solicitors' letter of 16 July 1993 advising that the Statement of Claim would be amended, deferring furnishing particulars on the ground of unnecessary expense, and asking for their approval in the course of action; and they had expressed approval. As time passed after 16 February 1994 without a reply and without an application to amend the Statement of Claim, the position which the plaintiff indicated by circumstances to the defendants was, in Lord Salmon's terms, that the dog had expired. There was nothing in the circumstances to indicate that the defendants should do more, as what was before them was a standing assurance that the plaintiff intended to get on with the action with an
Amended Statement of Claim, the credibility of which was negated by failure to reply to the later enquiry and say whether the plaintiff intended to proceed.
The next action in evidence is the defendants' solicitors' letter of 9 July which recited the events and stated that they were instructed to apply to strike out the proceedings for want of prosecution, and would proceed unless they heard within fourteen days. The reply of 6 August 1996 said that the plaintiff intended to proceed and "... you will receive the amended statement of claim in due course" and after the defendants' solicitors called for the
Amended Statement of Claim by their letter of 23 October 1996 and received no reply, the present application was brought.

When I asked whether there were bases for finding that the defendants made an election or choice to leave the matter lie, and for finding that they did so in the hope that it would expire, the plaintiff's counsel replied by referring only to the passage of three years, which I take to refer broadly to the period from 16 July 1993 to 9 July 1996. However, in view of the correspondence this cannot be seen as three years of inactivity on the part of the defendants, who took as much action as could be expected of defendants to ascertain whether the plaintiff was to proceed. Inactivity of a defendant could not be adverse to an application based on want of prosecution unless circumstances called on the defendant to take some action.

The defendants did press the plaintiff to get on with the action when the plaintiff was not actively pursuing it, and pressed in 1996 for a few months before bringing this application, and I do not find that the defendants exercised an election in favour of allowing the matter to lie. I do not find that the defendants chose silently to acquiesce in the delay; their solicitors' conduct was to the contrary. They cannot be said to have been disabled from relying on delay by the considerations stated by Cross J. His
Honour's reasoning must in my opinion be applied with care, as it could not support an approach to dismissal for want of prosecution in which the issue becomes the quality of the applicant's endeavours to persuade the respondent to take action against the applicant; that would be a parody of justice as the applicant cannot be constructively responsible for the conduct of the respondent's legal business.

Findings and challenges - impact of dismissal.

The principal contention against the Master's exercise of discretion was not based on any identifiable expression in the Master's reasons but was based on a depiction of the impact of the decision on the plaintiff and the circumstances of the plaintiff's inattention and delay.

It is of some importance that nothing is known about the strength of the plaintiff's case or its prospects of success; the claim was not verified and no facts out of which it is said to arise were put forward, and nothing is known of it except that the plaintiff wishes to bring it, that the plaintiff filed a Statement of Claim, and has not ever made a long foreshadowed amendment, or applied for leave to amend or put in evidence any draft amendment or any material establishing what the amendment is to be.

The plaintiff's counsel submitted that the law relating to exclusion of a party from a hearing of a case because of non-compliance with procedural requirements is (in counsel's expression) a Unified Field including applications based on want of prosecution, setting aside judgments and late amendments, and that the underlying principle is shown by the majority judgments in Cohen versus McWilliam <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 146], Davies versus Pagett <case>; [(1986) 10 FCR 226], Herron versus McGregor (1986) 6 NSWLR 254 at 254-5, Hart v
Herron (Court of Appeal, unreported, 3 June 1993) and Trad versus Clark (Supreme
Court, Bryson J, unreported, 23 August 1995). Counsel contended that by the time the defendants chose to press for dismissal any further Amended Statement of Claim could not introduce new material; presumably a reference to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p20) rule 4, which operates more amply. Counsel contended that the plaintiff is confined to repleading but not substantially enlarging the statement of claim which has been filed.

In relation to Calvert versus Stollznow the plaintiff's counsel said that the defendants could have made stronger protests, made an earlier notice of motion, and also moved for security for costs; I do not understand why the last observation was made. Counsel also referred to holding 2(c) in the Court of Appeal in Stollznow versus Calvert [[1980] 2 NSWLR 749], which is supported by observations of Moffit P at 753-754 paragraph 12. The plaintiff's counsel also referred to Ulowski versus Miller [[1968] SASR 277] at 283-4.

Counsel referred to the citation from Davies versus Pagett [(1986) 10 FCR ]
at 481 in the judgment of Priestley JA in Cohen versus McWilliam: "The fundamental duty of the Court is to do justice between the parties. It is, in turn, fundamental to that duty that the parties should each be allowed a proper opportunity to put their cases upon the merits of the matter. Any limitation upon that opportunity will generally be justified only by the necessity to avoid prejudice to the interests of some other party, occasioned by misconduct, in the case of the party upon whom the limitation is sought to be imposed. The temptation to impose a limitation through motives of professional discipline or general deterrence is readily understandable; but, in our opinion it is an erroneous exercise of the relevant discretion to yield to that temptation." 
These observations are not in my view applicable to the present case, where it could not on any view be said that the plaintiff has not been allowed a proper opportunity to put its case upon the merits of the matter; the plaintiff had an opportunity to produce the Statement of Claim on which it relies from the initiation of proceedings on 31 May 1993 until the hearing before the Master, and the Master's order did not withhold from it a proper opportunity to put its case upon the merits. All of the observations of Priestley JA must be understood with his Honour's adoption of Sheller JA's reasons, and with the facts at 491 in which there was an inexplicable negligent failure of Mrs
Cohen's solicitors to obtain instructions and file a Defence relying on a statutory defence. The solicitor whose instructions had been conveyed by Mr
Cohen apparently began to consider Mrs Cohen's separate and independent defence only when he decided to cease to act for Mr Cohen and "[t]he inference is inescapable that he took instructions from Mr Cohen and failed to take instructions from Mrs Cohen and, in any sufficient way, serve Mrs Cohen's interests. Mrs Cohen's defence threw up a conflict of interest with that of her husband, since if it succeeded, he would be solely liable for the amounts claimed." On the facts found Mrs Cohen had not had a real opportunity to defend. It was in this factual context that Priestley JA referred, in citation, to the duty of the Court to allow each party a proper opportunity to put that party's case upon the merits of the matter, and cited Sir Samuel
Griffith's reference in Rowe versus Australian United Steam Navigation Co Ltd <case>; [(1909) 9 CLR 1] at 6 "... the right of every man to a fair hearing before he is condemned lies at the root of the tree of justice". In the present case there are no facts, whether interaction of the conduct of other persons or otherwise, which have worked to deprive the plaintiff of a fair opportunity to put its case; that opportunity was before it for almost four years before the proceedings were dismissed.

Kirby J in State of Queensland versus JL Holdings Ltd (supra) at 167 to 172 well illustrates the discretionary nature of a decision in this field and the wide range of matters which may be relevant to the discretion and of the weight which the Court may decide to attribute to particular factors. In the present case relatively few of the potential factors listed by Kirby J were present; it was not accepted that the plaintiff genuinely wished to pursue the proceedings, there had been a very long delay, the plaintiff had not explained the delay or offered any matter which could be regarded as excusing it, and had not brought it to an end; the proceedings related to events which extended over a period of five years and that period ended over four years before the proceedings were commenced; the limitation period had expired during prolonged inactivity by the plaintiff to which the defendants did not contribute; there had been correspondence over the years of delay in which the defendants had called the plaintiff's solicitors' attention to the proceedings and in reply had either been told that the proceedings would receive attention or had been ignored; and a person whose evidence would appear to be relevant had died.
There had been no proof of any circumstances such as inattention by its solicitor, or any other interaction with any other person's conduct, which had worked to impede the plaintiff's opportunity to prosecute its proceedings. In the presence of these considerations, the Master's decision to dismiss the proceedings was an exercise of discretion reasonably available to him within [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p33) [rule (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s6.html) 
Order: The appeal is dismissed with costs. 
Referred to: 
Do Carmo versus Ford Excavations Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 146] 
Wickstead versus Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR 1] at 11 
Port of Melbourne Authority versus Anshun Pty Ltd [No 1] [(1980) 147 CLR 35] 
Southern Cross Explorations NL & Ors versus Fire and All Risks Insurance Co Ltd & Ors [No 2] [(1990) 21 NSWLR 200] at 209 
Brouwer versus Titan Corporation Ltd [(1997) 73 FCR 241] 
Lane versus Jurd & Anor [No 2] [(1995) 40 NSWLR 708] 
Protective Commissioner versus B & Anor (Hodgson J, 23 June 1997 
Byron versus Southern Star Group Ltd <case>; <case>; [(1986) 10 FCR 226] 
Herron versus McGregor (1986) 6 NSWLR 254 at 254-5 
Hart versus Herron (Court of Appeal, unreported, 3 June 1993) 
Trad versus Clark (Supreme Court, Bryson J, unreported, 23 August 1995).

Stollznow versus Calvert [1980] 2 NSWLR 
Ulowski versus Miller [[1968] SASR 277] at 283-4 
Davies versus Pagett [(1986) 10 FCR 266] at 481 * * * 
