

Rosser versus Maritime Services Board of New South Wales (No 3) Matter No /93 [1997] NSWSC 582 (25 November 1997) 
Rosser versus Maritime Services Board of NSW (No 3) /93 November 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales /1993 - ROSSER V MARITIME SERVICES BOARD OF NSW (NO 3) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I believe that the final decision I need to make in this long-running case is how the costs of the hearing on quantum should be paid and borne. 
Mr Brereton and Mr Meek for the plaintiff say that the answer to the question of costs is simple. They submit that as the plaintiff succeeded on the inquiry in obtaining a judgment for $576,450, costs should follow the event.

Mr Donohoe QC and Mr Kunc for the defendant basically rely on two propositions in their endeavour to persuade me that the ordinary rule should not apply.
First they rely on Calderbank letters. Secondly they say that there is a practice since the decision of Holland, J in Walker versus Crane Enfield Metals
Pty Ltd (1.12.1989 unreported) that if there are negotiations for a settlement and one party makes offers near the mark and the other makes totally unrealistic offers, then the court may make the appropriate orders to reflect the need to encourage bona fide attempts to settle litigation. They say that such a principle applies here.

The background to this costs dispute is that the litigation between the parties was fought hard at every stage. The plaintiff sought specific performance of a contract to dredge Yamba/Iluka Harbour. A hearing on liability took place over six days in 1993. The plaintiff established the contract on which he relied, but did not obtain specific performance. The plaintiff was held entitled to an inquiry into damages and was awarded 90% of his costs of the proceedings up to 16 September 1993.

The damages hearing took place before me, commencing on 5 August, 1996. The first five days were spent hearing evidence at Maclean Courthouse. Ten further days were occupied hearing evidence and addresses in Sydney. The hearing concluded on 23 August 1996. On 17 September 1996, I delivered reasons why there should be a verdict for the plaintiff for $576,450.

The evidence now presented shows that on 8 August 1996, that is, on the second last day of the hearing at Maclean, the defendant offered to settle the proceedings on the basis that it would pay the plaintiff $750,000 inclusive of all costs, if the plaintiff's claim for damages was dismissed. This offer was withdrawn on 12 August, but was reinstated on 14 August and withdrawn by 21
August. On 14 August, the plaintiff made a counter-offer of $1,600,000 inclusive of costs on the same basis. This was rejected. There were earlier offers by the defendant of $180,000 plus costs of the liability hearing as taxed, and an offer by the plaintiff of $2,500,000 inclusive of costs.
However, it is difficult to see how these can be of relevance except, perhaps, with respect to the second of the defendant's arguments.

Mr Brereton and Mr Meek say that the fact that the defendant's offer was inclusive of costs disqualifies it from being within the scope of the English
Court of Appeal's decision in Calderbank versus Calderbank [[1976] Fam .] This submission is based on two lines of argument. The first is by analogy to
Offers of Compromise under the Supreme Court Rules. The second relies on decisions of the courts, particularly Smallacombe versus Lockyer Investment Co
Pty Ltd <case>; [(1993) 42 FCR 97], 102.

There are close analogies between the Offer of Compromise procedure and the
Calderbank letter. However, there are also vital differences as noted by
Lindgren, J in MGICA (1992) Ltd versus Kenny & Good Pty Ltd [(1996) 140
ALR 707.] However, both processes serve the public interest in terminating litigation by posing at least the possibility of having to pay more or receive less costs if there has been an unreasonable rejection of an offer.

Under the Offer of Compromise procedure laid down by Part 22 of the Supreme
Court Rules, an offer may be made "plus costs", but cannot be made inclusive of costs. The reason for this is twofold. First the wording of Pt 52(17) shows that such an offer cannot be an offer within Part 22. Secondly, if it were otherwise, whenever a court was asked to give effect to the rule, it would have to indulge in a taxation of costs: Associated Confectionery (Aust) Ltd v Mineral and Chemical Traders Pty Ltd [(1991) 25 NSWLR 349], 351; see also McLean versus Commonwealth (Sperling, J 22.8.1996, unreported).

The first of the reasons for disqualifying inclusive offers does not apply to
Calderbank letters. The second, however, does. Indeed, in the present case I am asked by the defendant to defer making an order for costs until the plaintiff's bill has been referred to an expert referee.

I should digress and consider that submission.

The plaintiff has brought in a bill totalling $374,189.06. This includes both the hearing on liability and that on quantum. The costs up to and including 7
August 1996 which the defendant says was the position when the offer was made on 8 August, are claimed to be $264,709.01. The defendant claims that this is excessive to the extent of $144,868.46. However, it further says that if even only $91,159.02 were struck from the plaintiff's bill, the offer would be more than the plaintiff recovered. The plaintiff looks at the total costs and says that if the plaintiff recovers at least $173,551 for costs, he gets more than the offer, so that the offer is irrelevant.

Furthermore, the plaintiff says that the offer was actually made just before the "Circuit Dinner" at Yamba at 7pm on 8 August and there was no real opportunity to consider the cost implications until after the Court had left
Maclean the next day. Thus, at the very least, the costs of 8 and 9 August must be taken into account.

For present purposes I should assume that the defendant's approach is correct, as any other approach makes consideration of this point otiose.

Doubtless the plaintiff's solicitor could have done a calculation as to how much the plaintiff would have had in his pocket after paying his own costs and could have advised the plaintiff accordingly. However, the vice of the offer is that the court cannot easily make this calculation. Either the court has to guess, and with quantum of costs these days I would not even want to hazard a guess, or the question of quantum has to be referred to an expert at cost to the parties. It was this step that Giles, J considered was the real vice in the Associated Confectionary case.

Thus, in my view, the Court should in this respect treat Calderbank letters by analogy with Offers of Compromise.

This was the position taken by Spender, J in Smallacombe's case. In that case the plaintiff recovered a verdict of $326,000. A Calderbank letter had offered $400,000 inclusive of costs. At pp 101-2, the judge ruled that such a letter containing an inclusive offer was not a Calderbank letter.

The defendant's counsel submit that I should not follow this approach. They principally rely for this submission on the decision of Rolfe, J in the
Commercial Division of this Court in Garrett versus Kidron (9.6.1994 unreported). In that case, an offer of $110,000 inclusive of costs was made, but the defendant made it clear that the offer was, in effect $80,000 for damages and $30,000 for costs. Although acknowledging that the offer was an inclusive one, Rolfe, J treated it as apportionable, but held even on that basis, it did not affect the proper order for costs that should be made. His
Honour did not, nor did he need to, consider Smallacombe's case. I do not consider that this decision detracts from what I have said above.

Before dealing with the second of the defendant's main submissions, I should note a couple of supplementary reasons given to support the first. Although Mr
Donohoe QC and Mr Kunc acknowledge that the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) is inapplicable to this case, they submit that [s (2)(h)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html) of that Act shows a legislative intent that "public policy is moving away from any narrow or formal approach to offers of compromise". Again they submit (para 4.9 of their written submissions), "A narrow approach to facilitation of settlements is out of harmony with the modern trend to encourage persons to explore resolution outside the court system." 
I have been trained since a young man to see a red light whenever coloured language appears in what are presented as logical submissions. Good logic needs no colour. In modern advertising, spruikers use terms like "Flexible" and "Modern" to signal something good and terms like "Narrow", "Rigid" and "Traditional" to suggest something bad. However, in law, there is only one rule and it does not matter if it is a flexible, modern rule or an old fashioned and narrow rule. A litigant who really wants to make a serious offer of compromise either does so in the proper form at least 28 days before the hearing or delivers a Calderbank letter at such time as the opponent may reasonably respond. A rolled up offer including costs (and also including a term that the plaintiff give away his victory and have his proceedings dismissed) made on the evening of the fourth day of a damages hearing is not,
I hope, a presaging as to how litigation is to be conducted in the "modern" world. I say nothing about the repeat of the offer made on the eighth day of the damages hearing after virtually all the costs had been incurred. I must add that offers could have been made at any time after September, 1993.

I now turn to the second submission that in making an order for costs, the court not only takes into account the offers the defendant has made which are near to the mark, but also considers how reasonable were the plaintiff's rejections and counter-offers.

Counsel for the defendant submit that the rationale of the decision in
Calderbank versus Calderbank is that the court looks to whether the defendant's conduct was reasonable. Although it is easier to decide this question when the plaintiff receives slightly less than the defendant's offer, precise mathematical equivalence is not required. An offer slightly above the verdict might still be reflected in the plaintiff receiving less costs. This submission is supported by the phraseology used by Cairns, LJ in
Calderbank when, at page 106, he says the offer made by the wife was one which "the husband ought to have accepted". However, in that case, the husband in any event got less than the offer.

Later cases repeat the maxim that a person who behaves unreasonably in rejecting an offer may be at risk as to costs. However, in virtually every case, the offer was more than the verdict (if the plaintiff's costs were in issue). Indeed the cases leave one with the feeling that generally it is only considered unreasonable for a plaintiff to reject an offer which is less than the eventual verdict. However, there is little actual discussion of what is reasonable in this connection, though see Dobb versus Hackett [(1993) 10 WAR .] 
The only case of which I am aware which adds to the defendant's submission is
Holland, J's decision in Walker's case. Walker's case was heard before
Holland, J and a jury. The plaintiff received an adjusted verdict of $98,741.
The defendant offered to settle for $10,000 clear of worker's compensation repayments, but inclusive of costs. The plaintiff made a counter-offer of $115,000 inclusive of costs. Holland, J considered that the result of the case was that after a five day trial, the plaintiff recovered a little more than what he was prepared to take by way of settlement. Plaintiff's counsel asked for and obtained indemnity costs.

The key passage of Holland, J's judgment reads as follows, "It would seem to me that I should accede to this application because the offer that the defendant made was so far away, and the offer that the plaintiff made was so close to, the actual result that has ensued that the view ought to be taken that the judgment of the defendant as to the outcome of the trial was so far astray that it has added a burden of costs to the plaintiff that could have been avoided had the plaintiff's offer then been accepted." 
The decision in Walker's case may have been made in anticipation of some regime which would apply after the Offer to Compromise rules had come into force. That decision was made after those rules had been promulgated, but before they came into force. However, my reading of the authorities fails to show anything which supports a general rule along the lines suggested in that judgment. I consider that the most a court can derive from Walker's case is that in an exceptional case it may be unreasonable for a party to refuse an offer that is close to, but less than, the verdict and that such unreasonableness may be tested by the party's counter-offers.

In the instant case, there were counter-offers made by the plaintiff which were well wide of the mark. I have taken these into account. However, I do not consider that these, taken in conjunction with an offer that appears to be less than the verdict, demonstrate such unreasonableness that would operate to prevent the ordinary rule as to costs being applied. Even though the plaintiff did, on 14 August, 1996, put a counter-offer of $1,600,000 inclusive of costs on the basis that his claim could be formally dismissed, I consider that the form of the order offered, that is dismissal, is a relevant matter to take into account when one is evaluating the reasonableness of the plaintiff's attitude.

The result is that I decline to refer the assessment of costs to a referee and
I decline to stay the making of a formal order for costs pending that reference. I will note, however, in case the Court of Appeal considers that I have erred, that the parties agreed that the expert referee should be Mr John
E McDonald, a former Registrar of this Court.

The only orders that I make are that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings on and after 17 September, 1993 and to reserve liberty to apply.
 * * * 
