

Ren Zhi Yu (aka Irene Ren) versus Wu Yee Chun Yu and Anor [1996] NSWSC 492 (16
October 1996) 
Ren Zhi YU (aka Irene REN) versus Wu Yee Chun YU & ANOR /96 
WEDNESDAY 16 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER JA, BEAZLEY JA, ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Negligence - Personal Injury - Traffic Accidents - Plaintiff pedestrian crossing road at marked crossing against "Don't Walk" sign - Defendant motorist with green light in her favour strikes plaintiff - Whether defendant negligent - Contributory negligence - Extent of contribution - Motor Traffic Regulations 1935 reg 67(2); General Traffic (Pedestrian) Regulations 1937, reg 6A(1); GIO versus Ergul (1993) Aust Torts R 62, 633; Stocks and McDonald Hamilton Pty Ltd versus Baldwin (CA 20 September 1996, unreported) applied 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: I will ask Abadee AJA to give the first judgment.

ABADEE AJA: The appellant Ren Zhi Yu (aka) Irene Ren claimed damages for injuries she sustained in a motor vehicle accident on 21 September 1991.

The accident occurred at about 4.40pm on a Saturday in George Street,
Haymarket at the intersection of that street with Rawson Place. The appellant's case was that she was in a pedestrian crossing proceeding from east to west in George Street when she was struck by the second respondent's vehicle, then being driven by the first respondent.

The appellant alleged that the accident was caused by negligence on the part of the respondents and various particulars of negligence were assigned. The respondents in addition to denying negligence also alleged that the appellant's injuries, loss and damage were suffered partly as a result of her own contributory negligence. One particular of contributory negligence alleged was that the appellant had walked onto the street contrary to a "Don't Walk" sign.

The matter came on for hearing before Newman J. His Honour in a reserved judgment found that the defendant driver was not in breach of any duty of care and rejected the appellant's claim entering judgment for the respondents.

The appellant has appealed to the court against the judgment seeking orders that the appeal be allowed, and that judgment be entered for her and the matter be sent for re-trial on the issue of damages.

The matter was listed before this court on 27 August 1996. The question arose as to whether or not the appellant had left the eastern kerb of George Street at a point of time when the "Don't Walk" light was fixed or was flashing. In any event an adjournment of the appeal took place in order for that particular matter to be further considered. The reasons for the court granting an adjournment appear in the judgment of Mahoney ACJ and do not need to be repeated here. However, it is appropriate to record that the judgment reveals that whilst the appeal was adjourned it was made clear that the further hearing of the appeal as such could be heard before a reconstituted court. In fact the court has been reconstituted.

Against this background I now turn to consider the appeal. There was no dispute in the appellant's case at the trial that if the respondent driver was negligent then the appellant was also guilty of contributory negligence. In the result, the matter of contributory negligence did not arise for consideration, in view of the trial judge's finding that the driver was not guilty of any negligence.

The undisputed evidence at the trial was that the appellant sustained severe personal injuries when she was struck by the vehicle driven by the first respondent. There was no dispute that George Street at the relevant point was divided for traffic purposes into seven lanes, four on the western side of the road "centre" and three on the eastern side. The lane on the western side of the centre closest to the centre of the road was designated as a right-hand turn lane. This apparently permitted traffic travelling north to make a turn into Rawson Place. A pedestrian crossing was marked extending from the corner of Rawson Place and George Street across to the western kerb of the latter thoroughfare. That crossing was controlled by pedestrian lights which were in standard form indicating "Don't Walk" in red, "Walk" in green, the red illuminating flashing when those lights were changing from "Walk" to "Don't
Walk".

The intersection of George Street and Rawson Place was also controlled by traffic lights. His Honour found that the right-hand turn lane was controlled by lights using red and green arrows to indicate to drivers of vehicles turning right when they were allowed to do so.

At the trial it was also undisputed that the driver was driving her vehicle in the western lane of George Street which was closest to the right-hand turn lane, in other words in the third lane away from the western kerb of George
Street. Another matter that was undisputed was that at the time of the impact the pedestrian lights at the intersection were showing the "Don't Walk" sign and that traffic lights controlling the northbound traffic were green.

An important factual issue at the trial was for how long the pedestrian lights had been showing the "Don't Walk" sign and for how long the green light had been in the driver's favour as she travelled northwards in George Street. In the result, his Honour found that the appellant left the eastern kerb at the time when the "Don't Walk" sign was in a fixed position.

Admitted in evidence at the trial was a letter from the RTA dealing with the phasing of traffic lights at George Street and Rawson Place.

The trial of the matter was complicated by the fact that neither the appellant nor the driver gave evidence. The appellant did not do so because as a consequence of her serious injuries she had no recollection at all of the accident. This was not disputed. On the other hand the driver did not give evidence because, as the affidavit evidence indicated, she was not within the jurisdiction of the court at the time the case was heard.

Evidence as to the circumstances of the accident came from four witnesses.
Two, a Mr Levi and a Mr Gleeson were eye witnesses to the accident and the other two, Constable Spain and Sergeant Petersen, gave evidence of police enquiries into the subject accident. All four were called in the plaintiff's case. It is appropriate to observe here that Mr Gleeson, who, as I have already indicated, was called in the plaintiff's case was never asked in his evidence in-chief as to what the position was of the "Don't Walk" lights at the time the appellant left the eastern kerb. This was a matter that was dealt with ultimately in cross-examination by counsel for the driver and the owner of the vehicle and following cross-examination of Mr Gleeson his evidence in relation to this aspect of the matter was not the subject of any re- examination.

It is also appropriate to say that of the two witnesses, Mr Levi and Mr
Gleeson, his Honour found Mr Gleeson's evidence to be more credible. This finding was made for reasons stated by his Honour. In addition to furnishing reasons why there was conflict between Mr Levi and Mr Gleeson, as to why he preferred the evidence of Mr Gleeson his Honour stated that he was impressed by the manner in which Mr Gleeson gave his evidence. The findings of fact of the trial judge to the extent they were based on the credibility of Mr Gleeson as opposed to the evidence of Mr Levi would ordinarily stand absent reasons for concluding that the judge failed to use or palpably misused his advantage:
Devries versus Australian National Railways Commission <case>; [(1992-1993) 177 CLR 472] at .

The trial judge found the following facts. The appellant left the eastern kerb of George Street at a time when the pedestrian light was showing "Don't Walk" and the traffic lights were showing green. She moved across the road in the manner described Mr Gleeson, crossed in front of Mr Levi's Toyota Land Cruiser and then emerged into the lane in which the first respondent's vehicle was travelling at the time when the front of the first respondent's vehicle was entering the intersection. The light controlling the northbound traffic had been showing green for some little time prior to the impact and "certainly on
Mr Gleeson's evidence at a time when the vehicle was some fifty metres from the intersection". His Honour made the following finding (at AB 154): "...At all times, on the only evidence on the topic, I find that the defendant's vehicle was travelling within the speed limit of 60 kilometres per hour. Because of the size of Mr Levi's vehicle the defendant could not have seen the plaintiff for at least the distance across the right-hand turn lane before the plaintiff came into contact with the defendant's vehicle." 
His Honour, in making that finding, did not refer, however to what the first respondent had told the police shortly after the accident occurred and which appears in his Honour's judgment at AB 146. It is to be noted that in the statement made by the first respondent to the police she told the police that when she was driving she had first seen the woman on the median strip. His
Honour further found that the accident occurred in the pedestrian crossing.

In the appeal the appellant has challenged the finding of fact made by his
Honour that the plaintiff left the eastern kerb of George Street at a time when the pedestrian light was showing "Don't Walk" and the traffic lights were showing green. It was submitted to the court by Mr Gross QC that this was a finding not open to his Honour nor was his Honour permitted by way of inference to so find. In my view the finding was one open on the evidence and particularly so once his Honour accepted the evidence, as he was entitled to do, of Mr Gleeson where it conflicted with that of Mr Levi.

Mr Gleeson gave evidence that he was standing on the western side of George
Street, Haymarket at the intersection of George Street and Rawson Place, waiting to cross from the western side to go up Rawson Place. He said he had a clear unobstructed view of the northbound traffic lanes and of the road across to the other side. Traffic was very light that afternoon. The only car he could remember was a car standing stationary at the turn right lane into
Rawson Place. Mr Gleeson saw a woman who was clearly the appellant beginning to cross the road from the eastern side on the opposite side to where he was.
She was within the pedestrian lines. He first became aware of her at the kerb or upon immediately leaving the kerb on the eastern side. He watched her cross the road. He had a clear vision of her. He described her as being in a hurry and she crossed the intersection from the eastern path, "kept continuing in front of where the stationary car was and came out from the front of the stationary car". Indeed, in cross-examination he said he told the police the pedestrian had been running. Similarly he told an investigator she had been running, although in his evidence he described the pedestrian as "not running full out." Mr Gleeson was able to see her at all times. He described her movement from the eastern kerb across to where she was struck as "a continuous movement. She didn't pause anywhere going across." She was struck no more than a foot to a metre past the front of the stationary vehicle ie, on the western side of the median strip. He said that the car that struck her was about fifty to sixty metres back when he first noticed it travelling "roughly" at a speed of sixty kilometres per hour. Whilst he was not observing the vehicle at all times he said he did not notice any change in speed nor observe any deviation in course. He did not hear any braking sound. The time interval between first seeing the woman and the time she was struck may possibly have been, in his estimation, less than ten seconds. In cross-examination Mr Gleeson said that at approximately 7pm or shortly thereafter he contacted the police. He told them he had been standing on the western side of George Street waiting to cross to Rawson Place. He saw the 'Don't Walk' light facing him (AB 60) and described how the woman had run into the path of a car in lane 3 of George
Street. In my view it was clearly open for his Honour acting upon the evidence of Mr Gleeson to make the finding of fact that the appellant left the eastern kerb of George Street at a time when the pedestrian light was showing "Don't
Walk" and when the lights for northbound traffic were green.

In coming to this conclusion I also have regard to some materials which were put before this court this morning including an affidavit from the solicitor for the respondents and also a note provided to the court from the court reporter who recorded the proceedings at the trial.

In my view it was clearly open for his Honour to make the finding that has been challenged on this appeal and to draw the inference that he did. His
Honour, as I have earlier said, was clearly concerned with this important factual issue as to how long the pedestrian lights had been showing the "Don't
Walk" sign and for how long the green light had been in the respondent's favour as she travelled northwards in George Street. That concern expressed, he addressed the issue, and findings in relation to it were open to be made in reliance upon Mr Gleeson's evidence, and if need be the inference from such.

The appellant has also challenged the finding that the light controlling the northbound traffic had been showing green for some little time prior to the impact and certainly on Mr Gleeson's evidence at a time when the respondent driver's vehicle was some fifty metres from the intersection. In my view these findings were open to be made by his Honour.

Mr Levi gave evidence that the northbound traffic was light. Mr Gleeson described the traffic as being very light for George Street. He thought that there were cars going up and down George Street. The only car he could remember was the one referred to being the stationary vehicle standing for the purposes of making a turn right into Rawson Place. Constable Spain who arrived within five minutes of the accident, said that there was a stream of cars or traffic or medium traffic. The respondent driver in fact told the police as she was approaching the intersection of Rawson Place the green light was facing her.

In his reasons for judgment his Honour reproduced notes of the police interview with the respondent driver. The following version appears in the judgment (at AB 146). It seems that the respondent stated to the police: "...I was travelling north in lane 3 of George Street at about fifty to sixty kph. I was approaching the intersection of Rawson Street there was a green light flashing - when a woman suddenly rushed out from my right-hand side and hit the front of the car..." 
In my view it was open to his Honour to infer and find that the lights of the northbound traffic had been showing green for some little time prior to the impact and had not changed from red to green immediately prior thereto.
Further, once his Honour concluded where there was conflict between Mr Levi and Mr Gleeson, not only for the reasons stated by him but also having regard to his evaluation of Mr Gleeson's credibility, his Honour was further entitled to make the finding of fact that has been the subject of additional challenge.

In my view the appellant's challenge to the findings of his Honour should be rejected.

Before turning to the appellant's submissions it is appropriate to refer to some other factual matters.

According to Mr Gleeson's evidence the point of impact occurred at a distance no more than a foot to a metre past the front of Mr Levi's vehicle. The police photograph showed that the damage to the vehicle indicated damage to the vehicle principally involving the driver's side of the windscreen. Mr Gleeson said that when he saw the appellant struck she was carried onto the bonnet and then over it. It would seem to be a reasonable inference that the impact between the pedestrian and the vehicle occurred on the driver's side at a point between the front of the car and the windshield.

According to the police evidence when the two police attended the scene the weather was dry and the traffic was medium. Constable Spain's observation was that the traffic lights were functioning normally.

His Honour was mindful that the accident occurred in a pedestrian crossing. He referred to Regulation 67(2) of the Motor Traffic Regulations dealing with the obligations of a driver approaching a marked foot crossing to proceed at a speed as to be able if necessary to stop before reaching such a foot crossing or to lessen the speed or to stop the vehicle and allow such pedestrian to pass in front. His Honour also referred to Regulation 6A(1) of the General
Traffic (Pedestrian) Regulations 1937, a regulation dealing with the duty of a pedestrian at a marked foot crossing where there is an illuminated sign displaying at successive intervals "Walk" and "Don't Walk". This regulation provides that no person shall commence to cross the carriageway towards the sign whilst it is displaying in his direction the words "Don't Walk".

His Honour had regard to the decision of this court in Government Insurance
Office of New South Wales versus Ergul (1993) Aust Torts Reports 62, 633 where the relationship between the two regulations was considered.

Mr Gross QC has relied upon this decision as supporting a submission that by applying the principles stated therein the inevitable conclusion in this case must be that the appellant is entitled to a verdict. In Ergul's case
Mahoney AP (as he then was) concluded that the provisions as to pedestrian lights in the Regulations did not exempt the driver of a motor vehicle from compliance with the requirements of regulations such as 67(2). His Honour expressed the law as follows at 62, 639: "... In my opinion reg.6A did not have that intention [to withdraw from a pedestrian crossing in breach of it any or all of the protection given to him by reg.67(2)]. It remained the duty of a driver to proceed at such a speed as to be able 'if necessary' to stop before reaching the crossing and to give way to a person already on the crossing...The breach of reg.6A by the pedestrian would of course be of significance in determining whether, in a particular case, the driver was negligent under the general law and the extent to which the pedestrian was responsible for what occurred. But the duties imposed by reg.67 are I think, not negatived by the fact that the pedestrian was in breach of reg.6A..." 
Meagher JA dealt with the question of whether the motor bike in Ergul's case had been negligent. He said at 62,641: "The next problem is whether the motor bike or motor vehicle was negligent.
The plaintiff did not see it. All that he saw on the road was the loaded truck, which was driving on the median lane. It would therefore necessarily follow that the motor vehicle or motor bike in question was driving in the inside lane and was obscured from the plaintiff's vision by the truck.
Moreover, if the plaintiff's vision of the bike or vehicle was obscured, the driver of that bike or vehicle would have no vision of the plaintiff. Although the facts are a trifle slight, I think his Honour was correct in drawing an inference that, on the balance of probabilities, the bike or vehicle was either being driver too quickly or was not keeping a lookout, or both.
Otherwise, it is not easy to see how the accident could happen. It is common knowledge that pedestrians cross roads at pedestrian crossings both with the lights and against the lights. It is therefore a breach of duty for a driver in the inside lane with his vision obscured to drive so fast that he cannot stop immediately if a pedestrian emerges. It follows that, in my opinion, his Honour's finding of negligence is immune from attack." (my emphasis) 
With respect I particularly agree with his Honour's remarks in relation to common knowledge.

In the instant case the trial judge referred to these passages concluding that the duty cast upon a motorist when approaching a marked pedestrian crossing whether it was controlled by traffic lights or not is an onerous one.

In Ergul the court does not appear to have referred to the decision of the High Court in Sibley versus Kais <case>; [(1967) 118 CLR 424.] Nevertheless, that decision is instructive. The case concerned an accident between two vehicles at an intersection. Regulations provided that the plaintiff had a duty to give way to the vehicle on his right. The High Court emphasised that the "Right hand rule" is not the be all and end all in relation to the questions of civil responsibility. The regulations were said not to be definitive of the respective duties of drivers of such vehicles or in respect of themselves. At p 427 the court said: "The common law duty to act reasonably in all the circumstances is paramount.
The failure to take reasonable care in given circumstances is not necessarily answered by reliance upon the expected performance by the driver of the give- way vehicle of his obligations under the regulations; for there is no general rule that in all circumstances a driver can rely upon the performance by others of their duties, whether derived from statutory sources or from the common law. Whether or not in particular circumstances it is reasonable to act upon the assumption that another will act in some particular way, as for example by performing his duty under a regulation, must remain a question of fact to be judged in all the particular circumstances of the case." 
At the same page their Honours also said: "...the obligation of each driver of two vehicles approaching an intersection is to take, reasonable care. What amounts to reasonable care is of course, a question of fact." 
Whilst the breach or breaches of regulations such as those with which we are concerned is thus of significance in determining whether in the circumstances of the instant case the driver was negligent and the extent to which the pedestrian was guilty of contributory negligence, at the end of the day what amounts to reasonable care on the part of the driver remains a question of fact albeit, in such determination it is proper to have due and significant regard to the found breaches of regulations. As I understand the observation of Meagher JA in Ergul at 62, 641 that it is therefore "a breach of duty for a driver in the inside lane with his vision obscured to drive so fast that he cannot stop immediately if a pedestrian emerges" this is a statement to be seen in context and having regard to the facts of that case. I do not understand his Honour to be laying down a general rule of law of universal application that the driving he described in that passage must constitute common law negligence. At least I do not read his Honour's remarks in that way. Indeed, in Ergul Clarke JA expressed no views on the meaning of the regulations and their effect on a negligence action being content to agree with the majority on the issue of negligence.

In the instant case the trial judge, having considered Ergul's case, nevertheless concluded that the facts would seem to fall within the stricture adverted to by the Court of Appeal in Stewart versus Carnell [(1984) 2 MVR .]
In that case a pedestrian was stuck down in a busy street whilst "darting" across the street during peak hours between stationary cars into the path of a moving line of traffic, including the motorist. The court said at 151: "Negligence implies a want of care to prevent forseeable injury. There are limits on the extent to which irrational behaviour of pedestrians, in apparent disregard of their own safety, should reasonably be anticipated by a reasonable careful motorist." 
In the instant case his Honour said at AB 158: "Even assuming that the defendant had observed the plaintiff prior to her crossing the centre of George Street knowing that the traffic lights were in her favour and that there was a place where the plaintiff could stop with safety was she is in breach of duty by continuing to proceed driving towards the traffic light within the speed limit? The action of a pedestrian emerging from behind a large vehicle such as Mr Levi's, moving rapidly in disregard of a pedestrian light showing "Don't Walk" and then enter the path of the oncoming traffic must surely be classified as irrational behaviour which no reasonable driver would be able to anticipate.

In short I am of the view that there was nothing the defendant could do, acting reasonably, and indeed to the standard suggested by Clarke JA in
Ergul's case to avoid this accident." 
No binding principle of law is to be extracted from Stewart, although
Stewart may in some cases assist in a process of reasoning leading to the conclusion stated. The cases to which we were referred involving accidents between motorists and pedestrians are really but questions of fact. Thus in
Lakewood Electrics Pty Limited and Anor versus Campanaro (Court of Appeal 24
March 1995, unreported) the Court held that the case was not one of irrational or unexpected behaviour or the act of the pedestrian against which the motorist could not reasonably have been expected to take care.

The reference by Newman J to the standard suggested by Clarke JA is as I would understand it a reference to his Honour's views at 62,640 to the effect that since the advent of compulsory insurance and consequential notions of risk- sharing the courts have in substance elevated the "reasonably prudent driver" to the role of the perfectionist. Views may differ in relation to this approach. I do not see that the advent of compulsory insurance and consequent notions of risk-sharing or even contemporary perceptions as suggesting that all financial and other misfortunes suffered by the victim of a motor car accident should be put right at the expense of the motorist or his insurer.
Fault on the part of the driver must still be shown. Fault remains the touchstone of the injured party's entitlement to recovery from the insurer.
Nevertheless, it is the common law duty to act reasonably in all circumstances which remains paramount. The measure for determining what constitutes reasonable care is an objective and impersonal one. It is the "standard of the reasonable man", and what is required is conduct that would be expected of a reasonably careful man in such circumstances: see Cook versus Cook <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 376] at 382. What is considered to be reasonable in the circumstances of the case will presumably be influenced by current community standards. It may be the reflection of changing community standards, rather than merely in compulsory insurance that there is to be found the explanation for perhaps a more rigorous definition of the care expected on the part of owners and drivers of motor vehicles. There is also the recognition that a person driving a motor vehicle may cause, in some cases, immense harm to pedestrians.

However, the Court of Appeal has recently (since the decision in the instant case) considered and analysed the law in relation to the approach that may be adopted in a case of this nature. The case is Stocks and McDonald Hamilton
Pty Limited versus Baldwin (Court of Appeal 20 September 1996, unreported). It is true that the case is not one of a pedestrian crossing in a pedestrian crossing against a "Don't Walk" sign but this said, the case involved a motorist colliding with a pedestrian in circumstances not completely removed for the circumstances of this case. The plaintiff had stepped into the kerb side lane behind a vehicle sufficiently large enough to obscure her from the view of the oncoming motorist. She had already crossed one half of the road.
She was hit by a vehicle on the inside of that stationary vehicle.

In his reasons for judgment Mahoney P said as follows (at p 2): "The use of motor vehicles in the city creates real dangers; vehicles may strike passengers or they may collide with one another. But the fact that such dangers are created and that it is apparent that they exist does not mean that vehicles must be driven and pedestrians must be controlled in such a way that these dangers are entirely removed... <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47-48 Mason J indicated that what a driver must do is determined by 'what a reasonable man would do by way of response to the risk' attendant upon his driving".

His Honour later said: "The advantages to the community - and to the reasonable pedestrian in particular - are such that the reasonable person (whose opinions represent the law) would accept that vehicles must be driven at a speed which involves, and leaves to be borne, a foreseeable risk of injury. As cases which come before this Court evidence, it not frequently occurs - and it is therefore foreseeable - that a person may step suddenly from behind a parked van or other obstruction into the path of an oncoming vehicle." 
Indeed, it is foreseeable that a pedestrian may suddenly cross roads at a pedestrian crossing both with the lights and against the lights, as the judgment of Meagher JA in Ergul reveals.

Again in Stocks Mahoney P at p 4 analysed with particular care the balancing process to which Mason J referred in Shirt's case: "In the 'balancing' process to which Mason J referred, at least four things are to be borne in mind: the extent of the damage that may be done by a driver to a pedestrian; the degree of likelihood that a pedestrian will suddenly come into the path of an ongoing vehicle; the consequent extent of the precautions which a driver must take against that eventuality; and the extent of what a driver is able to do when confronted with such a danger.

The damage which a driver may do to a pedestrian is great: the injuries suffered by the present plaintiff show this. This is an important matter when deciding what a driver must do. The inconvenience of driving slower is to be measured against, inter alia, what may be done to a pedestrian if the driver's estimate of the risk is wrong.

Pedestrians sometimes act carelessly. I do not mean by this that they do so more often than not. But, in my opinion, they do so with sufficient frequency that a prudent driver would take account of it. The likelihood of that occurring is not a 'far-fetched or fanciful risk' which is to be put aside or discounted. It is something which occurs often enough for the prudent driver to foresee it and take it into account.

Mr Maconachie QC not merely submitted that a prudent driver may so drive that there are risks of injury; he submitted that the Court should accept that a prudent driver may determine what he should do upon the assumption that pedestrians will obey the law and will take sufficient care for their own safety. In my opinion that puts the matter too high in favour of the defendant driver." 
Indeed, I would add that this latter submission advanced in Stocks appears to be also inconsistent with the type of approach discussed by the
High Court in Sibley versus Kais, albeit in the context of two vehicles coming into collision at an intersection.

Again, in Stocks Mahoney AP at p 5 appears to have drawn on some of the law touching upon employer's liability for breach of the duty of care in a workplace situation holding that in deciding what as a reasonable person a driver must do: "he and the court must take into account the likelihood that the pedestrian may do what in this case, as the judge held, the plaintiff did." 
In Stocks the speed at which the defendant was driving became significant because of the effect it had, or may have had upon what the driver would be able to do if the eventuality of the type under discussion occurred.
In a practical sense the driver could avoid the pedestrian only by stopping and his capacity to do so would be affected by speed. The Court of Appeal ultimately upheld the finding a speed of forty kilometres per hour contributed to the accident.

Finally in Stocks Mahoney P observed (at 7): "But, in the end, the determination of what a duty of care requires in such circumstances is not to be determined by a syllogistic process from facts to conclusion. It involves the kind of value judgments to which Mason J referred to in Shirt's case and involves taking into account not merely the matters to which I have referred but all of the circumstances of the case. I am satisfied that the speed at which the defendant was driving contributed to the accident which happened." 
The principles which guide the court in appeals of this nature are well- established. I have already referred to the matter of findings depending on credibility of the witness. However, the court is entitled to look at the facts provided and to draw its own conclusions and inferences from them:
Warren versus Coombs <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 531.] 
The appellant has submitted that the duty of the first respondent driver was clear, namely, to approach the intersection at a speed so as to enable her to stop to avoid the plaintiff who was a pedestrian upon the crossing, so that she breached her obligations to approach the intersection at such a speed so as to be in a position to stop if a pedestrian emerged. I have already given reasons why Ergul does not compel the conclusions urged by the appellant that breach of the regulation perse as a matter of law, inevitably lead to the conclusion the plaintiff must recover. Had the matter stopped there I would not see anything in Ergul compelling a decision as a matter of law in favour of the appellant. However, Newman J did not have the benefit of being assisted by a case such as Stocks and more particularly by the type of reasoning contained in that decision.

In the instant case Mr Gross also submitted that his Honour was in error in focussing upon the foreseeability of a pedestrian stepping from a median strip, whereas he submitted that the issue of foreseeability should be considered by looking at the situation from the point of view of the pedestrian, not being at the median strip but before in fact she had reached that median strip. There is some substance in this submission. In any event in the evidence before Newman J was a statement of the defendant. There is available inferences to be drawn from such notwithstanding his Honour's finding that where there was a conflict between Mr Gleeson and Mr Levi he accepted Mr Levi's evidence. In her statement to the police the first respondent driver said that she first saw the plaintiff "standing on the median strip." But that she was near her when she suddenly rushed out. She said that she was not sure there were any cars alongside her. In any event the first respondent took no evasive action nor did she slow down or brake from an admitted speed of 50 to 60 kph. If the first respondent's vision of the pedestrian was obscured to some extent by the size of Mr Levi's vehicle, stationary and waiting to make a right-hand turn, then there is much to be said for the view that the speed she was travelling at, approaching a pedestrian crossing (even with a green light in her favour) was excessive or that reasonable care in the circumstances required that she slow down so that she could be in a position to see if there was a pedestrian upon the pedestrian crossing, even apart from her duty of care arising from regulation (2) of the Motor Traffic Regulations. In any event there was, as
Ergul showed, a situation where the first respondent was under a duty imposed by regulation 67. Next, there is no evidence in the statement made by the first respondent to the police (albeit as the trial judge found taken under difficulty, but nevertheless "altered" by the first respondent prior to its signature) and recorded in the notebook as to why the first respondent did not see the appellant before she observed her on the median strip. The evidence suggests on the eastern side there were three lanes going south and traffic was very light, according to the evidence of Mr Gleeson, three lanes of traffic. There was nothing, or at least nothing suggested in the statement, that there was anything obstructing the first respondent's view of the appellant as she was crossing George Street from the eastern kerb to the median strip. The only thing obstructing her view was the Toyota Land Cruiser which would have obstructed her view of the appellant only as she crossed the right-hand turn lane in front of the Land Cruiser. In her statement the first respondent said there were no cars in front of her before the intersection.
Indeed, Mr Gleeson said he could not see anything obstructing the line of sight of vehicles travelling north in George Street. "A line of sight from those vehicles as they approached the intersection towards the Eastern side of the pedestrian crossing." (my emphasis) Again there is much merit in the argument that had the first respondent been keeping a proper look-out as she approached the intersection she would have observed the appellant crossing George Street from the eastern kerb without pausing. An obligation of the first respondent to slow down to such a speed that she could stop at the pedestrian crossing arose as soon as the appellant was upon the pedestrian crossing.

Having regard to these matters, the principles as discussed in Ergul and more recently in Stocks and the court's obligations in accordance with
Warren versus Coombs, I am of the opinion that the appellant has made good her case of negligence based upon a failure of the respondent to take reasonable care in several respects including failure to keep a proper look- out, driving at an excessive speed and in and about the failure to break or swerve.

The appellant also submitted that whether or not her behaviour was to be classified as "irrational behaviour" her behaviour should have been anticipated by a reasonably careful motorist. There is support for such a view to be found in the recent decision of Stocks and in the observation of
Meagher JA to like effect in Ergul.

According to Mr Gleeson the plaintiff was proceeding from east to west in a continuous movement. According to the respondent she observed the appellant upon the pedestrian crossing at least on the median strip so she said. In my view it was reasonably foreseeable and at least reasonably anticipated by a reasonable driver that the appellant might continue across the pedestrian crossing or proceed across the intersection. Indeed, having admittedly observed the appellant at the median strip she was under an obligation to take some evasive or defensive action (which she did not) so that she would be able to stop should the pedestrian continue across the crossing.

In my view for these reasons the appeal should be allowed.

The next matter to consider is whether we should make a finding of contributory negligence, no finding having been properly made at the trial.
The appellant seeks a judgment and that the matter be submitted for a re-trial on the issue of damages.

As his Honour's judgment discloses there was no dispute in the plaintiff's case that if the defendant was negligent the plaintiff was also guilty of contributory negligence. Normally the matter of the degree of contributory negligence is for the trial judge. However, in the instant case where the facts have been revealed, the appellant cannot remember, and the driver respondent was out of the country at the time of trial, in my view the court should determine contributory negligence for itself and leave a re-trial to be had only on the damages question.

In his written submission Mr Gross submitted that the plaintiff was not entirely without fault in proceeding against a "Don't Walk" sign. Clearly this is so. The plaintiff was in clear breach of regulation 6A. On the findings and the way the case was conducted she had run across the road without stopping.
Clearly the appellant was reckless in her behaviour. She apparently deliberately embarked upon a dangerous course. She did not even stop after she passed in front of the stationary Toyota. She proceeded immediately to, in effect, step into the lane in which the respondent was driving. According to the evidence of Mr Gleeson she was looking straight ahead. Indeed, in her position whilst in front of the Toyota she would not have been able to see over it to the south. In my view her behaviour was somewhat irrational and in complete disregard for her own safety. I also note when one looks at the photograph which appears in the appeal book at page 92 that the end of the median strip seems to be fairly close in position to the left-hand line of the median strip.

Next, the appellant before embarking upon her hazardous journey across the road could also have seen the first respondent's vehicle travelling as she crossed from the eastern kerb, had she been keeping a reasonable look-out. The impact location I have already described. In this case the driver had the green light in her favour but failed to respond to a situation that suddenly confronted her.

The principles relating to the matter of apportionment are clearly established in Prodrebersek versus Australian Iron & Steel Pty Limited <case>; [(1985) 59 ALJR 492] at 493-494. (as applied in Stocks) Undertaking the comparison required by both culpability and the relevant importance of the acts of the parties in causing damages I would conclude that the greater proportion of culpability was on the part of the appellant. Indeed, it was submitted by Mr Gross that were the court to hold the finding of fact made by the trial judge that the "Don't Walk" sign was in a fixed position at the time the appellant left the eastern kerb that it would be open to this court to make a finding of fifty per cent contributory negligence as and against the appellant. However, in the circumstances I consider that the appellant's responsibility was greater than fifty per cent. I would apportion the responsibility for the damage as being sixty-five per cent against the appellant and thirty-five per cent as against the respondents.

For the above reasons I would allow the appeal. I would set aside the judgment of Newman J. I would enter a judgment for the appellant but with a finding that her contributory negligence be assessed at sixty-five per cent. I would remit the proceedings to the Common Law Division for assessment of damages in accordance with these findings. The respondents should pay the costs of the appellant in the first trial and on the appeal and are to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act in respect of the costs of the appeal.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with the orders proposed by Abadee AJA and also with the short reasons he has given.

BEAZLEY JA: I also agree.
 (Mr Poulos QC made an application for costs of the first day of the appeal) 
MEAGHER JA: The orders which the court has proposed already will be amended so that the appellant will pay the respondents' costs of the first day of the appeal.
 * * * 
