

Registrar Court of Appeal versus Craven (No 2) No. Ca 40130/94 Contempt -
Practice and Procedure [1995] NSWSC 178 (30 December 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), MEAGHER(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 27 April 1995 #DATE 30:6:1995 #ADD 24:10:1995 
Counsel for the Claimant:    K Mason QC and N J Williams 
Solicitor for the Claimant:
I V Knight, Crown Solicitor 
Counsel for the Opponent:    C J Stevens QC and K E Burke 
Solicitors for the Opponent:
Gillis Delaney Brown
ORDER
Order that the Opponent be fined the sum of $10,000.00. 
Order that, in addition to the said fine, the Opponent be sentenced to a term of six months imprisonment commencing on 30 December 1995. 
Order that the Claimant's
Notice of Motion filed 2 December 1994 be dismissed. 
Order that the Opponent pay the Claimant's cost of all proceedings in the
Court except for the proceedings on 27 April 1995.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P In these protracted proceedings, the Court has before it two tasks.
The first is to consider a notice of motion filed for the claimant which urges the Court to reopen a determination previously announced that Mr James Craven (the opponent) should be acquitted of charges 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the charges of contempt brought against him by the claimant. See Registrar, Court of Appeal versus Craven [(1994) 126 ALR 668 (NSWCA)], 702. The second task, in the light of the resolution of the first, is the completion of the proceedings for contempt and the determination of the penalty which it is appropriate to impose on the opponent in the light of his convictions.
 
Reopening unperfected orders of the Court
The orders of the Court, pronounced on 11 November 1994, have not been entered pending the resolution of these proceedings.
The orders are therefore, as the law describes them, "unperfected". The practice of this Court, in relation to unperfected orders in proceedings civil in character, is well established. I described the practice recently in Haig versus The Minister
Administering the [National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/npawa1974247/), Court of Appeal , unreported, 4 November 1994; (1994) NSWJB 120. I did so in these terms (at ): "There is no doubt that the Court may correct unperfected orders, ie those pronounced in Court at the time of the handing down of a decision before the entry of a formal order in the records of the Court. This course is adopted, for example, where it is established that a mistake has occurred in the
Court's understanding of the matters in issue between the parties. See eg Winrobe Pty Limited and Anor versus Sundin's Building
Company Pty Limited (No 2), Court of Appeal , unreported, December 1992; (1992) NSWJB
New South Wales Medical
Defence Union Limited versus Crawford (No 2) Court of Appeal, unreported, 30 June 1994; (1994) NSWJB
In Winrobe, the
Court, being convinced that an appeal had been decided on a basis not raised at the trial, withdrew its published orders.
It did so although they had been formally pronounced in open court and supported by reasons which were then delivered
Subsequently, the Court published a judgment which came to a conclusion different from that earlier reached
See Winrobe Pty
Limited and Anor versus Sundin's Building Company Pty Limited (No 3),
Court of Appeal , unreported, 4 May ; (1993) NSWJB
The Court emphasised the importance of intellectual honesty and the manifest integrity of its process.
The same principles were emphasised in Crawford (No 2). When, later, it was pointed out that one of the orders in Crawford (No 2) itself did not conform to the majority opinion of the judges expressed in their published reasons, the Court withdrew those orders. It announced new orders for the purpose of bringing the record of the Court into line with the decision of the judges. See
New South Wales Medical Defence Union Limited versus Crawford (No 3), unreported, Court of Appeal , 23 September ;
NSWJB 102.
 
In all of the foregoing cases, either by direction of the
Court or by sensible arrangement between the parties, the formal orders of the Court were withheld. They were not perfected. There was therefore no impenetrable barrier to the correction of the orders. Yet even in such cases, special circumstances must be shown before the discretion to set aside or alter orders which have been announced is enlivened The purpose of the jurisdiction is 'not to provide a backdoor method by which unsuccessful litigants can seek to reargue their cases' or 'simply for the purpose of giving a party the opportunity to present a case to better advantage. See Autodesk
Inc versus Dyason (No 2) <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 300], 301, 312, 328; State
Rail Authority of New South Wales versus Codelfa Construction Pty
Limited <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 29], 683; Permanent Trustee
Co. (Canberra) Ltd versus Stocks and Holdings (Canberra) Pty Ltd [(1976) 28 FLR 195 (FC)], 201. Special or 'very special' circumstances must be shown, amounting to a serious oversight or departure from due process or mistake. Otherwise, the orders pronounced must stand. In Australian courts other than the
High Court of Australia, they must then be corrected, if at all, by appeal or by judicial review where available."
Haig concerned the jurisdiction of this Court to correct a perfected order. Even in such a case, the Court reserved the possibility of correction, stating that it would only be used in the most exceptional of cases. See
Wentworth versus Rogers and Ors (No 9) [(1987) 8 NSWLR 388 (CA)], 26; [(1993) 82 LGERA 158 (CA)], 172. Neither the inherent power of the Court nor the power conferred by Parliament under [s 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) is unlimited. Neither permits the Court to undo basic principles of jurisprudence in the name of an undefined feeling that an injustice has occurred which the
Court must correct.
In the present case, the problem presented in Haig does not arise. To that extent, there can be no doubt that the Court has a large jurisdiction to correct its unperfected orders. The case is really part heard. In "special circumstances" the Court should certainly do so. The Court's insistence upon intellectual honesty is demonstrated by the cases cited in Haig. If a court concludes that a mistake has occurred or that a principle of due process of law has been overlooked, its fidelity to truth will ordinarily require that the mistake be corrected or the departure repaired. Only in this way will the final, perfected orders of the court, represent the formal manifestation of the court's duty to the law.
This said, a special difficulty arises in the present case. It is not whether a mistake has occurred or whether it occurred on a matter upon which, precisely, the claimant was not heard. I am prepared, for the reasons stated by Meagher JA, to accept that the Court's reading of [s 9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) of the [Director of
Public Prosecutions Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/) (Cth) was mistaken. Properly understood, the subsection means that the undertaking given by the Director of Public
Prosecutions for the Commonwealth (DPP) to the opponent prevented any answer which the opponent gave in evidence or the fact that he "disclosed or produced documents or information documents (etc) obtained as a direct or indirect consequence of his answer" from being used in evidence against him in any proceeding, Federal or State. I say in explanation that I must have read [s (6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) with the assumption that, appearing in a Federal Act, it would be confined to use of the opponent's answers etc in evidence against the person in any future Federal proceedings. It would normally be the case that a
Federal Act would be addressed to Federal concerns.
A question arises as to whether the DPP may validly give an undertaking that answers etc given by a person such as the opponent "will not be used in evidence against the person" in any proceedings - Federal or State. A question might arise as to how, precisely, the Federal DPP could fulfil such an undertaking, if State prosecuting officials, or others in civil litigation, sought to use in evidence in a State court the answers etc given by the beneficiary of an undertaking afforded by the Federal DPP. During these proceedings the constitutional validity of <case> of the Federal Act was raised in passing. But this issue was ultimately not pressed. To press it would have required the giving of notices to the law officers. See [s 78B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s78b.html) of the [Judiciary Act 1903](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/) (Cth). That had not been done.
Without deciding the point, this Court should accept that <case> is a valid law of the Australian
Parliament. In its terms, it is not limited to use of evidence in future "specified" proceedings or even future Federal proceedings, whether "specified" or not. Upon the assumption that <case> is valid and means what it says, the undertaking given by the Federal
DPP cloaked the opponent with protection against use of any answers he gave in the trial of Mr Yuill in later proceedings - State as well as Federal. Such answers etc could not be used in evidence against him in any future proceedings, including any proceeding brought under the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). To the extent that the earlier decision of this Court decided otherwise, the mistake should be corrected. See Craven, above, 688f, f, 701.
In addition to all this, the Solicitor-General informed the Court, in terms which I would unreservedly accept, that the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales would not use any such evidence in any future proceedings against the opponent for the prosecution of any State offence. Of course, that is an undertaking given now. But the fact that it was not made earlier is irrelevant given the foregoing conclusions.
 
Reopening unperfected orders following acquittals
The mistake being established, and the clear jurisdiction being available to remedy it, the only question which remains on the first point is whether the Court should reverse the acquittals in the circumstances of this case. Are the circumstances, in the relevant sense, "special"? The proceeding is one which is not civil but quasi criminal in character. There is a longstanding principle of our law which protects the finality of acquittals which have been pronounced in open court, such that the accused and the public have heard the accused person acquitted by formal pronouncement. See eg Reg versus Duncan [(1881) 7
QBD 198], 71.
The principle is recognised, as Meagher JA has pointed out, in international human rights law. The International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, Art 14.7 states: "14.7 No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for an offence for which he has already been finally convicted or acquitted in accordance with the law or penal procedure of each country." 
Inherent in the expression of the principle, so stated, is the notion that the acquittal must have been lawfully and validly entered.
If an acquittal were entered as a result of a slip, clerical mistake, mistake of identity or like error, it would not be an "acquittal" of the person as either the law, or international principle, contemplates. Arguably, where what has occurred is a mistake which can be corrected, the acquittal earlier pronounced is not one which involves a "final" acquittal "in accordance with the law and penal procedure" of this country.
The more recent authority of Australian courts addressing the issue of reconsideration of an apparent
Order of acquittal suggests that, as a matter of jurisdiction, relief in the nature of certiorari may be ordered notwithstanding that its effect will be to quash an order of acquittal and restore a conviction. See Davern versus Messell <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 21], 112. The reasoning which appears to have found favour with the High Court, both in Davern and in Benz, is that expressed by Professor
Martin Friedland in his book Double Jeopardy, 1969,
This involves drawing a distinction between an acquittal of an accused person (eg by a jury after a trial) on the merits and an acquittal at one tier of the court structure where what has occurred is "such a mistrial as to render the proceedings a nullity": "Once the case is in the appellate hierarchy there is no logical reason why the matter should not be determined assuming that the point involved is of sufficient importance to warrant the attention of the Court - by the very highest tribunal.
There can be no surprise or unfairness; the accused simply takes the appellate structure as he finds it. If the House of
Lords agrees with the Court of Criminal Appeal then the accused has no complaint; if it disagrees, then the accused is simply back in at least as good a position as he was before invoking the appellate process."
This line of authority was applied by Mahoney JA in New South Wales Meat
Industry Authority versus Randall (1994) 1 NSW Cts Rev
No.8, 84 (CA). At 87, his
Honour said: "... (T)he proceeding was dismissed simply because, in the absence of notice, the
Authority did not appear. This, in my opinion, does not involve an application of the rule. The judge did not consider the application in any way. I appreciate that, on quashing of the order for acquittal, if it be such, the accused will have to attend a further hearing of the proceeding on which, before the magistrate, he was convicted. But by reason of the court's error, the accused could not, in reality, be convicted by the judge. That, I think, is not a 'hearing on the merits' for the purpose of this rule."
That decision was recently confirmed by this Court in a case where a
Judge of the District Court erroneously declined to state a case for the opinion of the Court of Criminal Appeal, although asked in time to do so.
Notwithstanding the fact that the accused's appeal was, by orders made, upheld and the informations formally dismissed (a certificate of acquittal later being issued) this Court held that the orders should be quashed. The defects in procedure had robbed the case of the characteristics of a trial and acquittal on the merits. One Judge (Powell JA) expressly denied that the accused had been acquitted at all. See Director of Public Prosecutions v
Cassell, Court of Appeal , unreported, 16 June 1993.
The claimant in these proceedings contended that there had not been any "hearing on the merits" of the point before this Court which determined the ultimate dismissal of charges , 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9. I agree with Meagher JA that there was such a hearing; simply a mistake in the determination of it.
Therefore, it appears to me that the pronounced acquittal of the opponent was made, following a hearing on the merits. It cannot be corrected to restore an earlier order of conviction wrongly set aside - for there was no earlier conviction. It cannot be corrected as a mere procedural slip. This case is not analogous to those where a jury's verdict is taken but corrected immediately afterwards when it is found that it does not, as pronounced, reflect the true verdict of the jurors. See eg The Queen versus Cefia [(1979) 21 SASR 171 (FC)], 563; M
Friedland, Double Jeopardy, 1969, 61. Here, an order of acquittal was stated in terms at the end of a full hearing by this
Court on the merits.
To reopen the acquittal in this case would be a form of double jeopardy against which the common law, alike with international human rights law, has generally set its face after a trial on the merits. In Green versus United States US (1957) at 187f, Black J explained why the Anglo-American system of jurisprudence has such a "deeply ingrained" resistance to exposing people to forms of double jeopardy. It is because they involve the use of public resources and powers to "make repeated attempts to convict an individual for an alleged offence, thereby subjecting him to embarrassment, expense and orders and compelling him to live in a constant state of anxiety and insecurity".
Of course, the case is not one of double jeopardy strictly so called. But the predilection of our law to relieve a person from a second exposure to conviction after the burden has apparently lifted has been extended to other cases by analogy. See eg R versus Tait and Bartley [(1979) 46 FLR 386 (FFC)], 467;
Davern versus Messel <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 21], 399. In my view this is such an analogous case.
To undo the orders of acquittal pronounced by this Court requires the intervention of the Court by order. To attract that intervention, "special" circumstances are necessary. Yet the "special" features of this case, namely their criminal character, argue against the provision of the relief claimed, not in favour.
Although the claimant has demonstrated a mistake which should be acknowledged by the Court, the pronounced orders of acquittal of the quasi criminal charges brought against the claimant should not be disturbed. They should stand. In due course they should be perfected.
 
The penalty proper to the contempt proved
Both the claimant and the opponent were content to approach the question of the proper penalty to impose by reference to the consideration expressed by this Court in Registar, Court of Appeal versus Gilby, Court of Appeal , unreported, August 1991; (1991) NSWJB 76. The considerations there stated were: 
The seriousness of the contempt proved; 
Whether the contemnor was aware of the consequences of what he did; 
Whether the contempt was committed in the context of a serious crime; 
Whether the contempt was motivated by fear of harm if evidence were given; and 
Whether the contemnor has received any benefit by indicating an intention not to give evidence.
So far as the seriousness of the contempt proved is concerned, there is no doubt that a refusal to give answers when lawfully directed to do so in the course of a criminal trial is a most serious contempt. in Gilby the Court, at , said: "... It may be accepted that, if witnesses will not give evidence, the process of law enforcement will be less effective and more people will suffer accordingly. There is a public interest in ensuring that, in this regard, disobedience of the law will be, and will seen to be, punished." 
In Smith versus The Queen [(1991) 25 NSWLR 1 (CA)] at 10, referring to Gilby, I observed: "To refuse to be sworn (or to affirm) or to give evidence such as occurred here amounts to a serious contempt in the face of the Court. It is serious because courts decide cases on the basis of evidence. If evidence is unjustifiably withheld, the administration of justice is impeded."
For the opponent it was put that the Court must confine its penalty to the three counts upon which he was convicted. I agree. In light of the foregoing rejection of the reopening of the Court's announced orders, it would be quite wrong in principle for the Court to take into account the matters of which the opponent was acquitted. It would offend principle to leave the acquittals stand but to correct the mistake of the Court by imposing a penalty which took into account conduct of which the opponent was acquitted.
In respect of the three matters upon which the opponent stands convicted, it will be remembered that a consideration relevant to that determination was that the opponent had previously, in other proceedings, given evidence on oath and so was not at any further risk of jeopardy in providing the answers to the questions asked. See Craven (above), 699. The opponent argued that this consideration was not drawn to his attention. In the context of the facts of this case, I see no merit in that argument.
It is nevertheless appropriate to consider the opponent's refusal to answer the questions in the context in which it occurred. I described the significance of that refusal in my earlier reasons.
See Craven, above, 671: "Mr Craven was an associate of Mr Yuill who was the managing director of the Spedley Group of companies.
There is absolutely no doubt that Mr Craven's evidence was extremely important to the Crown in its endeavour to establish
Mr Yuill's guilt of certain offences and in explaining the extremely complex movement of funds within the Spedley Group." 
The repeated refusal of Mr Craven to answer the questions giving rise to the charges upon which he has been convicted was, in the context, very serious. I did not take the opponent ultimately to submit otherwise. But the seriousness is tempered by the finding of the Court that the punishment to be imposed must be confined to the three matters only of which the opponent was found guilty.
So far as the contemnor's awareness of the consequences of his action is concerned, it is important to view his conduct in the context of the legal advice which he received. The evidence clearly establishes that the opponent was acting on the advice of
Mr Gruzman QC. He is one of the most senior and experienced barristers in this State. The Almanac shows that after the law officers, he ranks fifth in seniority amongst all counsel. Evidence given to this Court by Mr John Macphillamy, solicitor, which I would accept stated that a letter of 18 October 1993, in evidence, was sent to the Federal DPP along lines dictated by Mr Gruzman in his chambers.
This letter stated: ".. It seems clear, and I have senior counsel's advice to confirm the law, that Mr Craven cannot be compelled to give any evidence in the current proceedings against his will. I wish to make it quite clear that if the terms of the undertaking reached with the ASC are observed and the DPP decides not to proceed further with any prosecutions against
Mr Craven he, in turn, will abide by the undertaking and willingly give evidence in the current proceedings."
It is important to note that this is a contemporaneous letter. It is confirmed by a reputable solicitor. It states the advice which the opponent had received from his counsel. This makes it much easier for me to accept, as
I do, the opponent's evidence to this Court that he was advised by Mr Gruzman that the undertaking proffered to him was "deficient in the manner in which the evidence can be adduced by independent means". According to the opponent, whom I accept on this point, he had numerous conversations with Mr Gruzman during this time. He said: "I recall one such conversation when, in relation to the subpoena itself, Mr Gruzman advised me, with words to the effect: 'You are obliged to attend the trial of Brian Yuill as a witness under the subpoena and you are obliged to be sworn and to give evidence.' 
I also recall at this time and on a number of subsequent occasions,
Mr Gruzman advising me, with words to the effect: "You must consider each question very carefully. You must make up your mind as to whether the question being asked is one which may be a question in a chain, which, although not of itself incriminating, but in the totality it may be, and if this may occur, do not to (sic) answer any such questions." 
Mr Craven also stated, in evidence which I accept, that Mr Gruzman, anticipating that he would seek leave to appear for Mr Craven at the trial, said words to him to this effect: "I am going to try to explain to his Honour the reasons that you should not be compelled under the subpoena to answer incriminating questions, however, should this fail and he orders you to be sworn to give evidence, you will be given a pretty hard time. You will probably be shouted at by various people including the Judge who will in all likelihood get very cross with you. Do not give in. You must remain absolutely resolute and consistent in declining to answer questions which may, in their totality, incriminate you." 
As it has been held, this was erroneous advice. But if the Court of Appeal could make a mistake in respect of the scope of the protection afforded by the relevant legislation, we can scarcely be unduly censorious either to Mr
Gruzman or to the opponent, a layman, who was taking his advice.
The duty of the opponent was to answer the questions as directed by
Shadbolt DCJ. That was true of the three questions now in issue. That is the advice which Mr Gruzman should have given the opponent upon a true understanding of the scope of the protection afforded by the Federal DPP's undertaking. It is correct that that protection received by the undertaking from the DPP was not precisely what the opponent hoped, expected and thought that he deserved. But to none of the questions which he was asked, and directed by Shadbolt DCJ to answer, did the opponent have any lawful risk of self-incrimination. He was obliged in law to answer.
The knowledge and belief of the opponent, in refusing to answer the questions asked, was to a large extent necessarily that which he received on the advice of the lawyers retained to assist him.
Such advice cannot excuse entirely the opponent's personal obligations to the law. Otherwise, it would be a simple thing, in every case, to search counsel's chambers until someone could be found erroneously to plant a seed of doubt in the mind of a witness seeking to escape an obligation to give evidence. That is not the law. But it is the law that the state of mind of the contemnor is relevant to the punishment which a court will impose. In this case, there seems to be no doubt that Mr Gruzman had introduced into, or reinforced in, the opponent's mind a belief that he had a residual right to decline to answer questions. More than this, that he should exercise that right, whatever the judge did and said and even if people became very angry with him (as they did). This Court must take into account the beliefs and understanding of the opponent (however misconceived) in deciding the order of punishment that is appropriate in this case.
As to the context of the contempt, it is accepted for the opponent that his refusal to answer the questions, as found, occurred in the context of a jury trial involving seven counts of an indictment involving very serious charges brought against Mr Yuill. The opponent argued that, in the events which occurred, no injustice was produced by his contempt. This, it was put, was by reason of Mr Yuill's conviction, even in the absence of the opponent's testimony. Further, it was pointed out that a second trial of Mr Yuill is still to occur. I take this submission to indicate that the opponent will have an opportunity, if called at a second trial, to act lawfully and in accordance with the clarification of his legal duty which, if nothing else, these proceedings have produced.
So far as the motivation of the contemnor is concerned, there were, undoubtedly, a number of factors which were affecting his mind. But I would accept the submissions put for him that it would be extraordinary for a lay person not to conform to legal advice, as to his rights, received from experienced and senior counsel retained by a reputable solicitor who affirmed and followed up that advice.
I would accept that those advising the opponent and the opponent himself, were genuinely concerned that answers to the questions by Shadbolt DO would expose the opponent to the risk of possible further incrimination. Given that this Court was also originally of that mistaken view, we can hardly be too critical of Mr Gruzman, Mr Macphillamy or the opponent to the extent that they came to a similar conclusion. Had there been, in truth, a residual risk of self-incrimination, even of a technical kind and with little practical chance of its occurring, the opponent's refusal to answer the questions asked would, arguably, have been lawful.
So far as the fear of harm is concerned, the opponent stated that he did have fear of Mr Yuill, who, he alleged, had caused threats to be made to him.
He also had fear of the prosecuting authorities, believing that he had been "double-crossed" by the Federal DPP. Whilst I am not convinced that this fear was a major consideration in the opponent's conduct I do not doubt that he genuinely believed that he had been of enormous help to the prosecution case against Mr Yuill and deserved, and would receive, a larger protection than ultimately ensued. Having reached that conclusion, he sought to put pressure on the Federal DPP to drop the charges brought against him. Having failed, he became suspicious of the Federal authorities and concerned that they would perfect their double cross by using, indirectly, the material he had supplied against him. There is no doubt in my mind that that was a major motivation of the strategy which the opponent, and his lawyers then devised. They did so in the hope of obtaining a wider protection for the opponent.
However understandable this might have been, and even morally justifiable in the eyes of the opponent, once he was called to give evidence he was bound by his legal duty. He could no longer engage in negotiation and bargaining with the Federal
DPP. It was no longer a question of trading off his evidence against a wider immunity. Save for a real legal risk of incrimination, he was duty-bound to answer, just as Shadbolt DCJ directed him to do. See Craven, above, 686.
It was not suggested that the opponent received any benefit from his conduct at the trial of Mr Yuill. On the contrary, Shadbolt DCJ referred his contempt to this
Court which has now convicted him and must proceed to make the appropriate orders.
 
Matters personal to the contemnor
I have given much thought to the orders which are appropriate in this case. Ordinarily, a refusal of the kind that occurred here would attract a
custodial sentence. However, four considerations, essentially, cause me to hold back.
The first is my belief that the opponent was greatly affected in his conduct by the legal advice which he received. Although that advice was, as has been found, wrong, the error cannot be said to have been evident for a like error originally affected this Court.
Secondly, by chance, Mr Yuill's conviction at his first trial was set aside. The opponent may therefore have an opportunity to expiate his error. I would therefore withhold a custodial sentence but on a clear understanding that this is upon condition that the opponent cooperates fully, in every lawful way required, with the prosecuting authorities and answers, to the full extent of his legal obligation, any questions that may be asked of him in Mr
Yuill's second trial, should he again be called to give evidence at that trial. In approaching the matter in this way, I would not myself conclude that the expression of contrition made by the opponent was purely formal. In his affidavit of 5 December 1994 he said: "I apologise with profound contrition that for failing to answer the questions put to me referred to above in the criminal proceedings in the District Court of New South Wales before his Honour Judge Shadbolt ... and apologise to his Honour for any inconvenience so caused." 
In the same affidavit he said: "I humbly and most sincerely apologise to this honourable
Court and to his Honour Judge Shadbolt for failing to answer the questions referred to ... during the proceedings before the District Court and for these proceedings which have arisen out of my conduct. Had I not feared that I was in serious risk of self-incrimination then I would have, as I have done in numerous proceedings and examinations regarding the Spedley related matters, answered all questions put to me honestly and candidly." 
In a later affidavit of 1 May 1995, sent to the
Court without objection after argument was concluded, the opponent said: "In the event that I am subpoenaed to give evidence in the
Brian Yuill re-trial and that I have or am given again an
Undertaking as I had before, then if the Judge informs me at the time I am sworn, that it protects my answers and/or then directs me to answer the questions, I will answer the questions.
My desire to have the Judge direct me first is to maximise the security I can have and is not intended to reflect upon my feelings towards the Court."
I see no reason not to accept that statement. In the circumstances I see every reason to do so. The Solicitor-General, for the claimant, signified that he did not wish to add to his earlier submissions. He did not protest against the late provision of further evidence.
Thirdly, I also take into account the evidence which showed that the opponent was employed on a part-time basis as a cook at the Paddington Drop in
Centre run by the Uniting Church of Australia for homeless people. This employment was not permanent. But it was a suitable vocation in which the opponent could reflect upon his found errors.
The opponent's evidence stated that he and his wife were expecting a child in July 1995. The opponent's wife is currently the only person within their household who holds a full-time position of employment. The opponent states, and I would accept, that during the period following the birth of the child, his wife will be unemployed for at least six months. The opponent hoped to maintain work looking after homeless people so that he and his wife would not be obliged to survive on social security benefits.
Fourthly,
I remind myself again that the case must be approached as limited to the three charges which have been accepted by the Court and entirely to exclude the charges which, by mistake, resulted in orders of acquittal.
After the proceedings stood for judgment the Court became aware that on June 1995 in the Criminal Division of the Supreme Court Abadee J convicted the opponent of serious criminal charges to which he had pleaded guilty. He sentenced the opponent to 9 months imprisonment with a minimum term of 6 months and 23 days commencing from 7 June 1995 when he went into custody. The opponent is thus in custody at this time. He will most likely be there when the second trial of Mr Yuill is heard, probably in September 1995. As my orders envisage the suspension of the sentence of imprisonment for contempt, no requirement arises for me to hear the opponent further upon the consequence of his present imprisonment for a further custodial sentence.
Orders 
The orders which I favour are: 
Order that the opponent, James Ashley Woodford
Craven be fined the sum of $ 10,000; 
Order that, in addition to the said fine the opponent be sentenced to a term of six months imprisonment commencing on 30 December 1995; 
Order that order 2 be suspended upon the opponent's giving to the Court undertakings that:  (a) he will cooperate with all lawful directions given to him by the Director of Public Prosecutions of the Commonwealth or any prosecutor or officer on behalf of the Director engaged in the prosecution of the second trial of Brian Richard Yuill;  (b) he will answer all questions put to him during such second trial of the said Brian Richard Yuill, as directed by the Judge presiding at such trial, in the event that he is called to give evidence as a witness at such trial; and  (c) in the event of any breach of the foregoing undertakings that he will appear before this Court as required by the Court for orders for the carrying into effect of order 2; 
Order that the opponent pay the costs of all proceedings in the Court, except for the proceedings on 27 April 1995;
Order that the claimant's motion be dismissed; and 
No order for costs in respect of the motion.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA In this matter, the Court gave judgment on 11 November 1994 in a summons brought by the claimant charging the opponent Craven with 9 counts of contempt of Court. The charges all arose out of Craven's refusal to answer questions when giving evidence in the trial on one Yuill, despite Shadbolt
DCJ's orders that he do so. After considering all the matters which arose in a somewhat complex case, the Court came to the conclusion that Craven was guilty of charge 1, 2 and 3 but not of charges 4,5,6,7,8, and 9. The reason why the
Court acquitted Craven of the latter six charges was because it was of the view that an undertaking wider [s.9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) of the [Director of Public Prosecutions
Act, 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/) (Commonwealth) would not have protected Craven from use of his evidence in the Yuill case in a subsequent prosecution by the State of New
South Wales for an offence against the [Crimes Act, 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) (New South Wales). It was conceded that Craven might have been liable to such a prosecution.
The claimant has now brought a
Notice of Motion seeking the vacation of any orders or declarations made by us in respect of charges 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and
These orders and declarations have not been taken out. The claimant's case requires us to consider three matters: whether any mistake has been made, whether there is any jurisdiction to correct a mistake if it has been made, and whether we should exercise such a discretion if the jurisdiction exists.
On reflection I am inclined to think (subject to one consideration, which
I shall mention) that we were mistaken. We confused the actual proceedings against Yuill with potential proceedings against Craven. Section 9(6) of the
Commonwealth Act reads as follows: "(6) The Director may, if he considers it appropriate to do so, give to a person an undertaking that: an answer that is given, or a statement or disclosure that is made, by the person in the course of giving evidence in specified proceedings; the fact that the person disclosed or produces a document or otherthing in specified proceedings; or any information, document or other thinking that is obtained as a direct or indirect consequence of an answer that is given, a statement or disclosure that is made, or a document or other thing that is disclosed or produced, in specified proceedings; will not be used in evidence against the person, and where the Director gives such an undertaking: an answer that is given, or a statement or disclosure that is made, by the person in the course of giving evidence in the specified proceedings; the fact that the person disclosed or produces a document or other thing in the specified proceedings; or any information, document or other thing that is obtained as mentioned in paragraph (ba); as the case may be, is not admissible in evidence against the person in any civil or criminal proceedings in a Federal Court or in a court of a
State or Territory, other than proceedings in respect of the falsity of evidence givenby the person."
The actual proceedings against Yuill were clearly "specified proceedings" within the meaning of the Federal Act. The potential proceedings under the
State [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) against Craven would not have been "specified proceedings" within the meaning of the Federal Act; but that circumstance is, if one thinks about it - although it did not appear to us at the time - wholly irrelevant.
The words of s.9(6) state that an undertaking given in "specified proceedings" grants an immunity in all proceedings, State or Federal, "specified" or "not specified".
The first issue, then, should be decided in favour of the claimant. The only possible qualification is one which was not argued, namely whether the
Commonwealth has power to grant an immunity in respect of State proceedings.
Since it was not argued, it need not be discussed.
The second issue is whether the Court has jurisdiction to correct such a mistake. It obviously has. The contrary was not suggested.
The third issue is whether such jurisdiction should be exercised.
The learned Solicitor-General argued persuasively that we should exercise such a jurisdiction because the making of the mistake which I have endeavoured to outline involved a denial of natural justice, inasmuch as the court decided an issue on which it had heard no argument. At this point I am unable to accept the learned Solicitor- General's argument. The relevant issue before the court was whether the undertaking under s.9(6) adequately protected
Craven. We decided it did not. In coming to that conclusion we made a mistake.
Nonetheless, we heard both sides on that issue, and we decided that issue. In these circumstances I do not see how we can be said to have decided an issue without hearing the parties on it. But even if there was no denial of natural justice there still would be jurisdiction to recall the order and correct the mistake.
I do not think we should. A charge of contempt is a quasi-criminal charge.
Amongst other things that means that considerations of "double jeopardy" arise, a notion common to many systems of law, and one which has even percolated into the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 14.7). One ramification of that notion is to hedge an acquittal with a certain sanctity, so that an acquittal arrived at by mistake is beyond recall. In my view, therefore, the Court should, whilst acknowledging its mistake, refuse to vacate the orders it made on 11 November 1994 and proceed to adjudicate the balance of the outstanding questions as if the original judgment were correct.
The outstanding questions principally concern penalty. The facts could not be simpler, On three occasions Craven refused to answer questions put to him when he was giving evidence when the questions were rightly put required an answer, and were the subject of a direction by the trial judge to answer them. That this involved a gross contempt can hardly be gainsaid. One hardly needs authority so to conclude. However, authority exists if needed: see
Registrar of
Court of Appeal versus Gilby (unreported, NSW Court of Appeal, 20
August 1991) and Registrar of Court of Appeal versus Raad (unreported, NSW
Court of
Appeal, 9 June 1992). In this courts' judgment of 11 November 1994 we pointed out that the motivation of this contempt was either to try to force the
Commonwealth authorities to grant a larger indemnity than they were prepared to do, or to take revenge on them for failing to do so. It has now been suggested by Craven that Mr Gruzman QC, who formerly appeared for him, advised him to perform these antics. To my mind that does not excuse him. What is worse, although a formal expression of contrition was made, when the matter was specifically brought to the attention of Mr Craven's present legal representatives, the Court was not given an assurance that there would be no repetition of this conduct, a matter of some little importance in light of the possible imminence of further proceedings.
In all the circumstances I am of the view that the following orders should be made: 
Order that the opponent Craven be fined the sum of $50,000. 
Order that, in addition to the said fine, the opponent Craven be sentenced to a term of 6 months' imprisonment commencing 30 December 1995. 
Order the opponent Craven to pay the costs of all proceedings in the
Court of Appeal except for the proceedings on 27 April 1995. 
Order that the claimant's notice of motion be dismissed.
No order for costs in respect of the notice of motion.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA Three questions have now arisen for determination in these proceedings, they being: - whether, in proceeding, as I did, upon the basis that, in the light of the "concession" made by the Solicitor-General, which concession is set out in the Judgment delivered by me on 11th November 1994, it was not open to the
Court to find Mr. Craven guilty of contempt in respect of charges 4 to 9 inclusive, I fell into error? if so, whether, in the light of the fact that the Declarations and Orders made by the Court on 11th November 1994 have not been entered, the Court ought, to the extent necessary, to withdraw those Declarations and Orders, and substitute Declarations that Mr. Craven was guilty of contempt in respect of all 9 charges? whether or not that course be adopted, what, if any, is the penalty appropriate to be imposed upon Mr. Craven in respect of the charges finally held to have been established?
Each of these questions needs to be dealt with separately.
Was there an error?
It is to be recalled that [s.9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) of the [Director of Public Prosecutions
Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/) (Cth) ("the [DPP Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/)"), pursuant to which the indemnity was given to
Mr. Craven, is in the following terms: - "(6) The Director may, if he considers it appropriate to do so, give to a person an undertaking that: an answer that is given, or a statement or disclosure that is made, by the person in the course of giving evidence in specified proceedings; the fact that the person discloses or produces a document or other thing in specified proceedings; or any information, document or other thing that is obtained as a direct or indirect consequence of an answer that is given, a statement or disclosure that is made, or a document or other thing that is disclosed or produced, in specified proceedings.
 will not be used in evidence against the person, where the
Director give such an undertaking; an answer that is given, or a statement or disclosure that is made, by the person in the course of giving evidence in the specified proceedings; the fact that the person discloses or produces a document or other thing in the specified proceedings; or any information, document or other thing that is obtained as mentioned in paragraph (ba); as the case may be, is not admissible in evidence against the person in any civil or criminal proceedings in a federal court or in a court of a State or Territory, other than in proceedings in respect of the falsity of evidence given by the person."
It is further to be recalled that the undertaking which was given to Mr.
Craven, omitting formal parts, was in the following terms: - "I, EDWIN JAMES LORKIN, Associate Director of Public
Prosecutions HEREBY
UNDERTAKE pursuant to the provisions of section 91(1) of the Corporations Act 1990 and the powers in [section 9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) of the [Director of Public Prosecutions
Act, 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/) that: any answer you give, or any statement or disclosure you make, in the course of giving evidence in the proceedings specified in the Schedule hereto; the fact that you disclose or produce a document or other thing in the said proceedings; or any information, document or other thing that is obtained as a direct or indirect consequence of an answer you give, a
statement or disclosure you make, or a document or other thing you disclose or produce in the said proceedings; will not be used in evidence against you other than in proceedings in respect of the falsity of any evidence you may give.
 
SCHEDULE 
Proceedings against BRIAN RICHARD YUILL for offences against sections 229(1), and 229(4) of the Companies (New
South Wales)
Code."
Finally, it is to be recalled that the "concession" which was made, in his
Written Submissions, by the Solicitor-General, so far as is relevant, was in the following terms: - "PRIVILEGE AGAINST SELF-INCRIMINATION
The
Opponent's refusal to answer questions would not constitute contempt if it was justified by a privilege to decline to answer on the ground of selfincrimination.
The privilege was not available in the present case because:- as to all questions put to the Opponent the existence of a use - derivative use indemnity from the Associate Director of the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (C'th) in respect of the Opponent's evidence resulted in there being no real and appreciable risk of conviction arising from answers to those questions.
 ...
With the exception of certain questions as to which self-incrimination privilege never arose or was waived (see below), it may be conceded that many of the questions the refusal to answer which are the subject of these charges may, if answered, have had a tendency to incriminate the Opponent in relation to offences under the Companies Code and purely State offences under the [Crimes Act, 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) .
Nevertheless, it is submitted that the undertaking provided by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions removed the peril of self-incrimination and thereby abrogated the privilege. it will also be submitted (see below paras. 19-26 and 39-48) that the privilege was not available to the Opponent because he invoked it, not because of a genuine fear of self-incrimination but for the collateral purpose of obtaining discontinuation of criminal proceedings pending against him."
In the course of his Written Submissions - upon which he did not elaborate in his oral submissions - the Solicitor-General drew attention to, and sought to rely upon, the provisions of [s.91](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/s91.html) of the [Corporations (New South Wales) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/) ("the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/)"), which provisions include the following: - "91. (1) The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions: has the same enforcement powers in relation to the co-operative scheme laws as has the Director of Public
Prosecutions of New South Wales; and may, in relation to an offence against a cooperative scheme law, perform the functions and exercise the powers conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by the [Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/) of the Commonwealth as if the offence were an offence against a national scheme law of this jurisdiction.
 ...
 
For the purposes of the exercise of enforcement powers, and other functions and powers conferred by this section, including the obtaining of warrants to arrest, an offence against a co-operative scheme law is taken to be an offence against a national scheme law of this jurisdiction.

In this section "enforcement power" means a function or power relating to: the investigation of an offence; or the arrest and custody of persons charged with an offence; or the institution and carrying on of a prosecution of an offence; or matters relating to such an investigation, arrest, custody or prosecution."
As is apparent from the Judgment which I delivered on 11th November 1994, while I was prepared to accept that, as a result of the interaction of [s.91(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/s91.html), (4), (5) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/), of [s.9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) of the [DPP Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/) and of the other provisions of the various Commonwealth and State Acts to which the
Solicitor-General, in his Written Submissions, had referred, it was open to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions to prosecute for offences under (inter alia) the Companies (New South Wales) Code, and, in relation to any such prosecution, to give Mr. Craven an indemnity which would, to some extent, protect
Mr. Craven in respect of some offences against State laws in respect of which he might otherwise have been liable to prosecution,
I was unable to accept that those provisions enabled the Commonwealth Director of
Prosecutions to give Mr. Craven an indemnity which would, to the same extent, protect Mr. Craven in respect of any offences against State laws in respect of which he might otherwise have been liable to prosecution. Whatever may have been the reasons which led Kirby P and Meagher JA to a similar view, the reason for my taking that view which reason I do not appear to have spelt out clearly in my earlier Judgment - was that I doubted that it was open to the
Commonwealth to legislate so as to enable the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions to give undertakings the effect of which would be to render statements made or information disclosed, unable to be used, and inadmissible in evidence, not merely in proceedings for an offence against the laws of the
Commonwealth but "in any civil or criminal proceedings in a federal court or in a court of a State or Territory".
In the course of his submissions on this occasion (see for example,
Transcript pp. 6,7-8), the Solicitor-General has indicated that his earlier "concession" was only that, "absent the indemnity", Mr. Craven would have, or might have, been at risk, and has submitted, both, that the Commonwealth has power to legislate in the terms contained in s.9(6) ought to be given their ordinary and natural meaning. Despite the fact that, as I recorded in my earlier Judgment, in the course of his submissions, on behalf of Mr. Craven, to Shadbolt DCJ on 1st November 1993, Mr. L.C. Gruzman Q.C. had said "there is no indemnity whatsoever against prosecution by State Attorneys Generals (sic) and there are potential offences here throughout the
Commonwealth", and despite the fact that, in the course of his submissions (see Transcript pp.
-30), Mr. C.J. Stevens Q.C., who appeared, on this occasion, for Mr. Craven, came perilously close to submitting that it was not open to the Commonwealth so to legislate as to produce the result that, if the Director of Public
Prosecutions were to give an undertaking pursuant to [s.9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) of the [DPP Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/), the rights of State Authorities to prosecute for, and to tender evidence in support of, offences under purely Sate laws might be impaired, in the event, no such submission was advanced.
In the circumstances, I am prepared to proceed upon the bases, first, that
I misapprehended the submissions advanced by the Solicitor-General on an earlier occasion; and, second, that, as no question as to the Commonwealth's power to legislate is now raised, the language of [s.9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) of the [DPP Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/) should be given its natural and ordinary meaning, and should not be read down - I would, however, wish to refrain from expressing a concluded view on the question of the Commonwealth's power until I have heard full argument on that question.
Should the earlier
Declarations and Orders be set aside?
While I would not wish to cast any doubt upon the general principle that it is open to the Court, in an appropriate case, to recall an unperfected
Order and to replace it with another, I would deny that such a power is available in a case such as this, as also would I deny that - assuming that, at least in theory, the power extends to a case such as this - it would be appropriate for the power ever to be exercised.
The reasons for my expressing that view are simple, they being: -  . with respect to those who take a lesser view, it is my view that these proceedings were not quasi-criminal, but truly criminal, in nature - the conduct with which Mr. Craven was charged, being conduct impeding, or interfering with, the administration of justice amounting to a misdemeanour at common law, and, thus constituted criminal, as opposed to civil, contempt, albeit that such contempts might be dealt with summarily by the superior courts of record such as this Court (see, for example R. v. Castro:
Skipworth's and the Defendant's Case ((1) [(1873) LR 9 QB 219]; The
Director of Public Prosecutions v. Chidiac ((3) [(1991) 25 NSWLR 372)]; as I understand it, it is a fundamental rule of the common law which finds its clearest expression in the "double jeopardy" rule, and is the foundation of the pleas of autrefois acquit and autrefois convict - that, in the absence of a clear right of appeal, where a criminal charge has been adjudicated upon - even if erroneously - by a court having jurisdiction to determine it, the adjudication, whether it takes the form of an acquittal or a conviction, is final as to the matter adjudicated upon (see, for example,
Davern v.
Messel ((5) <case>; [(1983-1984) 155 CLR 21).] in these circumstances, as it seems to me, even if - as I am prepared to assume was the case - I was in error in my earlier
Judgment, it would be wrong to attempt to recall the Declarations and Orders then made.
What is the appropriate penalty? .
I therefore proceed upon the basis that Mr. Craven stands convicted for but three of the contempts with which he was charged. But even if one proceeds upon this basis, the facts remain that, as both Kirby P and Meagher JA have pointed out in their separate Judgments, the contempts of which Mr. Craven stands convicted were very serious in nature and totally lacking in any kind of justification - in this regard it is sufficient to note that, even if he had not earlier waived any privilege, and even if the undertaking did not have the effect, in law, for which the Solicitor-General has contended, Mr. Craven would have been protected if, having claimed privilege, he, under protest, had complied with Shadbolt DCJ's direction to answer the questions (see, for example, R. v. Maywhort ((6) [(1955) 1 WLR 848)]; C. v. National Crime
Authority ((9) [(1987) 78 ALR 338)).]
I am, however, unable to accept the view, apparently held by Kirby P, that the seriousness of contempts of which Mr. Craven stands convicted is, in some way, diminished by the advice said to have been given by Mr. Gruzman. On the contrary, I remain of the view, which I expressed in my earlier Judgment, that Mr. Craven's refusal to answer was not dictated by any real apprehension that he might be at risk if he were to answer, but was part of an attempt on his part to obtain a full transaction indemnity to which he - and his advisers - knew he was not entitled. Far from being persuaded to the contrary view by the letter of 18th October 1993 which Kirby P has set out on pp. 10-11 of his
Judgment, I would point out, first, that, the two paragraphs in that letter immediately preceding those set out by Kirby P. are in the following terms: - "Mr. Craven has been subpoenaed to give evidence against Mr.
Yuill and there has been tendered to him an undertaking pursuant to [S91(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/s91.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/) and [S9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) of the [DPP Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/).
This undertaking is quite inadequate to protect him from further prosecution arising from matters revealed in the course of his evidence or lines of enquiry pursued as a result of matters referred to in his evidence.

In a matter of this complication it is quite clear that as the investigation proceeds in Court other offences such as breaches of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) might be revealed on Mr. Craven's evidence and although his evidence could not be directly used against him them would be nothing to prevent the DPP charging him with crimes where perhaps he was an innocent participant. In such circumstances, if a conspiracy charge was brought, and one of the other alleged conspirators gave evidence for the DPP, Mr.
Craven could find himself in a difficult position." second, that it is clear - as Mr. Craven and his advisers then well knew, and the Court has so held - that no such "undertaking" as is referred to in the paragraphs which have been set out by Kirby P was ever "reached with the ASC"; and, third, that immediately following the paragraphs set out by Kirby P, the letter proceeded: "I believe that it is essential that this matter be resolved immediately so that both the prosecution and the defence in current proceedings against Mr. Yuill are not misled as to the availability of Mr. Craven to give evidence."
As if this were not enough, it is to be recorded that, in a further letter written by Mr. Macphillamy on behalf of Mr. Craven on 26th October , the following (inter alia) appears: - "Our client will not give evidence in the current proceedings.
At the time that he gave his acknowledged induced statement, he did so in the context that the Investigating Authorities had very little knowledge or understanding of this extremely complicated matter. It was for this reason, our client was told, that until he had demonstrated his ability to elucidate what had occurred, to lead the investigating officers to the relevant documents and to state specifically what evidence he could supply, the Commission was unable as a matter of public interest to grant or recommend the granting of an indemnity to our client.

Our client had necessarily to trust the Commission and Its officers, and to act honestly and openly in unreservedly supplying them with the information which they required.

Obviously this was done in secrecy and was never intended to be made available to Mr. Yuill.

Events have proved that Mr. Craven's information and assistance as well as his evidence are invaluable to the preparation and conduct of the prosecution of Mr. Yuill. Nonetheless the 
Commonwealth DPP has acted in gross breach of faith in supplying a copy of our client's secret statement to Mr. Yuill and is seeking to force him to give evidence against Mr. Yuill without giving him the benefit of the indemnity which he was entitled to expect.

On those facts nobody, including our client, would trust the
Commonwealth DPP.

The undertaking proffered refers to further information obtained as a result of our client's evidence or documents which he may produce. Once the Commonwealth
DPP has the information, it can ascribe the source to persons or documents other than Mr.
Craven.

Mr. Craven could never prove that he was charged in breach of the undertaking and accordingly he would have to rely on the honour of your Department.

On past experience, he is not prepared to do this and he will therefore not give evidence on the grounds that any such evidence might tend to incriminate him."
Nor, I regret to say, am I able to accept, as genuine, the "apology" proffered, and the expressions of contrition contained, in the Affidavit sworn by Mr. Craven after the delivery of the Court's earlier Judgments, for, as I recorded in my earlier Judgment, I regard Mr. Craven as a most unsatisfactory witness. As will shortly appear, my view, in this respect, bears on the question of what is the penalty appropriate to be imposed on Mr. Craven.
Although they do not agree as to the appropriate amount of any fine to be imposed, each of Kirby P and Meagher JA is of the view that a fine is an appropriate penalty to be imposed. Having regard to the fact that Mr. Craven is - and, seemingly, has for some time been - unemployed, and, as it would appear, without funds of his own, I question whether, if the decision were mine alone, I would impose a fine (as to the potential relevance of the means of a contemnor see Smith v. The Queen ((10) (supra) at 12 and cases there cited)). However, in an endeavour to produce some consensus within the Court on this issue, I would join with Kirby P to impose a fine of $10,000.00.
 .
Although Kirby P would suspend the execution of the sentence, upon Mr.
Craven giving to the Court the undertakings set out in his
Judgment, both he and Meagher JA are of the view that it is appropriate that a sense of six months imprisonment be imposed on Mr.
Craven a view with which I agree.
However, in the light of the history of what has already occurred, and of my assessment of Mr.
Craven, I would regard any undertaking given by him as being worthless, and, that being so, I would not join with Kirby P in suspending the execution of the sentence. Rather, I would leave it to Mr. Craven, in the event of his later fulfilling his duty to give evidence, to move for his discharge (see, for example, Young v. Registrar of Court of Appeal (No. 3) ((11) (supra)).
Post Script 
Since the above was written, Kirby P has revised the draft of his
Judgment which I had earlier read. In the course of his doing so, his Honour has referred to (inter alia) two matters, they being:  . the unsolicited Affidavit sworn by Mr. Craven delivered to the Court after the conclusion of the hearing; and the fact that Mr. Craven has recently pleaded guilty to one or more charges preferred against him in respect of what, during the course of the earlier hearing in the Court, came to be known as "the Bisby rights matter", in consequence of which plea Abadee J sentenced Mr. Craven to a term of imprisonment.
For the reasons which I now set out, neither of those matters has caused me to change the views, which I have earlier set out, as to the penalty appropriate to be imposed on Mr. Craven.
So far as the first of those matters is concerned, I was not, at first, disposed to read material which had not been tendered at the hearing. However, as it has become apparent that Kirby P has read the Affidavit, and gives some credence to it, I have now done so. I am, however, in contrast to Kirby P, not prepared to give the slightest credence to what Mr.
Craven, so belatedly, now says that he will do. It would be enough to say, once more, that I regard Mr.
Craven as an unsatisfactory witness, and that I would regard any undertaking given by him as worthless. It is as well, however, to add that, although, as
Meagher
JA has pointed out in his Judgment, the matter was expressly raised with Mr. Craven's then counsel at the time of the hearing, the
Court was not then given any assurance that there would be no future repetition of the conduct which led to his appearance in this
Court. In these circumstances it is hard to avoid the conclusion that Mr. Craven's Affidavit was no more than the last frantic effort of a truly desperate man to avoid his well merited punishment.
So far as the second of those matters is concerned, I must say that, except insofar as it bears upon the date for the commencement of the sentence to be imposed by this Court upon Mr. Craven,
I regard the sentence recently imposed by Abadee J as irrelevant to my considerations. The reasons for this view are simple: .
the various offences of which Mr. Craven has now been convicted are different in nature, and were committed at different times, and in different circumstances; just as I regard the penalty appropriate to be imposed by this Court on
Mr. Craven as one to be determined by the factors to which I have earlier referred, so also would I assume that the sentence imposed by Abadee J was one which his Honour considered appropriate in the circumstances with which he was concerned to deal. as the offences were different in nature, and were committed at different times and in different circumstances, it would not be appropriate for there now to be made any order the effect of which was that the sentences imposed by
Abadee J and by this Court be served concurrently.
Save only that I would now propose that the sentence to be imposed on Mr.
Craven commence on 30th December 1995, I confirm what I have earlier written.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/178.html  
