

Finemores versus Workcover Authority of New South Wales Matter No 30075/98 [1998] NSWSC 669 (14 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
FINEMORES versus WORKCOVER AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES /98 December 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT: 
HIS HONOUR: By summons filed 23 July last the plaintiff seeks a declaration that a guideline issued by the defendant (the Authority) to the plaintiff dated 9 April 1998 described as "Self-Insurer Guideline Number 98/04" was inconsistent with the [Workers Compensation Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) or the regulations made thereunder, and consequential relief. 
The guideline in question, issued as a condition of the plaintiff's licence as a self-insurer under the [Workers Compensation Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (WC
Act), and accepted by the plaintiff as such, described its purpose as being: "To make clear Workcover's expectations that workers' legal costs incurred during conciliation will be paid regardless of whether litigation is subsequently commenced or not" and went on to point out that after 1 March 1998 where there was a dispute in relation to a claim the worker must refer the dispute for conciliation by the
Workers Compensation Resolution Service before litigation could be commenced.

The substantive part of the guideline relevant for these proceedings provided: "Insurers and self-insurers are to pay one representative of the worker up to the prescribed maximum costs. The payment is to be made at the conclusion of the conciliation process on receipt of a bill of costs and disbursements regardless of the outcome." 
The plaintiff's contentions in substance are that the guideline requires the payment of the worker's costs of conciliation irrespective of the outcome of the conciliation or any subsequent litigation proceedings, and that such costs are required to be paid at the conclusion of the conciliation process and hence before any litigation in relation to the claim.

Division 5 of Part 7 WC Act provided for self-insurers and in particular <case> provided for certain conditions relating to insurers to apply, including <case> and <case>. Section 181 provided for the licence issued to be subject to such conditions as are prescribed by the Act or the regulations and such further conditions (not inconsistent with the Act or the regulations) as may be imposed by the Authority on the granting of the licence or at any time during the currency of the licence, whilst <case> gave power to the Authority to cancel or suspend a licence for inter alia breach of any conditions of the licence.

The licence issued by the Authority to the plaintiff made it a condition of the licence that it act in accordance with: "All directions, guidelines and additional conditions of licence" issued by the Authority.

Under the WC Act as it stood prior to 1 August 1998, <case> provided for the costs in relation to any proceedings to be in the discretion of the
Compensation Court and subs (3) expressly provided that the Court could not order the payment of costs by a person claiming compensation unless the Court was satisfied that the application for compensation was frivolous or vexatious or fraudulent or made without proper justification, but that if it was, subs gave the Court power to order a claimant to pay the costs of any part of an application that was frivolous or vexatious et cetera. Subs 7(c) provided for the costs in the discretion of the Court to include the reasonable expenses incurred in relation to conciliation proceedings, and <case> provided limitations on the recovery of costs unreasonably incurred, including in subs costs incurred after a reasonable offer of settlement in the proceedings was made and costs after unreasonably failing to participate in conciliation of the dispute.

These provisions have, since the amendments effected by the [Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wimawca1998540/) (WIM
Act), which commenced on 1 August this year, been recast, and are now to be found substantially in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wimawca1998540/s112.html) and <case> of the WIM Act.

It follows that whereas prior to 1 August 1998 the WC Act, although generally providing for the payment of costs to an applicant, did contain exceptions, and the authority to determine whether or not costs were payable to an applicant or even by an applicant was vested in the Court, on the other hand, the guideline provided not only that the applicant's costs of the conciliation proceedings were to be paid by the insurer in every case, but also that such costs were to be paid at the conclusion of the conciliation proceedings, that is prior to the claim, if not resolved, being litigated and the Court exercising its jurisdiction in respect of costs.

Three situations which spring to mind where the costs of the conciliation proceedings may not have been ordered to be paid by the insurer to the applicant when the matter was determined by the Court, namely: if the claim was fraudulent or vexatious; if the applicant made no reasonable effort to participate fruitfully in the conciliation process; and if either during the conciliation process, or more so before the conciliation process, the insurer made a reasonable offer of settlement which was rejected out of hand, and where the applicant subsequently recovered less than the amount of the offer.

In each of those cases it may well have been open to the Court to either make no order for the costs of the conciliation, or in an extreme case to order the applicant to pay the insurers costs of the conciliation. Yet notwithstanding these possibilities the guideline provided that the costs of the conciliation process were to be paid by the insurer in every case and at the conclusion of the conciliation process, that is before the matter went to court.

In this way I am satisfied that the guideline which was made a condition of the licence imposed conditions which were inconsistent with the Act and therefore contrary to <case>(b) and accordingly that the guideline was invalid.

Miss Guilfoyle on behalf of the defendant, has however submitted, whilst not conceding that this was the case, that this is not an appropriate case to make a declaration or give any other relief to the plaintiff, and indeed she submits that the plaintiff has no standing to bring the claim because as she points out, there is no evidence of any proceedings being taken by the
Authority to suspend or cancel the plaintiff's licence on account of a breach of the guideline.

There is evidence on the other hand of two cases where the plaintiff has not complied with the guidelines. In my opinion the possession of a self-insurer's licence under the Act is a significant right, and a self-insurer, or any other kind of insurer for that matter, ought not to be required to breach the guidelines and wait to see if any proceedings are taken to suspend or cancel the licence and then if so, make an application to the Court such as the present.

The plaintiff has in my view sufficient interest in having the matter resolved so that it could either have the guideline set aside or, if unsuccessful, be in a position to know exactly where it stands in relation to compliance with the guideline.

The position changed somewhat on 1 August 1998 when the WIM Act came into force. By that Act the conciliation provisions were taken out of the WC Act and placed in the WIM Act ss 76 and following, and the provision relating to the licensing of self insurers became Pt 6 of the WIM Act (ss 190 and following). These provisions are however in similar terms to the earlier provisions in the WC Act.

However, at the same time Pt 13 r 51D of the Workers Compensation Regulations came into force relating to the payment of the costs of conciliation. It is not necessary to set them out in detail at this point but in anticipation of that, a letter was sent to all licensed insurers by the Authority dated 30
July 1998 referring to the amendment and containing the following passage: "Payment Of Conciliation Costs: 
Guideline 98/07 has been superseded by the new legislation but insurers should continue to pay workers costs for conciliation as set out in that guideline." 
I have considerable difficulty in giving any meaning to that passage. It seems to suggest that the guideline has been superseded by the new legislation (so therefore it no longer applies) but goes on to say that insurers should continue to pay workers' conciliation costs as set out in the guideline (as though it still does apply).

This matter was apparently raised in correspondence from the plaintiff's solicitors to the defendant dated 18 November 1998 (exhibit A), but no response was received to that letter and the position was not clarified, in particular the guideline was not withdrawn.

I have now been informed by Miss Guilfoyle, she having received appropriate instructions, that what was meant by the passage referred to in the communication of 30 July 1998 was that the guideline no longer applied to matters referred to conciliation after 1 August, but that it should continue to be adhered to in respect of any outstanding matters where the reference to conciliation had been made prior to 1 August.

For reasons already given I am satisfied that it was invalid and has no application to conciliations referred prior to 1 August; and it has been agreed that it is appropriate to make a declaration by consent that it does not apply to conciliations referred after 1 August.

I therefore make a declaration that the guideline issued from the defendant to the plaintiff dated 9 April 1998 and described as "Self Insurer Guideline
Number 98/04" was inconsistent with the [Workers Compensation Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) and the regulations made thereunder.

By consent, I make a further declaration that the guideline issued by the defendant to the plaintiff dated 9 April 1998 and described as "Self Insurer
Guideline Number 98/04" does not apply to any applications referred for conciliation after 1 August 1998.

I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
