

Regina versus Towney Matter No 71702/98 [1998] NSWSC 763 (22 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
REGINA versus JASON TOWNEY /98 April 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: In the matter of Jason Towney, that matter has proceeded to some considerable degree before me today. 
Part way through that application I was provided with a reference dated 20
April from the Sydney City Mission plainly prepared for a different purpose. I heard quite a degree of evidence all of which disposed me to give consideration to providing bail to Mr. Towney on the basis that he underwent some such detoxification or rehabilitation programme as would enable him to avoid further offences whilst on bail and to assure a bail court that he would attend at the legal proceedings which are currently listed before the
Blacktown Court on 3 June 1998 for sentence.

However, it was not until very late in the proceedings that it became clear that the desired place for Mr. Towney during the remand period was Benelong
Haven at Kempsey and it has not been possible to obtain any clear indication from that institution that he would be acceptable to that institution.

It is not at all desirable that proceedings of this kind should be interrupted in this way particularly because it is not possible, bearing in mind the state of the lists to adjourn the matter to a date next week and I am unwilling to remain part heard in a bail application which does not at the moment show any clear signs of any definite date.

In those circumstances I have published these remarks for the assistance of whatever justice might subsequently be hearing the matter and I direct that a copy of these remarks be taken out and placed with the papers.

In accordance with the wishes of the applicant and without opposition from Ms.
Adofaci appearing for the Director, who has been good enough to afford me in this matter great co-operation and skill, the matter is marked withdrawn and dismissed without prejudice to any future application in the light of the special circumstances arising by dint of the inability to obtain information from Benelong Haven.
 * * * 
