

Regina versus Nhan Thanh Nguyen [1996] NSWSC 395 (2 September 1996) 
REGINA versus NHAN THANH NGUYEN /95 
MONDAY 2 SEPTEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
McINERNEY J, SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY J: Mr Justice Sully will deliver the first judgment.

SULLY J: Mr Nhan Thanh Nguyen applies for leave to appeal against a sentence of imprisonment imposed upon him by his Honour Judge Nield in the Liverpool District Court on 20 October 1995.

At the time the applicant was just a little older than eighteen years. He pleaded guilty to an offence of supplying heroin. The details of the supply follow the conventional pattern in such matters and are sufficiently canvassed in the remarks on sentence. I need not repeat their detail now.

At the time of the commission of the offence the applicant was at liberty on a bond which had been given to him in January 1995. He had then been placed upon a recognizance pursuant to <case> of the Crimes Act to be of good behaviour for two years. That recognizance had been made available to him in respect of an offence of possess prohibited drug.

The offence with which this Court is concerned took place on 28 February 1995, which is to say fairly early in the piece during the course of the recognizance of which I have spoken. The applicant committed a further heroin- related offence on 18 October 1994 and, at the time of the committing of the present offence in February 1995, he was on bail in relation to that October matter.

So that the offence which brings him in particular before this Court, and which brought him in particular before Judge Nield, was an offence not only serious in its own terms, but all the more serious by reason of its having been committed in the circumstances to which I have just referred.

I have read with some care the remarks on sentence of his Honour Judge Nield.
It seems to me that they canvass fairly and comprehensively all of those matters, objective and subjective, which one might have thought it proper and necessary to bring into balance for the purpose of quantifying a just sentence according to law.

The thrust of the challenge now made to that sentence is, as I have followed the submissions put with helpful clarity and succinctly by Mr Haesler for the applicant, not so much that there is patent error demonstrable on the face of what his Honour said, but that there is latent error in the sense that a reasonable mind might think a starting point of four years to have been simply too much for a young offender in the position of the present applicant.

I do not agree with that submission. I accept, as of course, that it is a tragedy for the whole community when somebody as young as eighteen years of age comes before any Court charged with a serious drug-related offence, never mind a series of serious drug-related offences.

I agree that there ought always to be some room for manoeuvre in every sentencing exercise where the person being dealt with is so young. But it seems to me that this is another one of those occasions upon which the Court has to make it as clear as words can do that there are categories of crime, of which drug-related crime is certainly one category, where youth of itself cannot be allowed, and will not be allowed, to become a shield of convenience behind which people may shelter, from what the Courts have told them, and what
Parliament has told them, in unmistakably plain language and for years, what they may not do, and that is traffic in drugs.

In all the circumstances of this case I do not think that the circumstance upon which the learned primary Judge settled is demonstrably outside the range of a sound sentencing discretion. It does not seem to me to be to the point to argue whether it might be high on the relevant scale of things, or whether it might be down the relevant scale, or within an intermediate range.

It seems to me that the only question to be determined here is one of discretion. Given the objective gravity of the matter, given the record of the applicant, given the imperative need for the Courts to show unswerving resolution in their determination to play their part in stamping out drug trafficking, I myself do not think that a sentence of penal servitude of four years, in the context of a statutory maximum of fifteen years, falls outside the range of an acceptable exercise of the sentencing discretion.

I do not think that the apportionment of the sentence between minimum term and additional term was itself erroneous in principle.

All of those things having been said, it seems to me that the applicant should have leave to appeal but the substantive appeal cannot succeed and should be dismissed. I propose orders accordingly.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed. The orders of the Court therefore will be as proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
