

Whittaker versus Flynn and Anor Matter No 12466/91 [1997] NSWSC 400 (12
September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Whittaker versus Flynn & Anor /91 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /91 - Whittaker versus Flynn & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff was born on 3 October 1944. She is now 52 years of age. In 1960, at the age of 15, she completed her schooling with the Intermediate Certificate. 
She entered into her first marriage in 1963. There are two children of the marriage (both are now grown up). She commenced working in 1961. She completed a dressmaker's apprenticeship.

In 1979, the family moved to Taree. On 2 February 1989, she suffered injury when she fell from a ladder whilst working for Flynn's Silk Store. She had been employed as a Sales Assistant in the wool section since mid 1985.

Prior to that accident, she had been in regular employment (save for a period of about seven years which she took off to have her two children). She had been employed, inter alia, in sales and in the ladies' fashion business. For about three years, she ran her own fashion store.

She married her present husband in December 1988. He is about 12 years younger than her.

Following the accident, she returned to work on 16 February 1989. In July , she was transferred from the wool section to the material section. She was then required to lift heavy rolls of material. In August 1989, she obtained a light work certificate. She was then working four hours a day. On September 1989, her employment was terminated when the employer was no longer able to provide light duties.

She looked for other work. On 6 November 1989, she commenced work with Fair
Dinkum Bargains as a Store Manageress. She says that she had physical problems but carried on working because she needed the money. This employment came to an end on 14 January 1990. The evidence suggests that two particular problems arose between the plaintiff and her employer (Dr Johnson). He became aware that she had been injured and was claiming compensation against her previous employer. There was also another matter which involved allegations of stealing. She says that the employment came to an end after she was told that she could not return to work until she obtained a Clearance Certificate from her doctor. She further says that her doctor was not prepared to give her such a Certificate.

In 1992, she commenced part-time childminding for a friend. This work continued for about 18 months. She was working three days a week and received $50 per week. She did not disclose this issue to the Taxation Office.

She has not worked since that time. In October 1994, she and her husband moved to Wollongong. He is in employment. The future of the job may be uncertain.
She has made some attempts to get other employment. It seems that for significant periods, little has been done to obtain suitable employment. As I understand the position, for some time, she has given up trying to obtain it.

Her physical injuries concern her neck, right shoulder, left knee and her low back. In addition to the physical problems, she has suffered psychological problems.

Prior to the accident, she had an involvement in netball (both as player and coach). She had interests in fishing and driving four wheel drive vehicles.
She enjoyed working.

Following the accident, she received treatment from her general practitioner (mainly Dr Keegan). In October 1990, she saw another general practitioner (Dr
Stevens). This was because her back was not getting any better. He referred her to Dr C Edmund Graham (an orthopaedic surgeon). In October 1993, he performed a lumbosacral fusion and laminectomy. She later saw another surgeon (Dr Hopcroft), who performed surgery on her left knee. She has seen Dr Dent and Mr Jenkins (a psychologist). She saw Mr Jenkins after contemplating suicide.

She has given evidence as to her present position concerning her complaints. I shall refer to certain of the evidence given by her. She still has some movement restrictions in her neck. The range of movement has increased.
Physiotherapy has helped. She still has pain and headaches. Her right shoulder is getting better. Her left knee has improved since the operation. Her back is getting worse. She is never pain free (the pain varies). Her back has deteriorated in the last 6-8 months. It restricts her movement and activities.
It continues to be her main problem. Her psychological state has improved following treatment from Mr Jenkins.

She has said that, since the accident, she has needed assistance with housework. There was a particular need for assistance after surgery. The assistance has been provided by both her husband and by paid assistance (Home
Care and VIP). She has said that she has difficulty with various tasks (including cleaning the bathroom and toilet, washing windows, vacuuming and hanging out washing).

She continues to take medication. She has been having physiotherapy. She performs a daily walking regime.

The plaintiff has given oral evidence. She was extensively cross-examined.
During the course of the cross-examination, she was shown film taken by an investigator during July 1996 and August 1997. Dr Hopcroft was present and saw the film. Her husband has been called. Dr Hopcroft gave supplementary oral evidence and was cross-examined.

Both parties have tendered documentation (which included photographs of the ladder, the film and reports from various experts). Although there are many reports, Dr Hopcroft was the only expert who was called to give oral evidence.
The Court was told that Dr Graham was not presently able to give evidence.

I have closely observed the demeanour of witnesses. In assessing credibility,
I have had regard to both demeanour and evidence.

At the commencement of the hearing, the questions of both liability and quantum remained in issue. Whilst liability was not conceded, it was common ground that it was not a real issue. Ultimately, the defendants made no submissions on the question of liability. In the light of the material that has been placed before the Court, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has demonstrated breach of duty on the part of the defendants. I now turn to the question of quantum.

I should perhaps mention that the defendants pleaded certain matters of estoppel. Ultimately, these matters were not pressed.

The relevant heads of damage are non-economic loss, past and future economic loss, past and future out of pocket expenses, past and future care, a Fox v
Wood component and loss of superannuation benefits.

The sum of $24,288.40 is claimed for past out of pocket expenses. Save as to the sum of $3,657, the total figure is accepted by the defendants as to both mathematics and causation. The sum of $3,657 relates to a claim for paid care.
It is accepted that this amount has been incurred. The dispute relates to the question of causation.

It is common ground that, had the plaintiff remained in her pre-accident employment, subject to what she has earned since that time, the sum of $122,101 is the amount she would have received from pursuit of that pre- accident employment. The defendants dispute that this sum represents her past economic loss.

It is not disputed that the plaintiff has suffered serious injury. It is accepted that she has been left with disabilities and a reduced capacity to work. Largely, the area of dispute is whether or not she has exaggerated the effect of her injuries.

Despite the tender of a considerable body of expert material, little reference was made to it in submissions. Reference was made, inter alia, to aspects of reports which tended to support the defendants' contention of exaggeration.
Certain of the experts qualified by the defendants have expressed views as to exaggeration by the plaintiff.

Largely, the film tended to be inconclusive. It could be viewed as showing the plaintiff demonstrating a range of movement in excess of what she says her capacity to be. Dr Hopcroft, who had the advantage of seeing the film, took the view that what it showed was consistent with the claims made by the plaintiff. However, he was inclined to regard certain of the conduct of the plaintiff as "guarding" rather than "exaggeration". As I understand this evidence, he seemed to be of the view that she may have been reluctant to demonstrate her full capacity because of pain.

It seems to me, that there is material before the Court which shows overstatement on the part of the plaintiff. Her conduct in the box was inconsistent with other material. I am not satisfied that she is incapacitated to the extent that she has presented to the Court and to the doctors. She has given evidence that I do not accept. However, largely, the material satisfies the Court that she has significant disability. The difficulty is to measure the loss suffered by reason of that disability.

The nature of her problems is well documented in the numerous reports that have been tendered. It is unnecessary to repeat the detail that may be found therein.

I am satisfied that all of her physical problems can be related to the accident. Her major problem is the injury to the low back. There has been deterioration. Further deterioration may be expected in the future. There has been overstatement in the complaints made concerning her back, neck and right shoulder. The left knee problem has not been regarded as a matter of great significance. She has had some psychological problems which can be related to the accident. These have been improved with treatment (inter alia, pain management training and psychological counselling). It is not said that she suffers from any psychiatric disorder (rather, it is said that, inter alia, she has suffered from distress which is related to pain). Her problems interfere with her daily activities and impair her enjoyment of life.

It is common ground that the assessment of damages is governed by the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act, 1987 (the Act). The awarding of damages under the Act is controlled, inter alia, by various thresholds.
In this case, detailed reference to these thresholds is not necessary.

Whilst there has been some common ground, there are substantial differences in the submissions made on behalf of the parties. I shall first turn to the question of non-economic loss. The exercise involves an assessment of the proportion to be determined having regard to the maximum amount which may be awarded. For the purposes of this assessment, the maximum ("a most extreme case") is $180,000.

The plaintiff sees the appropriate percentage in the range of 45-50%. The defendants see it in a range of 20-25%. In my view, in the circumstances of this case, non-economic loss should be assessed at 38% of a most extreme case.
The sum of $68,400 is allowed.

I now turn to past and future economic loss. Generally speaking, the plaintiff claims past loss of at least $100,000 and future loss in the order of $105,000. The defendants are prepared to allow past loss in the order of about $55,000 and future loss in the order of about $51,000.

The plaintiff has a reduced capacity for work. There have been physical restrictions on what she can do. There has been some change since surgery in
Her condition may deteriorate in the future. She has said that she liked to work and had hoped to work for as long as she could. The accident did take place in 1989 and she has in fact had limited employment during the subsequent years. The future, of course, is largely imponderable.

Whilst she retains a capacity for work, in present times, she may experience difficulty in the exercise of that capacity. In the past, she has made some attempts to obtain suitable work. However, it seems that, for significant periods, little effort has been made to get suitable employment. I am of the view that she could have done much more to seek suitable employment.

In the circumstances of this case, I do not consider that economic loss can be measured with mathematical precision. It is best done by way of general assessment. Doing the best that I can in the circumstances, I allow the global sum of $75,000 for the past and the global sum of $80,000 for the future.

There is an associated claim for loss of superannuation benefits. The plaintiff claims $15,000. The defendants are prepared to allow $5,000. The evidence demonstrates that there will be a loss. In the circumstances of this case, the assessment is largely an arbitrary exercise. I assess the loss in the sum of $10,500.

I now turn to the claims for past and future care. The plaintiff claims $34,476 for the past and $75,000 for the future. The defendants are prepared to allow $10,816 for the past and $37,525 for the future.

In my view, these are also assessments that cannot be made with mathematical precision. Again, the Court is left to do the best it can in the circumstances. As is often the case, the evidence concerning the need for care had vagueness and uncertainty. The circumstances vary from time to time. Some of the services have been provided by paid care. The bulk of it has been provided by the husband of the plaintiff. He continues to provide services.
There has been changes in her capacity in the past. Her capacity may deteriorate in the future. There may be a utilisation of paid care in the future. Even if she had not been injured, as her age increased, her husband may have provided services. In argument, there was some reference to various of the provisions in section 151K. In assessing the amounts to be awarded for care, I have had regard to the relevant provisions of the Act.

In my view, in the circumstances of this case, the global sum of $20,000 should be allowed for past care and the global sum of $45,000 should be allowed for future care.

There is agreement as to the Fox versus Wood component. I allow the sum of $200 for this head of damage. There is agreement as to the amount to be allowed for future out of pocket expenses. I allow the sum of $9,172 for this head of damage. There is some minor dispute as to the amount claimed for past out of pocket expenses. On the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the full amount claimed should be allowed. I allow the sum of $24,288.40 for this head of damage.

The total of the sums allowed is $332,560.40. There will be judgment in the rounded sum of $332,500. The defendants are to pay the costs of the proceedings. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
