

Gio versus Alameddine [1996] NSWSC 238 (28 June 1996) 
GIO versus ALAMEDDINE /94; DC 156/91 
Friday 28 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Handley JA, Sheller JA, Cole JA 
CATCHWORDS: MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS - LIABILITY - CHALLENGE TO ESSENTIAL FACT.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
The respondent's husband was the driver in a motor vehicle accident that occurred on 4 December 1986. The issue at the trial was whether the respondent was a passenger in the vehicle. The respondent and her husband gave evidence that she had been a passenger. A constable held to be a reliable witness gave evidence that at the scene of the accident the respondent's husband said he was the only person in the vehicle. The trial judge held that the respondent's husband was not a person of good credit though the respondent was not "a wholly unreliable witness". Another constable who attended the scene was not called to give evidence. The trial judge held on the balance of probabilities that the respondent's wife was in the vehicle at the time of the accident. The appellant challenged that finding and also argued that inadequate reasons had been given.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: (1) The judge's finding was not glaringly improbable or inconsistent with incontrovertible facts; (2) The judge recognised the various factors and sufficient reasons were given.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an appeal by the New South Wales Insurance Ministerial Corporation, formerly the Government Insurance Office, against a judgment for the plaintiff entered by Taylor DCJ on 31 March 1994. The case arose out of a motor vehicle accident which undoubtedly occurred on 4 December 1986 in Brunker Road, Greenacre.

The issue on liability at the trial was whether the plaintiff, the wife of the driver, was present in the motor vehicle at the time of the accident. As a result of the accident, the vehicle driven by the plaintiff's husband, left the road and collided with objects on the side of the road. The police were called and Constable Nesbitt, one of the two constables who attended at the scene of the accident, was called to give evidence.

The trial judge found that the plaintiff was an unreliable witness and his reasons for judgment contain clear bases for this finding. He also found that
Constable Nesbitt was a reliable witness. The plaintiff's husband told
Constable Nesbitt, at the scene of the accident, that he was the only passenger in the vehicle and Constable Nesbitt made contemporary notes based on this information.

The plaintiff's husband with a criminal history of social security fraud was not a person of good credit and the trial judge was entitled to view his evidence with considerable scepticism. Notwithstanding the difficulties with the credit of the plaintiff and her husband, the trial judge concluded that she was not "a wholly unreliable witness" and his final conclusion was that, despite the very strong case mounted by the defendant, it was more likely than not that she was a passenger in the motor vehicle at the time of the accident.

Mr Mater for the appellant has helpfully set out in his written submissions the matters going to the credit of the plaintiff and her husband which underpin the trial judge's assessment of their credit. However, the fact remains that despite these adverse and critical findings, his Honour did accept that the plaintiff was a passenger in the vehicle.

The accident occurred at 8 p.m. and there is nothing glaringly improbable about the presence of a wife and children in a car being driven by a husband at that time. There are no other objective matters which indicate that the judge's finding was glaringly improbable and there are no incontrovertible facts which are inconsistent with it.

The difficulties for the plaintiff's case flowing from the evidence of
Constable Nesbitt and the judge's acceptance of it are substantially diminished by other evidence indicating the presence of a second policeman,
Senior Constable Johnson, at the scene of the accident who made independent investigations. Constable Johnson was not called as a witness.

In these circumstances I have reached the firm conclusion that the case is not within the narrow exceptions to Abalos and the primary challenge of the appellant should therefore fail. The second ground urged by Mr Mater was that his Honour had failed to give adequate reasons for his conclusion.

It is not easy to express reasons for accepting a witness's evidence. The trial judge set out various adverse factors but concluded that despite these he should accept the plaintiff's evidence. In my judgment no further reasons were called for in a case of this kind and I would therefore propose that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

COLE JA: I agree.

SHELLER JA: I also agree.
 * * * 
