

Permanent Trustee Company Limited versus Fraser Nos. Ca 40573/93 and Ed 3754/92
Testator's Family Maintenance - Precedent [1997] NSWSC 249 (7 July 1997) 
COURT
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), HANDLEY(2) AND SHELLER(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, November 1994 #DATE 24:2:1995 #ADD 30:8:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    C M Harris 
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Tonkin Drysdale Partners 
Counsel for the Respondent:   R J Desiatnik 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Bingham Finlay
Turnell and Corah
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P: This appeal raises for consideration the concept of "moral duty" in resolving disputed claims under the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) (the Act).
 
High Court's obiter caution about glossing the statute
The appeal was one of a number in a special list of appeals to this Court from the Equity Division of the Supreme Court involving challenges to determinations under the Act, and in one old case, under the Testator's Family
Maintenance and [Guardianship of Infants Act 1916](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/goia1916231/). A degree of uncertainty was introduced into the series of appeals by the delivery, shortly before the commencement of the special list, of the High Court's judgment in Singer v
Berghouse (No. 2) <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 653] In that decision, the majority (Mason CJ, Deane and McHugh JJ) offered comments concerning the commonly used reference, in cases of this kind, to the "moral duty" said to be owed by the deceased to a claimant within the class of eligible persons specified in the Act. Their Honours remarked (ibid, 657; 487): "For our part, we doubt that this statement provides useful assistance in elucidating the statutory provisions. Indeed, reference to 'moral duty' or 'moral obligation' may well be understood as amounting to a gloss on the statutory language."
This comment was supported by a footnote citing two opinions of Murphy J, extracts from which I will set out below.
The facts of the present case are set out in the reasons of Sheller JA.
The primary decision-maker (Master McLaughlin) referred on several occasions to the "moral duty" owed by the deceased to his daughter, the respondent, and to other persons. He determined the case by reference to what he considered the "moral duty of the deceased" in the circumstances to require. In viewing the entitlements of the two grandchildren beneficiaries of the will (whose interests were represented by the appellant's appeal), the Master rejected the notion that either had a "moral claim" upon the deceased or his estate. The colour of "moral duty", "moral claim" and "moral obligation" thus permeated the Master's reasons. In saying this, I intend no criticism of
Master
McLaughlin. He was, after all, following time-honoured formulae expressed many times in judgments of the High Court of Australia, the Privy Council and this
Court usefully collected in the reasons of Handley JA.
In this appeal, as in others in the special list, the appellant latched onto the use by the Master of the criterion of "moral duty". In the light of
Singer (above), it urged that this reference vitiated the exercise by the
Court of the statutory discretion. This was because that discretion had been exercised by reference to a criterion now said to be irrelevant and a "gloss on the statutory language". If the point was good in this case, it was good in numerous other cases. It would require the setting aside of virtually every judgment under the [Family Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) (and any remaining under the former
Act) in respect of which final orders had not been entered. In many, indeed nearly all, decisions under the Act there is repeated reference to perceptions of "moral duty" and "moral obligation", just as there are in texts on this area of the law. See eg A. Dickey, Family Provision After Death, Law Book Co,
Sydney [1992, Ch 6], 73ff.
It was therefore necessary for the Court in this, as in other cases, to consider the meaning of the comments of the majority in Singer and their consequence for the case in hand.
 
The judicial consideration of "moral duty" in family provision cases
I have expressed my view on the point in other cases. But in deference to what Handley JA and Sheller JA have written in this case, I will repeat my opinion.
The comment of the majority in Singer about "moral duty" and "moral obligation" must be understood by reference to the two opinions of Murphy J to which their Honours refer in the immediately succeeding footnote.
The first of these opinions is found in Hughes versus National Trustees
Executors and Agency Co of Australasia Limited <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 134.] In that case, Murphy J (who was part of the majority) was at pains to stress that a claimant, under what might generally be described as the Victorian equivalent to the Act, ought not to be put to the obligation of establishing, in addition to statutory qualification and need, a "moral" entitlement in order to secure relief. Murphy J said (at 158): "Many cases suggest that an applicant must show a moral claim as well as (being left without adequate provision) ...; this gloss on the Act is unwarranted and inconsistent with the language and with the legislative scheme. The statutory specification of a deceased's spouse and children as persons entitled to claim if the distribution of the estate does not make adequate provision ... is a legislative judgment that such persons have a claim unless disentitled ... or unless they are adequately provided for by independent means." 
In Goodman versus Windeyer and Ors <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 490], Murphy J, this time in dissent, adhered to his opinion in Hughes. In Goodman he said this (at 504f): "This is another case in which the question of whether an applicant was left without adequate provision is confused by the introduction of considerations of moral duty. ... Unless an applicant is left without adequate provision, he or she is not entitled to an order, even if the circumstances disclose a breach of moral obligation. I adhere to what I said in Hughes v National Trustees Executors and Agency Co (Australasia)
Limited."
Does the repeated indication by the Master of his consideration of the "moral duty", owed by the deceased respectively to the appellant and the respondents, indicate, with the benefit of Singer, that his discretion miscarried because exercised by reference to a consideration now perceived to be irrelevant?
In my view, such a drastic consequence is not required either by the observations of the majority in Singer or by the High Court's reference, in the footnote, to what Murphy
J said earlier. There are two reasons for expressing this conclusion.
First, as a technical matter concerning the binding rule, the cited remarks of their Honours in Singer were not essential to the decision in that case. That decision appears to have turned, ultimately, upon the fact that Mrs
Singer had failed, by evidence, to establish a relevant need for provision.
That the remarks in Singer concerning "moral duty" and "moral obligation" are obiter dicta, is indicated by the language chosen by the majority to express them. The sentence in question begins with the word "indeed". This suggests that what was being said by their Honours went beyond that which is essential to their reasons. It was something additional or supplementary. Moreover, the verbs used by their
Honours are the tentative "may well be understood". These are hardly normative words. As I read them, their effect is to go no further than to warn any diversion of the attention of the decision-maker from the actual language of the Act. With that warning, I would respectfully agree. In every case, the duty of a decision-maker, exercising a statutory discretion, is to conform to the statute, having regard to its language and the implications properly to be derived therefrom. Care must be taken to avoid binding the decision to judge-made rules or formulae.
That it could not have been the intention of the law to expunge the notions of "obligation" altogether from this area of the law is made plain from the terms of the Act itself. By [s 23(b)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the Act, express reference is made by Parliament to this consideration: "23. On an application in relation to a deceased person made by or on behalf of an eligible person, if the Court is satisfied: that, at any time before his death, the deceased person entered into a prescribed transaction: which took effect within the period of 1 year before his death, and was entered into at a time when the deceased person had a moral obligation to make adequate provision, by will or otherwise, for the proper maintenance, education and advancement in life of that or any other eligible person which was substantially greater than any moral obligation of the deceased person to enter into the prescribed transaction ...
the Court may ... make an order designating ... notional estate..." (emphasis added)
In Singer, their Honours make no reference to this provision of the Act.
They were probably not referred to it. But the mention of "moral obligation" in [s 23(b)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the Act, in the context of the making of "adequate provision by will or otherwise for the proper maintenance, education and advancement ...
of ... (an) eligible person", makes it tolerably clear that the concept of "moral obligation" had not been entirely banished by Parliament from this realm of discourse.
Secondly, it is important to reflect upon the concerns which occasioned
Murphy
J's observations in the cases cited in Singer. Murphy J was there stressing that the entitlement of the claimant was to be found in the terms of the Act. Thus, the claimant was not to be put additionally to the proof of having a "moral claim". Nor did the existence of a "moral claim" suffice if the claimant was not, by the statute, eligible to claim. Reference to concepts of "morality", in this respect, might confuse the focus of attention afforded by [ss 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s7.html) and [9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s9.html) of the Act, as might the repeated invocation of the image of a "wise and Just testator" sitting in an armchair by an unlikely Antipodean fireplace pondering the moral entitlements of specified persons.
Nevertheless, the conventional reference to "moral duty" may, in the context of a particular decision, amount to little more than a shorthand expression for the lengthier statutory provisions in [ss 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s7.html) and [9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s9.html) of the Act.
[Section 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s7.html), for example, is expressed in the permissive "may". The Court "may" order that provision be made. But the discretion is, in turn, governed by the condition that it is the opinion of the Court that it "ought", having regard to the circumstances at the time the order is made, make such an order for the eligible person. By definition, for the claimant to succeed the deceased must have failed to make proper provision by the will. What does "ought" involve?
It involves a reflection on the needs of the claimant which the
Court considers "ought" to be met by an appropriate order. The "ought" in this sense, is a reflection of the need. The need occasions the "ought". Cf Benney v Jones [(1991) 23 NSWLR 559 (CA)] 560, 568.
 
The dangers of diverting attention by considerations of "moral duty"
What I take Murphy J in Hughes and Goodman, and the majority in Singer, to be warning about is this. Courts must be very careful not to substitute notions of morality (eg in the sense of disqualifying personal conduct, sexual acts, drinking habits etc) for the purposes of the Act. By its terms, the Act is designed to protect eligible persons where inadequate or no testamentary provision is made for their maintenance, education or advancement in life. I do not take the comment in Singer to go beyond this.
I do not consider that it would be safe for this
Court, or other courts in this State, to disregard the obiter dicta in Singer versus Berghouse (No 2) concerning "moral duty". Nor do
I believe that they should regard those words as a slip or oversight of a very long strewn of authority. As Handley JA has pointed out, the judicial disquiet in the High Court of Australia concerning the criterion of it moral duty" pre-dates Murphy J's expressed anxieties. In
Australia it may be traced at least to the dissenting opinions of Williams J and Fullagar J in Coates versus National Trustees
Executors and Agency Company
Limited and Anor <case>; [(1956) 95 CLR 494], 512, 522f.
Recent academic analysis has suggested that the judicial development of the concept of "moral duty" may have departed from the original rationale behind the statutory protection for the neglected dependents of testators. In
New Zealand, the Law Commission, in its review of succession law, has raised the question whether the concept of "moral duty" is a satisfactory basis for determinations under the Family Protection Act 1955 (NZ). Ms Virginia Grainer of the Law Faculty of the Victoria University of Wellington has proposed that the use of the concept of moral obligation should be abandoned and replaced by a more clearly defined test based on dependence and need. Ms Grainer's submission to the Law Commission has now been published. See V Grainer, "Is
Family Protection a Question of
Moral Duty?" (1994) 24 Vic Uni Wellington L
Rev 141. At 142, she says: "Family protection legislation was originally introduced to provide a mechanism for ensuring that testators met the needs of dependent family members. Over time the ends met by the legislation have changed. The interpretation of the legislation on the basis of moral duty is now inappropriate given the prevailing social, philosophical, political and economic climate and people's understanding of the family.

Furthermore, little heed is paid to the advantages of testamentary freedom and the disadvantages of family inheritance by family protection legislation based on the concept of moral duty."
At 145, Ms Grainer observes, by reference to the early Privy Council decision in Allardice versus Allardice (1911) AC 730 (PC) where the then New
Zealand Act was under consideration: "In the last eighty-four years since Allardice was decided, the concept of moral duty in the family protection context has developed to the extent that today the duty is considerably more extensive than any duty envisaged by the instigators of the original legislation."
Ms Grainer collects the elements which a large number of New Zealand decisions have found to be relevant to the concept of "moral duty", as judicially elaborated in that country. She observes, at 147: "The court is required to establish the content of the duties of 'a just but not a loving' testator. (Allardice, 973) This formulation denies that love plays any part in the creation of this duty. Instead the duty is characterised as being based on justice. Testators can be forced to act justly but not lovingly. However, this requirement to make proper provision, sometimes based purely on the familial relationship, appears to have some causal connection to partisan idealised family sentiment (love)? rather than any objective view of justice.
The content of justice in this context is not clear from the cases. Although it is stated repeatedly that justice is not necessarily equated with equality, the findings in some cases suggest that it is."
Ms Grainer then examines the recent
English study by J Finch and J Mason,
Negotiating Family Responsibilities, Tavistock, Routledge, London, 1993. Those authors concluded from their study that there was no clear consensus amongst the English respondents to the survey as to the responsibilities that people ought to acknowledge towards their relatives. The authors concluded that it was inappropriate to consider family life in terms of duty. They also rejected the corollary of the "right" to claim assistance from the family. They suggested that it was neither sustained by community opinion nor by modem social attitudes and circumstances.
So far as the latter are concerned. Ms Grainer points to a number of developments - social, economic and political - which render the concept of "moral duty" unsatisfactory and inappropriate as a basis for determinations under the Family Protection Act of New Zealand. She lists:
Changes in the balance of responsibility between the family and the State;
Changes in the status of women;
Increased longevity;
Changes in needs and concepts of wealth; and
Changes in attitudes to testamentary freedom.
Ms Grainer's conclusions are then stated, at 160-1: "The author is not denying that there may be a moral duty on testators that extends beyond the grave, to meet the needs of dependants where possible. Nor is the author denying that promises to leave bequests to family members in return for goods and services in their lifetimes create obligations that must be enforceable after death. The author is not denying that families are important to most people and that testators should be free to make bequests to family members, along with anyone else, as they see fit and according to their understandings of their moral responsibilities. Rather, it is the concept of a generalised 'moral duty' to one's family that applies irrespective of need as the basis for determinations under the family protection legislation that the author rejects. Given the current social, philosophical, political and economic climate, and people's understanding of the family, the use of such a concept is now unsatisfactory and inappropriate."
With every respect to those who are of a different view, I see much force in these comments. Considerations such as those mentioned by Ms Grainer were undoubtedly behind the remarks, in majority and dissent, of Murphy J.
Awareness of such considerations may have informed the remarks of Mason CJ,
Deane and McHugh JJ in Singer versus Berghouse (No 2), when their Honours warned against glossing the statutory language. Therefore, notwithstanding the long history behind the use of the concept of "moral duty" in this area of legal activity, I respectfully agree with the opinion now expressed in the High
Court. Although obiter and not technically binding, it must not be seen as a slip. Courts in this State, including this Court, should conform.
 
Conclusion: verbal not substantive error
I am, nevertheless, prepared to take the Master's repeated references to "moral duty" in his reasons in this case to be simply a shorthand phrase for the "ought" in <case> of the Act and the words "inadequate" and "proper" 'in s (2) of the Act. In the light of the warning of the High Court in Singer (against glossing the statute), it would be wise if references to "moral duty" and "moral obligation" fell out of this lexicon. They should be replaced, where appropriate, by the phrases actually used by Parliament in the
Act. This will ensure that the statute is not "glossed" and that the decision-maker's attention is kept upon the application of the stated statutory criteria to each case. Furthermore, such a course will replace potentially confusing and sometimes controversial notions of moral obligation with the attention which the present Act requires upon the inadequacy of the provision for the claimant not at the time of death but at the time of the Court's order. This, as the
Court has repeatedly pointed out, is an important distinction between the requirements of the Testator's Family Maintenance Act and [Guardianship of
Infants Act 1916](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/goia1916231/), <case> and the terms of ss 7 and 9 of the current Act. See eg Benney, 569.
In the light of Singer (above) and with the wisdom of hindsight, it would have been preferable had the Master not referred to concepts such as "moral duty". This is a criticism of the language used in his reasons. But the focus of attention in this Court is, as in any appeal, not upon the verbiage of the reasons by which the decision-maker explains his or her opinion, but on whether the order which was made has been shown to be wrong. Obviously, the reasons must be examined, for they may indicate that the order is contaminated by error which may then authorise the intervention of this Court into a decision held to be discretionary in character. But if the ultimate order appears correct, this Court will not intervene to substitute what it thinks to be more felicitous reasons, embellished with legal hindsight, for those offered by the
Master.
Alike with Sheller JA, I have concluded that no error has been shown in the substance of the Master's orders under the Act. The respondent was within the specified class. Adequate provision was not made for her maintenance and advancement in life.
The deceased ought to have made provision. The provision made by the Master has not been shown to be wrong. Like Sheller JA, I agree with it.
 
Order: appeal dismissed
Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE2
HANDLEY JA: In this appeal
I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Kirby P and Sheller JA. I agree that the appeal fails and should be dismissed with costs and I agree with their reasons for making those orders. However I wish to add some observations of my own in relation to the dicta of the majority in Singer versus Berghouse (No2) <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 653.] The relevant passage is set out in the other judgments, and there is no need for me to repeat it.
I agree with Kirby P that the dicta in question were obiter, not necessary for the decision, and tentative. The minority accepted the traditional approach.
See at 662-3, 666. It appears that the validity of the moral duty test was not raised in argument. The statements of Murphy J reflected a
minority view and in the second case he dissented. Both cases were decided under the Testator's Family Maintenance Act 1916 which was repealed on 1
September, 1983. The [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) differs from the earlier Act.
Under the old Act and its equivalents a qualified applicant who established that he or she had been "left" by the deceased's testamentary or intestate dispositions without adequate provision for his or her proper maintenance education or advancement established a prima facie case. The nature and extent of any order would depend upon the court's consideration of "all the circumstances of the case" (s 3(1)) and the court could refuse to make an order in favour of a person "whose character or conduct is such as to disentitle him to the benefit of such an order" (s 3(2)).
However it was clear that a moral claim on a testator's bounty was not enough if the applicant was not in need. This had been well understood from the earliest days of this legislation. See Allardice versus Allardice (1911) AC 730 at 732-3, 734 where statements to this effect in the New Zealand Court of
Appeal were approved. They were again approved in Bosch's Case (1938) AC at , 478. The danger under this legislation of reliance upon irrelevant and extraneous moral considerations had also been recognised. Thus the High
Court's reliance in Ellis versus Leeder (1951) CLR at 652 on what was referred to as "the illicit cohabitation" between the deceased and the executrix contributed to the errors which led to the reversal by the privy Council. See
Leeder versus Ellis <case>; [(1953) AC 52] at 12, 21 the court held that the fact that an applicant was "a wronged wife" was not relevant nor were general considerations of fairness and justice. See at 20, 21; and Stott versus Cook [(1960) 33 ALJR 447] at 135 Fullagar and Menzies JJ said that the
Act existed for the purpose of remedying "breaches of a testator's moral duty ... not for making what may appear to the court to be a fair distribution of a deceased person's estate".
A qualified applicant in need ordinarily established a moral claim on the deceased's bounty and a corresponding moral duty. The decisions on the old Act and its equivalents did not require such an applicant to establish any wider moral duty. The need itself, and the deceased's ability to meet it gave rise to the relevant moral duty.
References to moral duty, moral claims, and the making of orders to enforce the duty and remedy its breach were deeply entrenched in the case law.
It is only necessary to refer to decisions of the High Court and Privy
Council. In Bosch's Case the Privy Council said ((1938) AC at 478) that "the court must place itself in the position of the testator and consider what he ought to have done in all the circumstances of the case" and at 481 they referred to "the duty that he owes of making proper provision for his wife and children". Compare Dillon u Public Trustee (1941) AC at 301. In Sampson v
Sampson <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 576] at 583 the Court (Rich, Dixon and McTiernan JJ) said:- ... (The Act) is remedial; for it empowers the Court to remedy the injustice which a capricious or unfair use of the testamentary power may inflict upon those who may be considered to have moral claims upon the post mortem dispositions of the testator".
Again, in Delacour versus Waddington <case>; [(1953) 89 CLR 117] the court (Dixon CJ,
Kitto and Taylor JJ) said at 127:- "The provisions of that Act ... are designed to provide for relief where testamentary dispositions have been made without regard to the moral claims which one spouse may be said to have upon the other, or which a child or children may be said to have upon a parent. A consideration of the classes of persons for whose benefit the provisions were enacted makes it clear that the Act contemplates the existence of such moral claims even though particular claimants may have had no legal right to be maintained by the testator in his lifetime".
See generally
Lieberman versus Morris <case>; [(1944) 69 CLR 69] at 11, 12, 17, 18, 20 and 21, McCosker v
McCosker <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 566] at 128-9, 134, 135, , 137; Pontifical Society versus Scales <case>; [(1962) 107 CLR 9] at 540, , 542; Hughes versus National Trustees <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 134] at 434, 435, 437, 439, 440, 444, 447-8, , 456-7; and Goodman versus Windeyer <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 490] at 496-8, 501, 503, -510 and 511.
References by the High Court to moral duty have continued in relation to the 1982 Act or its equivalent. In Smith versus Smith <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 217] at 233
Gibbs CJ, Wilson and Dawson JJ said that it "enabled persons ... regarded as having a moral claim against a testator or an intestate to enforce that claim against his estate after his death". Similarly, Mason, Brennan and Deane JJ at said that the
Act was "aimed at ensuring that the legitimate claims of an 'eligible' person ... upon the deceased person's bounty are satisfied out of his or her estate upon death." Finally, in Neil versus Nott <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 509] the court reversed a decision of the Supreme Court of Victoria refusing a widower an extension of time of four months to make a claim against his deceased wife's estate. Brennan, Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ in a joint judgment said at 511 that the appellant's illness and financial state were prima facie "sufficient to entitle him to a brief indulgence to allow consideration of his moral claim."
These principles had a decisive effect on the decisions concerning the date at which the court should consider whether the statutory pre-condition for the making of an order (its so-called 'jurisdiction') was satisfied. In
Coates versus National Trustees <case>; [(1956) 95 CLR 494] the court by a majority, Dixon
CJ, Webb and Kitto JJ; Williams and Fullagar JJ dissenting, held that this was the date of death.
This decision was followed in Dun versus Dun <case>; [(1957) 99 CLR 325.]
In Coates' Case at 527, 528 Kitto J said:- ... it is the hypothetical testator, endowed with wisdom and justice and aware of all that there was to know at the time when the testator died ... whose moral duty affords a test by which a court may decide whether any and if so what provision would have had to be made by the actual testator's will in order that an applicant's proper maintenance and support should have been adequately provided for ... Understood in the sense I have indicated the doctrine that a conception of moral duty should be the guide in determining adequacy ... is fully warranted by the terms of the Acts. It necessarily involves that the circumstances at the death are the circumstances to consider; but it is not the starting point from which the reasoning proceeds which leads to that conclusion. Both the conclusion and the doctrine rest upon the terms of the legislation".
Williams J and Fullagar J who dissented in Coates' Case considered that the notion of a breach by the testator of his moral duty was a gloss on the language of the statutes which had been introduced by judicial decision (above at 512, 522-523) and they concluded that the question should be considered as at the date the court was hearing the application.
In Dun versus Dun the Privy Council <case>; [(1959) AC 272] upheld the majority view, stating that in their opinion this was "the natural construction" of the section ((1959) AC at 288, 100
CLR at 369) and gave effect to "the plain meaning of the statute" (290, 371). However even the minority in Coates thought that the concept of moral duty was "useful as a yardstick" (Williams J at 512), "a guide ... a commonly convenient factual test" and "a helpful gloss in many cases" (Fullagar J at 522-3, 523).
The Court is now entitled to consider statements by the Minister and others during the Parliamentary Debates leading to the enactment of the 1916
Act. The Minister's speech when moving the Second Reading and that of his supporting speaker are instructive. He stated that the purpose of the bill was to remedy "injustice" where a man or woman had "neglected" to make adequate provision for proper maintenance, that parents should be prepared "to do a square deal" and that when a man disinherits his children "cause should be shown ... before that injustice is allowed to remain". Reference was made to "the responsibility of parentage", the contributions wives and children make to the accumulation of property by a husband and parent, and there are statements such as "the Court has a right to be invoked to say whether that man has done strict justice in connection with the disinheriting of his family", "there are certain social duties cast on every man who dies possessed of property" and that it had been decided in Victoria that a similar statute "does not warrant interference ... where there is no capricious or unreasonable testamentary disposition". (Hansard 30 August, 1916 pp ,1248-9).
The question is whether the dicta in Singer versus Berghouse (No 2), based on judgments of Murphy J on the old Act, provide a sufficient basis for this
Court to now decide that the concept of moral duty and its breach should no longer be used in deciding cases under this Act. The Act widened the class of eligible applicants, included anti-avoidance provisions and provided that the
Court should consider the circumstances when the order is made. There was otherwise no apparent break with the past. The Court's duty was to make such provision as "ought" to be made (s 7, <case>). This was the expression used in the classical passage in Bosch's Case ((1938) AC at 478). How is the Court to determine what provision "ought" to be made? Its order does not give effect to any antecedent legal duty. See Dillon versus Public Trustee (1941) AC at 301. The only other possible yardstick, apart from the ideosyncratic views of each judicial officer, is that of moral duty and Parliament used this very concept in <case>(b)(ii).
In deciding the question of power the Court must now consider the circumstances at the date of hearing. This weakens and may displace the test of moral duty as applied to the testator himself. But the "wise and just testator" of Bosch was always a hypothetical person. This was pointed out by
Kitto J in Coates' Case at 527 in the passage quoted.
The same Judge recognised in Stott versus Cook (above) at 450 that the court worked with imperfect materials and said that it:- "is obliged to form a moral judgment as to the duty which would have lain upon the testator if the circumstances had been none other than those which the evidence proves".
The test of the hypothetical wise and just testator required the court to apply its own conception of current community standards. This was articulated by Stephen J in White versus Barron (above) at 440 where referring to the classic test in Bosch's Case, he said:- "No doubt this requires (the judge) to recognise and to apply prevailing community standards of what is right and appropriate since it is by those standards that the content both of the moral duty owed by a just husband and father to his wife and children and of departures from it will be measured".
This question was discussed by Mahoney JA in Kearns versus Ellis (5/12/84, unreported at 7-8) and by Bryson J in Gorton versus Parkes (1989) 17 NSWLR at 10-11 where he said:- "The legislation does not ... spell out concepts of moral duty and of need; its method is to entrust to the court ... the application of the general test ... to particular facts ...
This part of the judicial function must be exercised contemporaneously ... judges share with all members of the community access to the current moral beliefs of the community of which this legislation makes them the spokesman.
This is an echo from the speech of Lord Radcliffe in Davis Contractors v
Fareham UDC <case>; [(1956) AC 696] at 728. His Lordship demonstrated that the implied term theory based on the actual or imputed intention of the parties could not be a satisfactory basis for the doctrine of frustration and said:- "... it might seem that the parties themselves have become so far disembodied spirits that their actual persons should be allowed to rest in peace. In their place there rises the figure of the fair and reasonable man. And the spokesman of the fair and reasonable man, who represents after all no more than the anthropomorphic conception of justice, is and must be the court itself."
There is no difficulty in applying the moral duty test under the new Act by considering what the hypothetical wise and just testator would have done at the date of hearing in the light of the facts established by the evidence.
The new Act has now been in force for nearly twelve years.
After its commencement Judges of the Equity Division and this Court had to decide whether the old case law remained relevant. The first reported case in which this matter was addressed was Lloyd versus Nelson [(1985) 2 NSWLR 291] where Needham
J at 298 held that the principles applied by the courts to the old Act continued to apply except to the extent that the new Act otherwise required.
This view has been consistently followed by the Equity Division and by this Court ever since.
See the decisions of this Court in Churton versus Christian [(1988) 13 NSWLR 241] at 648, 651, 656, 657-8;
Benney versus Jones [(1991) 23 NSWLR 559] at 347-8. Particularly relevant in the present context is the reasoning of Priestley JA in Benney versus Jones at 569 where his
Honour said:- "It seems to me that the introduction into <case> of the present
Act of the word 'ought' in replacement of the words from <case> in the 1916 Act 'as the Court thinks fit' shows the intention of the present Act to accept the approach adopted by the majority in Hughes and to reject that of Murphy J. The word 'ought' seems to be deliberately adopted, in the present
Act, from what Gibbs J called the classical statement in Bosch. To my mind this is a very clear indication that an eligible person within par (c) and par (d) must show a moral claim on the estate before an order can be made; I also think this is the same thing as saying that the deceased ... must have had a moral obligation to that eligible person."
Having carefully reconsidered the case law on the two Acts including Neil v Nott and given the dicta in Singer versus Berghouse (No 2) respectful consideration
I have concluded that the moral duty test under the new Act is valid and remains "a useful yardstick" and "a convenient factual test".
For all these reasons, in my judgment the courts of this State should continue to follow the existing decisons on the new
Act until they are reversed by the High Court and in the meantime the dicta in Singer versus Berghouse (No 2) should not be followed.
JUDGE3
INTRODUCTION
SHELLER JA: Permanent Trustee Company Limited, the executor and trustee of the will of John Thomas Harris (the deceased), appeals from orders made by
Master McLaughlin on 22 September 1993 pursuant to the provisions of the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) (the FP Act) in favour of the respondent, Patricia
Faye Fraser, in relation to the estate of the deceased who was the respondent's father. The Master ordered that the respondent receive out of the estate (a) Unit 2/21 Berith Street, Umina, and (b) a legacy in the sum of $60,000, such legacy not to bear interest if paid on or before 20 October , and that the costs of the respondent on the common fund basis and the costs of the appellant on the trustee basis be paid out of the estate.
The deceased died on 3
December 1991 aged 79. By his last will, which was made on 7 July 1997, after bequests of his motor vehicle and a diamond ring to his granddaughter, Michelle Driscoll, and two small diamond rings to his granddaughter, Leanne Driscoll, the deceased left the rest and residue of his estate after conversion into money and payment of his debts funeral and testamentary expenses to such of his granddaughters,
Michelle and Leanne, as should survive him and attain the age of 25. The value of the net distributable estate of the deceased as at the date of the hearing of the application was in the vicinity of $350,000. The principal asset was the home unit which was valued at $135,000. In addition to the 1987 will of which probate was granted, the deceased made wills in 1964, 1969, 1978, 1983, 1984 and
In all these wills up to and including the 1983 will he made some provision for the respondent and her children. None of his last three wills made any provision for the respondent or her children.
The respondent was the only child of the deceased to survive him. By the marriage to his first wife, Gladys, the deceased had two children, the respondent, who, according to her evidence, was conceived out of wedlock and born on 24 May 1934, and Marjorie Jeanette Driscoll, who was born on 27
February 1939, married Desmond
James Driscoll and was killed in a motor vehicle accident on 20 April 1980. The deceased's first marriage seems to have ended in divorce. In the 1950's he married Stella Ruby Hogg who died in 1985.
His second wife had a child by a previous relationship, Harold
Rogers. Clause of the deceased's will was as follows: "I DECLARE that I have made no gift to my daughter PATSY FAY
FRAZER and my stepson HAROLD RODGERS (sic) as I have made gifts to both my said daughter and stepson during my lifetime and I have no continuing relationship with either of my said daughter or said stepson."
Admitted into evidence pursuant to s32 of the FP Act was a handwritten letter dated 5 November 1984, and addressed to "To Whom it May Concern" and signed by the deceased and his second wife. The terms of the letter were: "We wish to let anyone know. Our daughter Patricia Faye has nothing to do with our wills. We have found this person has had money from us. We have found her to be a liar, thief and a compulsive drinker and has lived in very bad company." 
THE RESPONDENT'S CIRCUMSTANCES
In 1964 the respondent married Barry Fraser. They were divorced in 1976.
Prior to her marriage she had lived in a de facto relationship. Her partner in that relationship died in a motor vehicle accident. The respondent has six children, twins by her de facto partner, Sharon Harvey and Janine Beyer, who were born on 22 November , and four by her marriage, Warren Michael Fraser who was born on 8 July 1965, Shane Barrie Fraser who was born on 24 July 1966,
Lisa Marie Fraser who was born on 28 February 1968 and Kellee Patricia Fraser who was born on 20 January 1975. All her children have left home and are self supporting. At the date of hearing the respondent was living alone in rented accommodation at Woy Woy, for which she paid rent of $120 per week. She did not work, and her only source of 'income was the widow's pension of $379.30 a fortnight.
Apart from some items of furniture and furnishings, the respondent had no assets.
 
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
The Master applied the principle of moral duty. He said that the Court, in exercising its discretion under s7 of the FP Act, must determine "whether a testator has fulfilled any moral duty which he owed to a person in the position of the (respondent) who is making a claim against his estate".
He held the deceased had failed in the moral duty he owed to the respondent both during his life-time and after his death. He made orders by reference to what he considered the deceased's moral duty to be.
In Singer versus Berghouse <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 653] in a joint judgment the majority of the High Court said at 656-7: "In Australia, it has been accepted that the correct approach to be taken by a court invested with jurisdiction under legislation of which the Act is an example was that stated by 
Salmond J in In re Allen (Deceased); Allen versus Manchester [(1921) NZLR 218.] In that case his Honour said at 220: 
The provision which the court may properly make in default of testamentary provision is that which a just and wise father would have thought it his moral duty to make in the interests of his widow and children had he been fully aware of all the relevant circumstances.

For our part, we doubt that this statement provides useful assistance in elucidating the statutory provisions. Indeed, references to 'moral duty' or 'moral obligation' may well be understood as amounting to a gloss on the statutory language.
Hughes versus National Trustees Executors and Agency Co 
Limited <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 134] at 504-5". (These are references to the judgments of Murphy J in those cases.)
Based on this dictum the appellant argued that the "moral duty" of the deceased was irrelevant and that the Master erred in law in determining the claim by reference to it.
The appellant accepted that the case was one in which some order under the
FP Act should be made. However it contended that in the words of Stout CJ in
In re Allardice quoted in Bosch versus Perpetual Trustee Company at 477, the FP Act allows the Court to alter a testator's disposition of his property only so far as it is necessary to provide for the proper maintenance, education and advancement in life of the claimant where adequate provision has not been made for this purpose and submitted that, to adopt the language of
Kirby P in
Hunter versus Hunter [(1987) 8 NSWLR 573] at 575, the Master's order had cut an unjustified swathe through the testamentary provisions and that proper provision, in all the circumstances, required no more than a portable life tenancy of the unit and a smaller capital sum for exigencies.
 
THE MASTER'S
DECISION
In his judgment the Master referred in detail to events in the lives of the respondent and the deceased and to the relationship between the deceased and the respondent and the Driscoll family. The appellant did not challenge the Master's findings of fact. Since the appeal turns upon the Master's application of the principle of moral duty and whether his order was too generous it is not necessary again to recite the evidence which supported the findings the Master made. It is sufficient briefly to summarise the Master's conclusions.
Having held that the respondent was the only eligible person in relation to the deceased within the meaning of s6 (1) of the FP Act, the Master stated his conclusions as follows:
The mere fact of paternity creates a moral duty in a testator to provide for his children; Gorton versus Parks [(1989) 17
NSWLR 1]; Eggler versus Mitchelmore (unreported) Court of Appeal 11
November 1992.

Until 1984 and during the last five months of his life the deceased recognised a degree of moral duty owed towards the respondent.

There was no evidence which supported the statements made by the deceased in his will and in the letter of 5 November
The Master said that upon the evidence he was satisfied that those statements were not true.

Since the deceased's explanation for his failure to provide for the respondent was without substance there was no reason why he should not have done so.
The Master held that the deceased totally failed in the moral duty which he owed to the respondent, both during his life time and after his death. He found that the deceased appeared to have resented the very existence of the respondent and to have held her responsible for his being forced into an early marriage, with the consequent effect which that marriage had upon his life.
Throughout his life time the deceased did little or nothing for the respondent. He took her away from school at an early age, and, in effect, disowned her, often denying to others that she was his daughter and introducing her as his niece. He offered her no physical manifestations of his affection such as a father would to his daughter and there was evidence that on many occasions when the respondent attempted to show affection through physical contact with the deceased he would rebuff such overtures. That the relationship between the deceased and the respondent was not a particularly good one for very large periods of the deceased's life time was the fault of no one but the deceased himself.
He spurned the advances of the respondent. He rejected her affection. The respondent did more than any normal daughter could have been expected to do, especially during the last months of his life time.
Apparently the deceased recognised in that final period what an outstanding daughter he had.
In coming to determine what order should be made, the Master observed - 
There was no other person to whom the deceased owed any moral duty or who had any moral claim upon his bounty. Neither of the two grandchildren beneficiaries had a particularly close or affectionate relationship with the deceased and in common with their father showed little interest in the deceased during the last five months of his life. Each had a secure career, were the owners of their own residence and had other assets.
Their financial and material circumstances were such that the Court would not on their account reduce or refuse an order of the nature which the financial and material circumstances of the respondent would justify the Court in making. .
The respondent's chief need was security of accommodation.
The respondent for a period of about seventeen years had secure accommodation in a house property in Melbourne which she owned. Partly to look after her father she moved to the Central Coast but was not able to purchase a house property there with the balance of the proceeds of sale of her Melbourne residence. The Master said: "I consider that the moral duty of the deceased, in the circumstances of the instant case, extended to providing (the respondent) with secure accommodation. Such accommodation is readily available, being the home unit owned by the deceased during his life time. I consider that (the respondent) is entitled to receive that home unit absolutely." 
In addition the Master considered that the moral duty of the deceased extended to making provision for a general improvement in the extremely modest life style of the respondent and making provision for some possible unexpected contingency. He said: "I consider that (the respondent) should receive, in addition to the home unit, a legacy in the sum of $60,000.
There will then remain to be divided equally between the two beneficiaries an amount of about $140,000." 
MORAL DUTY
The expressions "moral duty" and "moral obligation" have for many years been used by the Courts in New South Wales in deciding applications under the
FP Act and its predecessor the Testator's Family Maintenance and [Guardianship of Infants Act 1916](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/goia1916231/) (the TFM Act) and in other jurisdictions both in Australia and elsewhere in deciding applications under similar legislation. In his judgment in In re Allen (Deceased) Allen versus Manchester, referred to by the majority in Singer versus Berghouse, in a passage quoted with approval by the Privy
Council in Bosch versus Perpetual Trustee Company Limited [(1938) AC 463] at 479,
Salmond J said that the Act was designed to enforce the moral obligation of a testator to use his testamentary powers for the purpose of making proper and adequate provision after his death for the support of his wife and children, having regard to his means, to the means and deserts of the several claimants, and to the relative urgency of the various moral claims upon his bounty.
This dictum, together with that part of Salmond J's judgment which immediately followed it and was set out by the majority in Singer v Berghouse, was quoted with approval by Gibbs J in Hughes versus National Trustees, Executors and Agency
Co of Australasia Limited at , a case, brought under similar legislative provisions in the Victorian [Administration and Probate Act 1958](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/aapa1958259/), which concerned conduct allegedly disentitling the applicant to the benefit of an order. Mason and Aicken JJ agreed with the reasons of Gibbs J. The fourth member of the majority, Murphy J, in the passage referred to by the majority in Singer versus Berghouse, sounded a note of warning when he said at 158-9: "I am satisfied that the appellant was left without adequate provision for his proper maintenance and support in that the distribution of the estate was not such as to make adequate provision [(s91)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/aapa1958259/s91.html) and the inadequacy was not made up by independent means (see s95). Many cases suggest that an applicant must show a moral claim as well (see, eg Bosch v
Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd); this gloss on the Act is unwarranted and inconsistent with the language and with the legislative scheme. The statutory specification of a deceased's spouse and children as persons entitled to claim if the distribution of the estate does not make adequate provision (s91) is a legislative judgment that such persons have a claim unless disentitled under s96 (1) or unless they are adequately provided for by independent means (see s95)."
Later at 159-160 Murphy J said: "Difficulty arises from the unwarranted introduction of the notion of moral claim into s91, from which it follows that the appellant must establish his moral claim; in effect, his character and conduct must qualify him for the benefit of provision out of the estate. In this case, Harris J (with whom
Starke J agreed) stated: '......
evidence may be relevant both to the establishment of a moral claim by an applicant, which is part of his case, and also to character or conduct disentitling him to a benefit. In this case, the evidence considered by the learned Judge was clearly relevant to the question whether the appellant had a moral claim upon the bounty of the deceased. In my opinion, what the learned Judge did was to say that the onus lay on the appellant to establish his claim (part of which was to establish a moral claim) and to say that, having considered all the evidence, he was not satisfied that the appellant had a moral claim.
In my opinion, the learned Judge did not place on the appellant any burden of proof which did not lie on him.' 
In my opinion, this confuses the simple operation of the sections. Section 91 specifies the conditions of qualification; s96 specified the conditions of disentitlement of disqualification. To bring himself within s91, the appellant does not have to establish any moral claim or qualification other than those specified in the section."
In Goodman versus Windeyer at 497 the dictum from the judgment of Salmond J in
In re Allen was again quoted with approval by Gibbs J with whose reasons for judgment Stephen and Mason
JJ agreed. In that case Murphy J dissented. At -5 his Honour in the second passage referred to by the majority in Singer v
Berghouse said: "This is another case in which the question of whether an applicant was left without adequate provision is confused by the introduction of considerations of moral duty. In Re Bodman [(1972) QdR 281] at 284 Hoare J said: 'Unless the applicant can show that he or she was, at the relevant time, in 'need' of proper provision from the estate then the Court has no jurisdiction to make an order even though it considers that there was a clear failure of a moral obligation on the part of the testator'.

The reference to lack of jurisdiction is inappropriate but the principle stated is correct. Unless an applicant is left without adequate provision, he or she is not entitled to an order, even if the circumstances disclose a breach of moral obligation. I adhere to what I said in Hughes versus National
Trustees Executors and Agency Co (Australasia) Ltd."
The point made in the judgments to which Murphy J referred was that the existence of a moral obligation owed by the deceased to the claimant was a necessary part of the claimant's case but not alone sufficient to justify an order in the claimant's favour. Thus in theory an order would not be made out of the estate of a deceased parent in favour of a child who had over many years completely cut himself or herself off from the parent, even though the child was left in need. On the other hand a wealthy child who had cared for the parent throughout his or her life may have no claim for further provision under the legislation.
In Bosch versus Perpetual Trustee Company Limited at 477-8 their Lordships cited with approval the following passage from the judgment of
Stout CJ in In re Allardice; Allardice versus Allardice [(1910) 29 NZLR 659], a decision of the New Zealand Court of Appeal, at 670: "The whole circumstances have to be considered. Even in many cases where the Court comes to a decision that the will is most unjust from a moral point of view, that is not enough to make the
Court alter the testator's disposition of his property. The first inquiry in every case must be what is the need of maintenance and support; and the second, what property has the testator left."
The Courts, in giving effect to the legislative scheme, have accepted that bare moral claims of the sort mentioned by Stout CJ will not alone suffice to empower the Court to make an order.
The relevance of "morality" as a justification for taking account of a claimant's behaviour generally or to the deceased in particular has been less clear. Section 3 (2) of the TFM Act provided that the Court might refuse to make an order in favour of any person whose character or conduct was such as to disentitle him to the benefit of such an order. A widow's adultery, although brought about by the deceased's conduct, and a son's chronic drinking have led to the refusal of orders; In the Will of TM [(1929) QWN 2] and see Davern
Wright Testator's Family Maintenance in Australia and New Zealand, 3rd ed, at and following.
Section 3 of the TFM Act (and its equivalent in other jurisdictions proceeded on the same basis) conditioned the Court's discretion to provide for such maintenance out of the estate as the Court thought fit upon the deceased, by the terms of his or her will or as the result of intestacy, leaving the persons entitled to claim, or any of them, without adequate provision for their proper maintenance, education or advancement in life. In this context the deceased's failure to make such provision was regarded as a failure to fulfil a moral duty or obligation and to give rise to a moral claim on the deceased's estate.
The scheme of the FP Act is different. Section enables the Court, on the application of an eligible person, to order that such provision be made out of the estate or notional estate of a deceased person as, in the opinion of the Court, "ought, having regard to the circumstances at the time the order is made, to be made for the maintenance, education or advancement in life of the eligible person." Section 9 of the FP Act, so far as presently material, provides as follows: "(2) The Court shall not make an order under section 7 .....
in favour of an eligible person out of the estate or notional estate of a deceased person unless it is satisfied that: the provision (if any) made in favour of the eligible person by the deceased person either during his lifetime or out of his estate; ..........
 is, at the time the Court is determining whether or not to make such an order, inadequate for the proper maintenance, education and advancement in life of the eligible person.

In determining what provision (if any) ought to be made 'in favour of an eligible person out of the estate or notional estate of a deceased person, the Court may take into consideration: any contribution made by the eligible person, whether of a financial nature or not and whether by way of providing services of any kind or in any other manner, being a contribution directly or indirectly to: the acquisition, conservation or improvement of property of the deceased person; or the welfare of the deceased person, including a contribution as a homemaker: the character and conduct of the eligible person before and after the death of the deceased person; circumstances existing before and after the death of the deceased person, and any other matter which it considers relevant in the circumstances.

Nothing in subsection (3) (a) limits the generality of subsection (b), (c) and (d) and the Court may consider a contribution of the same nature as that referred to in subsection (3) (a) or of a different nature in so far as it considers it relevant under subsection (3) (b), (c) or (d)."
Section 9 prohibits the Court from interfering with testamentary dispositions or the distribution of an intestate's estate except to the extent necessary to ensure adequate provision for the proper maintenance education and advancement in life of eligible persons. In determining what provision, if any, ought to be made in favour of an eligible person out of the estate the
Court may take into consideration any contribution made by the eligible person to the property or welfare of the deceased and the character and conduct of the eligible person before and after the death of the deceased person as well as other circumstances and any other matter it considers relevant in the circumstances.
Section 9 (3) (b) of the FP Act speaks not in terms of the
Court's refusing to make an order because of conduct disentitling but, with quite a different emphasis, of the Court's taking into consideration the character and conduct of the eligible person before and after the death of the deceased person in determining what provision (if any) ought to be made in favour of the eligible person.
The FP Act requires the Court to be satisfied, at the time it is determining whether or not to make an order, that the provision (if any) made for the eligible person is inadequate. Under the previous legislation both the
High Court and the Privy Council held that the question whether the provision made in the will was inadequate for the claimant's proper maintenance was to be determined according to the circumstances as at the date of the deceased's death; Coates versus National Trustee Company Limited <case>; [(1956) 95 CLR 494] In Coates' case at 507 Dixon CJ referred to the decision of
Townley J in Re Brown deceased [(1952) QSR 47] and said: "In the course of his reasons Townley J referred to the statement made 'in Bosch versus Perpetual Trustee Co Limited for the Privy Council by Lord Romer to the effect that the court must place itself in the position of the testator and consider what he ought to have done in all the circumstances of the case, treating the testator for that purpose as a wise and just rather than a fond or foolish husband or father. The learned judge then said: 'To take into consideration changes in circumstances which could not have been foreseen by the testator would be to attribute to him not only wisdom and a sense of justice but also the gift of prophesy. What the testator 'ought to have done in all the circumstances of the case' could only be determined by a consideration of matters as they stood, at the latest, at his death. Unforeseeable circumstances arising after that event surely could not govern the wisdom or justice of his actions whilst alive. The court is required to determine whether or not he has made adequate provision in his will for the proper maintenance and support of the applicant which would seem to indicate that the court is to put itself in his position, attributing to him justice and wisdom, not after but immediately before death'.

The considerations stated by Townley J in this passage confirm the interpretation which the actual words of the provision suggest."
The Court was bound to take account of contingent events as well as what might be considered certain or exceedingly likely to happen; see 508. Even so, the judicially developed principle of a testator's moral duty or obligation, which necessarily meant what the testator, while living, could reasonably be expected to do, drove the Courts to the conclusion that the circumstances in existence at the date of death determined whether the Court had power to intervene; compare
Williams J at 512 and Fullagar J at 522. The application of such an inflexible principle, which could work injustice in particular cases, demonstrates the danger of departing from the language used, in an area of the law peculiarly the creature of statute, and (in the words of Stephen J in
White versus Barron <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 431] at 439) of propounding broad judicial doctrine in the form of rules of purportedly general application and relative inflexibility.
While the provision for an eligible person under a will or on intestacy, when considered in the circumstances obtaining at the date of the deceased's death, might fulfil the deceased's "moral duty or obligation", changed circumstances between then and the time when the Court is hearing an application may demonstrate that the provision in the circumstances then obtaining is inadequate for the proper maintenance of the eligible person. The deceased's fulfilment of his or her moral obligation becomes irrelevant. It is as unreal as as it is unnecessary to determine whether an order and, if so, what order should be made by reference to an obligation moral or otherwise of the deceased. The question posed by the FP Act is whether, in the opinion of the Court, any (and if so, what) provision ought to be made for the maintenance, education or advancement in life of the eligible person, having regard to the circumstances at the time the order is made.
Furthermore the list of eligible persons defined by the FP Act extends beyond the deceased's wife or husband or children, to persons living with the deceased as wife or husband on a bona fide domestic basis and persons who, at any particular time, were wholly or partly dependent upon the deceased and were either a grandchild of the deceased person or at that particular time or at any other time a member of a household of which the deceased person was a member; see Ball versus Newey [(1988) 13 NSWLR 489.] In consequence the concept of a moral obligation or duty owed by the deceased to persons during the deceased's lifetime is ill suited to describe the task to be undertaken by the Court when deciding whether an order should be made and, if so, what the nature of that order should be.
The majority of the High Court in Singer versus Berghouse at 657 restated the approach to be taken as follows: "The first question is, was the provision (if any) made for the applicant inadequate for (his or her) proper maintenance, education and advancement in life'? The difference between 'adequate' and 'proper' and the inter-relationship which exists between 'adequate provision' and 'proper maintenance' etc were explainec in Bosch versus Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd. The determination of the first stage in the two-stage process calls for an assessment of whether the provision (if any) made was inadequate for what, in all the circumstances, was the proper level of maintenance etc appropriate for the applicant having regard, amongst other things, to the applicant's financial position, the size and nature of the deceased's estate, the totality of the relationship between the applicant and the deceased, and the relationship between the deceased and other persons who have legitimate claims upon his or her bounty.

The determination of the second stage, should it arise, involves similar considerations. Indeed, in the first stage of the process, the court may need to arrive at an assessment of what is the proper level of maintenance and what is adequate provision, in which event, if it becomes necessary to embark upon the second stage of the process, that assessment will largely determine the order which should be made in favour of the applicant. In saying that, we are mindful that there may be some circumstances in which a court could refuse to make an order notwithstanding that the applicant is found to have been left without adequate provision for proper maintenance. Take, for example, a case like Ellis versus Leeder <case>; [(1951) 82 CLR 645] , where there were no assets from which an order could reasonably be made and making an order could disturb the testator's arrangements to pay creditors."
Their Honours went on to examine the nature of the two stage inquiry and referred to White versus Barron at 441-3, to the judgment of Gibbs J in Goodman v
Windeyer and to Pontifical Society for the Propagation of the
Faith versus Scales <case>; [(1962) 107 CLR 9] at 19.
In Singer versus Berghouse the High Court did not refer to the decision of this Court in Benney versus Jones [(1990) 23 NSWLR 559.] In that case Priestley JA at and following explained the significance of the use of the word "ought" in s7 of the FP Act and said it carried with it an idea of moral obligation. His
Honour with the agreement of Mahoney and Meagher JJA concluded at 469 that the word showed the intention of the FP Act to accept the approach adopted by the majority of the High Court in Hughes and to reject that of Murphy J. Neither in the High Court in Singer versus Berghouse nor in this Court in Benney versus Jones was reference made to s23 of the FP Act which enables the Court to make an order designating property as notional estate of the deceased where at any time before his death the deceased entered into a prescribed transaction, inter alia, "(ii) which took effect within the period of I year before his death, and was entered into at a time when the deceased person had a moral obligation to make adequate provision, by will or otherwise, for the proper maintenance education and advancement in fife of that or any other eligible person which was substantially greater than any moral obligation of the deceased person to enter 'into the prescribed-transaction;".
This is a moral obligation owed by the deceased while living.
Singer versus Berghouse contains an authoritative re-statement of the approach that should be taken by the Court when considering an application under s7 of the FP Act. However, although the FP
Act specifies matters which may be taken into consideration and allows the Court to take into consideration unspecified circumstances existing before and after the death of the deceased person and any other matters which it considers relevant in the circumstances, it leaves undefined the norm by which Courts must determine whether a provision is inadequate for the applicant eligible person's proper maintenance, education and advancement in life. To achieve what is seen to be the legislative intention and bring some certainty into the application of the FP Act, the
Courts have developed principles and standards which have been applied in determining applications under the FP Act and its predecessors. One such was the provision a just and wise testator would have thought it his or her moral duty to make in the interests of the prescribed claimants had he or she been fully aware of all the relevant circumstances.
 .
In deciding whether the provision for an eligible person is inadequate for that person's proper maintenance education or advancement in life the
Court should be guided by consideration of the provision which, in accordance with prevailing community standards of what is night and appropriate and in the cirumstances mentioned in the FP Act and then obtaining, ought to be made in favour of the eligible person; compare While versus Barron at 440 and 445 and
Kearns versus Ellis (unreported) Court of Appeal, 5 December 1984, per Mahoney
JA at 7. I do not think this approach produces any different result from that reached by reference to the concept of moral obligation or duty as that expression had generally been understood or used by the Courts. However it avoids doctrinal and inflexible judge made rules and fulfils the Court's function, adverted to by Mahoney JA at 8, of speaking for the feeling and judgment of fair and reasonable members of the community. This is a well recognised approach in other areas of the law; compare Lord Atkin's "general public sentiment of moral wrongdoing" (Donoghue versus Stevenson <case>; [(1932) AC 562] at ) described by Stephen J in Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Limited versus the Dredge "Willemstad" <case>; [(1976) 136 CLR 529] at 575 as the broad principle which underlies liability in negligence. As well as allowing for change in community standards this approach involves no departure from the language of the FP Act and removes any possible diversion resulting from a consideration of irrelevant moral duties of the sort to which Stout CJ and Murphy J referred and irrelevant behavioural considerations. I think this is the approach which the
Courts should now adopt.
 
THE ORDER UNDER APPEAL
In accordance with authority by which he was bound at the time this case was heard, the Master's reference to the testator's moral duty was entirely justified. However in using the expression the Master was not diverting from the approach which the High Court has now re-stated in Singer versus Berghouse. The error now revealed is one of language. In all the circumstances, to which the
Master referred, I think it was open to him to make an order and to make it in the terms that he did.
At the time of her application the respondent was fifty-nine and in good health.
There were no competing claims. Once it is accepted that adequate provision for her proper maintenance and advancement in life required secure accommodation for life as well as a capital sum to meet exigencies, this need is not met by giving her only a life estate in the home unit. Commonly people in the community need to move from their own home into a unit in a retirement village and then into nursing accommodation and then into total care accommodation; see per Young J in Christie versus Christie (unreported) December at 4. The need can be met if the respondent is given the home unit absolutely. She then has greater flexibility as well as greater security.
Accordingly it seems to me to have been well within an appropriate exercise of discretion for the Master to have made the order he did and I agree with it.
In addition the respondent was, in my opinion, entitled in the circumstances of this case to be provided with an amount sufficient to free her mind from any reasonable fear of any insufficiency as she grows older and her health and strength fail; see In re Harris <case>; [(1936) SASR 497] at 501; Eggler versus Mitchelmore
Court of Appeal, 11 November 1992 at 13. The appellant submitted that an appropriate provision would be $20,000. No reason was advanced. beyond the fact that this amount was considerably less than that awarded by the
Master, to support the conclusion that it was more appropriate. Bearing in mind the respondent's life expectancy and the needs that she is likely to have during her remaining years I consider the amount awarded by the Master appropriate.
 
CONCLUSION
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1997/249.html  
