

Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions versus Spiteri Matter No 13399/97 [1998] NSWSC 346 (19 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 September 1998 
COMMONWEALTH DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v MICHAEL JOHN SPITERI /97 March 1998 
Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter the dispute is in a narrow compass. It is an application under The Proceeds of Crime Act fundamentally that the applicant, Michael John Spiteri, be allowed $30,000 in Australian currency to be transferred from monies held overseas, in particular, from an account in Italy described in the documents, to enable his lawyers to prepare for appeals and proceedings relating to his funds and other appeals, no doubt in connection with his recent conviction for having imported a commercial quantity of cocaine. 
The parties do not dispute that he should have access to money for legal representation, the dispute centres around the terms upon which that should be granted. Mr. Spiteri contends that he should be allowed to withdraw the equivalent from overseas to bring it here and no more; the Director of Public
Prosecutions contends that he should bring all the money back in the identified accounts and they should be placed under the control of the official trustee and then there are various details setting out the reasonable expenses.

I do not understand any issue to be taken with the schedules attached to the draft orders put before the court on behalf of the Director of Public
Prosecutions save should I decide that the money alone should be taken out of the Italian fund and no other order be made, that appropriate adjustment should be made to the schedules.

It is entirely a matter for the discretion of the court under s.48 of the
Proceeds of Crime Act, as I understand it, s.48(1)(a) and s.48(1)(b).

I am satisfied that no injustice would be caused to the applicant, that is
Michael John Spiteri, were it to be made a condition that all the identified funds should be transferred to Australia, as sought by the Director of Public
Prosecutions. There are time limits in existence and procedures other than by bringing the money into Australia with the cooperation of the defendant may not be able to be completed within those time limits and, further, it may very well be that there would need to be additional applications for funding in relation to the conduct of all necessary proceedings and by bringing all the money in now, any further delays in dealing with these matters would be avoided.

There has been mention made of an alleged deception in that the funds overseas were not disclosed to the Legal Aid Commission and while it is important to emphasise that the director is in no way acting as a debt collector for the
Legal Aid Commission, I think it is, nevertheless, a relevant factor in exercising my discretion under s.48 and that factor weighs against acceding to the proposition put forward by Mr. Spiteri. I think it only right to mention that because it has been canvassed in argument and is referred to in the affidavits.

Accordingly, I propose and do make the orders sought in the document put before me on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions. Those are orders numbered one to six with the accompanying schedules and I shall sign those orders and date them and place them with the court papers.

PLIBERSEK: Can I seek an order that each party pay their own costs as to today's proceedings? 
HIS HONOUR: No order as to costs. * * * 
