

Regina versus Warren Laing [2000] NSWSC 1272 (21 March 2000) 
REGINA versus Warren LAING /95 
Thursday, 20 June 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, ABADEE J, LEVINE J 
RESULT: Leave to appeal refused.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: The court has just delivered its decision in the appeal of Mr Craig Laing against his conviction of cultivating not less than a commercial quantity of cannabis plants. The court upheld his appeal and quashed his conviction. His father, Mr Warren Laing was convicted at the same trial. The case against him was a considerably stronger one than that against his son. No doubt for that reason, he did not appeal against conviction but sought leave to appeal against sentence. 
There were two principal points that his counsel sought to make in support of his application.

The first was what was said to be a disparity between the sentence imposed upon him by the sentencing judge and that imposed upon his son for the same offence. The difference in sentencing was not, in my opinion, unreasonable.
The reasons given by the sentencing judge for it seem to me to have been perfectly sensible.

Further, although on a fractional basis (that is comparing the applicant's minimum term of two and a half years with his son's minimum term of two years) the difference might be thought to be significant, as a practical matter, the difference on the facts of the case and in the circumstances of the two men would not be such as in any event to excite any remark.

However, I need not go further into the disparity point, because the result of the son's appeal is that his sentence has been set aside. It seems to me that what remains for this court to do after that happening is simply to consider
Mr Warren's sentence on its merits in its own circumstances without reference to the now set aside sentence imposed upon the son.

This leaves the second of the two main points put for the applicant. This point was that the applicant's state of health justified a lesser sentence than that which he is presently serving.

There had been evidence before the sentencing judge that the applicant suffered from rheumatoid arthritis and had a coronary heart disease. There had also been evidence in the course of the jury trial itself of physical difficulties experienced by the applicant leading to periods in hospital. The sentencing judge took those matters into account as a special circumstances in sentencing the applicant.

In support of his application the applicant sought to put further evidence of his ill health before this court. Following various objections raised by the
Crown, some matters were not pressed on the applicant's behalf. What was pressed, and objected to by the Crown, were hospital report dated 12 April indicating the applicant was a "new diabetic", a letter dated 12 April on the letterhead of the Corrections Health Service which (it was asserted) showed that as a result of having contracted diabetes the applicant's eyes required treatment for "uncontrolled glaucoma", and a histopathology report dated 27 February 1996 describing a skin cancer, which, according to the report, had been completely excised. Counsel for the applicant said from the Bar table that he was instructed that since the report there had been a recurrence of this particular cancer.

The court admitted this evidence subject to objection. To decide on its admissibility for purposes of the application would require some discussion of relevant authorities and a detailed examination of a number of factual matters. The court does not think that a final ruling is necessary on these matters in this case, but, without ruling that the evidence is admissible, will take it into account in considering the application.

Some evidence tendered concerning the applicant's health was not objected to.
This dealt principally with the current state of symptoms of the matters taken into account by the sentencing judge.

The facts of the offence of which the applicant was convicted are set out sufficiently for purposes of considering the present application in the reasons just handed down in the case of Mr Craig Laing.

In sentencing the present applicant Luland DCJ took into account his age and his health. He noted that he had been convicted on 26 June 1991 on two counts of supplying a prohibited drug for which he had been sentenced to twelve months imprisonment and to three months for the possession of drugs. He had appealed against these convictions and was on bail at the time of the commission of the cultivation offence. On 10 March 1993 the appeal was decided and his twelve months sentence reduced to six months. The sentencing judge in my view rightly took into account that to have committed the cultivation offence during the pendency of his appeal aggravated the seriousness of his behaviour.

The sentencing judge commented that the applicant had shown no remorse for his offence. He went on to say the cultivation of prohibited plants was a serious offence, particularly when it involved a commercial quantity and particularly again when as in the present case, the plants themselves were not seized and destroyed.

It was in these circumstances that he imposed a head sentence of four years and six months and a minimum term of two years six months imprisonment to commence on 22 September 1995 and to expire on 21 March 1998, the additional term of two years to commence on 22 March 1998 and expire on 21 March 2000.

It was submitted on the applicant's behalf that the sentencing judge had limited his consideration of the applicant's state of health to the question whether or not it constituted a special circumstance entitling him to impose a lesser minimum term than otherwise would have been required. It was submitted that he should have given more general weight to the matter of health. Looking at the result of the sentencing judge's consideration however it seems to me that it was well within an appropriate range for the particular offence and would have been no different had the question of the applicant's health been approached in the way which it is now submitted it should have been.

It is regrettable that the applicant finds himself in a poor and apparently deteriorating state of health in custody. However, I think the sentencing judge gave appropriate weight to the state of affairs as it was at the time of sentencing. Taking the further evidence concerning his health into account, I do not think that the reasonableness of the sentence, either at the time of sentence by the sentencing judge, or today, is affected. It is the duty of the executive authorities to see that the applicant is properly cared for in custody and to determine whether, as an executive matter, he should receive some clemency.

So far as his application for leave to appeal against his sentence is concerned however it seems to me that the sentencing judge carried out his task appropriately, without any error of approach or of fact, and that there is no basis for this court to interfere with the sentence he imposed.

I would refuse leave to appeal.
 
ABADEE J: I agree with the reasons of Priestley JA and the orders that he proposes.

LEVINE J: I agree with Priestley JA.
 * * * 
