

Aghajanian versus Stanley Thompson Valuers Pty Ltd [2000] NSWSC 215 (3 March )

Last Updated: 16 October 2000 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT 
CITATION: Aghajanian versus Stanley Thompson Valuers Pty Ltd <case> 
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity 
FILE NUMBER(S): 4779/91 
HEARING DATE{S): 4 February and 3 March 2000 
JUDGMENT DATE: 03/03/2000 
PARTIES: 
Yourik Aghajanian (P1) 
Emmik Aghajanian (P2) 
Nshan Pty Limited (P3) 
Alice Aghajanian (P4) 
Ara Aghajanian (P5) 
Shakeh Arakelian (P6) 
Stanley Thompson Valuers Pty Limited (D) 
JUDGMENT OF: Hamilton J 
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable 
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable 
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable 
COUNSEL: 
S Donaldson (P1-6) 
S Kalfas (D) 
SOLICITORS: 
Tress Cocks & Maddox (P1-6) 
Phillips Fox (D) 
CATCHWORDS: 
PROCEDURE [574] - Costs - Departing from the general rule - Orders for costs on indemnity basis - Relevant considerations - Calderbank letter and other offers of compromise - Hopelessness of plaintiffs' case - Whether plaintiffs' conduct reasonable.

ACTS CITED: 
DECISION: 
Defendant's application for indemity costs refused.

JUDGMENT: 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
HAMILTON J 
FRIDAY, 3 MARCH 2000 /91 YOURIK AGHAJANIAN & ORS versus STANLEY THOMPSON VALUERS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This matter is before me this morning for the hearing of an application that the costs orders in favour of the defendant against the plaintiffs in these proceedings be orders on an indemnity basis. I delivered judgment in the proceedings on 17 December 1999: Aghajanian versus Stanley Thompson Valuers Pty
Ltd [[1999] NSWSC 1154] ("my judgment"). The defendant was successful in the proceedings. The plaintiffs were entirely unsuccessful in the proceedings. The plaintiffs do not oppose the making of an order for costs against them of the proceedings on the ordinary basis.
 Mr Kalfas, of counsel, however, applies on behalf of the defendant for indemnity costs of the whole proceedings. That application has been the sole subject matter debated before me this morning. Mr Kalfas argued that those costs should be awarded on either or a combination of the bases that the proceedings were hopeless and that a series of offers were made by the defendant to the plaintiffs during the course of the proceedings which it was unreasonable in the circumstances that the plaintiffs did not accept. The lengthy course of those offers, some put in the form of Calderbank letters and others made in the course of without prejudice negotiations, is set out in an affidavit of Peter Tredinnick, a member of the defendant's solicitors' firm.
 It is true that in my judgment all issues actually determined were determined against the plaintiffs, and I indicated that on other vital issues
I should have found against the plaintiffs, if that were necessary. The defendant's victory, therefore, was resounding. That does not mean that the decision on each of the issues contested was an obvious or easy one. Thus, the terms of my judgment indicate that the issue of the breach of a duty of care was an issue of some considerable difficulty and complexity factually. The question of whether a duty of care existed in the circumstances was, in addition, an issue of some considerable legal complexity. As to the issue of reliance, one matter was comparatively easy, as far as the decision was concerned, namely, the conclusion that none of the plaintiffs had seen the subject valuation before commitment to the transaction. That was clear on the evidence. However, there was considerable evidence (albeit, as it turned out, conflicting) as to whether the amount of the valuation had been conveyed to various of the plaintiffs at a more material time and, indeed, there was even conflict as to the amount said to have been told to them as the amount of the valuation. Thus reliance also involved issues of some difficulty both as to fact and as to law: see the recent decisions of Perre versus Apand Pty Ltd <case>; [(1999) 73 ALJR 1190]; Mahlo v Westpac Banking Corporation Ltd <case>
Whilst the plaintiff in the end lost on every issue, it was a case where the sense in which the various questions would be determined was not apparent before their exploration in the lengthy hearing which took place: see per Hill
J in John S Hayes & Associates Pty Limited versus Kimberley-Clark Australia
Pty Limited <case> and Wentworth versus Rogers <case>; and see also the decision of Lindgren J in the Federal Court in MGICA (1992)
Ltd versus Kenny & Good Pty Ltd (No 2) [(1996) 70 FCR 236.] These cases emphasise that the matter is essentially one for the exercise of a discretion at large by the Judge at first instance and also emphasise that one factor which should be taken into consideration is the protection of the integrity of the process of negotiation, which may lead to the settlement of litigation. It is important in relieving the Court of work, but of even greater importance in enabling parties to resolve disputes with early certainty and without the unnecessary expenditure of large sums of money at trial and in the appellate process.
 I do not need to outline in detail the negotiation process which is dealt with in Mr Tredinnick's affidavit. One important fact that needs to be borne in mind is, as was indicated in my judgment, that this suit was originally part of a number of actions arising from the Aghajanians' unfortunate transaction. The other proceedings were proceedings against them by their financier, AGC, and proceedings for negligence by them against their solicitor's firm. Those proceedings were settled, but not, as the evidence shows, until May of 1997. Up to that time the possibility could not be eliminated that, if proceedings against this defendant were withdrawn, the solicitor defendants, at least, would attempt to throw blame on the valuers rather than themselves if a trial against them took place. The prospects of success of such an argument may now appear slight, and may even have been understood to be slight at the time. However, such arguments have a tendency to come to the fore if one of the defendants in multi defendant litigation is eliminated. This risk could only have been totally removed if it were quite plain that the other defendants would not resort to such an argument if their cases proceeded. There was no evidence that that was so in this case. That is something that must be taken into account in considering the reasonableness of the plaintiffs' response to offers made up to May of 1997. I have examined the course of offers made before and since that time and, in the end, I do not accept that the plaintiffs' course of conduct, in not accepting any of the offers that were open to it from time to time, was so unreasonable as to justify the making of an order against them for indemnity costs.
 The conclusion is that the grounds put forward to justify an order for indemnity costs were not made out, looking at them either separately or in combination. The order of the Court as to the costs of the proceedings will, therefore, be that the plaintiffs pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings. As far as the argument this morning is concerned, the hearing was rendered necessary only by the defendant's desire to apply for indemnity costs. As it has lost that argument, an order should be made that the defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of the application for indemnity costs of the proceedings. The orders of the Court will be as follows: Judgment for the defendant.
 Order that the defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of the application for indemnity costs of the proceedings.
 Order that the plaintiffs otherwise pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings.
 ...oOo...

LAST UPDATED: 03/04/2000 * * * 
