

Langton versus Independent Commission Against Corruption Matter No 30027/98 [1998] NSWSC 559 (3 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
BRIAN JOSEPH LANGTON versus INDEPENDENT COMMISSION AGAINST CORRUPTION /98 November 1998 
Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
Name: Brian Joseph Langton versus Independent Commission Against Corruption 
Proceedings No. 30027/98 
Coram: Sperling J 
Date/s of Hearing: 26, 27, 28 October 1998 
Date of Judgment: 3 November 1998 
Catchwords: 
Administrative law - application for judicial review of finding of corrupt conduct by Independent Commission Against Corruption. 
Administrative law - interpretation of Guide to Members' Facilities and Services, Parliament of New South Wales, Legislative Assembly, October 1993 - air travel entitlements re charter flights - whether warrants transferable by members not travelling on the flight. [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) 
Greiner versus Independent Commission Against Corruption [(1992) 28 NSWLR ]

Counsel for the Plaintiff: J A McCarthy QC/P M Skinner/DD Knoll 
Solicitors: Chalmers Marx 
Counsel for the First Defendant: The Hon T E F Hughes AO QC/A O'Sullivan 
Solicitors: K Richardson, Solicitor to the Commissioner 
No. of Pages: 24 
BRIAN JOSEPH LANGTON versus ICAC (INDEPENDENT COMMISSION AGAINST CORRUPTION) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Background 
In April 1998 the Independent Commission Against Corruption (the Commission) furnished a report pursuant to the [Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) (the
Act), following an investigation into the conduct of The Hon Brian Langton MP (the plaintiff) and six other members of Parliament, in relation to five air charters in 1994. The investigation was conducted by The Hon. B S J O'Keefe
AM, QC (the Commissioner). The Commissioner found that there was corrupt conduct on the part of the plaintiff. On 21 May 1998, the plaintiff filed a statement of claim in proceedings previously instituted by him claiming declarations which challenge that finding.

Initially, the Commission, the State of New South Wales and the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly of New South Wales were joined as defendants. However, the plaintiff subsequently discontinued the proceedings against the second and third defendants, leaving the Commission as the only defendant.

At the relevant time, the plaintiff was the member for Kogarah in the
Legislative Assembly of the New South Wales Parliament, and Minister for Fair
Trading and Minister for Emergency Services. There were arrangements for payment out of public funds for air travel undertaken by members of Parliament and associated persons. These arrangements involved the issue of air travel warrants. It was common ground that the use of such air travel warrants was regulated by the Guide to Members' Facilities and Services, Parliament of New
South Wales, Legislative Assembly, dated October 1993 and issued to members of the Legislative Assembly for the 50th Parliament of New South Wales (hereafter referred to as "the Guide" or "the 1993 Guide").

It was common ground in the investigation by the Commission and in the proceedings before this Court that the plaintiff had arranged and travelled on air charter flights using warrants which included warrants supplied by members of Parliament who did not travel on such flights. The Commission found that the use of warrants supplied by members who did not fly on the charter flights was not permitted by the Guide properly construed. The plaintiff contended to the contrary at the investigation and in the proceedings before this Court, arguing that such use of warrants was permitted by the Guide properly construed.

The pleadings 
This issue was reflected in the pleadings in the present proceedings. The following is an extract from the plaintiff's statement of claim: "4. Upon the proper construction of the Guide, air travel warrants are transferable between Members of the Legislative Assembly where one Member elects to surrender additional warrants to meet the cost of an air charter notwithstanding that any Member who elects to surrender additional air travel warrants to meet that cost does not travel on that air charter."
The first defendant (the Commission) conducted the investigation, furnished the report and made the finding (collectively, `acted'), without or in excess of jurisdiction and in error of law, (collectively `In error'), in the following respects: a) Air travel warrants are transferable where one Member elects to surrender additional warrants to meet the cost of air charter. In error, the first defendant acted upon the basis that `Warrants are not transferable between
Members except where a Member's travelling on an air charter elect/s to surrender additional warrants between them to meet the cost of the air charter' (Report page 27.1) ...
 g) On the facts as found in the report, the plaintiff's conduct is not properly characterised as corrupt conduct within the meaning of the Act.
 h) In error, the first defendant (the Commission) found that the plaintiff engaged in corrupt conduct in the respects detailed in the report." 
So far as is presently relevant, the statement of claim seeks the following relief: a) A declaration that upon the proper construction of the Guide to Members'
Entitlements Facilities and Services, Parliament of New South Wales,
Legislative Assembly, dated October 1993, air travel warrants are transferable between members of the Legislative Assembly where one member elects to surrender additional warrants to meet the costs of an air charter notwithstanding that any member who elects to surrender additional air travel warrants to meet that cost does not travel on that air charter.
 b) A declaration that the plaintiff was lawfully entitled to meet the cost of the air charters by means of air travel warrants surrendered by other members of the Legislative Assembly notwithstanding that the members who surrendered those air travel warrants did not travel on those air charters.
 c) A declaration that the finding by the first defendant (the Commission), in the report furnished by it to the President of the Legislative Council and the Third Defendant, and entitled `Investigation into Parliamentary and
Electorate Travel: First Report April 1998', that the plaintiff engaged in corrupt conduct within the meaning of the [Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/), in the respects detailed in that report, was made without or in excess of jurisdiction, and is a nullity.
 d) A declaration that, on the facts found in the said report, the said finding was wrong in law.
 ...
 g) Such further or other declaration or order as the Court thinks fit.
 h) Costs." 
By its defence, the Commission denied the matters alleged in paras 4 and 12 of the plaintiff's statement of claim and disputed the plaintiff's entitlement to the declarations sought.

The nature of the proceedings 
The competency of these proceedings as a vehicle for judicial review of the
Commission's ultimate finding is established by the decision of this Court in
Greiner versus Independent Commission Against Corruption [(1992) 28 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281992%29%2028%20NSWLR%20125 "View LawCiteRecord" ) In that case, Priestley JA made the following cautionary observations (at ).
 "The proceedings in this Court are not an appeal. The Court has no power in these proceedings to investigate the facts of Mr Greiner's conduct. It has no power to do more than consider whether the Commissioner made any error of law in reporting his finding that Mr Greiner's conduct was corrupt for the purposes of the Act. One aspect of the proceedings that highlights their very limited nature is that only a fragment of the evidence which was before the
Commissioner is before this Court. This Court's decision flows from its opinion on questions of law involved in the Commissioner's finding and from nothing else." 
Those observations apply with equal force to the present case. A decision in these proceedings is not - and should not be construed as being - a determination by this Court as to whether the plaintiff has engaged in corrupt conduct within the meaning of the Act.

The Act 
I set out the provisions of the Act which are relevant: "8(1) Corrupt conduct is: ...
 any conduct of a public official that constitutes or involves the dishonest or partial exercise of any of his or her official functions, or any conduct of a public official or former public official that constitutes or involves a breach of public trust, or ...

Corrupt conduct is also any conduct of any person(whether or not a public official) that adversely affects, or that could adversely affect, either directly or indirectly, the exercise of official functions by any public official, any group or body of public officials or any public authority and which could involve any of the following matters: ...
 fraud, ...
 (1) Despite section 8, conduct does not amount to corrupt conduct unless it could constitute or involve: a criminal offence, or ...
 ...
 in the case of conduct of a Minister of the Crown or a member of a House of Parliament - a substantial breach of an applicable code of conduct.
 ...

For the purposes of this section: ...
 criminal offence means a criminal offence under the law of the State or under any other law relevant to the conduct in question." 
The Guide 
The relevant provisions of the Guide are as follows. A section of the Guide deals with travel, and a sub-section deals with air travel. The sub-section provides that members are provided with air travel entitlements for electorate and parliamentary business only, being in the form of air travel warrants issued by the Accounts Section of the Parliament. Air travel entitlements are also provided to spouses and approved relatives, subject to special requirements relating to them.

Warrants are issued in various classifications. These include S warrants for members (being for 48 single economy class journeys between any two centres in the state during the life of each Parliament), E warrants (being for 104 single economy class journeys per annum between electorate and Sydney for those members representing country electorates), I warrants (being for 12 single interstate journeys during the life of each Parliament), EM warrants (being for 32 single economy class journeys per annum between electorate and
Sydney for Ministers representing country electorates), SS and ES warrants (being respectively for 16 and 20 journeys per annum undertaken by city and country members' spouses or approved relatives).

The Guide goes on to provide: "Transfer and use of warrants ...

Warrants are ..... not transferable between members, spouses or approved relatives or other members, spouses, etc, with the exception of: the transfer of up to six electorate to Sydney warrants per annum from a member to electorate office staff (see Electorate Office Staff Travel
Entitlements); or where one member elects to surrender additional warrants to meet the cost of an air charter (see Air Charters)." (I will refer to this as "the no transfer provision".) It may be noted that para (2)(b) refers to a "member". It does not refer also to other warrant holders, namely, spouses and approved relatives. It also employs the phrase "one member" rather than "a member or members" . I will return to these features of the provision.

The Guide goes on to provide: "Air Charter Travel 
Members, spouses or approved relatives may charter a plane in lieu of travelling on commercial flights provided that: 
Sufficient warrants based on the equivalent commercial cost of one person travelling are surrendered.

Any member, spouse or approved relative travelling on the charter using
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council air travel entitlements must surrender warrants or entitlements between them to meet the total cost of the charter.

It is the responsibility of the member organising the charter to ensure that sufficient warrants are surrendered to meet the total cost of the charter or, alternatively, make up any shortfall by the payment of cash within 30 days of the receipt of an invoice from the Financial Controller.

Warrants surrendered for air charter travel must be of the same category as the charter undertaken, e.g., travel between any two centres in New South
Wales will require the surrender of intrastate warrants only.

For the purpose of calculating the number of warrants to be surrendered, each stopover will be counted as a single journey. Each leg will be costed based on flying time or information supplied by charter operator. Any fractions will be rounded up to the next complete warrant (see appendix for form)." (I will refer to this as "the air charter provision".) It may be noted that there is a shift from the singular to the plural:- "Any member" etc becomes a group of persons ("between them"). It may be further noted that para (3) is inconsistent with paras (1) and (2):- Paragraphs (1) and (2), when read together, provide that sufficient warrants must be surrendered by persons travelling on the flight to cover the whole of the cost of the charter, whereas para (3) requires that a shortfall be made up in cash by the organiser. It is clear that paras (1) and (2) must then be read as qualified by para (3). But these drafting deficiencies illustrate a lack of precision, evident throughout the document. I will return to this point.

The Commission's determination 
The Commission found that the plaintiff had organised air charter flights on which he travelled, utilising warrants some of which were supplied by members who did not travel on those flights. That finding was not challenged.

The Commissioner's interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Guide was as follows. There was a prohibition against transfer of warrants subject to two exceptions. Only exception (b) was potentially involved. The use of the word "additional" was important because it was only in the operation of the air charter provision that warrants additional to those required for an ordinary commercial fare were used for a flight. This indicated that exception was subject to the air charter provision. The words "(see Air Charters)" in exception (b) also meant that the detailed requirements relating to the use of warrants for air charter travel had to be complied with in order to bring a transfer of warrants within the exception. One such requirement was that the warrants used for an air charter were to be provided by persons travelling on the flight. Accordingly, the use by the plaintiff of warrants, supplied by members who did not travel, for charter flights on which the plaintiff did travel involved an unsanctioned transfer of those warrants. The plaintiff was not entitled to the benefit of air travel at public expense obtained in this way.

I should say a little more about what I understand the Commissioner to have meant in relation to the use of the phrase "additional warrants". Warrants had an ascertained or ascertainable value for ordinary commercial flights: one warrant for a one way trip, two for a return flight. Conceptually, in relation to a charter flight, one or two warrants (depending on whether it was a one way or a return trip) covered a warrant holder's base fare. The charter cost would commonly exceed the value of warrants used to cover the base fares of those travelling. Whatever warrants were contributed in addition, that is, for the additional cost of the charter flight, covered or went towards the travel costs of all those travelling on the flight. In a sense, such additional warrants were transferred because they covered or went towards the travel costs of persons other than the warrant holder who contributed them. Hence, the use of the expression "additional warrants" in a clause which made an exception to the prohibition against transfer.

The dispute 
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the Commissioner's interpretation of the Guide was wrong, that exception (b) to the prohibition against transfer of warrants between members gave rise to a right of transfer for the purposes of air charter travel, unqualified by other provisions of the Guide relating to air charter travel, that the Commissioner's interpretation was critical to the ultimate finding of corruption, and that the ultimate finding was accordingly vitiated by error.

Counsel for the Commission supported the Commissioner's interpretation of the
Guide. Counsel for the Commission also submitted that the Commissioner's interpretation of the Guide was not critical to the ultimate finding of corruption and, accordingly, did not vitiate the result.

The plaintiff's argument on the meaning of the Guide 
The argument advanced by counsel for the plaintiff against the Commissioner's interpretation of the Guide was as follows.

A Guide issued in 1988 (the 1988 Guide) was the forerunner to the 1993
Guide. It contained a section relating to air travel. The provisions are similar but not identical. The provision relating to air charter flights in the 1988 Guide was (so far as is material) as follows: "Air charter travel may be undertaken by members on official business utilising current air travel warrants without specific prior approval by the
Premier. Where a member arranged an air charter, it would be permissible for that member and any other members who travel on that flight, to surrender however many warrants are required to cover the charter based on the equivalent commercial value of the warrants so issued. Provided that the member responsible for organising the charter forwards the account to the
Parliamentary Accountant, accompanied by the appropriate number of warrants sufficient to fully cover the cost of the charter, the Legislature will pay the account without the member first being required to settle the bill and subsequently seek reimbursement." 
This provision is substantially to the same effect as the air charter provision in the 1993 Guide. (The provision was extended in 1993 to cover warrant holders other than members, but that is not presently relevant.) Then followed the same prohibitions against transfer of warrants as appear in the Guide, but without the exceptions that appear in the 1993 Guide. It was argued that, in this context, exception (b), introduced in 1993, was intended to provide for something new. The new element was said to be as follows.

Just as exception (a) in the 1993 Guide validated transfers to electorate office staff, exception (b) validated transfers by a member in connection with air charters. Exception (b) was unqualified in its terms and, in particular, was not qualified by the restrictions on the use of warrants for air charters appearing in the air charter provision. The words "(see Air Charter)" indicated only that there were other provisions in relation to air charter travel, and directed the reader to them. Those words did not incorporate the air charter provision into the exception.

Unless - so the argument ran - exception (b) was read as creating an entitlement to transfer warrants in excess of the use of warrants for charter flights permitted by the air charter provision, exception (b) is otiose.
 [The difficulty about this approach is that exception (b) can be read as serving a different purpose, namely, to make clear that pooling under the air charter provision was not constrained by the prohibition against transfer of warrants (see later).] 
The same background to the 1993 Guide was also used in a slightly different way. It was argued that, because there was no exception to the no transfer provision in the 1988 Guide and because the air charter provision allowed pooling of warrants by persons travelling on the flight, pooling did not involve a transfer within the meaning of the 1988 Guide. No provision was therefore required to make the air charter arrangements an exception to the no transfer provision.

Accordingly, it was said, when such an exception was created in 1993, it cannot have been for that purpose. It must have been for another purpose. This supported the plaintiff's position that exception (b) was introduced to create a new right of transfer, untrammelled by the restrictive features of the air charter provision.
 [The difficulties about this approach are as follows. The fact that the air charter provision was not made an exception to the no transfer provision in does not mean there was no tension between the two provisions. If there was, one would have to give way. I suggest that the air charter provision would have had to be given priority (see later). Insofar as pooling under the air charter provisions involved transfers, they would then not be transfers within the meaning of the no transfer provision, when read with the air charter provision. But that does not mean the pooling arrangement did not involve transfers of a kind. And it may have been thought prudent to introduce an exception to the no transfer provision in 1993 which made it clear that the air charter provision took priority. The argument does not, therefore, establish that, in the 1988 Guide, the no transfer provision and the air charter provision operated independently, so that anything by way of exception to the no transfer provision, as introduced in 1993, should be seen as creating an entitlement additional to the existing entitlements under the pooling arrangements in the air charter provision.] 
It was pointed out that exception (b) was limited to warrant holders who were members, whereas the air charter provision applied to all classes of warrant holders. This showed - so it was said - that exception (b) was intended to operate independently of the air charter provision, being a provision in favour of a limited class of warrant holder, namely, members.
 [This point depends on reading "members" strictly (see later).] 
Next, it was argued that exception (b) was specifically intended to validate the transfer of the warrants by a member for the purpose of air charter flights on which the member does not travel. Under the air charter provision in isolation, a member travelling on the flight could use any number of warrants issued to him or her without a transfer being involved, because the member would be using the warrants for his or her own benefit. It was only where the member did not travel on the charter flight that exception (b) made a difference to what would otherwise have been the situation. Therefore, it was argued, that must be the difference that exception (b) was intended to make.
 [The competing construction is that exception (b) was not intended to make a difference, that it is there only for more abundant caution (see later).] 
Next, it was argued that the air charter provision required only that warrants used for a charter flight must be surrendered by members, spouses or approved relatives travelling on the flight. It did not specify how such persons must have come by such warrants. The warrants used - or some of them - could, consistently with this provision, have been transferred to such persons under exception (b). The words "(see Air Charter)" in exception (b) were merely a helpful pointer to the provision which spelled out how warrants transferred by a member may be utilised for air charter flights.
 [The argument is circular. It loops back to the meaning of exception (b).] 
I have mentioned difficulties with each of these points. A more fundamental difficulty with the interpretation of the Guide advanced on behalf of the plaintiff is that it is antipathetical to the apparent policy underlying the provisions of the Guide relating to air travel. These difficulties are discussed more fully in the next section of this judgment.

The Court's determination as to the meaning of the Guide 
Notwithstanding the carefully prepared and carefully presented arguments advanced by counsel for the plaintiff, I am affirmatively satisfied that the interpretation given to the 1993 Guide by the Commissioner was right, and plainly so. My reasons include some of the reasons given by the Commissioner for his view, some advanced by counsel for the Commissioner in support of it and some of my own. They are as follows.

The Commission's interpretation of the Guide accords with the apparent policy considerations underlying the air travel provisions of the Guide.
Warrants are issued to individuals according to a predetermined assessment of the reasonable requirements of persons in specified categories. The scheme thus includes a limit on the travel benefits available to persons in each such category. There is no pool of warrants, based on an assessment of the global or aggregate requirement of parliamentarians and associated persons, which is then accessed according to individual needs. Warrants issued in excess of individual requirements, as events turn out, are not available for the use of others whose requirements prove to be greater than assessed for their class of warrant holder. Warrants issued in excess of individual requirements are, accordingly, not translated into a public expense. To that extent, public expenditure is avoided.

In the case of charter flights, a pooling of warrants by those travelling on the flight - whether in equal proportions or otherwise - does not infringe the underlying concept. A person contributing a warrant or warrants uses those warrants for his or her own transport. That is so, irrespective of whether the contribution equates with or is more or less than his or her pro rata share of the charter cost. To allow warrants, issued to persons who do not travel on the charter flight, to be used to provide air transport for others would infringe the concept underlying the scheme in a way that pooling of warrants by those travelling on the flight does not.

Next, it is to be observed that, but for exception (b) in para (2) of the no transfer provision, para (2) of that provision and the air charter provision would have to be read together and reconciled. Insofar as the no transfer provision was inconsistent with the air charter provision, the air charter provision would be given priority. Otherwise, assuming such an inconsistency, a central feature of the air charter provision - the pooling of warrants by persons flying on a charter flight - would be inoperative.
Exception (b) in para (2) of the no transfer provision can then be seen as having a sensible function, that is, to confirm conclusively that the air charter provision is unaffected by the no transfer provision.

The reference to a "member" in exception (b), rather than to any warrant holder, can be seen as an instance of the imprecision which characterises the document as a whole; see, for example, my earlier reference to the drafting deficiencies in paras (2) and (3) of the air charter provision. This can only be another instance of a drafting slip. A literal construction must be rejected. If "member" were construed as relating only to members, as distinct from members and other warrant holders (electorate office staff to whom warrants are transferred under exception (a), and spouses and approved relatives), the exception - according to the plaintiff's argument - would create a right of transfer in favour of members in relation to charter flights, leaving the restrictive features of the air charter provision as being applicable only to non-member warrant holders (electoral staff transferees, spouses and approved relatives). There is no sensible reason for such a distinction. And, if that were intended, the place one would expect to see the distinction made is in the air charter provision. If, on the other hand, exception (b) is intended merely to confirm that the no transfer provision is subject to the air charter provision, the drafting slip is even more obvious. On any view, the exception must be read as intended to apply to all warrant holders. The reference to "member", rather than to all warrant holders, does not, therefore, embarrass the construction supported here.

The phrase "one member" in exception (b) of para (2) of the no transfer provision supports this construction . The phrase implies one or more than one. The exception goes on to refer the reader to the air charter provision: "(see Air Charters)". The phrase "one member" can be a reference only to the persons travelling on a charter flight, as mentioned in the air charter provision. There is no other group of persons, which might include a member, mentioned in the air charter provision.

The word "additional" in exception (b) to para (2) of the no transfer provision also supports this interpretation. I support the Commissioner's view in this regard, as discussed earlier.

The plaintiff's claim in these proceedings depends on the Commissioner's interpretation of the Guide being wrong. I have upheld the Commissioner's interpretation. Accordingly, the plaintiff must fail.

The second point 
It is unnecessary, in these circumstances, to decide whether the
Commissioner's ultimate finding of corrupt conduct was dependent on his interpretation of the Guide. If I had any doubt about the proper construction of the Guide in relevant respects I would decide this point, but I have not. I would add that to do so would involve considerable further time in the preparation of this judgment. I have given priority to being available for other work in the Court, rather than to giving further time to what I would regard as a patently unnecessary exercise. There is the added advantage of a prompt judgment.

Cautionary observation 
I repeat, as stated earlier in this judgment, that nothing I have written is - or should be construed as being - a decision by this Court as to whether the plaintiff has engaged in corrupt conduct. I have not decided that question, nor expressed any opinion on it. The same is to be said about ancillary recommendations by the Commissioner. I have not decided or expressed any opinion about those matters.

Orders 
The orders of the court will be: 
Plaintiff's claim for declarations (a) to (d) inclusive in the statement of claim dismissed.

Plaintiff to pay the first defendant's costs in relation to the plaintiff's claim for those declarations.

Liberty to either side to apply within seven days, on two days notice, concerning these orders.

The balance of the proceedings to be listed for mention at a later date.
 * * * 
