

Regina versus Ahmad Toufic Elchami No. 60456 of 1995 Criminal Law [1996] NSWSC (4 March 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(2), ALLEN (1) AND DUNFORD(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 15:12:1995 #ADD 4:3:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant:    P M Skinner 
Solicitors for the Appellant:   Legal Aid
Commission 
Counsel for the Respondent:    G A Farmer 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
ALLEN J: This is an application for leave to appeal against the sentence imposed by Gibson DCJ upon the applicant in the District Court, Sydney, on 15
August 1995.
On 2 June 1995 the applicant had pleaded guilty before Shadbolt DCJ in the
District Court to one count of importing a quantity of heroin into Australia contrary to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Commonwealth). The amount of pure heroin contained in the substance imported was 548.8 grams. The applicant came before Gibson DCJ on 15 August 1995 and he was sentenced by him to a term of imprisonment for seven years with a non-parole period of five years.
The importation occurred on 16 March 1995. The applicant was a fifty-nine year old man, who was a native of Lebanon where he lived in Tripoli with his wife. He was in good health. He had been a taxi driver for about thirty years.
He had had little formal education, was virtually illiterate and had no specialised skills of any sort beyond those of being a taxi driver. The financial circumstances of him and of his wife were poor. He had one married son who was living in Australia and whom he had visited from Lebanon about five years previously. That visit had been possible because his son made a financial contribution towards the cost of air fare.
The applicant was desirous of visiting his son again, particularly as his son had serious domestic problems in consequence of which he was bringing up, on his own, two children, one of whom suffered from Down's syndrome. The applicant obtained a visa for that visit but the cost of it still remained a problem. He knew, from his work as a taxi driver, a man who was well known as being a drug merchant. Learning of the applicant's desire to visit his son in
Australia, the drug merchant offered to pay the applicant's air fare and to give him $A20,000 (actually $US15,000) for his living expenses in Australia, provided that he took with him to Australia an article or articles, which he would keep at his son's home in Australia until someone called and took delivery of them. The applicant agreed. His air ticket was purchased for him by the drug merchant and before the applicant left for Australia the drug merchant gave him two jars of fig jam.
According to the applicant the merchant told him that concealed inside the jars was hashish. When the applicant arrived at Sydney Airport on his journey from Lebanon, however, Customs inspectors checked the jars and found in one of them, in the presence of the applicant, white powder which tested to be heroin. The applicant then made an immediate acknowledgment of what had happened. He said that he had acted as he did because he wanted to see his son and he wanted to have enough money to cover his expenses. The applicant did not have any prior criminal record of any sort.
In his remarks on sentence Gibson DCJ said: "... the picture presented is that all too familiar one, of a person being paid a substantial amount of money to bring into
Australia narcotic goods. That he knew that they were narcotic goods I have no doubt. Whether he knew it was heroin or not, I do not think it mattered to him. The fact was, he was prepared to import into this country narcotic goods in my view whatever they were. That it happened to be heroin was incidental to the amount of money, some $20,000, that he was to be paid. He was, as I say, a paid courier on my view of the facts." 
There can be no quarrel with his Honour's description in that respect, nor has any complaint been made to this Court in respect of it.
Whilst it is not disputed that his Honour took into account all the matters required under [Pt 1B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/index.html#p1b) of the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Commonwealth), it is urged for the applicant that his Honour erred in a number of respects.
The first relates to a report, which was in evidence, of psychometric testing performed by Mr Taylor, a clinical psychologist, upon the applicant.
Notwithstanding that report, and the fact that the Crown did not cross-examine
Mr Taylor, his Honour said that he was not convinced that the applicant's intellectual functioning "is as low as he would have us believe". That is a reference to the opinion expressed by Mr Taylor.
 .
The argument advanced is that what his Honour did was without any sound basis, substituting a personal judgment for what was a matter of scientific expertise; and that there was no ground upon which he could reject the unchallenged assessment made by Mr Taylor.
The argument is misconceived. What his Honour did not accept was not the performance IQ figure assessed by Mr Taylor on testing, but the relevance of that IQ so determined to the mental capacity of the applicant so far as relevant to the commission of the present crime. In his report Mr Taylor said, amongst other things: "There may have been some impairment in his judgment associated with his low level of intellectual ability and his lack of insight as well as naivety." 
Later he said: "... when the man made an offer for him to bring what he thought was hashish into the country, he readily agreed. It seems reasonable that he would have believed that it was hashish rather than heroin when his intellectual level is taken into consideration. It was put to him that a payment for about $15,000.00 would have been excessive for bringing hashish into the country. His response was one of confusion and he did not appear to have any real understanding of the relative value of hashish or heroin. This would be consistent then with his low level of ability and his naivety." 
His Honour was not bound to accept opinions of that type contained in a report by a clinical psychologist.
As to the psychometric testing, there was some difficulty acknowledged by
Mr Taylor. The applicant could not speak English and was illiterate.
Accordingly, the only tests administered were the performance tests of the
Wechsler adult scale. What Mr Taylor did was extrapolate from the performance tests a figure for a full intelligence quotient. But his Honour is not to be taken, as I read his remarks on sentence, to dispute that those were the figures obtained by
Mr Taylor applying standard tests, albeit limited to performance tests. The point of his Honour's observation was that those figures, and the resulting extrapolated intelligence quotient, did not put him in the state of naive stupidity attributed to him by Mr Taylor.
They are very different things.
A further complaint made is that his Honour did not warn counsel appearing for the applicant at the sentence hearing that he proposed to reject, at least in part, the opinions expressed by Mr Taylor. The foundation for that complaint simply was not laid. All that the transcript stated was that counsel addressed. The Court has no material before it to indicate what his Honour said during the course of those addresses and this Court is fully entitled to use its knowledge of practice to infer that during the course of argument by counsel his Honour may well have made observations helpful to counsel. There is no indication in the transcript that counsel applied for an adjournment or demurred in any way. It is for the applicant to this Court to demonstrate error. No basis for the argument has been established.
The full intelligence quotient, as assessed by extrapolation by Mr
Taylor, was 76. Counsel for the applicant then puts to us the bold submission that an intelligence quotient of 76 necessarily brings an offender within the principles established by cases such as Scognamiglio [(1991) 56 A Crim R 81] and Regina versus Letteri CCA, unreported, 18 March
The principle which counsel urged is established by those cases is that "Reduced intellectual capacity has been held to require less weight to be given to considerations of general deterrence."
Time and time again this Court has had to say that that line of authority does not establish any such general principle. The principle in respect of below average intellectual capacity, so far as it may have any bearing upon the present case, is that the extent of the diminution of capacity can be such that it would be recognised by the community, being aware of it, that in being sentenced the offender is being given a lesser sentence than otherwise would be the case regard being had to the diminished responsibility which he had for the crime he committed, that diminished responsibility flowing from his diminished intellectual capacity.
Considerations in that regard were recently reviewed by this Court in
Regina versus Engert, unreported, on 20 November 1995. The principle, correctly understood, has no application whatever to the facts of this case. The applicant knew full well what he was doing. It was pre-planned.
It was organised. He was aware that it was wrong. His responsibility for the conduct is not reduced because his intelligence quotient is 76, any more than if it had been 86 or 96.
The next argument advanced is that his Honour erred in that the adjustment which he made pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) for the fact that there is no remissions system in place in this State was wrong. The argument, as I understand it, appears to be that it follows from what this Court said in
Regina versus El Karhani [(1990) 21 NSWLR 370] that a reduction of at least one-third is called for. In El Karhani this Court, in its joint judgment, said (at -385): "The
High Court of Australia and this Court have emphasised, in the fixing of non-parole (and hence parole) periods, that arbitrary formulae are to be avoided. This is so both for reasons of general legal principle and for reasons specific to sentencing.
The general principle is clear. A statutory discretion must be exercised individually by reference to the purposes for which
Parliament has provided it and upon the basis of the facts of each individual case. Its exercise may not be harnessed to preconceived rules or fixed formulae, however convenient they may be to the busy decision-maker:
Norbis versus Norbis <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 513.] This is not to say that a pattern may not emerge from many cases over time. But the function of the decision-maker is not to be surrendered to formulae, especially if they are arbitrary and precise. If
Parliament wishes to permit the discretion to be exercised in such a way it may so provide: see also Bugmy versus The Queen <case>; [(1990) 64 ALJR 309] and R versus Chee Ben Lian (at 13).
Therefore, it is necessary in each case to make an individual judgment of what should be done by way of the adjustment provided for by <case>.

It is not inappropriate to take into account that throughout
Australia the reduction of custodial sentences for remissions and the like is about one third of the sentence. Again, this is not a fixed ratio. But given the individualised 'adjustment' called for by <case>, it is an appropriate starting point." 
What was said by the Court in El Karhani does not give much comfort to the applicant in this case. In Regina versus Beeforth CCA, unreported, 24
November 1995
I said, in remarks which were agreed with by the Chief Justice: "What was said in El Karhani does not warrant treating what is said to be 'an appropriate starting point' as if it were a rule of law that it is to be the adjustment made in every case.
To elevate what is very commonly done to the status of a rule of law would be to fly in the teeth of what was said in El
Karhani in words that were quite clearly and carefully framed.
Nevertheless, the Court accepts that commonly a deduction of one-third is allowed. Whilst departure, in an appropriate case, from such a deduction would be entirely proper it would be desirable, where the departure is substantial, for the sentencing judge to indicate the reason for the particular deduction which he is making."
However, in the present case the departure is not substantial. The applicant was sentenced to seven years with a non-parole period of five years.
Had a one-third deduction been made from the seven years, the result would have been a non-parole period of four years and eight months. That is not a substantial departure from the ratio, when dealing in a sentence of many years.
It is argued, however, that in the individual circumstances of the present case the non-parole period should have been reduced substantially below even the one-third referred to by this Court in El Karhani. A circumstance upon which particular emphasis is laid is the applicant's age of fifty-nine years. For myself, I am unpersuaded that his Honour erred in fixing the non-parole period which he did. This is not a remarkable case. It is, as his Honour said, one of the common run of cases of heroin being imported from
Lebanon or elsewhere. True it is he is fifty-nine. On the other hand, his case differs from many others to which we were referred, in that he gave no assistance to the authorities in respect of co-offenders. He could have given the assistance of going to his son's house with the drugs, thereby leading to the apprehension of those who came to collect them. He chose not to do so. He is not to be punished for that. But he does not have the benefit in sentencing afforded in cases in which such co-operation has been given.
It is urged that his family circumstances are such that his Honour should have given him the benefit of a lower non-parole period. I do not accept that argument. His wife now has come out to Australia and his son is here. The other children of the marriage long since have grown up and ceased to be dependent.
This case is very different from Gedid, a decision of this Court, unreported, 23 April 1993. In that case, also of a Lebanese importing heroin, a Lebanese coming from circumstances of poor education and a deprived lifestyle, the Court upheld the same sentence given in this case, one of seven years with a non-parole period of five years. The offender was a woman. She was gaoled in Australia, leaving behind in Lebanon two children and her husband, who was said to be aged ninety- eight, who had been in hospital, was blind and wheelchair bound. It was accepted that her incarceration in
Australia had brought hardship to her family in that she could no longer support the children or her husband and pay the hospital fees. Her husband had to be returned to the home despite his condition. One of the children was still at school.
What his
Honour did was well within ordinary discretionary range, both as to the sentence and as to the non-parole period.
In the result
I propose that leave to appeal be granted and that the appeal be dismissed with an order that time served is to count.
JUDGE2
HUNT
CJ at CL I agree with the orders proposed by Allen J, for the reasons which he has given.
The orders of the Court are as proposed by Allen J.
JUDGE3
DUNFORD J I also agree.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/40.html  
