

Mitchell versus Osborne and Anor Matter No 4338/93 [1997] NSWSC 206 (20 May )
 ` 
Mitchell versus Osborne & Anor` ` 4338/93` `20 May 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `  `
 `4338/93 - MITCHELL versus OSBORNE & ANOR` `(CA 40737/94)` `  `
 `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: The late Leslie Campbell Mitchell died on 23 September 1992 having first made and published his last will and testament on 23 October 1984. Probate of that will was granted to the defendants by this court in its Probate Division on 18 March 1993. Apart from a legacy to one of the executors and his wife, the testator gave the whole of his estate to his daughter, Susan, and his son-in-law, Bernhard, in equal shares. The estate has a value of approximately $1,162,000. 
The deceased had, apart from his daughter Susan, a son Leigh, the present plaintiff, who was born on 6 October 1945. Leigh made an application under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) as did the deceased's divorced wife Zelma. On 17 November 1994, Master Macready dismissed the widow's application but ordered that Leigh receive a legacy of $75,000 and made orders as to how that legacy was to be borne and how the costs ought to be paid.

Leigh was not satisfied with that order and appealed to the Court of Appeal.
He lodged his grounds of appeal on 6 March 1995. Apart from focusing on certain alleged factual errors of the Master, the gravamen of the appeal was ground 8, namely: 
Having found that the size of the estate being a substantial one ... the
Master should have held that the appellant was entitled to a more substantial legacy than that which he ordered the appellant receive.

The matter made its way into the Court of Appeal list and was getting to the stage where it could be heard as a short appeal. On 16 August 1996, the solicitors for the estate wrote to the solicitors for the plaintiff putting an offer of settlement of the appeal. On 29 August 1996 the plaintiff's solicitors wrote indicating: 
Our client has instructed us to accept the offer as per points 1, 2 and 3 of your letter.

We note that we will arrange for our Counsel to contact the Estate's Counsel to discuss the finalisation of the matter with the Court of Appeal.

On 6 September the estate's solicitors forwarded draft short minutes of order and suggested that interest should run from one month after the date of the orders. On 10 September 1996 the plaintiff's solicitors indicated that the draft short minutes met their approval and that one month was a satisfactory period of time and their letter then concluded: 
Kindly forward to us as soon as possible the engrossed Short Minutes of Order for our signature.

As we understand it, the settlement has to be "approved" by a Judge of the
Court of Appeal. In this regard, we suggest our respective Counsel liaise with each other in relation to the conclusion of the matter as soon as is possible.

The next month, the executors' solicitor was informed that because of a disagreement between Susan and Bernhard, who had divorced, there was a difficulty in them proceeding with the settlement. They sought judicial advice as to what they should do and that advice was duly provided by Master
McLaughlin.

The problem, of course, was that the executors may have considered they had contractual obligations to the plaintiff but they also considered that they had fiduciary obligations to Susan and Bernhard. Accordingly, the only way of making sure that no-one could say that they were not performing their duties was to have the court determine whether there had been a binding settlement of the proceedings or not. They also had to put before the court all the arguments that could be put as to why there was not a settlement.

The plaintiff's solicitors took out a notice of motion before the Court of
Appeal on 6 May 1997. That motion sought a declaration that the proceedings had been compromised, an order for specific performance and consequential orders basically in accordance with the short minutes of order. The Registrar of the Court of Appeal, exercising the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, ordered that the motion be remitted to a single judge in equity. He did that yesterday and the motion came on for hearing before me this morning. Although there is a little uncertainty as to just what was delegated to me by the Court of Appeal, it seems to me that, as the motion remitted to me the question of setting aside Master Macready's order and making fresh orders, I have power to make the orders that the Court of Appeal could have made in the whole proceedings, and I will proceed on that basis.

There are two reasons why the plaintiff says that settlement of the proceedings did not constitute a final settlement. First, that on the proper construction of the correspondence, the parties had not yet reached a final agreement but were only to reach a final agreement when their respective counsel signed the final short minutes of order and, secondly, that because the court needed to give its imprimatur to the agreement, there was no final agreement until that imprimatur had been given and that each party could withdraw from the arrangement up until that time.

Mr Trebeck of counsel for the estate, referred me to the decision of Parker J in Von Hatzfeldt-Wildenburg versus Alexander [[1912] 1 Ch 284] at 288-9 where his Lordship referred to the distinction as to whether the execution of a further document was a condition of the parties' bargain or whether it was a mere expression of the desire of the parties as to the manner in which the transaction already agreed to would be consummated. The decision as into which category an agreement falls, is made by construction bearing in mind the parties' intention. The problem most usually occurs with informal contracts for the sale of land and, indeed, the key Australian decisions are in that area, such as the well-known decision of the High Court of Australia of
Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] and that of McClelland J in the Court of Appeal in G R
Securities versus Baulkham Hills Hospital [(1986) 40 NSWLR 622] at 628.
There are actually four classes of case, including situations where parties have made a provisional contract, which is to be replaced later by a further contract containing additional terms.

The question is one of construction. It seems to me in the instant case that in view of the very direct way in which the offer and acceptance were put, the fact that the detailed orders were set out in short minutes and were agreed to, and the fact that the formal short minutes did not need to be added to but only signed by counsel, that the parties in this particular case have reached the stage where they had made a final agreement and the signed short minutes were only a method of carrying out their agreement.

Was then the agreement one which was conditional upon the approval of the court? 
Two points really arise here. The first is whether the parties correctly understood the position that approval of the court was required. There is, especially in earlier cases, a considerable amount of authority for the proposition that parties cannot of themselves settle an application under either the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) or its predecessor the Testator's Family Maintenance Act. These authorities suggested that the court is required to consider whether it has jurisdiction and then to consider whether the settlement which the parties have propounded is an appropriate one. I dealt with some of those cases in Hamilton Smith v
Markby 24 May 1995 and see also McMahon versus McMahon 2 August 1985.
However, in more recent times, I think the judges of this Division have taken the view that where the plaintiff is sui juris, and the executor likewise, the court should merely accept a settlement of [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) proceedings in the same way as any other proceedings. See Hadley versus McNamara (Young J, .12.1995, unreported).

In any event, there is a distinction between the various types of settlement which can be arrived at under the Act. It has always been clear that parties can agree that proceedings be dismissed and that the plaintiff be paid a certain sum as the price of the plaintiff's consenting to the dismissal. It seems to me that if there were any problem with the court's approval in certain cases under this Act because a discretionary judgment is involved, those problems do not arise where a court of appeal is considering but one question, whether the quantum awarded by the court below is insufficient or too generous.

Accordingly, my view is that the parties in the instant case did not need the approval of the court to compromise this matter.

However, if I were wrong on that then the passage from Smallman versus Smallman [[1972] Fam 25] at 31, to which Mr Trebeck referred, should be followed. If the agreement is said to be subject to the approval of the court, that does not mean there is no agreement at all. There is an implied term in the agreement to present the settlement to the court for approval. In the meantime, it remains a binding agreement, which neither party can disavow.
There is no doubt in my mind that had a judge or judge of appeal been shown this settlement they would have given their approval, and it seems to me that the executors (even the reluctant litigants that they are) cannot be heard to say that the condition has not been fulfilled.

Accordingly, in my view, the plaintiff is entitled to the orders which he seeks. The appropriate orders are now to make the orders in the short minutes, which are on pages 54 and 55 of the affidavit of R P Holmes sworn on 15 May with order 8 to read: 
Order that interest on the legacy is not to run until 20 June 1997.

I order that the costs of the motion be paid by the defendants though there is to be liberty to apply with respect to costs if there are any difficulties in implementing that order.

I should add that the conduct of the executors in these proceedings has been exemplary. They have done all that they can do to keep the scales balanced between the beneficiaries, and the costs of the executors of the appeal should be paid out of the estate on the indemnity basis.
 * * * 
