

Gio General Limited t/as Gio Australia versus Newcastle City Council; Gio
General Limited versus Newcastle City Council Nos Ca 40152/95 [1996] NSWSC 322 (2
August 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), SHELLER(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
Appeals from two decisions of the Commercial Division (Bainton J and O'Keefe
CJ Comm D)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 20 - 21 November 1995 #DATE 2:2:1996 #ADD 2:8:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant      B W Rayment QC with
N G Rein 
Solicitors for the Appellant
Abbott Tout 
Counsel for the Respondent     J R Sackar QC with
D L Davies 
Solicitors for the Respondent    Phillips Fox
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P These proceedings involve two appeals from the Commercial Division of the Supreme Court. The primary appeal is against a decision of Bainton J, by which his Honour made certain declarations in favour of the respondent,
Newcastle City Council, in relation to an insurance policy which had been issued to it by the appellant, GIO General Limited. The second appeal, which is against a decision of O'Keefe CJ Comm D, has been brought defensively, to prevent determinations in that decision operating as an issue estoppel for the matter decided by Bainton J.
 
The Newcastle earthquake
By a policy of insurance No. PL8800104 (the policy) issued or renewed on or about 13 March 1989 the appellant agreed to insure the respondent for the period from 31 January 1989 to 31 December 1989. Under the policy the appellant agreed to indemnify the respondent against legal liability in respect of public liability, product liability and professional liability. The policy was renewed for the periods ending 31 December 1990 and 31 December
It was not renewed beyond that time.
Under the heading "Liability
Coverage" in the policy, there appears the following provision: "GIO will pay to or on behalf of the insured all sums for which the insured shall become legally liable to pay by way of compensation (excluding punitive and exemplary damages) in respect of:
Public Liability
Personal Injury
Damage to Property (Other than personal injury and damage to property arising out of Products Liability)
Products Liability (as defined herein) happening during the period of Insurance caused by an occurrence in connection with the Business of the insured
Professional Liability
A claim or claims made against the insured during the Period of Insurance arising out of any negligent act, error or omission committed or alleged to have been committed by the insured in the conduct of the insured's business as specified in the
Schedule.
Provided that: any such claim or claims arising out of any negligent act, error or omission committed or alleged to have been committed prior to shall be limited to $10 million in the aggregate any one period of insurance" "Occurrence" is defined to mean: "An event, including continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general conditions, which results in personal injury or damage to property neither expected nor intended from the standpoint of the insured."
Condition of the policy provides, relevantly: "Notices in writing shall be given as soon as possible to GIO: of any occurrence, claim, writ, summons or proceedings or of any impending prosecution or inquest...
that shall come to the knowledge of the insured..."
By an endorsement numbered 91/00512, dated 12 August 1991, the policy was amended, with effect retrospective to January 1988, by adding the following exclusion: "Exclusion 16 - Professional Indemnity 
The rendering of or failure to render professional advice or service by the insured or any error or omission connected therewith except as provided in
Liability Coverage (c) herein.
In all other respects the policy remains unaltered."
On 28 December 1989 an earthquake occurred in Newcastle causing death, personal injury and serious damage to property. Some of the people killed and injured were, at the time the earthquake occurred, in premises owned and occupied by the Newcastle Workers Cooperative Club Ltd ("the Club"). Those premises were badly damaged. A coronial inquest was held into the 12 deaths which resulted from the earthquake. During the inquest, the late
Mr Paul Kerr, who was counsel appearing on behalf of the family of one of the persons killed, submitted to the Coroner that he should apportion some of the blame for the deaths to the negligence of the respondent. Those submissions were reported on the front page of the Newcastle Herald of 18 July 1990 in an article titled "Some blame for buildings collapse rests with council: barrister". The article stated that: "Newcastle City Council had to accept some responsibility for the building collapses at Newcastle Workers
Club and Hamilton which resulted in 12 deaths, a barrister told the coronial inquest into the Newcastle earthquake deaths yesterday ... " 
The article went on to detail some of the allegations made by Mr Kerr: "Mr Kerr said that the Council had inspected
Newcastle Workers
Club as late as July, 1988, and issued a Certificate of Structural
Soundness.

This was despite the fact that evidence was given by Mr Kevin
Spring, an engineer who made a report on the collapsed building, indicating that a critical chord member had been omitted from one of the roof trusses in the auditorium during construction... " 
Mr Kerr reportedly asserted that: "That omission caused the whole of the western wall to be unstable and the roof to collapse. It could only be presumed that the Council had not inspected the building properly if the absence of the chord member which was included in the building plans had gone unnoticed "
On 18 July 1991 a number of actions were commenced in the Supreme Court of
New
South Wales. By those actions the plaintiffs sought damages arising from injuries sustained during the earthquake on 28 December
The Club and the respondent were joined as defendants in the actions. The appellant granted the respondent indemnity in respect of each of these claims.
Subsequently further claims were made by five other people (the claimants). Two of these claims sought damages from the Club and the respondent, in relation to injuries and losses suffered while the two claimants were at the Club. The other three actions were against the respondent only. They related to deaths and personal injuries caused when the claimants were struck by collapsing awnings whilst standing on a public footpath. The respondent sought indemnity from the appellant in respect of each of these five claims. However the appellant refused to provide indemnity.
The appellant then commenced proceedings in the
Commercial Division of the
Supreme Court, seeking declarations in relation to the notice allegedly given by it pursuant to the policy, and a further declaration to the effect that it was entitled to be indemnified in respect of the claims made by the five claimants.
This action was heard by O'Keefe CJ in Comm D, who delivered judgment on 30 August 1994.
The claims in respect of death and personal injury were subsequently settled. However, the Club then commenced proceedings in the Construction
Division of the Supreme
Court, seeking damages for the loss and destruction of its premises at the time of the earthquake. The appellant denied that it was liable to indemnify the respondent in respect of the claims brought by the
Club. The respondent then sought a declaration in the
Commercial Division to the effect that the appellant was liable to indemnify it in respect of the claims for property damage brought by the Club. This action was heard by
Bainton J, who delivered judgment on 2 March 1995.
 
The judgement of O'Keefe CJ Comm D .
In the proceedings before O'Keefe CJ Comm D, the appellant argued that the effect of the endorsement on the policy was that, if it was to be liable, it could only be liable under clause (c) of the policy (Professional
Liability). It could not be liable under clause (a)(i) of the policy (Public
Liability for personal injury). There were two grounds upon which this, claim was made. First, the appellant submitted that it could not be liable under clause (a)(i) because the injuries which befell the claimants were not caused by an occurrence in connection with the business of the respondent. That is, the appellant argued that there was no "occurrence" within the definition of that term given in the policy, and if there was, the occurrence was not "in connection with the business of the insured". In regard to the first point, the appellant argued the definition of "occurrence" contemplated a discreet circumstance, or set of circumstances, within the control of or caused by the insured. This contention was based on the words "neither expected nor intended from the standpoint of the insured" in the definition of "occurrence". This definition, it was argued, did not encompass a naturally occurring phenomenon such as an earthquake.
O'Keefe CJ Comm D dismissed the arguments based on this suggested meaning of the term "occurrence". His Honour noted that the policy defined "occurrence" as meaning "an event". However, he concluded that the words "neither expected nor intended from the standpoint of the insured" and did not connote the limitation contended for on behalf of the appellant. He held that the relevant "occurrences" were the collapse of the Club and the collapse of the awnings.
O'Keefe CJ Comm D noted that: "The fact that the collapse in each case occurred in the course of an earthquake does not render such collapse any less an event." 
His Honour therefore concluded that the personal injuries and deaths in question were caused by an "occurrence" within the meaning of the policy.
O'Keefe CJ Comm D then examined the phrase "in connection with", noting that it is ordinarily one of considerable width. His Honour commented that the giving of planning and building approvals and the issuing of various types of orders "was an ordinary incident of the business of the Council". He concluded that: "The relationship or association (i.e. connection) between the collapse (i.e. event) and the business of the Council (i.e the giving of approvals and making of orders) is of the essence of the cases made by the claimants and, in my opinion, falls within the ambit of the insuring provisions of section (a)(i) of the Policy."
The second argument advanced by the appellant was to the effect that, if the respondent had breached its duty to the claimants, such breach was a failure to render advice or service to the property owners given building approvals. That is, the breach arose in connection with the rendering of professional advice by the respondent.
The appellant argued that, upon the proper construction of the policy, such activities were clearly allocated to clause (c) of the policy by the endorsement of 12 August 1991.
O'Keefe CJ Comm D also rejected this argument. He pointed out that the allegations made by the claimants related to approvals given, orders made and perhaps inspections carried out by the respondent. His Honour held that these activities they were properly characterised as given, made or carried out in fulfilment by the Council of its statutory duties and functions. He stated that none of them constituted the rendering of professional advice or professional service. Nor did they involve a failure to do so.
O'Keefe CJ Comm D then examined the issue of whether the respondent had given notice within the requirements of condition 3 of the policy. In this regard the respondent relied on certain letters sent to the appellant on 23
December 1991, as well as the evidence of Mrs Janice Nysschen, an employee of
Jardine Australian Insurance Brokers Pty Ltd, the insurance brokers who acted for the respondent. Mrs Nysschen testified that in July 1990 she received a facsimile from the respondent which included with it an extract from the issue of the Newcastle Herald of 18 July 1990, and that she forwarded this to the appellant.
O'Keefe CJ Comm D accepted the evidence of Mrs Nysschen in this regard. Furthermore, after discussing the nature and relevance of the material in the newspaper extract he concluded that the respondent had satisfied the notice requirements of the policy.
 .
The final issue before O'Keefe CJ Comm D concerned the fact that the claims, in respect of which the respondent sought relief, were not made until after 31 December 1991, the date on which the policy expired. This lateness was not important with regard to clause of the policy, since liability to indemnify the insured under clause (a) arose on the happening of an "occurrence" within the period of insurance. However, clause (c) of the policy insured the respondent in respect of a claim or claims made against it "during the period of insurance". Therefore, the appellant maintained that the respondent was unable to claim indemnity under clause (c).
In response, the respondents for their part sought to rely on [s 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) of the [Insurance Contracts
Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/)").
O'Keefe CJ Comm D stated that "(c)learly, that section applied to the present Policy". He then considered the arguments mounted by each side. The appellant for its part argued that [s 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) would only operate where a claim had been made during the period of the policy, but where indemnity was not available by reason of non-compliance by the insured with its obligations under the policy. The respondent argued that the section extended to requiring the insurer to indemnify the insured where a claim is not made until after the insurance expires, but where the insured has given notice of relevant facts before the expiry of the policy.
O'Keefe CJ Comm D concluded: "The construction of [section 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) (3) advanced on behalf of the
Council is in accordance with the plain reading of the section.
On its face, the section addresses precisely the type of situation as occurs in the present case and in the absence of authority to the contrary I would adopt such an interpretation; the more so since [section 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) (3) is designed, inter alia, to protect an insured from falling between two policies."
His Honour referred to the decisions of this Court in East End Real
Estate Pty Ltd versus C E Heath Casualty and General Insurance Ltd [(1991) 25 NSWLR (CA)] O'Keefe CJ Comm D concluded that those decisions supported this, "plain reading" of the section. He concluded that [s 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) was appropriately invoked in the circumstances of the case before him.
For these reasons O'Keefe CJ Comm D held that a declaration should be made that the respondent had satisfied the notification requirements of the subject policy. Further the events which were the subject of the actions brought by the claimants were of such a nature as to fall within either clause (a(i) or clause (c) of the policy. They were not excluded by the endorsement.
 
The judgment of Bainton J
In the proceedings before Bainton J the arguments which had been raised before O'Keefe CJ Comm D were advanced once again. The appellant argued that the respondent was limited to claiming indemnity under clause (c) by reason of the endorsement, but that indemnity was unavailable under clause (c) because the claim was not made during the period of insurance and in any event because proper notice was not given as condition 3 of the policy required. The respondent again claimed that clause (a)(ii) was available, that the endorsement did not operate in the manner alleged by the appellant, and that it was entitled to rely on [s 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) (3) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), even though the claim was not made in the period of insurance.
Bainton J began by examining the issue of whether adequate notification had taken place, specifically, whether the facsimile reproducing the Newcastle
Herald article constituted adequate notice.
His Honour felt that the relevant "occurrence" in this case was the "earthquake and the contemporaneous collapse of the building".
He considered that the appellant had been given sufficient notice of this occurrence, and that condition 3 was satisfied.

His Honour then considered the issues surrounding the insuring clauses.
He began by investigating the applicability of the endorsement.
This required the determination of whether the claims against the respondent could properly be described as flowing from the rendering, or failure to render, "professional advice or service". Bainton J examined the statement of claim in the action brought by the Club against the respondent. He summarised the particulars of negligence as: "(an assertion) that the Council did not comply with its obligations in respect of extensions to the Club, being building work in the Council's area imposed on it by the Local
Government
Act 1919 and its subsidiary legislation."
His Honour then examined the powers and duties of the respondent with respect to building work during the period in which the extensions were erected. His conclusion was as follows: "It follows, in my view, that what a council was required to do when a building application was made to it, was to examine the plans and approve or reject them, it being directed to reject the plans unless it was satisfied that a building erected in accordance with them or of any approved modification would be in accordance with the provisions of the Act and
Ordinances. That, in my opinion, is not the rendering of professional advice or service: it is the carrying out of a statutory duty."
Bainton
J then considered whether the appellant was liable to indemnify the respondent pursuant to clause (c) of the policy, notwithstanding the fact that the Club's claim against the respondent was not filed until 8 December , well after the end of the final period of insurance, 31 December 1991.
His Honour was therefore required to determine the applicability of <case> of the Act. It is worth repeating in full the conclusions reached by Bainton J on this issue: "I have great difficulty in seeing how insuring clause which plainly enough is a contract of liability insurance, is one "the effect of which is that the insurer's liability is excluded or limited by reason that a notice of a claim is not given before the expiration of the period of insurance".
To refer to the exclusion or limitation of an insurer's liability for a particular reason, in my view, imports that there would be liability but for some provision in the policy which provides that it will not apply or will be limited for the reason that notice of claim is not given before the expiration of the period of insurance cover. On its plain language insuring clause (c) confers an entitlement on the insured only if a claim or claims is or are made during the period of insurance.
On that view of the operation of <case> (sic), subsection (3) of <case> could have no application to the present case. There is, in my opinion, a further reason why <case> (3) can have no operation in respect of a claim under insuring clause (c), namely that it cannot be said that GIO would but for the subsection, be relieved of liability under contract PL8800104 in respect of a claim after the expiration of the period the contract "by reason only that it was made after the expiration of the period of the insurance cover provided by the contract".
Contract PL8800104 insuring clause (c) provides cover only in respect of a claim or claims made against the insured during the period of insurance. No claim was made by the Club against the Council at any time duping the period 1 January 1989 to December 1991."
However, having reached this conclusion,
Bainton J then considered the effect of the decision of O'Keefe CJ Comm D, which was clearly contrary to his own conclusions. Bainton
J noted that the judgment of O'Keefe CJ Comm D was a determination with respect to the same insurance policy between the same parties, and that counsel for the appellant had conceded that an issue estoppel arose against the appellant to the effect that <case> (3) of the Act applied to insuring clause (c) of the policy. Therefore, the only live issue before Bainton J, was whether the respondent had satisfied the requirements of s 40 (3) of the Act by giving notice in writing to the appellant of facts that might give rise to a claim against the appellant as soon as was reasonably practicable after the respondent became aware of those facts, but before the expiration of the period of insurance, namely, 31 December 1991. Bainton J concluded that both the facsimile of 18 July 1990 and the letter of 23
December 1991 constituted sufficient notice for the purposes of <case> (3) of the Act.
Therefore, Bainton
J came to the conclusion that the appellant was liable to indemnify the respondent under either or both insuring clause (a)(ii) and insuring clause (c) in respect of any judgment which the Club obtained against the respondent.
 
The issues before this Court .
The appellant has appealed from both the decision of O'Keefe CJ Comm D and the decision of Bainton J. On the 24 April 1995 Clarke
JA ordered that the two appeals be heard together. However, the appeal against the decision of
O'Keefe CJ Comm D was only brought so that the issue estoppel would not remain between the parties. The appellant, without prejudice to its legal contest of the reasoning involved, has agreed not to dispute its liability to indemnify the respondent in respect of the actual claims dealt with by O'Keefe
CJ Comm
D. This Court is not concerned to examine the commercial reasons for that decision. It will concentrate its attention on the legal issues inherent in the reasoning of Bainton J.
As well as appealing against the substantive findings made by Bainton
J, the appellant contended that the declarations made by his Honour were, in any case, too wide. Therefore, the issues which this
Court is required to consider are as follows: 
Is the respondent's claim for indemnity in respect of the Club's claim within clause (a)(i) of the policy? 
If so, is it also within the terms of the endorsement of 12 August 1991, so that it must be brought, if at all, under clause (c) of the policy? 
If the respondent is limited to claiming pursuant to clause (c) of the policy, is s 40 of the Act applicable? 
If <case> of the Act is applicable, did the respondent satisfy the requirements of that clause? 
Even if the appeal is otherwise unsuccessful, were the declarations made by Bainton J too wide? 
The Club's claim does not fall within clause (a)(i) of the policy
By virtue of clause (a)(ii) of the policy, the appellant is required to indemnify the respondent in respect of damage to property "happening during the Period of Insurance caused by an occurrence in connection with the
Business of the insured". The important words for present purposes are "occurrence", 'in connection with" and "the Business of the insured".
The word "occurrence" is defined in the policy. However, as O'Keefe CJ
Comm D pointed out, this definition is of little assistance in the present situation. "Occurrence" and "event" are essentially synonymous, and the requirement that the insured neither expect nor intended the damage flowing this event is of no significance in this case.
Bainton J found that the relevant ,occurrence in this case was the "earthquake and the contemporaneous collapse of the building". This finding was supported by the respondent during argument before this Court. The difficulty with the finding is that the "collapse of the building" was, in fact, the relevant "damage to property". Hence if Bainton J is correct, the property damage was, in part, caused by itself. With respect, this construction would not make sense. Therefore, the relevant "occurrence" must be limited to the earthquake itself. This characterisation conforms with common sense. The most direct and most obvious cause of the damage to the Club was the Newcastle earthquake.
Moreover, as the appellant pointed out, this characterisation conforms with the information provided by both parties in the "Agreed
Statement of Facts" supplied to Bainton J, and the letters sent by the respondent to the appellant on 23 December 1991. Paragraph of this "Agreed
Statement of Facts" states: "5. On 28 December 1989 an earthquake OCCURRED in Newcastle causing death personal injury and damage to property." (emphasis added)
Clause (a)(ii) requires that the occurrence be "in connection with the
Business of the insured". The business of the respondent is the business of local government. Local government bodies such as the respondent undertake a variety of tasks. The relevant tasks impugned in this case related to the inspection and approval of various building works within the City of
Newcastle. The respondent emphasised the flexibility and width that various courts have assigned to the phrase "in connection with". See e.g. Collector of
Customs versus Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty Ltd (1993) 115 ALR 1 at 10,
However, it cannot be said, on any reasonable construction of the phrase, that the "occurrence" in this case, the earthquake, occurred in connection with the these activities. An earthquake, as such, cannot be "in connection" with the business of local government.
Even if this conclusion were open to some doubt, and I do not feel that it is, the respondent conceded in its written submissions that "the earthquake alone would not be an event 'in connection' with the business of the Council". For this reason, the Club's claim against the respondent does not fall within insuring clause (a)(ii) of the policy.
 
The effect of the endorsement to the Policy
Given that the circumstances of the Club's claim against the respondent do not fall within clause (a)(ii) of the policy, on the proper construction of the elements of that clause, it is not strictly necessary for me to decide whether the endorsement of August 1991 prevents the respondent from relying on clause (a)(ii). Nonetheless, I have reached the conclusion that the endorsement does have this effect. So I will express that view. The endorsement requires the respondent to bring its claim pursuant to clause of the policy. In fact, since the respondent is unable to rely on clause (ii), it would now favour such a conclusion.
 .
The endorsement of 12 August 1991 amended the policy so as to ensure that all claims relating to "the rendering or failure to render professional advice or service by the Insured or any error or omission connected therewith" could only be brought pursuant to clause of the policy. Therefore, it is necessary to determine whether the activities of the respondent, which gave rise to the claim by the Club, can properly be characterised as "the rendering or failure to render professional advice or service".
Bainton
J held that the relevant activities of the respondent were the various duties imposed on it by the Local Government Act in relation to the building work In particular, his Honour emphasised the requirement that the approval of the respondent be obtained for any erection or alteration to a building, a requirement imposed by <case> of the Local Government Act. This requirement imposed a duty on the respondent to examine building plans and satisfy itself that the proposed construction was in accordance with the various statutory obligations before granting its approval. Bainton J held that this activity was "not the rendering of professional advice or service: it (was) the carrying out of a statutory duty". Similarly O'Keefe CJ Comm D considered that the various inspection and approval tasks required of the respondent: "...were given, made or carried out in fulfilment by the
Council of its statutory duties and functions. None of them, in my opinion constitutes the rendering of professional advice or professional service, nor do they involve a failure to do so."
Both of the primary judges concluded that the relevant activities of the respondent consisted of the carrying out of statutory duties rather than the provision of professional service or advice. These two characterisations were considered to be mutually exclusive.
With respect, I cannot agree with the primary judges upon this view. The mere fact that the liability of the respondent is grounded in statute, rather than any common law duty, is not determinative of whether the relevant activities are properly to be characterised as "professional". The relevant activities conducted by the respondent must be examined to see whether, in their nature, they are properly characterised as "professional". The source of the respondent's duties to perform the activities, although a relevant circumstance, is not definitive. For the same reason, it does not necessarily matter whether the officers of the respondent who were alleged to have given faulty advice and service were professionally qualified engineers.
See also
FAI General Insurance Co versus Gold Coast City Council [(1993) 7 ANZ Ins Cas 61-153 (Qld] CA) at 77, 812. The question is, is the type of service which was provided properly characterised as "professional service".
 .
The term "professional" in the context of Professional Indemnity insurance today is very broad. This is evidenced by the very large range of policies which are written for such insurance. See e.g. D. C. Jess, The
Insurance of Professional Risks: Law and Practice, nd ed., Butterworths, , p. 194. The term involves, in the context of a policy written for a local government authority, no more than advice and services of a skilful character according to an established discipline. See Commissioners of Inland
Revenue versus Maxse [(1919) 1 KB 647 (CA)] at 166-7. On the evidence before the
Court as to the nature of the respondent's activities, I entertain no doubt that they would fall within this definition as now understood in this context.
The examination and analysis of building proposals with a view to granting consent is properly characterised as the provision of a service of a skilful character according to a discipline. In fact the evidence suggested (although this is not crucial or determinative) that some or all of the functions were performed by professionally qualified persons. Therefore the Club's claim which arose out of such activities fell within the endorsement to the policy, and thus within clause (c).
 
The application of <case> of the Act
The respondent has conceded that if it were to be limited to clause of the policy, as I would hold, the relevant claim against it was not in fact made during the period of insurance. Therefore, since clause (c) provides coverage on a "claims made" basis, prima facie the appellant would not be liable to indemnify the respondent.
However, the respondent contended before this Court, as it had done successfully before O'Keefe CJ Comm D and before
Bainton J (because of the issue estoppel), that <case> of the Act applied to require the appellant to indemnify it in respect of the respondent's claim.
Section 40 is in the following terms: "40. (1) This section applies in relation to a contract of liability insurance the effect of which is that the insurer's liability is excluded or limited by reason that notice of a claim against the insured in respect of a loss suffered by some other person is not given to the insurer before the expiration of the period of insurance cover provided by the contract.
 ...

Where an insured gave notice in writing to the insurer of facts that might give rise to a claim against the insurer as soon as was reasonably practicable after the insured became aware of those facts but before the insurance cover provided by the contract expired the insurer is not relieved of liability under the contract in respect of the claim, when made, by reason only that it was made after the expiration of the period of the insurance cover provided by the contract."
If <case> were to apply in the present case, the respondent first had to show that the policy operated so that the appellant's liability under clause was excluded or limited by reason that notice of the Club's claim was not given to the appellant before the expiration of the period of insurance cover provided by the policy.
There is no requirement stipulated in clause (c) that the respondent give notice of any claims to the appellant. The policy is a "claims made" type of insurance policy rather than a "claims made and notified" type. However, condition 3 of the policy requires that notice of any occurrence or claim be given to the appellant as soon as possible. Condition 12 (b)(iv) of the policy enables the appellant to cancel the policy where the insured fails to comply with any provision of the policy. The question is, do these provisions mean that the policy has the effect required by <case> (1) of the Act?
The appellant argued that a policy of insurance will only be within <case> of the Act where the requirement that the insured give notice of any claims is a condition precedent to the insurer's being liable to indemnify the insured under the policy. If this contention be correct, it is necessary to decide whether the requirement of notice contained in condition 3 of the policy is a condition precedent to the appellant incurring liability to indemnify the respondent. The appellant submitted that condition 3 was not a condition precedent to liability. It argued that a breach of condition 3 by the respondent would enable the appellant to cancel the policy prospectively, and perhaps to sue for damages. It would not affect the appellant's liability to indemnify the respondent in respect of claims already made. The appellant referred to a number of cases on the proper characterisation of condition precedents. See e.g. Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd versus Retail Traders Mutual
Indemnity Insurance Association <case>; [(1942) 42 SR 231] However, these cases are of only limited assistance. The answer must be found in an the interpretation of the terms of the policy itself.
Upon examination of the terms of the policy, and in the absence of express words to the contrary, it is clear that condition 3 is not a condition precedent to liability. It was merely part of the definition of the scope of the insurance. The question is then presented: does the fact that condition 3 is not a condition precedent to liability mean that <case> of the Act will not apply?
Should the interpretation of <case> advanced by the appellant be accepted?
The respondent has argued that the construction of s 40 advanced on behalf of the appellant is inconsistent with the decision of this Court in
East End Real Estate Pty Ltd versus C E Heath
Casualty and General Insurance Ltd [(1991) 25 NSWLR 400 (CA).] There are obiter dicta remarks in the judgments of both Gleeson CJ and Mahoney A in that case which suggest that <case> of the Act should not be limited to "claims made and notified" policies. Gleeson CJ, at , said: "The section (s 40) does not seem to distinguish between a "claims made and notified" form of cover and a condition requiring prompt notification of claims." 
Furthermore, at 409, Mahoney JA said: "The kinds of policies which are dealt with respectively by s 40 and <case> are not precisely congruent. Neither section is limited to the kind of policy which is here on question, namely, a policy limited to claims made upon the insured within the period of insurance and notified to the insurer within the period.
Both sections apply, I think, also to policies of other kinds."
I do not think that these passages are of any assistance to the respondent. While both Gleeson CJ and Mahoney A indicate that some latitude should be given to the application of <case> of the Act, there is nothing in what their Honours there say which is inconsistent with the view advanced by the appellant. Although s 40 of the Act is capable of application beyond "claims made and notified" policies, it does require that any provision requiring notification be a condition precedent to the insurer's liability to indemnify.
The respondent also cited passages in East
End, and in another decision of this Court, FAI Insurance Co Ltd versus Perry [(1993) 30 NSWLR 89 (CA)], which support the view that in insurance law, and particularly in the application of the Act, courts should rely on matters of substance rather than form. Insurers should not be able to avoid the provisions of the Act merely by employing an alternative drafting technique in the wording of a policy. An example of this view can be found in Gleeson CJ's judgment in East End, at 404: "The Act, in its long title, is described as an Act to reform and modernise the law relating to certain contracts of insurance so that a fair balance is struck between the interests of insurers, insureds, and other members of the public and so that the provisions included in such contracts, and the practices of insurers in relation to such contracts, operate fairly. It would hardly be consistent with the purposes thus described to construe the language of <case> in such a way as to make its operation depend upon the choice that is made between various available drafting techniques."
I wholeheartedly support this view, as I have made clear on a number of occasions. See Perry at 103; Antico versus CE Heath Casualty and General Insurance
Limited and Anor, Court of Appeal , unreported, 30 January 1996. However, no one could assert that this was a case where the insurer has relied on a drafting technique to avoid a provision of the Act. The policy of insurance in this case is not a "claims made and notified" type policy. It is an orthodox "claims made" policy. It is not a question of the form of the policy masking its true substance. The substance of the policy is that it is "claims made" policy. Indeed, that is its essence. Such policies have particular attractions to insurers and their systems of premium setting and reinsurance. Doubtless these considerations, while disadvantageous to insureds, are reflected in the premiums fixed and paid. I cannot support the contention of the respondent to the effect that <case> of the Act operates so as to convert a "claims made" type policy into a "claims made and notified" type policy. While this view might favour the insurer in the present situation, in that <case> of the Act is not operative, the appreciation of substance over form is not a mandate for the courts to alter the very basis and definition of the contract of insurance agreed by the parties. Conformably with this Court's repeated holdings, <case> must be given the meaning described. The appellant's liability under clause (c) would not be not excluded or limited merely because notice of the
Club's claim was not given to the appellant before the expiration of period of insurance.
Hence, <case> of the Act is not applicable to the present situation.
The policy simply does not attach to give rise to considerations of exculpation for defective notifications. It is possible (although by no means certain) that Parliament would wish to extend the facility of exculpation to claims made outside the period of the "claims made" cover. But that could have significant implications for re-insurance and for the availability of such cover in the Australian insurance market. It would doubtless require the establishment of appropriate statutory conditions for the provision of relief.
Section 40 (1) has now repeatedly been held to be inapt to afford relief in such cases. So it is also here.
Since the respondent is unable to rely on <case> of the Act to require the appellant to indemnify it against the Club's claim, it is not necessary to decide whether the respondent satisfied the notification requirements of <case> of the Act. However, if it had been necessary to decide this issue, I would have agreed with the conclusions reached by Bainton J and O'Keefe CJ
Comm D. The notification requirements of <case> (3) should not be interpreted in a narrow, restrictive manner. Also, because the appeal is to be allowed, it is unnecessary to consider the appellant's contention that the orders made by
Bainton J were too wide in their language. Any such view would not have been fatal but would, if the appeal had otherwise been dismissed, have resulted in an amendment.
 
Conclusions and orders
For the above reasons, the appeal should be upheld. The declarations made by Bainton J should be set aside. The summons should be dismissed with costs.
The respondent must pay the costs of the appeal.
But it should, if otherwise so qualified, enjoy a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
Although the appellant has agreed not to seek repayment of the monies paid pursuant to the judgment of O'Keefe CJ Comm D, for the above reasons it is clear that this Court should also allow the appeal against that judgment.
In respect of the decision of O'Keefe CJ Comm D, the appeal is allowed and the judgment set aside. No consequential orders are made.
JUDGE2
SHELLER JA I have had the benefit of reading the President's judgment.
Accordingly I need not re-state in full the facts or relevant parts of the policy which the appellant, GIO General Limited, issued to the respondent,
Newcastle City Council.
As its heading suggests the "Liability
Coverage" was to pay to or on behalf of the insured "all sums for which the insured shall become legally liable to pay by way of compensation" (with immaterial exclusions) in respect of particular types of liability, namely "Public Liability", "Products
Liability" and "Professional Liability". When construing this part of the policy it is important to remember that it provides cover only in case where the insured is legally liable to pay compensation. Public liability and products liability are expressly separately covered.
In the case of public liability (para (a)) the personal injury or damage to property must happen during the period of insurance and be "caused by an occurrence in connection with the Business of the insured." The definition of "occurrence" is intended to ensure that its meaning includes "continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general conditions". That it is defined to mean "an event" is not alone of great assistance.
Undoubtedly the earthquake of 28 December 1989 was within the definition an occurrence.
But when the phrase speaks of "caused by an occurrence", in my opinion, it speaks in the context of the insured's legal liability for injury or damage from an occurrence which is "causally relevant", a phrase I have taken from Fleming on the Law of Torts, 8th ed, at 194. In that context the occurrence is not the earthquake but the insured's act which rendered it legally liable to pay. Thus if a structure is unsound because the insured designed it negligently, the fact that its collapse was caused by an earthquake does not mean that it was not caused by an occurrence or event of negligence. In March versus E and MH Stramare Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506] at 509
Mason CJ, with whose judgment Toohey J generally and Gaudron J agreed, said: "In philosophy and science, the concept of causation has been developed in the context of explaining phenomena by reference to the relationship between conditions and occurrences. In law, on the other hand, problems of causation arise in the context of ascertaining or apportioning legal responsibility for a given occurrence. The law does not accept John Stuart Mills' definition of cause as the sum of the conditions which are jointly sufficient to produce it. Thus, at law, a person may be responsible for damage when his or her wrongful conduct is one of a number of conditions sufficient to produce that damage: see McLean versus Bell [(1932) 147 LT 262] at 590-1, per
Windeyer J."
With the greatest respect I do not think that the appellant's liability to indemnify the insured for legal liability to pay compensation in respect of damage to property is excluded merely by saying that the damage was caused by the earthquake. Indeed if, as I think, what is causally relevant is the act of the insured which rendered it legally liable to pay compensation, everything suggests that that was an occurrence in connection with the insured's business. However, for the reasons the President has given I agree that the endorsement of 12 August 1991 prevents the insured claiming indemnity from the insurer in respect of its liability to pay compensation in reliance on the public liability clause, para (a).
I also agree with the President that [s40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) does not apply to that part of this contract of liability insurance which provides cover for professional liability (para (c)). [Section 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) applies to a contract of liability insurance if its effect is that the insurer's liability is excluded or limited by reason that notice of a claim against the insured in respect of a loss suffered by some other person is not given to the insurer before the expiration of the period of the insurance cover provided by the contract; subs (1). The contract of insurance does not have this effect. At most condition 3 requires that notices in writing shall be given as soon as possible to the insurer of amongst other things, any claim that shall come to the knowledge of the insured. Even taking account of the cancellation condition 12, this does not have the effect that the insurer's liability is excluded or limited by reason that notice of a claim against the insured is not given to the insurer "before the expiration of the period of the insurance cover provided by the contract." If the contract of insurance did have this effect then [s40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s40.html) (3) would operate in the way Gleeson CJ described in East End
Real Estate Pty Limited versus CE Heath Casualty and General Insurance Limited [(1991) 25 NSWLR 400] at 405.
I agree with the orders that the President proposes.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I agree with Kirby P.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/322.html  
