

Ali versus Prestige Group (Australia) Pty Ltd and Anor Matter No 10793/97 [1997] NSWSC 278 (31 July 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Ali versus Prestige Group (Australia) Pty Ltd & Anor /97 July 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Ali versus Prestige Group (Australia) Pty Ltd & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 17 March 1997. The plaintiff suffered injury in the course of his employment as a machine operator on 6 April 1992. His right hand was caught in the machine. His hand and lower forearm were crushed. There was amputation through the forearm. 
The Summons names two defendants. The first defendant was his employer. The second defendant is alleged to be the manufacturer and supplier of the machine (a power press to manufacture muffin trays).

It is common ground that, on 30 September 1993, the plaintiff made an election to claim permanent loss compensation in respect of the injury. Pursuant to section 151A of the Workers Compensation Act, 1987 (the WC Act), he seeks leave to revoke the election and commence proceedings in this Court for the recovery of damages against the first defendant. He seeks an order extending the limitation period for the commencement of proceedings against the second defendant.

The plaintiff has provided affidavit evidence. The contents of the affidavit were interpreted by an official interpreter. Ms Welsh (the plaintiff's present solicitor) has sworn an affidavit. Mr Sharpe (a solicitor for the first defendant) has sworn an affidavit. It annexes a large bundle of documents. The plaintiff was briefly cross-examined by Counsel for the second defendant.

The affidavits provide material of some bulk. Unfortunately, little of that material has present relevance. The relevant material is parsimonious. I shall now refer to some narrative material.

The plaintiff first consulted a solicitor (Mr Jackson of Turner Freeman) on 15
April 1992. He received advice from time to time from Mr Jackson. Copy letters received from Mr Jackson are annexed to the plaintiff's affidavit. Following the advice from Mr Jackson, the plaintiff settled a lump sum claim. This took place in about September 1993. Subsequently, he settled a claim for weekly benefits (see annexure `A' to the affidavit of Ms Welsh). Mr Jackson continued to act for the plaintiff until about September 1996. On 10 September 1996, he consulted Ms Welsh. The steps that are referred to in her affidavit were then taken.

I shall first deal with the relief sought by the plaintiff against the first defendant. As the plaintiff has made an election pursuant to section 151A, he is precluded from claiming damages from his employer unless he obtains leave pursuant to that section. The relevant provisions are subsections (4) and (5).
These provisions are in the following terms:- 
An election is irrevocable, except that an election to claim permanent loss compensation may be revoked with the leave of the court given in accordance with this section. 
If: a person elects to claim permanent loss compensation in respect of an injury; and after the election is made, the injury causes a further material deterioration in the person's medical condition that, had it existed at the time of the election, would have entitled the person to additional permanent loss compensation; and at the time of the election, there was no reasonable cause to believe that the further deterioration would occur, the person may, with the leave of the court and on such terms (if any) as the court thinks fit, revoke the election and commence proceedings in the court for the recovery of damages in respect of the injury.

Hitherto, these provisions have excited minimal activity. Counsel were not able to refer me to any helpful past decision.

The Court has a discretionary power to grant leave. The plaintiff must first satisfy the threshold requirements set forth in (b) and (c) of subsection (5).
When these requirements have been satisfied, the Court may then exercise its discretionary power. The power will be exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best done between the parties. The onus rests on the plaintiff (see Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866).] 
At the commencement of submissions, Counsel for the plaintiff had looked to a report from Dr Zielinski dated 18 December 1996 as providing the evidence to satisfy the threshold requirements. During submissions, it was conceded that this report lacked the material to perform that function. The attention of the
Court was then directed to earlier reports provided by Dr Zielinski. These reports had been annexed to Mr Sharpe's affidavit. They gave little comfort to the plaintiff. The first defendant referred the Court to a report from Dr John
Harvey Drew dated 4 August 1993. He was an expert qualified on behalf of the plaintiff, who provided that report shortly before the election was made. This report was also an annexure to Mr Sharpe's affidavit. Its contents were damaging to the plaintiff's application. I gained the impression that the application may have been brought without a real appreciation of what may have been necessary to satisfy the threshold requirements.

The first of the threshold requirements necessitates a demonstration that, after the election was made, the injury caused a further material deterioration in the plaintiff's medical condition that, had it existed at the time of the election, would have entitled the plaintiff to additional permanent loss compensation.

Unfortunately, the evidence falls well short of satisfying any of the aspects of that threshold requirement. Accordingly, the power cannot be exercised in the plaintiff's favour and his claim for relief against the first defendant must fail.

I now turn to the relief claimed against the second defendant. The plaintiff relies on section 60C of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969 (the Lim
Act).

Section 60C is in the following terms:- 
C. (1) This section applies to a cause of action, founded on negligence, nuisance or breach of duty, for damages for personal injury, but does not apply to a cause of action arising under the [Compensation to Relatives Act 1897](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/). 
If an application is made to a court by a person claiming to have a cause of action to which this section applies, the court, after hearing such of the persons likely to be affected by the application as it sees fit, may, if it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so, order that the limitation period for the cause of action be extended for such periods, not exceeding 5 years, as it determines. 
In exercising the powers conferred by section 60C, the Act requires the
Court to have regard to all the circumstances of the case (including the matters enumerated in section 60E). The approach adopted in Taylor is also applicable to the exercise of such powers.

The plaintiff's affidavit, inter alia, deposes to the following:- "39. By the stage I stopped seeing Mr Jackson I was unaware that I could bring a claim against the manufacturer of the press or that I had three years in which to commence such proceedings. I did not know the value of my Common Law claim because no-one had calculated the future wage loss by way of lump sum for me. I did not know that the component for future wage loss in a Common Law claim was paid in a lump sum rather than by weekly instalments. I did not know that I could bring a claim against the manufacturer of the machine and would receive full damages although I would have to repay the weekly payments and lump sums I had received by way of workers' compensation." 
Such evidence as there is, indicates that the second defendant was not the manufacturer of the machine. It is not disputed that the second defendant supplied it as a second-hand machine to the first defendant. It is not said that it would be futile to order an extension of the limitation period. The plaintiff alleges a cause of action founded on negligence against the second defendant (see annexure `D' to the affidavit of Ms Welsh). The second defendant submits that it is no more than an arguable cause of action.

The only ground upon which the application for an order is opposed is that of prejudice. There is no evidence of actual prejudice. There is presumptive prejudice (see Taylor).

The submissions of prejudice that were made concern the machine itself and the effect of delay on the prospects of useful inspection of it at this time. The plaintiff's allegation is that the machine had welding defects. It is not said that the machine has ceased to exist. It would seem that the machine was repaired and placed back into service after the accident.

The circumstances of the accident were investigated by the WorkCover
Authority. The investigation involved, inter alia, an interview with a director of the second defendant and inspection of the machine. Material relating to the investigation remains available to the second defendant (see annexure `C' to the affidavit of Ms Welsh). It is not said that the second defendant did not have any opportunity to inspect the machine at an early stage. Both defendants were prosecuted pursuant to section 18(2) of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1983. The second defendant pleaded guilty to the offence.

After balancing up the relevant discretionary considerations, I have decided that it is just and reasonable to make an order and that I should make an order extending the limitation period. Accordingly, I order that it be extended up to and including 14 August 1997.

The claim for relief made against the first defendant has failed. In seeking relief against the second defendant, the plaintiff is asking for an indulgence. It was reasonable for the second defendant to defend the application. I order the plaintiff to pay the costs of the Summons.
 * * * 
