

Sally Anne Horsley (Plaintiff) versus Phillips Fine Art Auctioneers Pty Ltd , Corrigans International Pty Limited (Second Defendant), St George
Commercial Credit Corporation Ltd (Third Defendant), Anthony Alwyn Spies (Cross-Claimant), Sally Anne Horsley (First Cross-Defendant) and St George
Commercial Credit Corporation Ltd (Second Cross-Defendant) No. 3211/92
Conversion - Gift [1995] NSWSC 78 (16 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
SANTOW J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 31 July 1995 #DATE 5:9:1995 #ADD 16:10:1995 
Counsel for the Cross-Claimant:       V B Davoren 
Solicitors for the Cross-Claimant:     Bruce R Miles 
Aboriginal Legal Service 
Counsel for the Second Cross-Defendant:   R G Forster SC 
Solicitors for the Second Cross-Defendant: Shaw McDonald
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
ESSENTIAL ISSUES
SANTOW J The claims between the various parties have now reduced to a cross-claim, essentially in conversion, against the Third Defendant, St George
Commercial
Credit Corporation Ltd ("St George"). It is brought by Anthony
Alwyn Spies ("Anthony Spies") as Cross-Claimant.
Anthony Spies alleges that, in the circumstances, St George wrongfully took possession of certain furniture and chattels. These were originally itemised for a bill of sale entered into in 1986 in favour of the Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of Sydney.
They were included amongst the contents of the residence he then occupied with his parents and brother, Carl, owned by a Spies' family company and known as "The Swifts" at
Darling Point.
Anthony Spies claims that he had a half share in such furniture and chattels at the time of their seizure. Anthony Spies' cross-claim necessarily depends on his establishing the following: that he had the requisite title to the furniture and chattels so as to maintain proceedings in conversion (or in the alternative, detinue); that St George converted the furniture and chattels, and that he suffered quantified loss and damage by reason of
St George converting the furniture and chattels.
St George contends that Anthony Spies has failed to establish any of the foregoing three essential elements and has provided no quantification of damage.
In denial of the first essential element of title, St George also contends that, even if Anthony Spies originally had the requisite title to the furniture and chattels, which it denies, Anthony Spies with his brother, Carl
Spies gifted their respective half interests to their late mother, Joan
Phyllis
Spies ("Mrs Spies"), in 1987, prior to their seizure in 1992. The efficacy of any such gift is disputed by Anthony Spies. He denies that the delivery necessary to effectuate an oral gift ever took place.
St George appears to depend for its right to seize, on an assignment to it in 1990 of a second bill of sale granted by Carl Spies alone to the assignor (the Roman Catholic Church).
That 1990 Bill of Sale included the relevant furniture and chattels. But if an earlier gift had been effectively made by both brothers to their mother of the relevant furniture and chattels, then prima facie St George could derive no rights under the 1990 Bill of
Sale and its assignment. This is because since Carl Spies would have had no title to the furniture and chattels at the time he purported to grant the 1990 Bill of
Sale.
However the implications of that were not argued before me and no evidence was given by Carl
Spies. Furthermore, the estate of the late Mrs Spies was not a party to these proceedings, nor anyone claiming as a beneficiary of that estate. Nor was any claim made by Anthony Spies based on any interest in such estate.
 
ELABORATION OF FACTUAL BACKGROUND .
On 13 March 1986 Lawsons, the valuers, prepared what the parties agreed should be referred to as an inventory of certain furniture and chattels located at "The Swifts". It was not conceded that the inventory represented the current value of the relevant items.
There was no evidence before me as to that, beyond that the proceeds of sale they eventually fetched was in excess of $500,000. "The
Swifts" is a large property in Darling Point of considerable value, owned for many years by the Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of Sydney. It is a mansion of some forty-odd rooms and standing on over three acres of land.
By transfer registered 9 April 1986, a company, Minjar Holdings Pty
Limited ("Minjar"), acquired "The Swifts" from the Roman Catholic Church.
It executed a mortgage back in favour of the Roman Catholic Church over The
Swifts (described as a Third [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) Memorandum of Mortgage). Minjar is a company associated with the Spies family and in particular the now deceased father of Anthony
Spies as well as the two sons, Carl and Anthony
Spies. Anthony Spies, the adopted son of those parents, was secretary to that company at the relevant time. Evidence was given by Anthony Spies that the directors were the father and Carl Spies (transcript at 12).
After the acquisition of The Swifts, Anthony Spies and Carl Spies, along with their parents, took up residence there, accommodated as I describe in more detail later.
On 14 April 1986 Carl Spies and Anthony Spies executed a Bill of Sale ("the 1986 Bill of Sale") over such of the chattels listed in the Lawson inventory as had not been deleted by hand. It will be apparent from the inventory that these chattels included antiques which it may be inferred were of considerable value, since they were later to be sold by St George so as to yield proceeds in excess of $500,000.
The 1986 Bill of Sale was an ordinary bill of sale, in which "the mortgagor" is described as "Carl Douglas Spies and Anthony Alwyn Spies" and "the mortgagee" as "The Trustees of the Roman Catholic
Church for the
Archdiocese of Sydney". "Mortgagor" is defined in clause 24 as follows: "24........
 ... The expression "the
Mortgagor" used herein includes if this
Bill is given by one person that person his executors administrators and transferees and if this Bill is given by more persons than one those persons jointly and every two or more of them jointly and each of them severally and their respective executors administrators and transferees and if a
Company is a Mortgagor includes that company its successors and transferees: If this Bill is given by more than one Mortgagor the covenants and agreements on the part of the Mortgagor herein contained or implied shall bind the Mortgagors jointly and every two or more of them jointly and each of them severally;"
The 1986 Bill of Sale is expressed as being to secure what is described as an advance to the mortgagor of the sum of $200,000 (as well as money comprised in "the Principal Sum" secured under The Third [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/)
Memorandum of Mortgage, described below). I infer, for reasons elaborated below, that the $200,000 represented the purchase price of the relevant furniture and chattels acquired by Anthony and Carl Spies from the Church. It is a fair inference that the $200,000 secured by the 1986 Bill of Sale in fact represented an amount equivalent to the amounts totalled by Lawsons in their inventory, namely $277,641, less deductions for the amounts referred to in the
Lawsons' inventory as deletions. I infer these deductions were for items which can be taken to have been retained by the Church
The property the subject of the 1986 Bill of Sale is described in
Annexure "B" to the 1986 Bill of Sale as follows: "All those items as contained in the property "The Swifts" 68
Darling
Point Road, Darling Point as listed and described in the inventory and valuation dated 13th March, 1986 by Lawsons of James
R. Lawson Pty. Limited, less all deletions thereto as acknowledged by both parties prior to the date hereof."
Repayment of the principal sum was required as to $50,000 on 14 October and as to the balance of $150,000 on 14 April 1987; see clause
No interest is charged unless default is made (clause 29).
Clause 32 provides that the 1986 Bill of Sale is collateral to a "Third [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) Memorandum of Mortgage of even date between Minjar Holdings
Pty Limited ... as mortgagor and The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church of the Archdiocese of Sydney, as mortgagee ... over the property known as 68
Darling Point Road, Darling Point" ("The Swifts"). Clause then provides that: "... The Parties hereto further acknowledge that the Principal
Sum secured by this ordinary Bill of Sale is the same Principal
Sum as is secured by the said Third [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) Memorandum of Mortgage and the Parties hereto agree that any default by the Mortgagor in the deemed performance and/or observance of any one or more of the covenants, conditions, provisions and stipulations of the said Third [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) Memorandum of
Mortgage shall be deemed to be a default under the terms and conditions of this Security."
This Third [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) Memorandum of Mortgage was not in evidence before me.
Finally, clause 30 prohibits assignment by the mortgagor of the mortgaged premises without the previous consent in writing by the mortgagee.
According to Anthony Spies, some time in 1987 the 1986
Bill of Sale was discharged, though this is disputed by St George. There is no documentary evidence of such discharge. Section 13(1) and (2) of the Bills of Sale Act  provides, relevantly, as follows: "13. (1) A bill of sale may be discharged, or partly discharged, by a receipt indorsed on the bill of sale, or copy thereof, held by the grantee or person claiming through him, in the form set out in Part 1 of the Third Schedule, or to the like effect.

If the Registrar-General is satisfied that a bill of sale, or copy, held by the grantee or person claiming through him, for some good reason cannot be produced, such bill of sale may be discharged or partly discharged by a receipt in the form set out in Part 2 of the Third Schedule."
There is no receipt indorsed on the Bill of Sale or any copy thereof produced to the Court. Nor is any receipt in evidence of the kind referred to in s13(2) quoted above.
It appears that discovery was not sought from St George nor any Notice to
Produce such as might have elicited such a receipt if it existed. It was said by Counsel for St George that based on instructions,
St George was not aware of any such receipt being in existence. Nor, it appears, was there any subpoena upon the Trustees of the
Roman Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of
Sydney and no evidence was otherwise sought from that source.
Anthony Spies' did not come across as a witness of great commercial sophistication. I am satisfied his responses showed him seeking to answer conscientiously and as best he could recall. His recollection of repayment was not precise. He did claim recollection of having made payment of certain amounts in "the middle of the next year" (transcript at 14). He could not recall the particular payments. He added in cross-examination that as he recalled it, nothing had been paid to the Roman Catholic Church when he moved into "The Swifts" in April 1986 but that between then, and some time in 1987 some money was paid over to the Church (transcript at 23). He acknowledged in cross-examination that he could not recall how much was paid. He confirmed that he was not involved in the payments but said, "I think it was my brother or my father" (transcript at 23). No evidence was given by the brother and the father is now deceased.
There is, however, some evidence supporting the inference that the 1986
Bill of Sale was discharged. Thus, on 19 June 1990, the same mortgagee, namely
Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of Sydney, was the grantee of a new bill of sale ("the 1990 Bill of Sale").
This time it was granted by Carl Spies alone. That 1990 Bill of Sale was for the lesser amount of $93,500. It was not disputed that this amount represented unpaid interest owing to the Church which I infer was attributable to the original purchase of "The Swifts" and still outstanding on 19 June 1990. The 1990 Bill of Sale makes no mention of any ownership interest on the part of Anthony Spies.
It is expressed to be over "all furniture and furnishings now and hereafter situated in the premises known as "The Swifts", 68 Darling
Point Road, Darling Point".
The Cross-Claimant contended that the 1990 Bill of Sale could be only over
Carl Spies' half interest in the chattels, as Anthony was not a party to it.
When the second Bill of Sale was granted on 19 June 1990, I am satisfied this coincided with the principal mortgage to the Church being discharged over "The Swifts" and its re-financing by Minjar granting a fresh mortgage in favour of St George (there being also a second mortgage granted over the property to Custom Credit), Thus this fresh mortgage was granted on the same day as the 1990 Bill of Sale.
It was not disputed that the furniture and furnishings previously the subject of the 1986 Bill of Sale remained at that address in "The Swifts".
There is evidence that there would have been other furniture and furnishings added, being the personal belongings of at least Anthony Spies, as well as property contributed from the previous Spies' residence in Point Piper or subsequently bought by Carl Spies or his mother. Evidence was undisputed that the Spies family bought antiques.
In both the 1986 and 1990 Bills of Sale there is a similar printed
Statutory Declaration, clause 4 of which stating: "that the personal chattels comprised in such bill of sale are at the time of my/our giving the said bill of sale this day, my/our absolute property (except as stated in clause 7 of this
Declaration)".
In the 1986
Bill of Sale both Carl Spies and Anthony Spies signed that
Statutory Declaration. Whereas, in the 1990 Bill of Sale only Carl Spies signed it alone as he alone signed the 1990 Bill of Sale.
Anthony Spies gave evidence, which was not contradicted, that he did not know of the 1990 Bill of Sale at the time it was granted.
Clause 7 of the above Statutory Declaration was deleted in the 1990 Bill of Sale but not in the 1986 Bill of Sale. Clause 7, in both cases, read as follows: "That at the time of the giving of the said Bill of Sale money owing to ... on the security of the said personal chattels."
Had there been money still owing to the knowledge of the Trustees of the
Roman Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of Sydney on the 1986 Bill of Sale one would have expected that clause 7 in the 1990 Bill of Sale would not have been deleted, but rather completed instead so as to refer to money still owing under the 1986 Bill of Sale.
While the 1986 Bill of Sale is expressed as securing monies owing under the Third [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) Memorandum of Mortgage, it can be inferred this latter related to securing the purchase price for purchase of "The Swifts".
The Certificate of Title shows that mortgage to have been discharged.
In all the circumstances, though the state of the evidence is less complete than it should have been, I am satisfied that it is more probable than not, that the 1986 Bill of Sale was paid out, though it may well have been the case that no receipt of the kind required by s13 of the Bills of Sale
Act 1988 was ever executed. Those circumstances include the fact of a fresh bill of sale being executed to the same mortgagee for a different amount, referable to interest most likely attributable to the original purchase of "The Swifts" and the complete absence of any reference in it to the earlier 1986 Bill of Sale, including the deletion of clause 7.
Returning to earlier events, Anthony Spies gave evidence that he and his brother Carl "transferred the ownership of the furniture, paintings, art work, china and other items in the home at "Swifts", (shortly after the the payment out of the Bill of Sale, according to my beliefs and) I recall being present with my parents and Carl
Spies when we celebrated the transfer of the items of furniture to my mother, by sharing a bottle
Dom Perignon champagne. From that date I have considered that I have never had any further interest in the items referred to above and that they were the property of my late mother."
See Anthony Spies' affidavit of 10 July 1992, paragraph 5.
(The words in square brackets represent how that part of his affidavit evidence was to be read, by consent.)
At that time in 1987 the parents of Anthony and Carl, together with
Anthony and Carl, were still living in "The Swifts". The mother, Mrs Spies, died on 5 July 1991 and the father had also died before 1992. Anthony and Carl continued to live in "The Swifts" until 22 April 1992 when St George took possession.
It is clear enough that in 1987 the furniture and other items had been augmented from those the subject of the 1986 Bill of Sale, though I am satisfied that "The Swifts" would still have housed those items originally comprised in the 1986 Bill of Sale.
The family were all interested in antiques. "The Swifts" was a very large property comprising some bedrooms and other formal rooms all requiring to be furnished. At the time, Anthony Spies resided in separate accommodation in a separate adjoining cottage with his own bedroom and living room. His parents' bedroom was on the second floor, with Carl Spies two doors down from them in his own separate accommodation comprising a bedroom and another living room. It appears that the principal formal rooms - drawing room, study, games room - were on the ground floor. They were occupied by the parents where most of the items left in "The Swifts" were to be found. Other items were to be found in every bedroom.
Significantly, uncontradicted evidence given by Anthony Spies concurred in the conclusion that "the rooms where most of the items from the Roman
Catholic Church had been left were under the control of the parents or with your mother and father" (transcript at 19). It was also uncontradicted that each brother's accommodation was indeed separate. To the extent the two brothers used those rooms (drawing room, study, games room), I infer that they were not done as co-possessors, with their parents, but by leave of their parents; though no doubt their access was in practise untrammelled.
The background to the intended gift was that Anthony and Carl first discussed it with each other.
They decided that they wanted to gift the furniture left in the house by the Roman Catholic Church to their mother as she had been a good mother to them. They told their mother that they wanted to give these items to her (transcript at 20).
In cross-examination,
Anthony Spies concurred in the suggestion from St
George's Counsel that Carl had said in front of him, something like this: "Mother, Anthony and I would like to show you our appreciation for being such a good mother, by giving you the items covered in the Bill of Sale which we have now discharged." (transcript at 21)
Anthony Spies recalls them all celebrating with the champagne. Thereafter his recollection was not precise, though he thought he recalled that they "might have" walked around the rooms admiring the various items. But he did not recall whether he put his hand on any of the items or whether he or his brother handed any to his mother. Indeed his recollection was that he would not pick up any of the items "because she would tell me to put it down straight away" (transcript at 22). He had no recollection of statements being made to the effect that "these are the items we would like you to have" (transcript at 22).
I conclude, on the balance of probabilities, that Carl and Anthony did unequivocally state to their mother that they were gifting the furniture to her and had the celebratory drink. I also conclude that it is more probable than not that following the celebratory drink, at least Anthony would have walked around the various items of furniture.
However, it is not possible to conclude whether or not he was accompanied by his mother or indeed by Carl and, if his mother did accompany him, whether or not he put his hand on any of the items, though it is clear enough he did not pick any up to hand to his mother.
I should add that no evidence was given by Carl Spies, there having been a family falling out between the brothers.
Following St George taking possession of "The Swifts" on 27 April 1992, the brothers ceased to occupy the property and the furniture was put in storage. On 5 May 1992 the Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the
Archdiocese of Sydney transferred to
St George the 1990 Bill of Sale and the debt secured thereby. Though no document of assignment was produced, that transfer was not in dispute, according to the agreed chronology submitted by the parties.
 
LEGAL QUESTIONS
Question 1 Did Anthony Spies have and retail? the requisite title to the relevant furniture and chattels so as to maintain proceedings in converstation against St
George?
Question 2 If the answer lo question 1 is "Yes", did St George convert the relevant furniture and chattels, so far as Anthony Spies was concerned?
Question 3 Depending on the answers to questions 1 and 2, did Anthony
Spies suffer loss and damage by reason of St George converting the relevant furniture and chattels and, if so, has that loss and damage been quantified? 
Question 1 Did Anthony Spies haw and retain the requisite title to the relevant furniture and chattels so as to maintain proceedings in conversion against St George?
Elements of Conversion and Detinue
A useful explanation of the tort of conversion is found in the judgment of Dixon J in Penfolds Wines Pty Ltd v. Elliot <case>; [(1946) 74 CLR 204] at 229: "The essence of conversion is a dealing with a chattel in a manner repugnant to the immediate right of possession of the person who has the property or special property in the chattel".
Thus in this context, the wrongful sale and delivery of goods belonging to another person amounts to a conversion; that is to say, a physical dealing with the goods in a manner inconsistent with the owner's title: Claxton v.
Everingham [(1884) 6 ALT 132]
Accordingly, in order to maintain an action in conversion, the claimant must prove his or her right to immediate possession of the chattel at the time of the alleged conversion: Abbott v. NSW Monte de Piete Co <case>; [(1904) 4 SR ]
Such title to sue in conversion may be established through the claimant's proprietary or possessory interest in the chattel; but a mere contractual right to possession is not sufficient: Jarvis v. Williams [(1955) 1 All ER 108.]
The same considerations would apply in relation to the action framed in detinue. The essence of detinue is wrongful detention of a chattel to which the plaintiff has the right of immediate possession. This right must derive from some proprietary or possessory interest in the chattel: Russell versus Wilson <case>; [(1923) 33 CLR 538.] 
Were the chattels gifted by the brothers to their mother, so precluding a right to possession on the part of Anthony Spies? .
The question thus arises whether Anthony Spies retained the requisite right to immediate possession of the relevant furniture at the time of their seizure by St. George. This depends upon whether, accepting he earlier had such a right to the chattels by way of his claimed half interest, that right nonetheless continued to the time of seizure, notwithstanding the earlier steps said to constitute a gift to his mother. If such a gift were earlier effectively completed, then Anthony Spies would not have retained the requisite proprietary or possessory title to maintain an action in conversion or detinue.
 
Effective gift - delivery
A gift of chattels may be effectuated in one of three ways; by oral words of gift with delivery, by deed, or, in equity, by declaration of trust, The first method of oral words and delivery, and that of gift by deed are the only ones available infer vivos at common law. The history of delivery in the context of oral gifts is set out in detail in the joint judgment of Bowen and
Fry, L.JJ., in
Cochrane versus Moore [(1890) 25 QBD 57.] That decision reviews the authorities from the time of Edward I, including Bracton in his book de acquirendo verum dominio, in affirming the then rule in Irons versus Smallpiece 2 B and Ald, 551. It affirmed that an effective gift of chattels requires either a deed or testamentary document, or an actual delivery to the donee. The writings of Bracton invoke the mediaeval emphasis on the importance of seisin, whether applied to a pig's ham or a manor or field. It was said, at 66, that
Bracton was not copying Roman Law since "at least since the time of Justinian, gift has been a purely consensual transaction, and did not require delivery to make it perfect (Inst. ii, vii)". However, that last conclusion in unqualified form is open to question. It is true Justinian treated informal agreements to make a gift as enforceable (Inst. II. 7.2). But actual delivery of the thing, where a gift of that kind was in issue, remained necessary to effect a transfer of dominium (ownership) to the donee (though relaxed to the extent that delivery of the relevant instrument or document came to suffice); J A C
Thomas, Text book of Roman Law North Holland Publishing Company 1976 at 192 citing Justinian's
Code .8.53.6 and .3.29.2.
The later softening of the requirements of delivery in Roman law supports the observation of Buckland and McNair Roman Law and Common Law Cambridge 1974 at 112: "There is a curious difference in the evolution of conveyance in
Roman law as compared with ours. Our law requires in principle either delivery or deed; Roman law requires delivery, or for some things only mancipation. But in our law the actual transfer is not required on a sale of goods, and, apart from this, all incomplete transfer will be helped out in equity in favour of any one but a mere 'volunteer', a donee. In Roman law, on the other hand, sale always required a delivery to transfer the ownership and it was especially in favour of gifts that the rules were relaxed; whereas in our law it is precisely in the matter of gifts that we are strict and insist as a general rule upon delivery if there is no deed (2)." ((2) See for example Re Cole [(1963) 3 WLR 621] where the Court of Appeal reaffirmed this rule.
The delivery of the title deeds of land will not transfer the legal estate, though an equitable mortgage may be created by a deposit of title deeds; but with personal property the handing over of a document of title to chattels may in certain cases be tantamount to delivery of the chattels themselves, as in the case of delivery of a bill of lading to the purchaser of goods under a c.i.f. contract.)
Thus unless made by deed, a gift of chattels, though evinced orally or in writing, is not completed without delivery: Thomas versus Times Book Co Ltd [(1966) All ER 241] Delivery in this circumstance means the voluntary transfer of possession of the goods to another, whether by means of the physical transfer of the property itself or by some constructive delivery. Constructive delivery will be appropriate where, as is the case here, the chattels are bulky or consist of a collection of pieces or articles not readily susceptible of manual delivery: Lock v.
Heath [(1892) 8 TLR 295] 
Delivery prior to words of gift - retained possession and custody
Importantly though, the delivery need not be made at the time of the gift. Delivery may occur prior to or contemporaneous with or subsequent to the words of gift: In re Stoneham; Stoneham v. Stoneham [(1919) 1 Ch 149] though affirmed in Cochrane v Moore (supra) at 61-2).
This proposition as it relates to prior delivery, implicit in pre-existing possession or custody, requires some elaboration. Its implications depend on where pre-existing possession (or custody) resides - with a third party, with the putative donor or with the putative donee. (I leave to one side cases of shared possession.) As Buckland and McNair point out (at 113) Roman law allowed a similar result: "if the thing is already in the intended owner's hands, an actual delivery is dispensed with (traditio brevi manu)". Thus where the goods are already in the possession of a third party bailee, then the donor must in some way effect a change in the character of the bailee's possession so that henceforth the third party looks to the donee as his bailor. Likewise, where possession has remained in the donor, words of present gift may not suffice without delivery and in the absence of a deed or declaration of trust; Crossley Vaines' Personal Property E.L.B. Tyler and N.E. Palmer, Fifth Edition,
Butterworths 1973 at 308-9. But if the goods are already in the possession (or custody) of the donee, an effective oral gift of those goods may be made without the need for any further delivery, because delivery has occurred prior to the words of gift: In re Stoneham;
Stoneham v. Stoneham [(1919) 1 Ch 149] As Herron J stated in See v. See [(1946) 63 WN 181] at 183: "Manual delivery is not necessary to complete a verbal gift of furniture, for the facts may disclose that there has been such a change in possession consequent on the gift as is sufficient to effectuate it: Kiplin v. Ratley [(1892) 1 QB 582.] More especially in cases where the chattels are at the time of the parol gift in the possession of the intended donee, no further act of delivery or change of possession is needed to pass the property: In re Stoneham [(1919) 1 CH 149] supports this view."
And as Thornley stated in his article "Transfer of Choses in Possession between Members of a Common Household" [(1953) 11 Cambridge Law Journal 355] at : "Where no chattel is itself physically transferred there may nevertheless be a constructive delivery sufficient to pass ownership to the grantee. Thus words of gift uttered by the owner, and words of acceptance by the donee who is already holding the chattels concerned as bailee for him, change the character of the donee's possession so as to constitute a constructive delivery which will pass the title : Alderson v.
Peel (1891) 7 TLR 418; Re Stoneham [(1919) 1 Ch 149.] The same is true where the donee merely had custody of the chattels as the donor's servant; the custody becomes possession, and the title passes."
But as the case of Flinn v. White <case>; [(1950) SASR 195] demonstrates, in order for a gift to be held to be effectual in such circumstances, that is to say, where there is no further act of delivery or change of possession, it must first be established that the donee already had possession, or, at the least, custody of the chattels at the time of the words of gift.
In Flinn versus White (supra), a piano was purchased by the father of three daughters, two of whom played the piano, and placed in the family home. Some years before his death, the father said that as A., one of the daughters, was the pianist of the family, the piano was hers. The piano remained in the home and A continued to use it. After the father's death, the question arose as to whether there had been a valid gift of the piano by the father to A. Abbot J, at p 202, approved the proposition that if the donee already has possession of the chattel prior to the words of the gift, it is unnecessary to go through the form of delivery as a change in possession has already taken place, which is equivalent to contemporaneous delivery.
In addition, Abbot J referred to the principle enunciated in Knapp v. Knapp <case>; [(1944) SASR 257] that the custody of a chattel by a donee may be changed into possession as owner. At 202, Abbott J cited the words of Mayo J in Knapp v. Knapp (at 263): "A donee may acquire possession of the chattel by delivery, or, if he already has it in his custody, such as in the character of bailee for some particular duty or service, that custody may be changed into possession as owner."
These words of Mayo J echo the reasoning of Thornley. That is to say, where a donee merely has custody of chattels, such as is the case where a donor temporarily gives his servant control of a chattel, then upon words of gift and their subsequent acceptance, the custody becomes possession and the title passes. The authority for this point is Wittier v. Wittier [(1861) 4 LT .] In that case Mr Winter senior owned a barge which was worked by one of his sons as the father's employee. At 640 in that case Wightman
J found that before the gift the son had used the barge as servant to his father (and therefore had custody but not possession of the barge) and afterwards he possessed it and worked it as owner. Although aspects of Wittier v. Winter have been criticised in later cases, the above passage from Wightman J still remains good law. The proposition to be gleaned from these cases then, is that where there is no further act of delivery or change of possession, it must first be established that the donee already had possession, or, at the least, custody of the chattels at the time of the words of gift, in order for such a purported gift to be effectual.
In Flinn versus White, Abbot J found that in the case before him there was no evidence of either prior possession or custody of the piano by A. His reasoning proceeded therefore on the basis that there would have to have been a transfer of possession of the piano for the requirement of constructive delivery to be satisfied. His Honour concluded that there was no evidence on which he could be satisfied that there had been such a transfer of possession from the father to the daughter, He considered that the daughter had no more than a licence, revocable by the father at will, to use the piano in common with such other members of the family that desired to use it.
His Honour reasoned that as the father was the occupier of the house, the piano was his, and was in his possession.
He had done nothing to indicate a transfer in possession, and she had done nothing to indicate that she had become the owner. Because the daughter bore the onus of establishing that the gift was effectual, if the facts were equally consistent, as he concluded they were, with the possibility that the father intended to make a present, or that he intended to make a future gift, or that he intended to retain the ownership himself, then the daughter had failed to establish that there had been an effectual gift.
The purported gift In Flinn versus White therefore failed because the daughter could not satisfy the court that she had pre-existing possession or custody of the piano, and therefore a further act of delivery was needed to make the gift effectual. Such farther act of delivery had not occurred. It is perhaps open to question whether the daughter in fact failed to achieve custody of the piano in the circumstances.
Status as a licensee, as such, need not be fatal; a licensee can have the degree of physical control required for custody.
However the decision can be more readily justified in terms of onus. This required the daughter to dispel the implication of her having only limited access, by reason of the right to use the piano being at the father's pleasure and being evidently a shared right with at least one other daughter.
Some mention should made of two twentieth century English decisions in which the Court of Appeal examined the validity of gifts of furniture which bad purportedly been made by a husband to his wife, where both the husband and wife resided in the matrimonial home: Hislop v. Hislop (1950) WN (Eng) 125 and
In re Cole [(1964) Ch 175.] In both instances, the Court was not prepared to hold as efficacious, words of gift spoken in the presence of a wife, who was in joint occupation of the matrimonial home, to the effect that she could have the furniture, in the absence of some manual act of delivery.
However, neither case involved a wife who was a co-owner with a right to possession. Thus neither case puts in doubt the proposition that where a donee has pre-existing possession, no further act of delivery is necessary to transfer title in the chattels. Rather, in these cases it was thought that the mere fact that the wife was in joint de facto control of the furniture at the relevant time with the alleged donor was not sufficient of itself to show that she had pre-existing possession of the furniture, as opposed to merely being permitted to use and enjoy the furniture.
In these cases the Court adhered to the proposition laid down in Ramsay v. Margrett [(1894) 2 QB 18.] This is to the effect that in the case of a husband and wife living together, or other persons having a common establishment, possession, as it would otherwise be doubtful, is necessarily attached by law to the title and thus dependent on it. The husband had the title to the goods in these two cases and therefore was held to have possession of them. There was no discussion of the alternative possible characterisation, as involving prior custody in the wife, albeit shared with the putative donor husband.
In the present case, as I elaborate below, the living arrangements at "The Swifts" were quite different to the two English cases. Mr and Mrs Spies effectively lived in separate accommodation from their two sons Carl and
Anthony. They therefore cannot be considered to have shared a "common establishment" with their sons, as that term is used in the English cases. The fact that the parents gave their sons ready access to the relevant rooms in which most of the goods were kept did not make the establishment a common one.
In any event, those two cases did not explicitly deal with custody as a separate basis from possession. They appear to have proceeded on an implicit and I suggest, questionable, assumption. That is, that where goods are in the shared use of putative donor and donee, but where the putative donor has the superior right to those goods through ownership of the home in which kept, that necessarily precludes a finding of custody on the part of the claimant donee.
These English cases and the case of Flinn v. White can in any event be distinguished from the present situation. Here Mrs Spies had, clearly enough, physical control and therefore custody of the chattels, for reasons which
I will elaborate. Less clearly, and again for reasons which I will elaborate, she would have had possession as well. I say less clearly, because ownership of the house, and therefore the rooms, was, according to the evidence, in the family company Minjar Pty Limited, not in the parents. It can, however, be inferred from the parents' permitted occupation of "The Swifts" and the parents' acknowledged control of the relevant rooms, that the parents so occupied the Swifts by permission of Minjar Pty Limited and probably on a basis that their right so to occupy was exclusive as against the rest of the world, except Minjar. There is no evidence before me as to how that permission was formalised, if at all. It is reasonable to infer that Minjar Pty Limited was owned by the Spies family (though there is no evidence before me as to their precise shareholding). The evidence does include that the father and
Carl Spies were directors and Anthony Spies secretary. The reasoning for this conclusion depends on the legal meaning in this context of "possession" and "custody", to which I now turn.
 
Meaning of "possession" and "custody"
As recognised by the third edition of Words and Phrases Legally
Defined,
Butterworths, 1989, at 398 the word "possession" is of ambiguous meaning. Its legal senses do not always coincide with its popular sense.
Thus at 398 it is said: "The word 'possession' may mean effective, physical or manual control, or occupation, evidenced by some outward act, sometimes called de facto possession or detention as distinct from a legal right to possession. This is as a question of fact rather than as of law.
 'Possession' may mean legal possession that possession which is recognised and protected as such by law. The elements normally characteristic of legal possession are an intention of possessing together with that amount of occupation or control of the entire subject matter of which it is practically capable and which is sufficient for practical purposes to exclude strangely from interfering. Thus, legal possession is ordinarily associated with de facto possession but legal possession may exist without de facto possession, and de facto possession is not always regarded as possession in law.
In Pollock and Wright, Possession in the Common Law, Clarendon Press, ,
at 2 it is recognised that "possession, again, whether in the popular or in the legal sense, does not necessarily concur with title".
Then it is said (at 16) that possession at law need not be possession as against "all men without exception, though it be against the world at large". It is recognised that "a perfectly exclusive fight to the control of anything can belong only to the owner, or to someone invested with such right by the will of the owner or some authority ultimately derived therefrom, or, exceptionally, by an act of the law superseding the owner's will and his normal rights". Thus at 19 they conclude: "possession in law is a substantive right or interest which exists and has legal incidents and advantages apart from the true owner's title." .
I turn now to the meaning of custody in comparison to possession.
Pollock and Wright (supra) at 26, differentiate between possession and custody, with the following example: "A tailor sends to J.S.'s house a coat which J.S. has ordered
J.S. puts on the coat, and then has both physical control and rightful possession in law.

J.S. takes off the coat and gives it to a servant to take back to the tailor for some alterations. Now the servant has physical control (in this connexion generally called 'custody' by our authorities) and J.S. still has the possession in law."
The High Court in Federal Commissioner of Taxation versus Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Limited <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 499] considered the Commissioner of Taxation's power to have the taxpayer's documents held by a third party made available for production to him. This required an analysis of the ability of the person concerned so to produce them, such ability being defined by reference to "custody or control" in [s264(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/s264.html) of the [Income Tax Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) (Cth). At 504-5 Stephen J confirmed that "possession", like "custody", depends for its meaning upon the context in which used, citing
Towers and Co.
Ltd versus Gray [(1961) 2 QB 351] at 299.
Then at 505 Stephen J refers to the earlier cited example from Pollock and
Wright, concluding that the primary meaning of the word "custody" is that of physical control: "In looking to that ability and in describing what a person may be required to produce, the section first selects the most obvious instance of such all ability, the simple case of actual custody, using the word 'custody', as did the learned authors of Pollock and Wright, Possession in the Common Law, at p. 26, as meaning physical control."
Further explication of the relative differences of "possession" and "custody" does not need to deal separately with bailment. There is here no contract of custody for reward and gratuitous bailment is merely a subset of the right to possession.
However, a useful summary is to be found in Crossley
Vaines (supra) at 49. "(2) Legal possession. - Here we have a definite legal relation (Pollock and Wright, Possession in the Common Law, 27) but one which may exist without physical control or without lawful origin. The person who has both title to and physical control of a chattel has, of course, legal possession, but so also has he who has physical control of and a manifest intention to exercise dominion over a chattel. Thus a thief may haw legal possession of that which he steals. Again, legal possession may exist in the absence of physical control, as where a man's goods are in the hands of his servant. Unless, in special circumstances, the servant has been constituted a bailee of his master 's property (See R. v. Cooke (1871) LR 1 CCR 295,
The instances are generally to be found in criminal law.), he has not possession but a mere physical control; a de facto possession, called, conveniently, custody. Similarly the guest has custody only and not possession of the glass he drinks out of at his host's table ...
 'Custody' in this sense must not be confused with the contract of custody for reward, e.g., with respect to the warehousing of goods, which, of course, is a proper bailment under which legal and actual possession passes to the custodier; and even in the case of a gratuitous deposit for safe custody the 'depositary' is a bailee (See Chapter 6, p. 85) and has possession." 
Did Mrs Spies have pre-existing possession or custody of the relevant goods?
In the present case, the evidence is that most of the goods the subject of the gift were located in the main part of the house - in the drawing room, the study and the games room - where Mrs Spies and her husband resided (transcript at 19). The evidence is that these rooms where most of these items had been left were "under the control of, or with", the mother and father.
While no explication of the word "with" occurred in cross-examination, I am satisfied it was intended in the context to be synonymous with "control". The fact that the control was thus joint, between both parents, should not matter.
So too in Kilpin v. Ratley [(1892) 1 QB 582] possession was originally with the claimant's husband. But the claimant wife effectively shared that possession, by residing with him. The gift to her by a third party was still held to be effective.
Nor do I consider that untrammelled access to the relevant rooms allowed by the parents to their sons meant that the latter shared with their parents control of the rooms or what was in them.
Access was still by leave of the parents.
In addition, as earlier pointed out, the evidence indicates that Mrs
Spies and her husband could not be considered to be living in a 'common establishment' with their sons Anthony and Carl. The Cross-Claimant, Mr
Anthony Spies resided in a separate area behind the house, whilst his brother,
Carl Spies, had his own bedroom and living room separate from the area where
Mrs Spies and her husband resided. Although Anthony Spies indicated that he did not have cooking facilities in his separate accommodation, I am satisfied that any use by him of those facilities in the main part of the house would have been by permission of his parents.
Given these circumstances and were it necessary for me so to decide, I would be satisfied on balance that before the words of gift, most of the goods were, by virtue of their parents' control of the rooms in which most were placed, in the possession of Mrs Spies, though that possession was joint with her husband. In my judgment this conclusion is not precluded by the fact that ownership of the house was in the family company Minjar Pty Limited, having regard to what I have earlier inferred to be the nature of the parents' occupation rights ceded by Minjar to the parents, to the exclusion of all except Minjar.
I thus take the meaning of "possession" and "custody" from the context here, in accordance with the principles earlier enunciated.
It is a context where the entity with legal ownership, Minjar, is not itself the putative donor. It is furthermore a context concerned with the effect of clear words of gift on the ownership of goods then housed in rooms under the control of the putative donee. In this context, the notion of delivery, implicit in prior possession, performs an evidentiary function. That function is to justify characterisation of what has occurred as amounting to an effective gift notwithstanding the absence of a deed, in circumstances where the law has concluded that oral words of gift alone are not sufficient for this purpose.
It thus presupposes that there is sufficient in the way of an overt act of delivery or in the extrinsic circumstance of prior possession or custody, for the law to do so with reasonable assurance. Given that words of gift must in any event have been sufficiently proven, not much more should be needed to evidence such a donative intention. Thus possession in the de facto sense should suffice, just as custody suffices, without the necessity for full legal possession good against even the owner. To decide otherwise, by insisting upon a meaning of possession (or custody) tantamount to the absolute possession enjoyed by the full owner, would frustrate the intentions of the intended donor and for no sensible purpose. This is especially where there is no suggestion of shared control between putative donor and donee. I do not need to decide whether indeed that latter feature, absent here, should be fatal to an effectual gift, though am inclined to think it should not be fatal.
However, even if it could be considered that Mrs Spies did not have legal possession of the chattels, she quite clearly had custody of the chattels in the sense of physical control over them. On the authority of Winter v. Winter and Knapp v.
Knapp, this prior custody is enough to establish the effectuality of the gift to Mrs Spies. This situation, where Mrs Spies had, at the time of the words of gift, possession or at the least, custody and therefore control of the chattels is to be contrasted with the situation in Flinn v. White.
There the daughter did not satisfy the onus of demonstrating effective or physical control of the subject matter of the deemed gift.
It should be noted that while the evidence of Anthony Spies indicates that perhaps not all of the furniture the subject of the gift was located in the main area of the house where Mrs Spies and her husband resided, and that therefore conceivably not all of such furniture was in the possession or effective control of Mrs Spies at the time of the words of gift, certainly the majority was. This factor in my opinion does not alter the effectiveness of the gift. I am satisfied that the intended gift to Mrs Spies was of the entire conglomerate of furniture that was set out in the bill of sale. In these circumstances
I am satisfied that the fact that Mrs Spies had possession (and certainly custody) of the majority of the pieces of furniture at the time of the words of gift intended to apply to the whole is enough to make the gift of that majority a proxy for the whole, just as delivery of a part may be a delivery of the whole, if it is so intended- Dixon versus Yates (1833) 5 B and D at 339, Kemp versus Falk [(1882) 7 App Cas 573] at 586, HL per Lord Blackburn.
Carl and Anthony Spies clearly evinced their intention to make such a gift, when they unequivocally stated that they were giving the furniture to their mother. Mrs Spies accepted this gift, demonstrating this by partaking in the 'champagne celebration' at the time of the words of gift. This acceptance occurred at a time when most of the furniture was, as earlier concluded in the joint possession of the mother and husband.
 
Further act of delivery?
Given my conclusion earlier that there was at least such pre-existing custody in Mrs Spies (and, though less clearly, possession), I do not need to consider the nature of the further act of delivery that would have been necessary to make the gift effectual, had the evidence not established such pre-existing custody or possession. However, I will make some brief observations on the nature of the further act of delivery, whether constructive or not, that would then have been necessary in order to complete such a gift of chattels.
What such delivery requires is to be determined by reference to the nature of the chattels claimed to be gifted and to the kind of delivery to which amenable. For example, if the chattel were a simple pearl ring, then delivery would typically be its physical handing over. If, on the other hand, the chattels were, as here, a conglomerate of furniture scattered throughout a house, or otherwise bulky, it would be unreasonable to expect that the intending donor would pick up and hand to the donee each individual item included in the gift. Rather, one might typically find the necessary delivery to consist of picking up, say, one piece as proxy for the whole, with an accompanying indication to the donee that it was so intended. Such a method of delivery is not of course to be taken as exhaustive of the kinds of delivery to which such property might be amenable.
If it had been necessary for me to decide this question in the absence of prior possession or custody in Mrs Spies, I would have been inclined to conclude that there was in the present circumstances insufficient evidence to satisfy the onus of establishing later delivery. While the evidence shows that
Anthony Spies, his brother and their mother shared some champagne at the time of the words of gift and even if, as is less clear, it were the case that after the champagne the three of them walked around the house having a look at some of the items, it appears unlikely that any items were picked up by Mr
Spies or his brother, or that Mr Spies or his brother laid hands on any of the items or handed any to their mother. The celebratory drinking of the champagne, which took place at the time of, or just subsequent to, the words of gift, could not in my opinion suffice in themselves as an act of delivery.
However, based on my earlier conclusion that the furniture was already at least in the mother's custody and, on balance, in her possession, no further act of delivery was necessary. The earlier gift from Anthony Spies and his brother to their mother was therefore effectual. Accordingly Anthony Spies has not established that he any longer had property in the furniture at the time of the claimed act of conversion, thus precluding his action at the threshold.
 
Remaining Questions
In light of my answer to this question 1, questions 2 and 3 do not arise.
Based on the way this matter has been argued and pleaded, any implication of my earlier finding of an effective gift to the late Mrs Spies on the capacity of St. George to seize and sell the chattels under its 1990 Bill of Sale does not presently arise.
Even if it did, that aspect would be further complicated by the judgment of 17 December 1992 of Waddell CJ in Eq. Ms Horsley there brought an action as representative of the late Mrs Spies's estate, seeking damages for detention and conversion of "the Swifts" furniture. His Honour gave judgment for summary dismissal of the statement of claim. This was on the ground that no reasonable cause of action was disclosed on the evidence. In particular there was apparently then no evidence given to base Ms Horsley's claim that the goods had been transferred or gifted to Mrs Spies. Whether this finding would now give rise to any issue estoppel has not been raised in the present proceedings. Indeed Anthony Spies placed no reliance in the present proceedings on any claim to title based on the will of the late Mrs Spies, nor otherwise did he seek to claim through her.
 
ORDERS
Accordingly, I conclude that on the evidence before me the
Cross-Claimant's claim must fail. I direct the parties to submit orders giving effect to this judgment within fourteen days and to address me on costs; prima facie costs should follow the event.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/78.html  
