

Arbest Pty Limited and Ors versus State Bank of New South Wales Limited Nos. Ca /93; Cl 11085/91; Cl 11087/91 Trade Practices - Contract [1995] NSWSC 72 (12 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY ACJ(1), PRIESTLEY(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 9 August #DATE 4:8:1995 #ADD 12:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:     D A Cowdroy QC and 
C A Marlow 
Solicitors for the Appellant:    James Soulos 
Counsel for the Respondent:     A J L Bannon and A Robins 
Solicitors for the Respondent:   Hunt and Hunt
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY ACJ: Before the Court is an appeal from a judgment of Young J in the
Common Law Division which found in favour of the State Bank of New South Wales
Ltd (the Bank). The Bank had sought an order for possession of properties owned by the appellants over which the Bank held mortgages. At trial, the appellants instituted a cross-claim seeking relief under the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), [ss42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) and [43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s43.html), the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), [s7(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) and equitable relief framed in estoppel. Orders for possession had earlier been made in respect of all properties of the appellants except their matrimonial home (the Dulwich
Hill property). It was in respect of that property that Young J found against the appellants.
It is this decision which they now challenge in this Court.
In his reasons, Young J referred to a claim for relief under [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth). This was never pleaded by the appellants. It is conceded by the Bank that this reference was an error. However, it was an insignificant error given the almost identical wording of the Federal provision and its counterpart in the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) upon which the appellants did rely.
The appellants do not now dispute Young J's basic findings of fact.
Instead, they assert an erroneous application of the legal tests to the facts as found. If this were made good, it would justify this Court's reversing the decision of Young J.
Should this Court consider that the appellants, or any of them, are entitled to relief, the appellants argue that the appropriate redress would be, in effect, to extinguish the Bank's mortgage over the Dulwich Hill property and that part of the appellants' debt to the Bank. This, they urged, would place them in the position in which they would have been had the breaches complained of not occurred. Alternatively, they suggested that the matter be referred to a Master for appropriate investigation and assessment of the losses sustained by them and the amount of damages to be awarded against the Bank.
 
The nature of the appeal
This appeal reflects once again the unfortunate combination of misguided entrepreneurial enthusiasm of individuals and over-eagerness on the part of a financial institution to lend large sums of money. As many recent cases show, this potent combination was the hall-mark of many transactions in this country in the mid to late 1980's.
Young J noted the "evidentiary problems (which) clouded the present case".
These resulted in difficulty in finding with certainty all of the facts relevant to the decision. Young J acknowledged the difficulty of weighing the "selective memory" of the borrower with the equal difficulties of precision on the part of the Bank's officers, given the multitude of similar such applications processed by them at the relevant times.
Because the appellants did not seek to challenge Young J's findings of primary facts, the task of this Court is to determine the precise nature of those findings and to assess whether or not his Honour erred in deciding that the facts found did not constitute misleading and deceptive conduct or some other type of conduct which would in turn give rise to the relief sought. I do not agree with Powell JA that the task which this Court was asked to perform involved the slightest procedural unfairness to the Bank. It is important that the Court should seek to solve the problem before it by applying the correct legal tests to the facts found. It should resist a Medusan concern with original pleadings when the conduct of the case at trial clearly moved away from them. The applicable law requires, as I shall show, that all of the circumstances of the dealings between the parties be considered by the trial judge as by this Court. It would be artificial in the extreme to approach the careful and just resolution of this dispute by imposing a pleading limitation in this
Court which was not observed at the trial.
 
The facts - a wedding reception business is planned
The first appellant Arbest Pty
Ltd (Arbest) is the family company of Mr and Mrs Patsiadas, (the second and third appellants).Mr and Mrs Patsiadas were
Greek immigrants to Australia. They arrived in Australia from Greece in their early teens with little formal education. Their first business venture involved them operating a take-away food business and pizza shop, established in 1976.
Mr and Mrs Patsiadas had been long-standing customers of the Bank (and its predecessor). It is relevant to outline the history of this relationship. It commenced with their purchase in 1976 of a commercial property in Randwick for $70,000. The Bank provided $60,000 of the purchase price. This was followed in by the purchase of another commercial property in West Ryde for $132,000, of which the Bank advanced $80,000. In 1980, Mr and Mrs Patsiadas bought a block of land in Fairfield for $43,000 of which $42,000 was borrowed from the
Bank. Around June 1980, they bought another property in Fairfield. The Bank provided the entire purchase sum of $98,000.
The pizza and take-away business of Mr and Mrs Patsiadas was sold in
A further $20,000 was borrowed from the Bank and used for a visit to
Greece. In 1985-6, the property in Fairfield was sold for $132,000. Mr and Mrs
Patsiadas purchased a new home in Dulwich Hill for $120,000. The Bank's loan secured by the Fairfield property was transferred to the Dulwich Hill home.
The Bank granted an advance of up to $15,000 for renovations to that property.
It is against the history of these dealings between the appellants and the
Bank that the events arising in this appeal must be understood.
In late January 1989, in concert with Mr and Mrs Deni Xenos, Mr and Mrs
Patsiadas took a $5,000 option to purchase a property on the Hume Highway,
Yagoona (the Yagoona property) for $600,000. In its then state, the property consisted of three shops on the ground level and a reception hall upstairs.
The latter was, at the time of the purchase, being used for weddings and similar functions. Mr and Mrs Xenos subsequently withdrew from the purchase.
Mr Patsiadas enquired about the possibility of financing the purchase and renovation of the property. On 14 February 1989, Mr Montgomery, the manager of the
George St branch of the Bank, wrote confirmng the availability of $1 million for the project. On or about 22 February 1989, Mr Patsiadas reaffirmed his proposal to purchase and renovate the Yagoona property for $600,000.
According to Mr Patsiadas, this was met by Mr
Montgomery with the response, "Go ahead, George, no problems." Contracts to purchase the property were then exchanged. The Bank provided the $60,000 deposit.
Very shortly afterwards, Mr Patsiadas allegedly called Mr Montgomery again. He said that he would need to renovate the reception hall. He anticipated a further cost of $500,000. Again, according to Mr Patsiadas, the reaction of Mr Montgomery was "Go ahead." Soon after, the original contract was cancelled. A fresh one was entered into with Arbest Pty Ltd (Arbest) replacing
Mr and Mrs Patsiadas as the contracting party. But the same arrangements with the Bank continued.
On 1 May 1989, the acquisition of the Yagoona property was settled with the Bank providing a commercial bill facility of $670,000. Of this sum, $30,000 was set aside for future interest.
It is worth noticing at this stage a conflict in evidence as to Mr
Montgomery's precise reactions to the proposal for redevelopment of the
Yagoona property. He denied having merely said, "Go ahead, George". Instead, he claimed that he would not have responded without some qualification in the nature of: "Provided the Bank's valuers place a suitable value on the property and you can demonstrate an ability to repay the funds,
I don't envisage any problem with the loan being approved." 
Young J agreed with this version of the facts, saying that Mr Patsiadas' memory was not quite accurate. Obviously, this
Court cannot depart from any finding made by Young J about the truthfulness or accuracy of recall of witnesses. He had the advantages conventionally attributed to judges of trial who observe witnesses give their evidence.
Mr Montgomery left the branch of the
Bank serving Mr Patsiadas and his company in June 1989. He was succeeded by Mr Burcher. Mr and Mrs Patsiadas, met Mr Burcher in July to discuss their new plans for redevelopment of the Yagoona property. At this meeting, the appellants produced linen plans to be submitted to the local council providing for the consolidation of the
Yagoona property into a single title. The project was explained to Mr Burcher.
He was not otherwise familiar with the plans beyond what he had gleaned from the Bank's file. Mr Patsiadas, asserted that at this meeting, he informed Mr
Burcher that he had visited Bankstown Council with his architects many times and they had been very helpful. The alleged response of Mr Burcher was again unreservedly encouraging according to Mr Patsiadas. But this was qualified by
Young J's findings that these recollections were not an accurate reflection of the Bank officer's probable response. Nonetheless, the objective evidence shows that Mr Burcher signed the linen plans without further recorded objection.
Mr Patsiadas, and
Mr Burcher met again in November 1989. On this occasion, Mr Patsiadas showed Mr Burcher the plans for the internal redevelopment of the Yagoona property. These involved the approval for 11 retail shops and the reception hall upstairs. The development, he said, would cost approximately $1 million. According to Mr Patsiadas, Mr Burcher enquired as to how one would find 400 people for a wedding reception. Mr Patsiadas responded, "Greek people have big weddings or I can have two functions at the same time." He asserted that the reception hall alone would provide sufficient income to pay his commitments to the Bank. Mr Burcher informed Mr Patsiadas that the yearly interest payments alone would be in the range of $400,000.
According to Mr Patsiadas, Mr Burcher's ultimate response was: "I like the idea. I can't tell you anything now until you bring me the building approval for the application to be put to the
Bank." 
Mr Patsiadas, then pointed out that he would need $50,000 to buy out the lease of the existing reception hall business upstairs, and to continue paying architects' fees until he could come up with the building approval. Then he would be able to aggregate all the loans.
An officer of the Bank, Mr Robert Bishop, deposed to having sat in on the last de-scribed interview.
He wrote the following contemporaneous description of what occurred: 
Mr Patsiadas interviewed 27/11 - Has obtained DA Yagoona property for II shops. Reception room. Offer $2M for premises.
Subject to satisfactory re-evaluation he has requested the amalgamation of Patsiadas ODL (Overdraft Limit No.1) and T/L (Term Loan) into T/L of $350, 000 and addition C/bill $80,000 to purchase existing reception room business. "
Once again, Young J found that the events of the meeting did not exactly accord with Mr Patsiadas' recollection of the unqualified encouragement of the
Bank's officers. Nonetheless, his Honour's findings are a trifle ambiguous. He acknowledged that, "it must be realised that Mr Burcher generally agreed with Mr
Patsiadas'summary and often a lawyer or a banker will translate the client's or customer's words into legalese or bankese when making his or her notes."
The practical result of the meeting just described was to prove critical to the appellants' financial situation.
Upon being requested to advance a further sum of $50,000 for the purpose of obtaining vacant possession of the reception hall, the
Bank arranged to take out further security over Mr and Mrs
Patsiadas's family home at Dulwich Hill. It then advanced the $50,000 requested to the appellants. This was then used to pay out the existing tenants of the reception hall business upstairs. Later, as the lease for an antique shop in the complex expired it was not renewed in order to enable the redevelopment plans to go ahead. The only remaining tenant was the men's wear shop. The day following his meeting with Mr Burcher, Mr Patsiadas engaged an architect to obtain building approval. The architect's fees were to be $39,000 together with $11,000 for structural engineers' fees. The building approval was subsequently obtained for a fee of $100,000 for plans, specifications and miscellaneous fees. All of these moneys were advanced by the Bank. The mortgage over the Dulwich Hill property was executed by Mr and Mrs Patsiadas at the end of January 1990.
Mr Patsiadas met Mr Burcher again in February 1990. He informed him that the building approval was "on its way" and that his accountant had provided a projected cash flow. Mr Patsiadas's version of the conversation was that Mr
Burcher said, "Leave it to us George, and I will put it together and let you know in a few days." Not having heard anything, upon contacting Mr Burcher again to ask how the application was progressing, Mr Burcher allegedly said in
March 1990, "I am sorry I can't lend you any money because the Bank does not lend construction money." Needless to say this belated indication of the
Bank's position astonished Mr Patsiadas.
When Mr Patsiadas called on Mr
Burcher in person, the latter again said, "I'm sorry, I can't help." Mr
Patsiadas asked why he had not been told of this before. Mr Burcher allegedly insisted that it was in line with the Bank's policy. An appeal by Mr Patsiadas to the Bank's area manager left the local manager's original decision intact.
The total borrowings of Mr and Mrs Patsiadas came to approximately $1.13 million, $200, 000 of which related to a pre-existing housing loan.
From the Bank's perspective, in mid
January 1990, Mr Burcher had received a report regarding the Yagoona project from the Bank's valuer, indicating an opinion that the project was not viable. Mr Patsiadas, had subsequently altered the plan somewhat from the individual retail shops first envisaged to a cheaper plan of open-spaced design to be leased to a major food-chain.
However, the valuers confirmed the same opinion on 14
February 1990 that the project was not viable. They added that the appellants did not possess the necessary skills for such a project.
Before the final rejection of the project in March 1990, the Bank sought the further security in the form of a mortgage over the appellants' Dulwich
Hill property, agreed now to be valued at about $275,000. Mr Patsiadas signed the mortgage on 31 January and Mrs Patsiadas signed the documents on 9
February 1990. It was in unremarkable form and secured "all moneys owing and/or payable or hereafter to become owing and/or payable to the mortgagee by the mortgagor and/or the customer." 
The detriment allegedly suffered by the appellants
As the basis of their claims for relief under the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) and the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), the appellants claimed that they had suffered significant detriment resulting from the Bank's conduct. They argued that they had incurred costs in the region of $150,000 in connection with obtaining the
Building Approval for the proposed redevelopment. They had removed almost all of the rent-paying tenants from the buildings in accordance with the plans in order to be able to go ahead with the development; once approved they had then unexpectedly found themselves with no funds from the Bank by which to finance their plans. They were also heavily indebted to the Bank, including by way of a mortgage over their family home. When the commercial bill fell due to be rolled over, the Bank refused to do so. Instead, it transferred the debt to the overdraft account where interest of % accrued, demanding repayment of all moneys owing to it. The appellants say that their losses were directly caused by their having been misled by the Bank, virtually to the last moment into believing that finance for the planned redevelopment would be forthcoming.
They were encouraged in their outlays, by then incapable of being repaid. They were left with no possible means of otherwise raising the funds.
They were ruined. The Bank's proceedings to secure possession of the charged properties began in May 1991. The Bank recovered the Yagoona property and other securities. The only property which the Bank had not taken in possession was the Dulwich Hill home of Mr and Mrs Patsiadas, now the subject of the present litigation.
 
Young J's findings of fact - a preference for the Bank's version
In outlining the chronology of events, I have already referred to some of the discrepancies between the parties' respective recollections of the dealings between Mr Patsiadas and the Bank. Speaking generally, Young J expressed this opinion: "...I am of the view that the Bank officers did say from time to time to Mr Patsiadas that the applications for finance would have to be approved through the usual Bank channels." 
His Honour's finding on the Bank's communications concluded thus: "I consider that Mr Patsiadas got the firm impression FROM WHAT
THE BANK OFFICERS SAID that there would not be any problems about these formalities. "(emphasis added.)
Young J's finding in this regard is reflected in an internal memorandum, compiled in February by Mr Stephens, manager of the branch of the Bank handling the appellants' business. This confirmed that a previous manager,
Mr
Montgomery, had given: "a verbal undertaking to fund the refurbishment of the existing building".

While Young J expressed uncertainty as to how that information had become known to Mr Stephens, it was not disputed. It conforms to the terms of the memorandum received by Mr and Mrs Patsiadas in February 1989, making the $1 million available.
Young J went on to find that: "Despite the fact that (Mr Montgomery) lent $60,000 for a deposit, he was not irrevocably committing the Bank to the project. However,
MR MONTGOMERY AGREED THAT AT NO STAGE DID
HE EVER TELL MR PATSIADAS THAT THE FUNDS WOULD NOT BE MADE
AVAILABLE. He said that they would be available subject to certain conditions being met." (emphasis added) 
These findings are somewhat ambiguous, given the fact that a commercial bin of $670,000 was subsequently provided by the Bank, albeit for that first stage of the project.
 .
The ambiguity is also reflected in Mr Burcher's more specific act of signing the linen plans for the redevelopment project. Young
J accepted that
Mr Patsiadas took this as tacit endorsement of the plans. So much is entirely reasonable. However, Young J also acknowledged that Mr Burcher signed the plans because "he was asked to do it and could not see any purpose in refusing the request."
Of the November 1989 meeting between Mr Patsiadas and Mr Burcher, Young J held that Mr Burcher had "generally agreed" with Mr Patsiadas's summary of what had happened. Yet he also said that Mr Burcher had informed the appellant that the Bank was not committed to providing the project with further funds until it had seen local authority's building approvals, costings and detailed income forecasts. More significantly, Mr Burcher also deposed that he did not recall Mr Patsiadas, ever broaching the subject of requiring tenants to vacate before the Bank had approved further building work and that had such a suggestion been put to him, he would have strongly advised against it. He also indicated that he had thought the overdraft facility was being used to refurbish the appellants' properties at
Randwick, West Ryde and Fairfield, going on what Mr Patsiadas had told him in late 1989. Young J does not record any specific conclusion as to whose evidence he preferred on these matters.
The circumstances and motivations surrounding the granting of the Dulwich
Hill mortgage were obviously crucial to the resolution of this case as fought.
The appellants were seeking the further funds which they assumed would be secured by the mortgage. The Bank, was seeking to secure moneys already advanced by way of a mortgage over the property. Resolving the proper classification of the evidence is of obvious significance to the appellants' arguments that the
Bank's conduct was either misleading and deceptive or unconscionable in the circumstances. Yet Young J's conclusions on this issue remain opaque. As will appear, his Honour ultimately relied in his decision not so much on a preferred version of the recollected events, but on an objective assessment of Mr Patsiadas's attitudes towards the project and his apparent reluctance to be swayed in his plans.
Young J found that the Bank's argument with respect to the granting of the Dulwich Hill mortgage was largely correct.
That is, that "the further security was willingly offered and it was offered because of Mr Patsiadas' enthusiasm for the project. " 
However, Young J had earlier also outlined the apparently conflicting evidence of the Bank's officer, Mr Burcher, who indicated that, "about January 1990 he requested Mr and Mrs Patsiadas to provide further security AS THEIR GENERAL LEVEL
OF INDEBTEDNESS WAS
INCREASING" (emphasis added)
Having now stated Young J's important findings of fact, particularly with respect to the apparently conflicting evidence of Mr Patsiadas and the Bank's successive officers, I turn to examine the conclusions which his Honour drew from those findings of fact: 
The Bank is held not responsible for the investor's misguided enthusiasm .
Young J's findings, like the evidence of all witnesses at the trial, were ambiguous. Nonetheless, in considering whether, under [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), the Bank had "engaged in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive", Young J concluded: "(nothing in particular of what the Bank officers said or did amounted to a representation. At worst they did not make it clear to
Mr Patsiadas that there might be problems of getting the loan." 
This opinion was expressed, notwithstanding the opinion also expressed, (and referred to above), that Mr Patsiadas was certainly under the impression from what the Bank officers had said that his application for finance would be approved. Indeed Young J: "formed the view that Mr Patsiadas genuinely believed that the
Bank would lend him the money to finish the project".

Young J also concluded that the submissions of the cross-claimants under the general principles of equity or the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), left their position no stronger.
His Honour did acknowledge that, in the circumstances, it should have been apparent to those involved in the project, that the appellants required at least another $1 million for it to proceed, and further, that their conduct "from February 1989 to March 1990 showed that they were committed to the project and were depending on the Bank for finance." 
Yet Young J concluded that an opinion that it might have been more appropriate" on the Bank's behalf to "make clearer its lack of commitment to the project to the appellants" nonetheless did not amount to a contravention of s42. The making of "encouraging noises" and the Bank's decision to advance money to Mr and Mrs Patsiadas, whilst the viability of the project in its entirety was still being investigated by the Bank, did not necessarily imply that a final decision had been made. Nor would such a decision have been made until there had been a feasibility study. Mr Patsiadas, in his enthusiasm, took this conduct of the Bank to indicate continuing approval and encouragement. Certainly, on Young J's findings, the Bank did little or anything to dampen the fires of Mr Patsiadas's ardour - as it would have been so easy for the officers of the Bank to do.
Young J's ultimate decision essentially adopted the submissions for the
Bank. The Bank insisted that any misleading or unconscionable conduct must clearly reflect Mr and Mrs Patsiadas's proposals. But these kept altering. The
Bank argued that it had never represented that it would lend $1 million "no matter what the project was". Thus, the complaint was - as all acknowledged -eventually isolated to the Bank's permitting Mr Patsiadas to prejudice his financial position, and that of the other appellants so gravely, after the meeting between Mr Burcher and the appellant in July when the proposed redevelopment plan was discussed. This or at the latest by November 1989, was the moment of truth when the
Bank ought to have made its reservations and the possibility of its later withdrawal of support absolutely and unambiguously clear.
It was in the conversation of November 1989 that Young J found that Mr
Burcher had agreed, "on the whole", with Mr Patsiadas's version as to what had taken place. Despite this finding, (significantly qualified however by Mr
Burcher's insistence that he would not have committed the Bank unconditionally before a feasibility study had been done), Young J did not consider that the
Bank "made any representation by silence or otherwise." Nor did he consider that the Bank "should have said anything more than it did say to
Mr
Patsiadas." Thus, in Young J's view, Mr Patsiadas's plight was almost exclusively the product of his own unbridled enthusiasm for the project: 
I doubt whether anybody of any commercial experience would have entered into this venture without a feasibility study and a guarantee of finance. Mr Patsiadas got neither. He furnished figures through his accountant which were wildly optimistic. He kept changing his plans for the development, there is some evidence to suggest that he did not listen to what other people were saying to him and he made the assumption that he would be financed He was a good customer of the Bank and had always been financed for all his ventures before this and I think assumed that this would continue to be the case ...

I am of the view that (Counsel for the Bank's) submissions are quite correct. Mr Patsiadas was so enamoured of the project that he did not even know or care about the actual costs of the renovations."
Addressing himself, in particular, to the allegations of unconscionability surrounding the taking of the final mortgage, Young J found that Mr Patsiadas's interview with the Bank in late November 1989 and "his signing of pieces of paper (in relation to the mortgage) gave every indication that he appreciated that he knew his way around and realised that he would need particular bank finance for which he would need to make formal application." 
The fact that, to the Bank's knowledge at the relevant time, the chances of the project going ahead at that stage were "very slim" made no difference in his Honour's view to this finding in the Bank's favour. Moreover, Young J rejected the appellants' suggestion that the Bank's refusal to provide further funds had been on the grounds of their alleged policy against lending for construction which they said had not been earlier aired. Young J found that the Bank had never had such a policy, nor were its reasons so based. This ground of attack on the Bank was not pursued by the appellants in the appeal.
It can therefore be disregarded. The appellants' case in the appeal accepted the foregoing findings. But they asserted that, upon those findings Young
J should have given them relief against the Bank. By its conduct and its silence the Bank had led them along to their present predicament when proper and fair conduct would have resulted in much earlier candour, warnings and caution (and the saving of loss).
 
The claim made under [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/); introduction
The argument put by the appellants was that Young J had erred in his conclusion upon [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). They asserted that his Honour had incorrectly applied the test required by [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of that Act. If the correct test had been applied in determining whether or not there had been "misleading and deceptive conduct", the appellants submitted that the factual findings would have been sufficient to justify a decision in their favour. This was so because the Bank's conduct had led to their financial over-exposure. They had been induced by-that conduct to believe that the Bank's support in providing the necessary funds would continue when it must have been known to the Bank that it would (or might very well) not.
[Section 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), and its equivalent [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade
Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), have been the subject of many decisions. [Section 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s42.html) provides: (1) A person shall not, in trade or commerce, engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive.

Nothing in this Part shall be taken as limiting by implication the generality of subsection .

In Brown versus Jam Factory Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 53 FLR 340 (FC)] at 348 Fox J remarked of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) that "[s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) is a comprehensive provision of wide impact, which does not adopt the language of any common law cause of action. It does nor purport to create liability at all; rather it establishes a norm of conduct, (failure to observe which has consequences provided for elsewhere in the same statute, or under general law) ... In my view effect should be given to the ordinary meaning of the words used They should not be qualified or (if it be possible) expanded, by reference to established common law principles of liability... " 
In Henjo Investments Pty Ltd versus Collins Marrickville Pty Ltd <case>; [(1988) 79 ALR 83 ] Lockhart J said, at 93, "Misleading or deceptive conduct generally consists of misrepresentations, whether express or by silence; but it is erroneous to approach [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) on the assumption that its application is confined exclusively to circumstances which constitute some form of representation.
-Ultimately in each case it is necessary to examine the conduct, whether representational in character or not, and ask the question whether the impugned conduct of its nature constitutes misleading or deceptive conduct. " (emphasis added) .
Obviously the same insistence on the breadth of the provision of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) applies to [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) with its identical language and clear legislative purpose to mirror the same legal obligation in the State transactions covered.
Accordingly, in examining whether or not the damage allegedly suffered by the appellants may be attributed to a breach of that provision, it is imperative that the entire context within which the impugned conduct was said to have occurred, be considered.
There has been no dispute that the Bank's conduct was conduct in "trade and commerce" within the meaning of [s42.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) Similarly, it was not suggested that the Bank's officers could not be considered agents acting under the actual or apparent authority of the Bank. Nor can it be doubted that their representations were relied on in that capacity. As Burchett J said in a similar context, in Adour Holdings Pty Ltd (in liq) versus Commonwealth Bank of
Austraia [(1991) ASC 56-107] at 57,143: 
The conduct of business would be impossible if businessmen (sic) could not rely on representations, except those made at the very highest level of management. Customers of the Bank were entitled to proceed on the assumption that its branch manager and loans officer could communicate the Bank's attitude towards an application for a loan." 
I therefore turn to consider the first aspect of the appellants' argument under this head, namely, the Bank's intention to mislead them.
 
Intention of the Bank to mislead is not a statutory requirement for relief.
The appellants argued that in determining whether or not the
Bank's conduct breached [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), Young J had looked to whether the Bank had "attempt(ed) to mislead" Mr and Mrs Patsiadas (and Arbest) a test substantially higher than one of determining simply whether the Bank's actions had or were likely to have misled them, irrespective of the subjective intent of its agents. That this may have been his Honour's approach is reflected in his comment that the problems had arisen largely as a result of 'crossed communications' rather than any intention to mislead.
The appellants submitted to this Court that intention was an irrelevant factor in the objective assessment of the nature and effect of the Bank's conduct. They argued that, even if the Bank acted in a way which its agents subjectively considered to be honest and reasonable, this could nonetheless constitute a breach of [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) even if it was no more than likely to mislead or deceive and resulted in detriment being suffered. See Hornsby Building
Information
Centre Pty Ltd versus Sydney Building Information Centre Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) CLR 216], 223 and Brown versus Jam Factory Pty Ltd, above, 348. To consider whether the Bank attempted to be misleading was thus placing the test too high. It prevented the facts, as found, from satisfying the true criteria because of a misplaced emphasis in interpreting the intention of the Bank's agents (and thus of the Bank).
There is ample authority to support the appellants' arguments as to the applicable legal principle. In Parkdale Custom Built Furniture Pty Ltd versus Puxu
Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 191], Gibbs CJ commented, at 197: "There is nothing in the section that would confine it to conduct which was engaged in as a result of a failure to take reasonable care. A corporation which has acted honestly and reasonably may therefore nevertheless be rendered liable to be restrained by injunction and to pay damages if its conduct has in fact misled or deceived or is likely to mislead or deceive." 
See also Gardam versus George Wills and Co Ltd <case>; [(1988) 82 ALR 415], 666 and Global Sportsman Pty Ltd versus Mirror
Newspapers Ltd [(1984) 2 FLR 82], 88.
Having noted the legal principle, I would be reluctant to conclude from what is little more than a passing phrase that
Young J had been diverted into consideration of the Bank's subjective intention to mislead Mr and Mrs
Patsiadas (and Arbest), so that he misdirected himself in law. Looking to his
Honour's reasons as a whole, I would not accept that Young J made such a rudimentary error. The sentiments expressed by his Honour in the passage which the appellants criticised appear more a reflection of his assessment of Mr
Patsiadas's approach to the project and the evidentiary problems arising from "selective memory", rather than the adoption of a substantive consideration as determinative of his final decision.
It is the second and third limbs of the appellants' argument which go further towards establishing errors of law in the application of the test to determine misleading and deceptive conduct on the part of the Bank.
 
Consideration of a misrepresentation rather than of misrepresentative conduct
The second limb of the appellants' argument under [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) criticised Young J's finding that nothing of what the Bank officers "said or did amounted to a representations." The appellants submitted that the test adopted by Young J was too strictly confined to a consideration of the Bank's representations. This, it was urged, prevented an assessment of the whole of the Bank's conduct to determine whether or not [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) had been breached. Conduct under [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html), is not restricted to representations made or withheld. It must encompass a consideration of whether the whole factual matrix, (including actions, representations or even silence) could be interpreted as "misleading". Young J's almost exclusive concentration on the oral representations complained of prevented the consideration of the broader circumstances to which his Honour should have addressed his attention. This resulted in an erroneous application of the test to the facts.
The appellants submitted that Young J should have examined the larger context of the relevant circumstances surrounding the conduct between the Bank and Mr and Mrs Patsiadas.
He should, therefore, have considered the Bank's conduct from February/March 1989 (when the project involving the Yagoona property was first proposed by the appellants and discussed with the Bank), and -included the conduct surrounding the contemplated change in the original plan from one of refurbishment to one of redevelopment. It is only in this broader context of the project, seen in its entirety, that their erroneous belief as to the continued funding of their project could properly be assessed for the suggested application of the Act.
The Bank argued that to consider the context as broadly as the appellants would have this Court do would be to avoid addressing the very nature of the
Bank's alleged misrepresentation, the actual conduct it induced and the detriment allegedly suffered.
It could never have reasonably been alleged by Mr and Mrs Patsiadas that "the Bank would lend $1 million or that the Bank would lend no matter what the project was that Mr Patsiadas had in mind." The Bank maintained that the proposal for the dealings with the Yagoona property was never constant. It was never submitted that the project was not considered viable from its initiation and that the Bank had failed to communicate this conclusion to the appellants.
Rather, the argument was addressed to the later, much more expensive proposal of redevelopment and therefore the relevant representations were to be assessed only from the point at which this new proposal was advanced by Mr
Patsiadas. The 'gravamen of the complaint', as the Bank suggested, was only that the Bank had allowed Mr Patsiadas to "prejudice his position after the meeting which (Mr Burcher) puts as late November or early
December 1989" when the consolidated plans for redevelopment were allegedly presented to the Bank for the first time.
Within these narrow parameters, the Bank's suggestion was that Young J's findings were correct. His Honour had rejected the submission that the Bank had ever, without any qualification as to assessing the project's feasibility, simply said "Go ahead" to Mr Patsiadas, who, in turn, he found, had simply proceeded uncritically, energised by his own enthusiasm.
Even upon consideration of the Bank's conduct before the November 1989 meeting, (namely the "encouraging noises" which Young J agreed the Bank had made) the Bank maintained that no case could be sustained which amounted to "misrepresentation" or "deceptive conduct" on its part in relation to its commitment to the planned redevelopment. The 'encouraging noises' could really be distilled to three occasions when the Bank was confronted with Mr
Patsiadas's proposals. The first was the signing of the linen plans. This was entirely justifiable, so the Bank submitted, on the ground of the Bank's being unwilling to clog the title of the property and to be "generally ... of assistance." Further, as
Young J accepted, Mr Burcher had signed the plans because "he was asked to do it and could not see any purpose in refusing the request."
It was an action which, on the one hand, would obviously not be detrimental to the Bank. On the other, it could not be interpreted as misrepresentative as to the Bank's commitment to further funding. As will appear, I find this interpretation and justification of what Mr Burcher did rather unconvincing.
There were two other occasions which could have amounted to encouragement on the
Bank's part, (namely in July 1989 when Mr Patsiadas informed the Bank of his having engaged architects and engineers in furtherance of the redevelopment and then in November 1989 when the need to buy out the remaining tenants was voiced.) The Bank relied on Young
J's findings that its Bank's response was not one of unqualified support. Therefore, even the 'encouraging noises' which the Bank was found to have made, could not have amounted to actionable "misrepresentation", seen, as the Bank submitted they should be, within the context of redevelopment of the site, rather than its mere refurbishment. This was particularly so in the light of Young J's suggestion that it was Mr Montgomery who was the most encouraging because he never clearly explained that finance would not be granted.
In focussing on the nature of any representations "by silence or otherwise", I consider, with respect that Young J unduly limited his attention to the context in which the appellants claim that they were misled. The Full
Federal Court in Warner and Anor v Elders Rural Finance Ltd and Ors <case>; [(1993) 41
FCR 399 (FFC)] that "...consistently with regard to the natural meaning of the terms of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s52.html), the question is whether in the light of ALL RELEVANT
CIRCUMSTANCES constituted by acts, omissions, statements or silence, there has been CONDUCT WHICH IS OR IS LIKELY TO BE
MISLEADING OR DECEPTIVE. CONDUCT ANSWERING THAT DESCRIPTION MAY
NOT ALWAYS
INVOLVE MISREPRESENTATION..." (emphasis added)
When all the circumstances surrounding the Yagoona proposal are considered, within the findings of Young J as to what was probably said and not said by the parties, I have no difficulty in inferring from the
Bank's conduct in this case that the Bank had in fact represented to Mr Patsiadas for the appellants a higher degree of commitment than the Bank had ever actually entertained. That is, they were misled into believing that they would continue to receive funding for their plans for the Yagoona site as the project evolved. The Bank was kept informed as to the changing proposals. Its successive officers both witnessed and encouraged the outlays made by the appellants who were clearly relying on the necessary finance being forthcoming. No word of halt nor any word of clear warning was given. The Bank was fully secured. The appellants entered deeper into their peril, only to have the rug pulled from under them - belatedly and when they had no where else to go.
It is useful to look to Adour Holdings (above). The facts of that case are in many ways different. But the conclusions are instructive. There, the loan application to the bank was split into two stages. Unless funding for the second stage was guaranteed, there was no point to the initial stage being approved. The appellants would, as a result, suffer detriment in the form of the initial outlay made if the project was then frustrated. In the Federal
Court, Burchett J at 57,143, held that as a result of representations of the branch managers, the appellants in that case "were given to understand that the prospects for approval of the further loan they required were very rosy indeed - very much rosier than they actually were." 
Accordingly, he concluded that "Adour would never have entered into the transaction, but would instead have revived their applications for finance elsewhere or exercised their right to terminate the purchase of the land, had the bank's true position been communicated to them, or had they not been misled as to what its position was."
In the matter before this Court, there is obviously not the same distinct division of the financial project into two loan applications, the viability of the first being dependent on the success of the second. Nonetheless, despite the lack of precise division between the two stages of the appellants' proposal, to concentrate solely on the representations made by the Bank in relation to the second (redevelopment) stage of the project as the Bank urged, would be to mischaracterise the context in which the appellants were seeking and expecting finance from the Bank to continue. This is particularly so given the undisputed background of the many loan applications and approvals between the appellants and the respondents over very many years. These explained the nature of the commercial relationship between them, known to each, which had evolved and the reasonable expectations which derived from that relationship.
I remind myself that Young J expressed the opinion that "Mr Patsiadas genuinely believed that that the Bank would lend him the money to finish the project" and that he considered that Mr Patsiadas "got the firm impression from what the Bank officers said that there would not be any problems about formalities" Significantly, his Honour also found the Bank to have made "encouraging noises", beyond simple misrepresentations. He found that Mr
Patsiadas had taken these as meaning that there would be no problems with further formalities. The actions which the appellants point to as explaining and supporting this finding include: 
The ready offer of the loan by the Bank of up to $1 million in response to the appellants' original enquiries. Without making any assessment as to the feasibility of the purchase and renovation of the building, the Bank provided % of the $600,000 purchase price, including further expenses coming to a total of $670,000; 
The Bank did not follow its normal practice of not lending more than two-thirds of its valuation ($575,000) which would have come to under $350,000. It lent almost double its advised level; and 
The lack of any Bank valuation made prior to the loan, also contrary to its normal practice, and the failure to make any enquiries by the Bank to ensure that repayments would be met by the appellant. Once again this could quite easily and reasonably be interpreted by the appellants as signalling the
Bank's enthusiasm for the Yagoona project. The initial encouragement continued, according to the appellants, even when the project became one of redevelopment, requiring more funds than the original one of refurbishment.
In particular, the appellants pointed to: 
The fact that Mr Burcher, exercising the authority of the Bank, had signed the linen plans to enable consolidation of the titles of the property in accordance with the plans for redevelopment. As Young J found, the appellants took this action to be tacit endorsement by the Bank of their plans. In my opinion, this was a perfectly reasonable reaction to have had, particularly in the face of the suggested reason on the Bank's part, that it was done, because "no reason could be discerned for not signing them". The endorsement implied by fixing of the Bank officer's signature to the linen plans should have been reason enough not to have signed the plans if the
Bank's commitment was even then reluctant or problematical; and 
The
Bank had made the further sum of more than $100,000 available in credit facilities for architects, engineers and for the buying out of remaining leases.
Young J acknowledged that, given the nature of these actions and representations, individually and collectively "it must have been clear to everybody that if the project was to go ahead the (appellants) would need to borrow at least $1 million and it must also have been clear that the conduct of the (appellants) from February 1989 to March 1990 showed that they were committed to the project and were depending on the
Bank for finance. "
The adoption of the respondent's submission that the only pertinent representations made by the Bank were to be confined to the latter stage of the redevelopment proposal would result in a plainly unnatural application of [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). It would divert attention from the investigation of the whole context which in my view is required by the Act and pertinent authorities on its application. Nowhere is this more evident than in the suggestion as to the signing of the linen plan that "Mr Burcher did it because he was asked to do it and could not see any purpose in refusing the request".
With all respect, that explanation contradicts the obvious significance which such an act by such a person would reasonably have in the eyes of the appellants, as of any other reasonable person dealing with the Bank.
I turn now to consider the manner in which the Bank took the final mortgage which left Mr and Mrs Patsiadas over-exposed when the Bank subsequently refused further finance. Young J failed to examine the Bank's entire conduct, concentrating as he did on particular representations, to assess whether or not they were misleading.
No argument was put forward to suggest that Mr and Mrs Patsiadas misapprehended the significance of signing the mortgage to the Bank over their home. Their argument was, instead, that they were misled as to its purpose.
That is, they were misled into believing that the Bank was taking this added security in accordance with the anticipated advance of the necessary sums for the redevelopment of the Yagoona property owned by Arbest, their family company. They did not understand that this was simply the Bank further securing its already substantial lendings.
The appellants relied, in support of this argument, on the chronology of events surrounding giving of the mortgage. According to Mr Burcher's own affidavit of January 1993, he was already "beginning to have some doubts as to the viability of the business which the (appellants) proposed operating and hence (the appellants) ability to service a loan for the sum which they proposed borrowing from the Bank." 
The appellants submitted that these doubts were not effectively communicated to them. Despite the Bank's misgivings after its subsequent receipt of the adverse valuation, referred to by Young J, the further security of the mortgage was obtained by the Bank with no mention to Mr and Mrs Patsiadas of the valuer's report. They submitted that they were thereby led to believe that the mortgage was to secure the advancement of further funds. Indeed, the appellants pointed to Mr Burcher's testimony in cross-examination. Mr Burcher was asked whether he had been aware at the time the mortgage was executed that it was Mr and Mrs Patsiadas's understanding "that it was to be used by way of security for the advance to be made for the redevelopment of the building at
Yagoona." In response, Mr Burcher said that, "A: All the securities would be combined to secure the final loan. " "Q: The loan in respect of the Yagoona property? A: Yes, were it to be approved.
Young
J's findings as to Mr Patsiadas's offering the Dulwich Hill property out of enthusiasm should again be contrasted with his Honour's further findings that "about January 1990 he (Mr Burcher) requested Mr and Mrs
Patsiadas to provide further security as their general level of indebtedness was increasing".
These arguments are relevant to the manner in which the Bank obtained the final security and to the conclusion that its conduct misled, or was likely to have misled, the appellants into thinking that the expected funding for the
Yagoona redevelopment would be forthcoming. At no stage in this critical point of negotiations for finance were the true doubts of the Bank as to the viability of the project expressed to the appellants as candour and fair dealing required.
Nor was any attempt made to expel the appellants' understanding of the purpose of the Dulwich Hill mortgage.
According to the Bank, arrangements for the taking of the mortgage had already been made in December 1989, "before the proposal was seen to be non-viable. " This argument was accepted by Young J. At that time, title deeds to the property were deposited with the Bank to secure the loan of $45,000 which Mr and Mrs Patsiadas required to pay out the existing leases. The Bank argued that this decision to "buy out the upstairs tenant" had been taken long before the decision to redevelop the site, namely in October 1989. It was put that the security obtained in January 1990 was taken in fulfilment of that pre-existing obligation. The decision to acquire vacant possession of the upstairs area was taken when the initial idea of running a reception business was born, as Mr and Mrs Patsiadas had always intended running the business themselves. In the light of this factual interpretation, given that an equitable mortgage had already been secured in December 1989 (and contractual arrangements made as far back as October of that year), the Bank submitted that the argument that the legal mortgage was only given in expectation of its being security for future financing connected to the redevelopment was chronologically implausible, as was the suggestion that the Bank was misleading not to have indicated at the time of signing the mortgage, that this latter proposal would not be financed by the Bank.
With respect again, Young J erred in concentrating on the nature of the particular representations made by the Bank seen in isolation. He did not then accord appropriate significance to the pre-existing relationship between the appellants and the Bank, to the process of purchasing the Yagoona site seen in its entire context, and the manner in which the Bank was not only kept informed of the proposal, as it evolved, but was also actively encouraging it to go ahead. Had Young J applied the correct tests, required by [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), a different result would have followed.
I do not ignore Young J's findings as to relevant particular representations. For example, his Honour was convinced that "the Bank officers believed that they went through their usual spiel about 'Of course this is subject to the Bank's usual formalities'. ... Indeed I am of the view that the Bank officers did say from time to time to Mr Patsiadas that the applications for finance would have to be approved through the usual Bank channels" 
However, these findings do not contradict my own conclusions. Far from it. In
Adour Holdings (above), Burchett J, at 57,143, determined that the appellants' directors "were aware that they did not have the benefit of a binding agreement to lend They were aware that the Bank was not committed." 
This did not prevent the provision of relief under the equivalent section of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). This Court should take the same approach. Given the other encouraging inferences provided by the Bank's actions in Ardour, coupled with the failure of the bank officers adequately to impress upon the directors of the borrower the bank's reservations, Burchett
J held: "they (the directors) were not aware of the real nature of the
Bank's reservations, and that made a great difference.

The same reasoning is applicable to this case. Especially when it is seen against the varying signals of commitment offered by the
Bank, at the same time as it expressed sentiments of qualification. This conclusion is fortified by my opinion of the appellants' argument about Misrepresentation by the Bank by silence on the part of its officers.
I am not convinced by the Bank's answer to the appellants' suggestion that the Bank should have disclosed its then intention to cut off the funding, transfer the Patsiadas's existing debt to an overdraft account and demand repayment before taking out the legal mortgage. The Bank was well aware of the appellants' intentions to redevelop the site and of the outlays which the appellants had already made in relation to that plan. Even given the fact that, as Young J accepted, the equitable mortgage was secured in December , before the Bank had decided conclusively against continuing its support for the Yagoona project, to infer that the intention to secure vacant possession of the upstairs area was originally connected with the first plan of renovation (and was therefore somehow unrelated to the later designs for redevelopment) is an unrealistic characterisation of the relations by then established between the parties, and the rights and duties which emerge from them. The two projects were not distinct proposals. They were parts of an evolving plan of which the Bank was constantly kept informed. As was the case in Adour Holdings, the Bank must have been aware that, if the availability of finance at that late stage were blocked, the entire proposal, even in its original form, would be doomed to fail because of the already sizeable debts owed by the appellants to the Bank. The success of the project, even in its earlier cheaper manifestation, was by the later stages, entirely conditional on the further funds being approved by the Bank. So much would have been apparent to the Bank.
This conclusion leaves the Bank's action in respect of the Dulwich Hill mortgage open to the complaint that it amounted to an attempt to ensure that the Bank would be in a position to recover as much of its funds as possible from Mr and Mrs Patsiadas upon the realisation that they would find it virtually impossible to meet their payments and that the project designed to generate the funds to permit them to do so would no longer be viable, in any form.
It is to the point here to note the conflicting nature of the Bank's evidence as to the Patsiadas's acquiring vacant possession of the upstairs lease: Young J failed to resolve this conflict. While the Bank submitted to this Court that its arrangements were made in accordance with plans conceived long prior to the plans for redevelopment, Young
J referred to Mr Burcher's evidence in which he said that he "did not recall Mr Patsiadas broaching the subject of requiring tenants to vacate prior to the Bank approving funds for any building work. "
It is therefore proper to conclude that the taking of the mortgage by the
Bank at the very stage when this was done was not simply "for the purpose of restructuring loan facilities in the name of Arbest Pty Ltd" on the assumption that the business proposal, even in its original form, would be able to generate income and therefore repayments. Instead, it was taken to permit the
Bank to avail itself of the security offered upon assumption of continued support. if not before, then certainly at that stage, the Bank was clearly required by fairness and proper dealing to inform Mr and Mrs Patsiadas that no further funds would be forthcoming. See eg Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd v Karavas [(1991) 23 NSWLR 256 (CA)] at 275. It is no answer to say that Mr
Patsiadas 'willingly' offered the security of Dulwich Hill "out of enthusiasm". His "enthusiasm" would have been apparent even to those who wished not to see. Indeed that "enthusiasm" made it all the more important that his Bank of long standing should act in relation to him with candour, complete honesty and in such a way as to bring its real intentions home to him.
 
Misrepresentation by silence
The third limb of the appellants' argument in this Court was that Young J had erred in concluding that the Bank had not "made any misrepresentation by silence or otherwise". It was argued that this conclusion was made by his
Honour under the belief that a bank is not under a general duty to provide its borrower with "any commercial advice" and that by adopting this approach, he had effectively set too high a standard for the provision of relief in the circumstances. See in particular his Honour's reference to Beneficial Finance
Corporation Ltd versus Karavas (above) at 276-7. In his reasons, Young J commented: "...(i)t might be thought that it would be appropriate in these circumstances for the Bank to make it far more clear than it did that the Bank was not obligated to fund the project.
Whether this amounted to a legal duty on the bank is something that I will consider shortly. "
The appellants submitted that, conformably with recent authority of the
Full Federal Court, to inquire as to "whether an independent 'duty to disclose' has arisen is to digress from the application of the terms of [s 52".](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html)
Demagogue Pty Ltd versus Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31 (FFC)] at 40. Instead, the inquiry should be focussed, not on whether a common law or equitable duty to disclose information existed, but whether, in all the circumstances of the particular case, an obligation had arisen to reveal matters the non-disclosure of which would amount, relevantly, to a breach of [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), because of the belief which such silence had induced in the claimant.
In concentrating attention on the narrower relationship between the appellants and the Bank, as of lender to customer, and in considering whether or not the Bank was under a duty to disclose in that generic relationship, it was submitted for the appellants that Young J had failed to take into account the broader circumstances, including the longstanding relationship of trust between the appellants and the respondent and the Bank's continued encouragement for the Yagoona project. Seen in this context, the appellants argued, the Bank's silence as to its true attitude towards the future financing of Yagoona was both misleading and deceptive. Young J ought to have so found.
I agree. In assessing whether silence on the part of the Bank amounted to misleading and deceptive conduct in these circumstances, it was not to the point to have considered whether or not there existed at general law a duty on the Bank's part either to proffer financial advice or even a duty to speak.
It is a matter relevant to the claim for relief under the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), to which I shall return.
The Federal Court has considered on a number of occasions the circumstances in which silence may amount to "misleading" conduct. The Court has said that the issue will "clearly depend on all the circumstances of the case." See
Winterton Investments Pty Limited versus Hambros Australia Limited <case>; [(1993) 39 FCR 97] at 32: "Silence is to be assessed as a circumstance like any other.
To say this is certainly not to impose any general duty of disclosure; the question is simply whether, having regard to all the relevant circumstances, there has been conduct that is misleading and deceptive or that is likely to mislead or deceive. To speak of 'mere silence' or of a duty of disclosure can divert attention from that primary question. Although 'mere silence' is a convenient way of describing some fact situations, there is in truth no such thing as 'mere silence' because the significance of silence always falls to be considered in the context in which it occurs. That context may or may not include facts giving rise to a reasonable expectation in the circumstances of the case, that if particular matters exist they will be disclosed " 
See also Gummow J in Demagogue, at 37;
Winterton at 113; and Beach Petroleum
NL versus Johnson <case>; [(1993) 43 FCR 1], 404 Hill J said "the fact that no duty to speak is imposed by the general law will not conclude the inquiry whether that failure to speak is to be categorised as conduct which is misleading and deceptive. " 
Thus, even to refer to the expectation of warning as a 'duty' is misleading if to do so constrains the inquiry. The test by which this Court should assess that failure to disclose information has been formulated in differing but basically similar ways in the Federal Court on several occasions. Thus,
Hill J in Warner, at 404, said that misleading conduct would arise in "circumstances where the person ... was entitled to expect to be informed of any change. " 
Similarly, von Doussa J, in Beach Petroleum, at 45, stated that: "the question to be asked is whether the circumstances are such as to give rise in the applicants to a reasonable expectation that silence would be broken if particular matters exist. " 
The question presented by [s 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) is therefore not whether the Bank had an obligation at general law to disclose, or for that matter to give financial advice to customers such as the appellants. Cf Witham v MacPherson [(1982) 1 DLR 43]; A Duggan and Ors, Contractual Non-Disclosure , Longman,
Melbourne, 1994, 30f. The question is rather whether failing to disclose such significant information concerning the appellants' project as the valuer's negative report was misleading within the Act because of the belief thereby induced in the appellants concerning the state of the Bank's financial support for the project.
Considered in the light of the context of the relationship established between the appellants and the Bank, and the acknowledged acts of encouragement given by the Bank, as outlined above, not least of which include the considerable sums made available by the Bank with little or no deposit, the question posed by von Doussa J in Beach Petroleum must be answered, in this case, in the affirmative. it was reasonable for the appellants to infer that they would have been informed, at least when the Dulwich Hill mortgage was obtained, concerning such a significant development as the negative valuer's report affecting the likely availability of future funds to finance their project. This is no less the case, accepting fully Young J's findings that arrangements for the mortgage had been made before the
Bank's receipt of the report. The stages of the project must be seen as a continuum, and not as artificial, self-contained fragments.
For the Bank in the circumstances not to inform the appellants compounded the already misleading nature of its conduct which had hastened the appellants' financial disaster. It deprived them of the opportunity, even at that late stage, to reconsider the possibilities attending their ongoing financial commitment before offering the Bank as a final security, their family home.
 
Conclusions as to the claim under the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/)
I have therefore concluded that this Court should reverse Young J's conclusion upon [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). In my respectful view his Honour erred by failing to consider (and thus to accord the necessary weight to) the larger context within which the allegedly misleading conduct took place (See
CBA versus Mehta per Waddell AJA at 103, Taco Company of Australia Inc versus Taco Bell
Pty Limited ((1982) <case>; [42 ALR 177] at 202 and Parkdale at 199). He also erred by failing to apply to the facts found the test established, and regularly applied, in the Federal Court as to whether the silence of the Bank in respect of its on-going commitment to the project was also, in the circumstances, "misleading".
Were it necessary for me to address the claim made under [s43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s43.html) of the [Fair
Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), concerning unconscionable conduct, similar findings would follow.
The Bank failed not only adequately to alert the appellants to the possibility of the project's not being further funded but also continued to expose them financially notwithstanding the lack of long-term commitment on the Bank's part.
In the light of the conclusions which he reached, Young J did not have to consider whether the detriment allegedly suffered by the appellants was caused by the misleading conduct of the Bank. As I have earlier said, the Dulwich
Hill property is the only remaining property of the appellants which has not been seized by the Bank. What are the losses which the impugned conduct of the
Bank caused?
The majority of the High Court in Sellars versus Adelaide Petroleum (1994)120
ALR at 25 note in relation to actions under [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), "(i)n the context of contravention of [s52(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) in the form of misleading conduct constituted by misrepresentations, acts done by the representee in reliance upon the misrepresentations amount to a sufficient connection to satisfy the concept of causation. " 
The detriment sustained includes (1) the moneys outlaid for the obtaining of the building approval; (2) the loss of rent from leases terminated in fulfilment of the planned redevelopment; the costs of the mortgage secured over the Dulwich Hill property; and (4) the added detriment inflicted by refusing to roll over the commercial bill line and charging instead interest of more than 27% while demanding immediate repayment of all moneys to which has now been added the costs of this litigation. Those losses are attributable to the Bank's conduct in misleading the appellants into believing that the project would continue to be financed. The decision not to continue with funding of the Yagoona project, after leading the appellants to believe the contrary, left the appellants overexposed and with no other means of meeting repayments or pursuing their original proposal, e.g. by seeking alternative financing. The appellants are therefore eligible for relief under [s68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s68.html) and s[72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s72.html) of the Act.
 
The cross-claim made under the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/)
In dismissing the cross-claim under [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), Young J also found it unnecessary to consider further the parallel submissions made by the appellants for relief under the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).
Given the conclusions to which I have come under [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) and the breadth of the relief available under [ss68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s68.html) and [72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s72.html) of the Act, it is strictly unnecessary for me to explore the possibility of obtaining relief under [s7(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). That remedy is not, in substance, relevantly different from those available under the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
Nonetheless, there have been many like cases involving imprudent financial provision by banks in recent cases. See e.g. West v AGC (Advances)
Limited [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610 (CA)], Karavas, (above), Gough versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia unrep'd Court of Appeal 31 May 1994 and Akins versus National
Australia
Bank unrep'd Court of Appeal 5 August 1994. It is therefore useful to emphasise once again the obligations placed by the law on financial institutions to prevent or avoid conduct which may subsequently give rise to the avoidance of transactions on the grounds of the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).
[Section 7(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of that Act provides, "Where the Court finds a contract or a provision of a contract to have been unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made, the Court may, if it considers it just to do so, and for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an unjust consequence or result, do any one or more of the following...." 
The Act affords large remedies to a successful claimant.
The apparent intention of the Act was to encourage the development of a statutory doctrine of unconscionability. It reverses a long history of freedom of parties to contract. That freedom, in its acceptable form, is an attribute of economic liberty. Concern has been expressed that ss 7 and 9 of the Act should not be construed so as to discourage entrepreneurial activity or stifle beneficial and creative risk-taking. See e.g. Karavas at 266-267, Commonwealth
Bank of Australia v Mehta [(1991) 23 NSWLR 84 (CA).]
Doubtless considerations of this kind led Meagher JA in Karavas, at 276, to remark that, "There is no duty on a financier to provide either a borrower or a third-party guarantor with any commercial advice... " 
In Gough, I commented, at 23, that financiers will rarely, if ever, be in the position generally to offer to those whose interests will no doubt be different and possibly in conflict, appropriately independent financial advice. A Bank's interest is to secure income to itself upon properly protected investments.
In assessing the implications of the Bank's silence in this case, in the context of the claim as to misleading and deceptive conduct under [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), Young J erred in limiting his attention to the question whether there was a legal duty on the part of the Bank to disclose or to make available financial advice to the appellants.
In considering a claim based on [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), an enquiry as to the existence or nature of a possible duty to ensure independent advice is given to a client by a financial institution is of considerable relevance. I am not convinced that it is appropriate to equate any such duty with a common law tortious duty of care. Meagher JA in Karavas, at 276, acknowledged that, if there is a deliberate assumption of responsibility or offering of advice, then a duty of care might arise between financier and borrower, which even then may not be breached if the advice given were merely incomplete as distinct from deliberately misleading. See also Meagher JA in
Mehta, at 92. A similar view has been expressed in a judgment of the Supreme
Court of South Australia concerning off-shore loan agreements. See Karrawirra
Wines Pty Ltd versus State Bank of South Australia (unrep'd SASC 25 February 1994).
There, Matheson J acknowledged that the more usual relationship of banker-customer embodied in the maxim caveat emptor: "should not be permitted to obscure the fact that, IN A
PARTICULAR CASE, these parties may stand aside from their customary roles and, knowingly on each side, deal with one another on the basis of a relationship which has a higher degree of trust and reliance in respect of the information or advice which is passed between them. " (at ) (emphasis added) 
Matheson J was reluctant in that case to avoid the contract without proof of a deliberate assumption of responsibility by the financier which would satisfy the necessary requirements of proximity under a tortious duty of care.
In considering claims to relief under the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) it is not necessary to enquire about the existence and scope of a common law duty of care on the part of financial institutions.
A court must constantly keep its attention focussed upon the factors which must be considered as required by [s9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of that Act It may then eventuate that, as I stated in Karavas, at 268, ".. where the borrowers ... are ill-educated, inexperienced in business, related to those principally involved by blood or affection and involved in the purchase of a business with some apparent risk ... that the financier will be well advised to ensure that the guarantors and mortgagors receive effective, independent financial advice on the risks they are running ...
If it meant that guarantors and mortgagors sometimes received effective, independent, financial advice before imprudently putting their life's savings and the roof over their head at risk, that ... would be no bad thing.

See also Gough (above) at 23.
The policy considerations sustaining the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) require such an approach. It is not appropriate for financial institutions to lend very substantial sums of money to borrowers without making adequate and candid assessments as to the ability of such borrowers to repay such loans, knowing that the position of the financial institution will generally be secured by mortgages or other securities taken to cover the borrowings and accumulated interest.
See Karavas, at 268. Financial institutions are all too aware of the risks involved in such transactions. Moreover, they are generally in a superior position to organise their affairs appropriately to accommodate such risks. Invariably they are in a better position to bear the losses which may result from a failure of the borrower to appreciate the true nature of the transactions entered into and the risks which are run. This is the way that the obligations which may be effectively imposed by the Act upon financial institutions can be seen as arising out of the particular facts of each case.
It is inappropriate to endeavour to fit such a duty into the already established and defined general law categories of tortious duty.
Under the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), the appellants sought the setting aside only of the final mortgage taken. Factors relevant to that application are as follows:- 
The lack of formal education of the appellants and the weak grasp of
English of Mrs Patsiadas, at least; 
The relationship of trust developed between the parties, fostered in part by the frequent provision of funds by the Bank on the basis of little security, including almost $700,000 for the Yagoona project which was the clear predecessor to the proposal for redevelopment for which funding was eventually refused; 
The manifest lack of experience, apart from a small take-away business, necessary to sustain the business of the size of that anticipated even under the original proposal, compounded by the lack of any prior feasibility checks by the Bank before the original provision of funds; 
The other acts of encouragement to which I have already referred and which Young J accepted; 
The taking of the mortgage. Although this was to secure funds already advanced in accordance with plans made prior to the negative valuer's report, it must nonetheless be seen in the context of the ongoing proposals of the appellants of which the
Bank was kept constantly informed.
Against these factors, there is absolutely no evidence of any duress on the part of the
Bank. The appellants had also engaged the services of a Greek solicitor and accountant from whom independent advice could have been more effectively obtained by them. As Powell JA has pointed out, Mr Patsiadas can hardly be portrayed as a financial babe in the woods.
Nonetheless, an assessment of the circumstances of the signing of the final mortgage over Mr and Mrs Patsiadas' home bears a definite mark of inequality in this case. This is particularly so given the knowledge of the
Bank of a critical factor which it refrained from disclosing, in apparent circumstances of self-interest. Indeed, the transaction bears the hallmark of one in which the financial institution became very aware of its own exposure.
It took advantage of the circumstances to secure what assets it could, in the sure knowledge that the appellants would then find it impossible to make their repayments.
In my view, the mortgage was unjust in the circumstances and the appellants are also entitled to relief under the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).
 
A separate claim on behalf of Mrs Patsiadas is not pursued
It was not specifically argued before this Court that Mrs Patsiadas's obligations to the Bank should be considered separately from those of her husband. Nor is it necessary for the purpose of deciding the case for me to express any further opinion on that matter. However, Mrs Patsiadas may have had an argument in her own right, either under general principles of unconscionability (see Commonwealth of Australia versus Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447] and Akins versus National Bank of Australia) or under the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) (see e.g. Gough (above)).
In the context of a wife being held responsible for financial decisions made by her husband, I have commented in Gough that there appears to be a trend in the general law towards recognising a duty "on the part of those with responsibility in relation to others, to ensure that they obtain independent advice. " 
See also Warburton versus Whitely unrep'd
Court of Appeal 10 February 1989 and Barclays Bank Plc versus O'Brien <case>; [(1994) 1 AC 180], 196. The nature of relief to be granted by the Court
The Bank has suggested that there is a need for further detailed argument concerning whether there was any loss caused by the Bank, even if it was established that the Bank had engaged in conduct which was misleading and deceptive. However, it follows from my conclusions upon the application of [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) that the appellants have suffered detriment by their reliance on the belief, created or fostered in them by the Bank, that funding for the Yagoona redevelopment would continue to be available. The clearest detriment in that regard was the signing of the Dulwich
Hill mortgage.
Nonetheless, the precise measure of relief available remains in issue.
Under [s68(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s68.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), "A person who suffers loss or damage by conduct of another that is in contravention of a provision of [Part 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/index.html#p3), [4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/index.html#p4), [5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/index.html#p5) or [5B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/index.html#p5b) or [5A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/index.html#p5a) (section [43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/index.html#p43) excepted) may recover the amount of the loss or damage by action against the person or against any person involved in the contravention." [Section 72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s72.html) of the Act grants the broadest of powers to make orders to compensate for such loss or damage, including declaring contracts between parties void, the making of orders varying the terms of contracts or agreements and the payment of sums representing the amount of the loss or damage. Similarly, under [s7(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), orders may terminate or otherwise affect the operation or effect of a land instrument.
In an action brought under [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), the High
Court has decided that, where the applicant has suffered economic or financial loss, the applicant will be entitled to recover, "a sum representing the prejudice or disadvantage (the applicant) has suffered in consequence of his altering his position under the inducement. " 
See Sellars versus Adelaide Petroleum <case>; [(1994) 120 ALR 16], 526, 535 and Toteff v
Antonas <case>; [(1952) 87 CLR 647], 650. Thus, a successful applicant will be compensated for damage which would not have been suffered had the misleading and deceptive conduct not been engaged in. See Brennan J in Wardley, at 534.
The measure of damages favoured is a reflection of the principles applied by the common law for actions in deceit or negligent representation. In Wardley, the majority of the High Court, at 526, held that although common law standards may provide a relevant guide: "...it would not be right to conclude that the measure of damages recoverable under the sub-section necessarily coincides with the measure of damages applicable in an action for deceit ... it will always be necessary to look to the provisions of the Act with a view to ascertaining the existence of any relevant legislative intention... "
See also Gates versus The City Mutual Life Assurance Society (1986) 160 CLR , at and Brown versus Jam Factory Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 53 FLR 340], at 351. Clearly this reasoning should apply to actions, such as the present one, brought under the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
The appellants were misled into believing that funding for their project of redevelopment of the Yagoona site would be forthcoming when the Bank's legal obligations required of it candour and plain speaking which did not occur until later. The measure of damages which would therefore be most appropriate is that necessary to place the appellants as far as possible in the position in which they would have been had they not been so misled. Such damages should be assessed from July 1989. It was then that the proposed redevelopment project was first put to the Bank.
 
Orders
I presently favour relieving the appellants, Mr and Mrs Patsiadas, from the provisions of the mortgage to the Bank, over their home, given as further security for the Yagoona loans and remitting the determination of any damages to which they are additionally entitled to a Master of the Supreme Court.
However, as the Bank has asked to be heard further upon the provision of relief, I would provide it with that opportunity.
The appeal should be relisted to permit the parties to make further submissions upon the relief which follows, consequential upon the determination of the appeal substantially in favour of the appellants.
JUDGE2
PRIESTLEY JA In this appeal, with some qualifications, I agree with Kirby
ACJ's analysis both of the facts and the reasons of Young J and consequently with the conclusions he reaches in light of the relevant statutory provisions.
The first qualification may not be particularly material to the result, but because I take a view which in formal terms is somewhat different to that of Kirby ACJ, on a point on which he places some stress, I should make clear my own position. The matter
I refer to is the representation/conduct distinction. I do not disagree with what has been said about this in cases such as Henjo
Investments Pty Limited versus Collins Marrickville Pty Limited <case>; [(1988) 79 ALR 83 (Lockhart] J) where attention is drawn to the fact that the relevant statutory words are "conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive", not representation. The point I would make simply is that since the conduct which the statutes speak of is conduct which has an effect of a particular kind on a complaining party, there is not really very much difference between a representation in the wide sense in which that word was explained in Hawkins versus The Queen (1994) 181 CLR and conduct which has an effect on a party making a claim of breach by a person of the relevant statutes.
A second qualification is that I do not attach the same significance to the signing of the linen plans in July 1989 as does Kirby ACJ.
My substantial agreement with Kirby ACJ lies in the area of what happened from the end of November 1989 until the time when Mr Burcher told Mr Patsiadas that the Bank would lend no further money. It is the conduct of the Bank during this period, when it decided not to lend further money to the appellants and for what seems to me to be an unconscionable period did not tell the appellants of that decision, which leads me to think findings should be made of breaches of [s 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html), and appropriate relief granted.
At this stage I need to make the final qualification of my agreement with
Kirby ACJ's conclusions.
The aspect of this case in which I think the appellants are entitled to relief is that which concerns the mortgage given by the appellants over their Dulwich Hill home. The Bank's answer to the appellants' case on this was that there had been an agreement in equity for the granting of this mortgage before the Bank had reached the decision to lend no further money to the appellants. On this view, it was said that there was no connection between the later conduct which was conduct in breach of [s 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) and the obtaining by the Bank of the security rights over the Dulwich Hill home. Young J accepted this argument.
It seems to me however that if there was a mortgage of the home agreed upon at the end of November 1989 in such a way as to create an equitable mortgage (something about which I have found the facts rather unclear) that mortgage was given for a particular and limited purpose, whereas when the registrable mortgage came into existence the Bank was obtaining it for the general purpose of providing further security for all loans.
Thus, at the least, the appellants are entitled to have the amount for which that mortgage should stand as security reduced to the amount for which the equitable mortgage was given (if indeed it was given) at the end of
November 1989.
If the facts do not support the contention that at that time there was an equitable mortgage, then the mortgage should be altogether set aside.
As I presently see the matter, I would not be prepared to go further than this. However, Kirby ACJ's proposal, in conformity with the request made by the Bank in the course of argument, is that the matter be re-listed to permit the parties to make further submissions upon the relief which should follow consequentially upon the views the court has arrived at.
It is because I am prepared to agree in the re-listing proposal that I have not found it necessary to resolve at this stage the question whether the mortgage of the Dulwich Hill property should be dealt with so as to reduce the security it affords to the Bank or to set it aside altogether. From my point of view, it will be more satisfactory to make this decision after the argument of the parties is completed.
I therefore agree, notwithstanding the qualifications I have mentioned, with what is proposed by the Acting
Chief Justice at the conclusion of his reasons under the heading "Orders".
JUDGE3
POWELL JA In this appeal, the Appellants, Arbest
Pty. Limited ("Arbest") and
George Patsiadas and Amalia Patsiadas ("Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas") seek to have set aside orders made by
Young J, when sifting as a Judge of the Common Law
Division in November 1993, in favour of the Respondent ("the Bank") in proceedings which had been brought by the Bank, as mortgagee, seeking to obtain possession of a number of properties, of which one or more of the
Appellants was registered as proprietor or proprietors, and which properties had been mortgaged by the relevant proprietor or proprietors (inter alia) to secure the repayment of various advances which had earlier been made by the
Bank to Arbest.
Although the position is not entirely clear, it would seem that, at about the time of the commencement of the proceedings, Mrs. Patsiadas yielded to the
Bank possession of a property at 30 Francis Street, Fairfield which she owned and which appears to have been the subject of related proceedings - No. 11086 of 1991 - and Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas yielded to the Bank possession of one of the properties - Perouse Road, Randwick - the subject of proceedings No.
 of 1991, and it may be that judgments for possession were later entered in respect of those properties (Appeal Book p.744). Further, it would seem that, in March 1992, or thereabouts, Badgery-Parker
J directed the entry of judgment in respect of a further property - 3A Chatham Road, West Ryde - the subject of proceedings No. 11087 of 1991.
Although it would appear that a Notice of Appeal was filed in respect of the Judgment entered by Badgery-Parker J, and although applications for a stay of execution are said (Appeal Book p. 765) to have been made to both his
Honour and the Court of Appeal, no such stay was granted, and it would appear that the appeal was not thereafter prosecuted (Appeal Book p.558) -despite this, Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas, in March 1994 - over 4 months after the delivery of Judgment of Young J - renewed the application for a stay of execution in respect of the Dulwich Hill property, an application apparently prompted by the fact that, at that time, the property was to be submitted to public auction within a few days' time.
By no later than May 1992 (Appeal Book pp. 104-105), the Fairfield and
Randwick properties had been sold by the Bank, no attempt having been made by
Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas to restrain the sale of either property (Appeal Book p.
) - despite this, in the Amended Cross-Claim which they were to file at the commencement of the hearing before Young J, (Appeal Book p.25) Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas were to seek (inter alia) Orders, either, setting aside, or, declaring void, the mortgages pursuant to which the Fairfield and Randwick properties were sold.
In the circumstances, it will come as no surprise that I record that, in its Amended Defence to Cross-Claim, the Bank asserted (inter alia) that Mr.
and
Mrs. Patsiadas were estopped from raising any claim to relief.
The claims with which Young J was thus called upon to deal were the Bank's claim for possession of the property at Dulwich Hill, which was Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas' home, which claim was raised in proceedings No. 11087 of 1991, and the Cross-Claims which, in the proceedings brought against them respectively,
Arbest - in proceedings
No. 11085 of 1991 - and Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas had raised against the Bank, that relief in the case of each Cross-Claim being sought to be based upon the provisions of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) and the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) - having regard to the provisions of [s.6(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s6.html) of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), one can but say that Arbest's attempt to pray in aid the provisions of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) was a bold one.
Having regard to the fact that the case which the Appellants have sought to raise on the hearing of the Appeal appears to me to differ from that pleaded by them in their respective Cross-Claims and sought to be established on the hearing before
Young J, it is, I think, appropriate that one should record here what was the case pleaded by the Appellants in their respective
Cross-Claims.
Insofar as the Cross-Claim, in each case, was sought to be based upon the provisions of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), the Cross-Claim, having earlier recited the acquisition by Arbest, with the assistance of financial accommodation provided by the
Bank, of a property at Hume Highway, Yagoona ("the Yagoona property") and the alleged fact that prior to Arbest's acquisition of that property, it (Arbest) had made known to the Bank that it would need additional finance of about $500,000.00 in order that it might renovate the property upon its acquisition, continued with the following (inter alia) paragraphs: - "8. In or about March 1989 the (Bank) represented to both and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) that funds would be lent by (the Bank) to (Arbest) to permit (Arbest) to renovate the
Yagoona property.
In the alternative to 8, the (Bank) represented to both and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) the (Arbest) could reasonably expect that funds would be available to permit (Arbest to renovate the Yagoona property." 
Then, after reciting that, after it had acquired the Yagoona property, Arbest proposed a re-development of the property as opposed to a renovation of it, and - so it was alleged - had shown the Bank certain plans for the proposed redevelopment, the Cross-Claim continued with the following paragraphs: - "14. On or about 14 July 1989 the (Bank) represented to both and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) that funds would be lent to (Arbest) to re-develop the Yagoona property generally in accordance with the plans ...
In the alternative to 14 the (Bank) represented to both and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) that (Arbest) could reasonably expect that funds would be available to permit to redevelop the Yagoona property generally in accordance with the said plans.
The (Bank) further represented both to (Arbest) and (Mr.
and Mrs. Patsiadas) that the (Bank) was in the business of lending money by way of construction finance for development projects of the kind proposed by (Arbest) in the said plans.
 ...
In or about late November - early December 1989 the (Bank) represented both to (Arbest) and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) that funds would be lent by the (Bank) to (Arbest) to permit to redevelop the Yagoona property generally in accordance with the said plans and (a development approval for the construction of the improvements which had been granted by the Council of the City of Bankstown).
In the alternative to 19 the (Bank) represented both to and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) that (Arbest) could reasonably expect that funds would be available to permit to redevelop the Yagoona property generally in accordance with the said plans and the said development approval.
The (Bank) further represented both to (Arbest) and (Mr.
and Mrs. Patsiadas) that the (Bank) was in the business of lending money by way of construction finance for development projects of the kind proposed by the company in the said plans and in the said development approval.
 ...
Each of the representations made by the (Bank) to both and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) referred to in paragraphs , 9, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20 and 21 were made by the (Bank) in trade or commerce within the meaning of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair
Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) .
The (Bank) did not have reasonable grounds for making the said representations or any of them.
Each of the said representations made by the (Bank) both to (Arbest) its servants and agents and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) was misleading or deceptive or was likely to mislead or deceive within the meaning of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
By making the said representations and each of them the engaged in conduct in contravention of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair
Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
By reason of the said conduct of the (Bank) in contravention of the said Act (Arbest) suffered loss and damage and is likely to suffer or sustain further loss or damage.
By reason of the said conduct of the (Bank) in contravention of the said Act (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) personally and jointly suffered loss and damage and are likely to sustain further loss or damage.
At all material times it was known to the (Bank) that (Mr.
and Mrs. Patsiadas) had a solicitor acting for them and the failed to forward to (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas') solicitor the Third Party Mortgages executed by (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) on or about 1st May 1989 and secured over their joint properties at (Ryde) and (Randwick) and (Mrs. Patsiadas') property at to secure loans to (Arbest) on 1st May 1989 and thereafter. (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) did not have the advantage of independent advice as to the appropriateness of executing the said documents and the relevance and consequences of such execution.
At all material times it was known to the (Bank) that (Mr.
and Mrs. Patsiadas) had a solicitor acting for them and the obtained the signatures of (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) on st May 1989 to a Form of Guarantee Document without proper explanation as to their liabilities under the document (if any) and other documents executed on 1st May 1989.
At all material times it was known to the (Bank) that (Mr.
and Mrs. Patsiadas) had a solicitor acting for them and the failed to forward to (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas') solicitor the Third Party Mortgage executed by (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) and secured over their home at (Dulwich Hill) and executed on st January 1990 and 9th February respective to secure loans to (Arbest). Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas did not have the advantage of independent advice as to the appropriateness of executing the said document and the relevance and consequences of such execution.
In reliance on the representations of the (Bank) to (Arbest) its servants and agents and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) as more fully set out above (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) provided to the security over their four properties including their home in addition to the security over the Yagoona property purchased by (Arbest).
Each of the said representative made by the (Bank) both to (Arbest) its servants and agents and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) was misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive within the meaning of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
The conduct of the (Bank) in obtaining four Third Party
Mortgages, and Form of Guarantee Document, in all the circumstances was unconscionable and unjust and was unconscionable conduct within the meaning of [s.43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s43.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
By reason of the said conduct of the (Bank) in contravention of the said Act and otherwise (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) personally and jointly suffered loss and damage and are likely to suffer further loss or damage."
Insofar as the Cross-Claim in each case was sought to be based upon the provisions of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) the Cross-Claim contained the following (inter alia) paragraphs: - "39. In the alternative, (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) repeat the facts set above and say that in the events which have happened including the circumstances particularised hereunder the
Contracts made between (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) and the pursuant to which the (Bank) provided financial accommodation to (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) or to (Arbest) were unjust within the meaning of [s.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).

Particulars (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) relied upon the Bank in their dealings and as a result trusted the Bank to honour its stated intentions.
(Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) is (sic) of Greek origin and is of limited education.
The position of the Bank and (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) in the circumstances was one of inequality.
Language difficulties at the time of entering into the loan transaction were such as to lead to misunderstanding between the Bank and (Mr. and
Mrs. Patsiadas).
The Bank by providing the deposit monies for the purchase of the Yagoona property acted in a way which was to (Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas) consistent only with an intention to advance monies for the purchase and refurbishment of the building.
The Bank gave verbal assurances to (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) that monies would be made available for the purchase and refurbishment.
The transaction was improvident.
(Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) claim orders setting aside each of the mortgages executed by them and damages."
Two things, in my view, are made clear by these extracts from the
Amended
Cross-Claim, they being: - insofar as the Cross-Claim was based on the Bank's alleged breach of the provisions of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), the basis for that claim was, not some extended form of conduct over a period of many months, but three express representations alleged to have been made on behalf of the Bank, those representations having been made in March 1989, July 1989 and late November -
early December 1989; insofar as the Cross-Claim was based upon the provisions of s. 7 of the
Contract Review Act 1980, the claim was based to some extent at least upon the same representations as those to which I have referred.
If any confirmation that this was so be needed, it is, I suggest, readily to be found in the Affidavit sworn by Mr. Patsiadas on 9th May 1991 (Appeal
Book pp. 3 et seq) shortly after the commencement of these proceedings, which
Affidavit was the first - and principal - Affidavit tendered on behalf of Mr.
and Mrs. Patsiadas and Arbest on the hearing before Young J and which
Affidavit was not supplemented by oral evidence given in chief by Mr.
Patsiadas on that hearing. If any further confirmation that this was so be thought necessary, it might be found at the commencement of Young J's Judgment where his Honour sets out (Appeal Book pp. 744-745) his understanding of the
Appellant's case and the issues which he was called upon to determine in the following way: - "The Amended Cross-Claim sets out the following causes of action at law or in equity. For simplicity, I will refer simply to the defendants in the proceedings as 'the
Cross-Claimants' and the Bank as 'the Bank'.

A. The Bank made representations that it would make further loans to the Cross-Claimants who inextricably altered their position as a result of those representations and then the 
Bank reneged. The representations were made in trade and commerce and were false and misleading contrary to [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (sic).

B. The various transactions in which the parties were involved were effected by the Bank taking unconscientious advantage of the Cross-Claimants.

C. The said representations were unconscionable under [s.43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s43.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).

D. Relief should be given to the Cross-Claimants under the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).

The defences were really denials of the factual allegations made by the cross-claimants. Thus it is necessary to analyse the evidence to see where the truth lies."
A consideration of Young J's Judgment, in my view, makes it clear that his
Honour rejected the case which Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas and Arbest sought to set up in reliance on the provisions of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
Thus, having recorded, in summary, the evidence of Mr. Patsiadas on the one hand, and the evidence of Messrs. Montgomery and Burcher, the relevant bank officers, on the other, his Honour said (Appeal Book pp. 755-756):- "I do not consider that anything in particular of what the Bank officers said or did amounted to a representation. At the worst they did not make it clear to Mr. Patsiadas that there might be problems of getting the loan. It must have been clear to everybody that if the project was to go ahead the cross claimants would need to borrow at least one million dollars and it must also have been clear that the conduct of the cross claimants from February 1989 to March 1990 showed that they were committed to the project and were depending on the Bank for finance. It might be thought that it would be appropriate in these circumstances for the Bank to make it far more clear than it did that the Bank was not obligated to fund the project.
Whether this amounted to a legal duty on the
Bank is something that I will consider shortly.

From the Bank's point of view it had not committed itself to the project.
Mr. Patsiadas was a good customer, he had provided security and the Bank was quite willing to advance him moneys.
They were quite willing to advance money on bill line so that the customer could be put in funds while the project was investigated.
Mr. Patsiadas took this conduct to indicate to him that there had been an approval and everything was alright.
A more experienced business customer would have appreciated that whilst the Bank was lending him money on security to keep the project going, a final decision on the project had not yet been made and could not be made until there was a proper feasibility study." 
Later, having recorded, and dealt in some detail with, counsel's arguments on this aspect of the Cross-Claim his Honour concluded (Appeal Book pp. 762-763): "Essentially this case depends on the facts. I doubt whether anybody of any commercial experience would have entered into this venture without a feasibility study and a guarantee of finance. Mr. Patsiadas got neither. He furnished figures through his accountant which were wildly optimistic. He kept changing his plans for the development, there is some evidence to suggest that he did not listen to what other people were saying to him and he made the assumption that he would be financed. He was a good customer of the Bank and had always been financed for all his ventures before this and
I think assume that this would continue to be the case.

The Bank was prepared to advance moneys and Mr. Montogmery at least probably made encouraging noises to Mr. Patsiadas.
However, I do not consider that the Bank ever went beyond making encouraging noises and indicating that Mr. Patsiadas would need to make a formal application in due course which would be considered on its merits though the odds would be that the project would be approved. Mr. Patsiadas' interview with the Bank on 27 November and his signing of pieces of paper gave every indication that he appreciated that he knew his way around and realised that he would need particular bank finance for which he would need to make formal application.

I do not consider on the evidence that the Bank made any misrepresentation by silence or otherwise. I do not consider that the Bank should have said anything more than it did say to Mr. Patsiadas. I am of the view that Mr. Bannon's submissions are quite correct.
Mr. Patsiadas was so enamoured of the project that he did not even know or care about the actual costs of the renovations.
He just went ahead regardless. He dug himself into a hole and he cannot blame anything that the
Bank said or did not say for that predicament." 
Having done so, his Honour then concluded (Appeal Book pp. 763-764):- "The only thing that remains is whether the case of the Dulwich
Hill mortgage is in a separate situation. This is Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas' home. It could be said that by mid-January 1990, the
Bank knew that the odds of it granting further accommodation were very slim. Notwithstanding this, the Bank took a further mortgage over what it knew was Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas' home.
Mrs. Patsiadas did not speak English; she signed the mortgage at the Ashfield branch of the Bank without any explanation.
 
The Bank says, however, that all the arrangements for taking further security were really made in December - a time before the proposal was seen to be non-viable.
Mrs. Patsiadas had left everything to Mr. Patsiadas, the further security was willingly offered and it was offered because of Mr. Patsiadas' enthusiasm for the project. On reflection I think the Bank's case on this point is correct and that accordingly no special order should be made with respect to Dulwich Hill.

I have examined the case as a factual one and focussed mainly on the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). However, if one focuses on the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), the general principles of equity or the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) the cross claimants' position is no stronger.

Some submissions were made based on Redrave v. Hurd [(1881) 20
Ch D 1], that as the Bank must have know that Mr. Patsiadas was making a false assumption, it would be unconscionable for it to rely on that false assumption even though it may not have engendered it. I do not see how in the way I have found the facts in this matter, that this submission advances the case at all.

Finally, Mr. Cowdroy Q.C. put that the Bank's conduct in accepting the voluntary surrender of two of the properties so they could be sold meant that it would be unjust for the
Bank to now insist that the final property, the matrimonial home, be sold to pay the debt on this venture. Whilst the Court does not relish the thought of the family home being sold, the
Court considers that the problems of Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas are of Mr. Patsiadas' own making and there is nothing in the
Bank's conduct which would justify the Court restraining the
Bank from realising this asset too if it were necessary to discharge its debt."
Despite the basis upon which, insofar as it invoked the provisions of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), the Amended Cross-Claim was pleaded -that is, that the misleading and deceptive conduct upon which Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas and Arbest relied was constituted by the express representations to which I have earlier referred - despite the fact that Young J found that no such representations had been made, and despite the fact that counsel for Mr.
and Mrs. Patsiadas and Arbest accepts that they (Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas) are bound by those factual findings, the case that was advanced on the Appeal was that it was not necessary, in order that this claim be made out, that there should have been any representation on the part of the Bank and that it was sufficient that there be found somewhere in his Honour's Judgment some finding of fact which could be categorised as conduct which was "misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive".
That this was so is made clear by the written submissions provided by counsel, which submissions, after referring, in a highly selective way, to what were said to be findings made by Young J continue in the following way: - "B. REQUIREMENTS OF S.42 [FAIR TRADING ACT 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/)
Having made the above findings, the Appellants submit that the requirements of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) have been made out (sic). [Section 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) does not require that there should necessarily have a representation as ad prerequisite to satisfying the requirements of the section. [Section 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) proscribes conduct that is 'misleading or deceptive' or which is 'likely to mislead or deceive.
On the facts as found by His Honour the Bank 'had made encouraging noises' and the Bank: - 'Did not make it clear to Mr. Patsiadas that there might be problems of getting the loan.' (AB 754 O-R; AS 755 K-L)
Taking these facts into consideration with the history of
Mr. Patsiadis' (sic) enquiries for finance, and of the execution of the plans for redevelopment, that conduct is sufficient to constitute misleading or deceptive conduct or alternatively conduct that was likely to mislead or deceive. His Honour found as a fact that Mr. Patsiadis (sic) 'got the firm impression from what the Bank officers said' that there would not be any problems in obtaining the finance (AB 755 I-J) and that he genuinely believed that the Bank would lend him the money to finish the project (AB 754 M-O).
It is submitted that, on the facts as found, the conduct of the Bank was, at the very least, likely to mislead: it did in fact mislead. In these circumstances there has been a breach of [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) (see Brown versus Jam Factory Pty. Limited Pty. Limited [(1981) 43 FLR 340] at p 604; Parkdale Custom Built
Furniture Pty. Ltd. v. Puxu Pty. Ltd. <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 191] at )." and later - "D. THE CONDUCT ENGAGED IN
If the Bank entertained reservations that it may not approve finance for the redevelopment of the site, then the same were never communicated to the Appellants, and in consequence they to their detriment. Indeed, all of the evidence points to the fact that they received nothing but encouragement from the
Bank even viewed only on the unchallenged facts. Indeed, the areas of conflict in the oral conversations between Mr. Patsiadis and the Bank officers are in a very narrow compass. The unchallenged facts are as follows: -
Upon Mr. Patsiadis' enquiry, the Bank readily offered a loan of up to $1M (see letter of 14 February 1989 AB 606).
Upon Mr. Patsiadas' subsequent enquiries from the Bank he was not deterred from proceeding with the proposal to purchase and/or renovate the building;
When the plans changed to a redevelopment, the new manager (Mr. Burcher) did nothing to dissuade Mr. Patsiadis from continuing nor to warn him that finance might not be available.
The Bank provided active encouragement by executing and lodging for registration the plans for consolidation of the titles which was consistent only with the Bank's knowledge of the redevelopment of the site as was explained in the
Appellant's Solicitor's covering letter dated 11 July (AB 636);
On the 16 January 1990 the Bank received a valuation which revealed that the Yagoona project was not viable (AB 301).
On the 31 January 1990 the Bank nevertheless took a mortgage over the Appellant's matrimonial home and gave the facility for the payment of $45,000 to obtain vacant possession of the upper floors. Although Mr. Burcher did not recall that the $45,000 was for this purpose, all the objective evidence tends to support Mr. Patsiadas' testimony that he told Mr. Burcher that the sum of $45,000 and the need to obtain finance was for that purpose (AB 760 O-Q).
The Bank knew as at the giving of such mortgage, that the
Appellants were under the misapprehension that the mortgage was required as a step in the provision of finance for the
Yagoona development.

At no stage was Mr. Patsiadas dissuaded nor was any reservation expressed. These were the 'encouraging noises' leading to the 'firm' impression 'from what the Bank officers said that there would not be any problems about these formalities'.
The finding that 'at worst they did not make it clear to
Mr. Patsiadas that there might be problems of getting the loan' is the gravamen of the conduct complained of: silence may constitute misleading or deceptive conduct where there is a duty to reveal the facts. In view of the long association which Mr. Patsiadas had with the Bank, and of the mutual trust which existed between the Bank and the appellants including the fact that the Bank knew that Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas placed great trust in the bank, the relevant duty clearly existed.
In these circumstances the Bank failed to warn the Appellants that the finance might not be available and in doing so breached [s.42:](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) see Rhone-Poulenc Agrochimie SA versus UIM Chemical Services
Pty. Ltd [(1986) 12 FCR 477.]
In this case, the silence was the element in all the circumstances which renders the conduct in question misleading or deceptive: see Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Meheta [(1991) 23 NSWLR 84] at p.32.
There was in effect a failure by the Bank to communicate its reservation that it might not lend the money and by such failure the Appellants acted to their detriment: see Winterton
Investments Pty. Ltd. versus Hambros Australia Limited <case>; [(1993) FCR 97]
With respect to those who may take another view, it seems to me that having regard to the manner in which, in this respect, the Cross-Claim was pleaded and, in addition, the manner in which the trial before Young J appears to have been conducted, the submissions which, in this respect, Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas and Arbest now seek to advance ought not to be entertained. If any support for the view which I have just expressed be thought necessary, it will be found in the Judgment of Mason J (as he then was) in O'Brien v
Komesaroff ((1) <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 310] at 319) where his Honour said: - "in some cases when a question of law is raised for the first time in an ultimate Court of Appeal, as for example upon the construction of a document, or upon facts either admitted or proved beyond controversy, it is expedient in the interests of justice that the question should be argued and decided (Connecticut Fire Insurance Co v Kavanagh [(1892) AC 473], 438;
Green versus Sommerville <case>; [(1979) 141 CLR 594], 607-608). However, this is not such a case, the facts are not admitted nor are they beyond controversy.

The consequence is that the appellants case fails at the threshold. They cannot argue this point on appeal; it was not pleaded by them nor was it made an issue by the conduct of the parties at the trial." (see also University of Wollongong versus Metwally (No. 2) ((2) <case>; [(1985) 59 ALJR 481], 7-8); Waterboard versus Moustakas ((4) <case>; [(1987) 180 CLR 491], 495-498).
Not only was the Bank not required to meet a case of the type now sought to be advanced, in this respect, on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas and
Arbest, but the "facts" upon which Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas and Arbest seek to rely in order now to support it are neither admitted nor are they beyond controversy. On the contrary, the evidence which was before Young J, in my view, is to the contrary of the "facts" now sought to be relied upon.
In order to demonstrate that the "facts" upon which, in respect of this claim, Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas and Arbest seek to rely are neither admitted nor beyond controversy, I set out below some - far from all - of the "facts" which are in dispute.
In the written submissions it is asserted that "upon Mr. Patsiadis (sic) enquiry the Bank readily offered a loan of up to $1M (see letter of 14
February 1989 AB 606)". Far from that letter addressed to
Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas - being, as seems to be suggested, an unqualified offer of a loan of up to $1,000,00, it was in the following terms: - "We refer to our discussion of 13th February 1989 and detail below a list of fees that will be applicable in the establishment of a Bill facility for $1 Million: - 
Application fee                $5,000.00
Registration
Fees                 126.00
Bank Solicitor Cost re:
Production of Documents              300.00
Search Fees                    28.00
Loan Security Duty               4,000.00
Inspection
Fee                 1,250.00 
As advised by phone we are in a position to offer you this facility SUBJECT
TO THE BANK NORMAL REQUIREMENTS at a margin of 1.5% p.a. above the Bank's cost of funds.

Should you have any further enquiries, please do not hesitate to contact this office." (my emphasis)
That Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas appreciated that it would be necessary for them to lodge a formal application for a loan, and that any loan which might be approved would be subject to such conditions - including conditions as to the provision of security - as the Bank determined is made clear by the following: - such a formal application appears to have been made in March 1989 (Appeal
Book pp. 718-722); the loan which was approved on 30th March 1989 (Appeal Book p.718), and offered to Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas, who later signed a formal acceptance (Appeal Book p. 602), was a Term
Loan of $600,000 for 12 months, security to be provided by the granting of first ranking mortgages over the Fairfield,
Randwick,
West Ryde and Yagoona properties; when Arbest was substituted as the purchaser of the Yagoona property, the original offer of a loan appears formally to have been declined on 28th April (Appeal Book p. 605) and a fresh application for a loan made on behalf of
Arbest (Appeal Book p. 691), which loan - in the same amount and for the same term, and subject to similar conditions - appears to have been approved on 9th
May 1989, and accepted by Arbest.
One adds, that it would appear that, at about the same time, Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas had made approaches to a mortgage broker, Allco Mortgage Corporation
Limited, in an endeavour to obtain a mortgage loan of $1,000,000.00, in response to which approach, on 23d February 1989, they were advised that "a first mortgage advance of $1,000,000.00 has been approved in principle by
Gregbo Investments Pty. Limited" the terms and conditions of which advance were contained in a "letter of indication" (Appeal Book pp. 729 et seq) - a copy of this "letter of indication" formed part of the material which accompanied the application for a loan which was made to the Bank in March (Appeal Book p.722).
In the written submissions it is asserted that "upon Mr. Patsiadis' (sic) subsequent inquiries from the Bank he was not deterred from proceeding with the proposal to purchase and/or renovate the building" in respect of which assertion it should be noted first, that the only "inquiry" said to have been made prior to Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas entering into the contract to purchase - on 22nd, not as Mr. Patsiadas has asserted, the 27th February 1989 - was on nd February 1989 itself and, second, that Mr. Montgomery, who was at that time the manager of the relevant branch of the Bank, not only denies that he said no more than "go ahead George", but asserts that, at the time, and, at a later stage, when Mr. Patsiadas spoke of renovating the premises, he made it clear that any advance would depend upon there having been a formal application for a loan - as there later was - and upon the Bank being satisfied as to the value of the property and the capacity of Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas to repay any advance.
In the written submissions it is asserted, first, that "when the plans changed to a redevelopment, the new manager, Mr. Burcher did nothing to dissuade Mr. Patsiadas from continuing nor to warn him that finance might not be available", and, second, that "the Bank provided active encouragement by executing and lodging for registration the plans for consolidation of the titles which was (sic) consistent only with the Bank's knowledge of the redevelopment of the site as was explained in the Appellant's solicitor's covering letter dated 11 July 1989".
In this regard it is to be noted: that, as at July 1989, the only development approval which had been sought, and granted, was for "alterations and additions to an existing reception lounge at ground and first floor (493-497 Hume Highway, Yagoona)" (Appeal Book 669 et seq); that among the conditions to which the approval dated 3 May 1989 was subject was a condition that "the lots to which the development relates shall be consolidated into one (1) lot a plan of consolidation shall be lodged prior to the release of the building application and registration shall be created prior to the occupation of the building" (Appeal Book 671); that, by July 1989, the Bank - pursuant to the terms upon which the commercial bill facility for $670,000.00 for a time of 11 months had been made available to
Arbest - had become registered as the proprietor of a mortgage of the land - the subject of the three Certificates of Title - upon which was erected the building known as 493-497 Hume Highway, Yagoona; that, as at 11th July 1989, Mr. Burcher had but recently taken up appointment as manager of the relevant branch of the Bank; that on 11th July 1989 the solicitor for Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas and
Arbest wrote to the Bank as follows: - "Re Arbest Pty. Limited (George and Amalia Patsiadas)
Property: 493-497
Liverpool Road, Yagoona 
I act for Arbest Pty. Limited which proposes at some time in the near future to develop the above property.

One of the requirements with Bankstown Council will be to have the three existing titles consolidated into one title to be known as Lot 345 of a new Deposited Plan.

I enclose linen plan of consolidation together with three copies for the Bank's endorsement and I ask that you forward these signed plans to me to submit to council.

In due course it will be necessary for the Bank to produce
Certificates of Title Folio Identifiers 3, 4 and 5/16767 to the Land Titles Office.
Notification of this will be given to the Bank.

Kindly let me have an assessment of your fees herein." to which letter
Mr. Burcher replied on 13th July 1989: - "Re Arbest Pty. Limited
Property: 493-497 Liverpool Road, Yagoona
Linen Plan 
We refer to the above and advise the following fees will be applicable for the registration of said linen plan: 
Consent fee - $35.00
Production fee - 70.00 
Should you have any further inquiries please do not hesitate to contact this office." that, in his Affidavit sworn 15th January 1993, Mr. Burcher when dealing with the occasion on which he signed the linen plan deposed as follows: - "4. Before I had had an opportunity to familiarise myself with the accounts conducted in the names of Arbest Pty. Limited,
Amalia Patsiadas and George Patsiadas ('the Defendants'), Mr.
Patsiadas called in at the branch and saw me.
I recall that during the interview I had available to me and I referred to, the relevant files and some linen plans for premises owned by the Defendants at 497-497 Hume Highway,
Yagoona.
Specifically I recollect that I perused the 'Application for Advance' dated about 28 April 1989, the letter of offer dated 28 April 1989 and a letter confirming the drawdown of the facility dated 4 May 1989, true copies of which are annexed and marked 'A;.
Mr. Patsiadas asked that I sign the linen plans to allow the titles to be consolidated. I was aware that there was a single building constructed over the land described in three separate certificates of title. I approved the consolidation of the titles and signed the plans immediately as I believed that the Bank's interest in the properties as mortgagor would not be adversely affected by the consolidation of the titles as requested by Mr. Patsiadas. Further, it seemed to me to be reasonable that there be one title only for the premises given that there was a single structure erected on it.
 ...
During the course of the meeting a conversation ensured to the following effect; - 
Mr. Patsiadas: 'Will you advance the money?' 
Myself: 'You will need to make a formal application to the
Bank for finance before the Bank can consider loaning further funds to you.
Such application will require Council approval of the proposed building work, plans, costing for the work and projected income and expenditure for the business which you intend to conduct to enable the Bank to asses you ability to service the loan.'
I deny that I stated at this time 'Just keep going George, it looks alright.' Any discussions about the Council's attitude to the project were in the context of Council's approval of the proposed work being a component of any application to the Bank for finance."
Insofar as concerns the claim based on the provisions of [s.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), the written submissions of counsel for Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas and Arbest contained the following: - "THE GRANTING OF THE ADDITIONAL
SECURITY OVER THE MATRIMONIAL
HOME
On 31 January 1990 Mr. Patsiadis (sic) executed a Memorandum of Mortgage providing the Bank with security over his matrimonial home at 126 Dixson Avenue, Dulwich Hill. On the February 1990 Mrs. Patsiadis, as joint tenant of the property, executed the Memorandum of Mortgage at the Ashfield
Branch of the State Bank. (AB E-F). No explanation was provided to her by the Bank at the time of execution.
Mrs. Patsiadis (sic) has very little understanding of
English and speaks very little English (AB 247 L-M). She is not able to read (AB 247 S) but she placed her signature upon the Mortgage where she was requested by her husband (AB 248
F-G). At the time she signed the Mortgage she knew that the house was being provided as security (AB 488 F); she also knew that if the monies were not repaid to the Bank the Bank could take the mortgaged property (AB 488 H-M), as 'the last piece ...
It is my house' (AB 488 K-L).
It is not the Appellant's case that Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadis did not understand the nature of a Mortgage. Rather, it was a misunderstanding as to the Purpose of the Mortgage. Both
Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadis (sic) believed that it was required by the Bank as but one of the steps in th process of arranging finance for the redevelopment of the site. Mrs. Patsiadis (sic) believed that the mortgage was required to enable the building to be refurbished (AB 485 T). Mr. Patsiadis (sic) clearly believed that when the plans were approved the Bank would be advancing the further funds for the improvement and refurbishment (AB 421 I-L). That was what he conveyed to his wife at the time she signed the mortgage over the matrimonial home (AB 458
G).
 ...
At the time that the mortgage over the matrimonial home was signed, Mr. Burcher was aware of Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadis' (sic) understanding that it was to be used by way of security for the advance to be made for the redevelopment of the Yagoona property: (AB 520 C-E).
In the circumstances, the obtaining, by the Bank, of the mortgage over the matrimonial home was unfair: the Bank well knew that Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadis (sic) were labouring under the misapprehension that finance would be provided.
In relation to the Contract (sic) Review Act claim, the
Appellants rely upon the following as grounds to set aside the Mortgage over the matrimonial home: -
The position of trust placed by them in the Bank arising from a relationship of 14 years;
The fact that the Bank did not disclose a valuer's report received by it prior to the execution of the Mortgage;
Each of the Appellants were (sic) labouring under a misapprehension that the mortgage was required to enable the
Bank to provide finance for the Yagoona premises; that misapprehension was known by the Bank;
The Bank remained silent and did not disclose the adverse valuer's report."
A reference to the Amended Statement of Claim will, I suggest, demonstrate that the case which, in this respect, as well, Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas sought to set up on the hearing of the Appeal differed from that which they had pleaded and which they had sought to establish on the hearing before Young
J who had rejected it.
As will probably be obvious from what I have earlier written in relation to the submissions sought to be advanced on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas and Arbest in respect of that part of the claim which is based on the provisions of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), it is my view that, for the same reasons as I have there recorded, the arguments now sought to be advanced in respect of this part of the claim ought not be entertained by this Court. In this respect, it is, in my view, sufficient to point out that far from it being the fact that Mr. Burcher was aware that Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas were labouring under a misapprehension as to the purpose for which the additional mortgage was being sought, the passage in the transcript to which reference is made in the written submissions is to the contrary.
Before passing from this part of the case, it is, perhaps, pertinent, in the light of the case which Mr.
and Mrs. Patsiadas originally sought to make out, namely, that they were innocents abroad, with but little experience in matters of business, who had been taken advantage of by the Bank, to point to the following: - at all relevant times, Mr. and Mrs.
Patsiadas appear to have retained, and been advised by, a solicitor and an accountant, each of whom was Greek speaking, and each of whom, for some purposes at least, was accustomed to deal on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas with the Bank; in addition, as I have earlier noted, Mr. and Mrs. Patsiadas had in
January or February 1989, also sought the assistance of a mortgage broker in relation to obtaining a loan which would enable the Yagoona property to be purchased, and were prepared to use the "letter of indication" obtained from that mortgage broker in support of the application for a loan made by them to the Bank in March 1989; far from it being the fact that Mr. and Mrs Patsiadas had little, or no, experience in business, it is to be pointed out that, of the four properties which, prior to the purchase of the Yagoona property, were owned by them directly, and which four properties were valued by Mr. Patsiadas in May 1991 in the sum of approximately $1.4 million, three of those properties were commercial properties, two of them being let for commercial purposes and returning gross rents of the order of $50,000.00 per annum; finally, it is to be noted that, in May 1991, Mr. Patsiadas valued the property at Yagoona at approximately $800,000.00, a sum significantly in excess of the amount which it had originally borrowed from the Bank in order to acquire it.
In the light of what I have written above, I conclude that the Appeals should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/72.html  
