

Healey versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia Matter No Ca 40219/98 [1998] NSWSC (17 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
GREGORY HARRISON HEALEY versus COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA 
CA 40219/98 June 1998 
Mason P 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The appellant seeks a stay of execution pending determination of his appeal. 
On 19 March 1998, Rolfe J gave judgment for the respondent, which I shall refer to as the Bank, in the sum of $3,857,838.14. This involved the dismissal of a cross-claim filed by the appellant. This cross-claim was effectively his only defence to a bank debt that had stood accruing interest since about 1991.

Rolfe J granted a twenty eight day stay. It expired on 16 April. On that day, the appellant filed a notice of appeal without appointment. No further steps were taken to prosecute the appeal, or extend the stay, until after the Bank embarked on steps in April and May with a view to making the appellant bankrupt and exercising its power of sale over various securities. Ultimately, on 1 June, a notice of appeal was filed setting out grounds of the appellant's challenge to the decision of Rolfe J.

On about 22 April, the Bank served a formal notice of demand, claiming the judgment debt and foreshadowing action to realise its securities. On about 30
April, a notice pursuant to <case>(b) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) was served.
The appellant has disputed its validity on formal grounds. On 23 April, the
Bank issued a twenty one day bankruptcy notice. It was served on the appellant on 13 May. On 2 June the appellant filed an application in the Federal Court of Australia seeking to have the bankruptcy notice set aside. It is returnable on 26 June. Pending the hearing of that application, the time for compliance with the bankruptcy notice has been extended to 26 June.

The principal ground upon which the stay has been sought is the impact of bankruptcy upon the appellant. The appellant is a practising solicitor. He is currently a partner in one firm and a sole practitioner in another. He has offered to pay to the Bank moneys due to him under various consultancy agreements with his partners. If paid, these sums would fall well short of the judgment debt. The Bank is not interested. If made bankrupt, the appellant would be able to continue in practice, but subject to the restrictions set out under the Law Society's policy about the effect of bankruptcy on a solicitor's practice as set out in the Law Society Journal of February 1997. I note these policies without endorsing their appropriateness.

Bankruptcy would impede the appellant's capacity to conduct the type of personal injuries practice which has been his staple for a number of years.
This is because of restrictions upon operating a trust account and upon borrowing to fund the costs of personal injury litigation on behalf of impecunious clients. The appellant's only effective source of income is his legal practice.

Two of the properties over which the Bank holds a mortgage securing the judgment debt, which it is threatening to realise by power of sale, are investment properties at 30 Fullers Road Chatswood and 202 Whale Beach Road
Whale Beach. The appellant has entered into contracts to sell these properties to companies in which (I was informed without objection) he has some interest.
That interest or association is evidenced by offers he has made on behalf of those companies in his affidavits. The appellant's capacity to complete these sales is entirely dependent upon the Bank giving a discharge of its mortgages.
It is far from clear that the Bank is willing to do this. The matter may depend upon valuations which have been sought by the Bank. The appellant has proposed to pay the net proceeds of sale into court pending the outcome of the appeal. Indeed, he has offered to top up these net proceeds by including the difference between the contract price and the value shown by two "kerbside" valuations with the additional moneys being advanced by the purchaser companies. This offer has been rejected by the Bank. I should add that the realisation of these securities, whether by voluntary or forced sale, will make comparatively little impact on the outstanding judgment debt. The contract price for the Chatswood property is $200,000 and that for the Whale
Beach property is $450,000.

The appellant's prospects of success in the pending appeal are highly relevant to the exercise of my discretion. I have accordingly read the judgment with a particular eye upon the grounds of appeal now indicated, especially grounds six, seven and eight, to which my attention was drawn by Mr Gee of Queen's counsel, senior counsel for the appellant.

I consider the prospects of success to be quite low. The effective defence raised in answer to the proven debt was that in about April 1992 the appellant and the Bank entered into what was called a "work-out agreement", the essence of which was that the appellant would take certain steps to dispose of assets over which the Bank held security, to maintain and further his legal practice and to repay the Bank, in consideration for which the Bank would facilitate the taking of those steps and forebear from calling up the loans. It was accepted that the sale of assets would not discharge the total indebtedness.
The repayment of the balance owing, or some part of it, and when and how this was to happen, was to be the subject of further negotiation. This balance was referred to in the proceedings below as the residual debt.

It was the appellant's case below that pursuant to that agreement he had done all things necessary to fulfil it, but that the Bank had breached its obligations. In some way which the trial judge found difficult to understand, and I share his difficulties, that breach of that alleged agreement was said to sound in damages, the quantum of which met the outstanding debt. As his
Honour noted, it was not in issue that the parties had never agreed on the amount of the residual debt and when and how it was to be repaid.

The appellant's case was rejected on evidentiary and legal grounds in the detailed reasons of Rolfe J. His Honour held that the alleged agreement as pleaded did not amount to a concluded and hence to a binding agreement. Rather it was nothing more than an agreement to agree. Indeed, his Honour held in the light of evidence which he analysed that there was no agreement of the type contended for. Rather, all that happened was that the parties continued to negotiate in the years following April 1992.

Based upon my reading of the judgment, which is detailed and refers to the supporting material, I consider that his Honour's conclusions were amply justified by the evidence which he sets out. Special reference might be made to the concession about the proposed deed of arrangement referred to at page , the letter of 11 April 1993 referred to at page 67, the letter of 13 March referred to at page 77 and his Honour's conclusions at pages 86 to 88, , 95, 96 and 101 and 102. I agree with his Honour that the fact that the
Bank wrote off the debt for internal accounting purposes carries little or no weight. I should add that, to say the least, the legal difficulties of persuading the Court of Appeal that an enforceable agreement sounding in damages was entered into are substantial. So much for a gloomy assessment of prospects of success.

I think that there are other reasons tending against the exercise of the discretion to deprive the judgment creditor of the present fruits of its judgment. There is the delay in prosecuting the appeal and the application for a stay. One gets the distinct impression that little was done until the wolves were at the door.

It is obvious that the principal reason why the appellant wants a stay is to impede the foreshadowed bankruptcy, at least until the appeal is determined.
In saying this, I am not suggesting anything improper in that desire.

I do not overlook the evidence of prejudice to the appellant in his legal practice but this needs to be partially weighed against the risks involved in allowing a clearly insolvent practitioner to continue in full practice. In saying this, I cast no aspersions upon the appellant's character but I think that the risk, though hypothetical, is not irrelevant. More importantly, I think it proper to have regard to the countervailing interests of the Bank.
After all, if its right to get at least as far as presenting a bankruptcy petition is impeded, then it may lose the right to challenge antecedent transactions that must have occurred within a fixed time before petition if they are to be successfully challenged.

It is also highly relevant that this application was brought after the bankruptcy notice had issued. The control of threatened or pending bankruptcy proceedings is vested in the Federal Court in that context. That Court can and will pay proper regard to the prospects of overturning the judgment in the pending appeal and it will be able to do so in the proper context of the proceedings to set aside the bankruptcy notice or extend time for complying with it, or in the context of an application to adjourn the hearing of a pending petition. See Ahern versus The Deputy Commission of Taxation <case>; [(1987) 76 ALR 137] at 148, Vincent versus State Bank of New South Wales [(1995) FCR 290.] Bryant versus The Commonwealth Bank of Australia Federal
Court of Australia Full Court unreported 21 September 1994, emphasises (at paragraph 39) that a judge of the Federal Court, faced with an application to set aside a bankruptcy notice on the basis of prospects of overturning the judgment debt in an appeal, is properly a matter for the judge vested with that bankruptcy jurisdiction. I do not agree with Mr Gee's submission that the
Federal Court would expect to be or be assisted by judicial advice from this
Court on such matters, nor do I accept that the appellant is prejudiced in his pending application before the Federal Court by any refusal of a stay in this
Court.

Mr Gee further argued that I should have regard to the fact that the Bank was prepared to keep negotiating for the period between 1992 and 1996. This is advanced as an indication of the comparative lack of prejudice to the Bank from allowing the status quo to remain pending the determination of the appeal. But the Bank started pressing in earnest in 1996 when it launched the proceedings in the Supreme Court. More importantly, the Bank is now a judgment creditor, its rights have been determined and that determination has, subject to any successful appeal, disposed of the argument based upon the alleged work-out agreement. Subject to the proper disposal of this application, the
Bank should be entitled to enjoyment of those rights, bearing in mind that the
Federal Court will control the exercise of those rights in a proper manner insofar as they involve bankruptcy.

It will be apparent that I have placed very little weight upon the appellant's proposals to make partial reductions of his judgment debt on various conditions. The Bank as the judgment creditor is best able to make up its own mind whether it is cutting off its nose to spite its face by rejecting those proposals. To my mind, there is sufficient uncertainty and shortfall in those proposals that they carry little weight. The upshot is that the appellant lacks the capacity to meet the judgment debt and is very unlikely to gain it on the present state of the evidence.

I would dismiss the application with costs.
 * * * 
