

Regina versus Michael John Finlay [1998] NSWSC 1034 (4 August 1998) 
REGINA versus Michael John FINLAY /96 
Friday 20 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
JAMES J, BELL AJ 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: Michael John Finlay has applied for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him in the District Court on 31 May 1996 following pleas of guilty to three charges of receiving, which is an offence under s188 of the
Crimes Act. On each of the three charges his Honour Judge Twigg imposed a sentence of penal servitude for 5 years 4 months, consisting of a minimum term of 4 years commencing on 31 May 1996 and an additional term of 1 year 4 months. Under s188 of the Crimes Act the maximum penalty for receiving is penal servitude for 10 years.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge's statement of the objective facts of the offences was largely taken from a facts sheet prepared by police, which had been admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence and which would not appear to have been the subject of any contention.

On 20 November 1995 police executed a search warrant at the applicant's house at Tamworth. In the applicant's house police found a lounge suite, a television receiver, a compact disc rack with a number of compact discs, a high pressure spray unit and a stereo system. On 17 October 1995 these items had been stolen, when property owned by a Mr Goode had been broken into and entered. Police also found in the applicant's home another television receiver and a camera, which had been stolen on 4 September 1995 when a home owned by a
Dr Rooney had been broken into and entered. On 17 November 1995 the applicant had given a friend, a Mrs Cramp, a camera and lens attachments for the camera, which had been the subject of a breaking entering and stealing at the home of a Mr Edgecock on 14 November 1995. In the case of each of the offences of breaking entering and stealing more property had been stolen than was recovered at the applicant's home or from Mrs Cramp. The total value of the goods which the applicant was convicted of receiving was $9,560.

The applicant had originally been charged with offences of breaking entering and stealing and had pleaded guilty at the first reasonable opportunity after the charges against him had been changed to charges of receiving.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge referred to the subjective circumstances of the applicant. At the time of sentencing the applicant was 30 years old. He had been in a de facto relationship but that relationship had broken up, partly as a consequence of the offences for which he was being sentenced. The applicant had a minor previous criminal history, including convictions for larceny in 1983 and 1984 for both of which he had been fined small amounts of money, and a conviction for receiving in 1984 for which he had been placed on a recognizance which had long since expired. He had never previously been sentenced to imprisonment. The applicant was in full-time employment, working 13 days a fortnight for a firm of cotton ginners.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge referred to answers given by the applicant when interviewed by the police, that the stolen property had been supplied to him by a man named Sao, who he later identified to the police as being a man named Naulty. In giving evidence before his honour in the proceedings on sentence the applicant had given an account of acquiring the stolen goods from the man Sao when that man was working at a hotel in
Tamworth. His Honour found that the evidence the applicant gave in the proceedings on sentence as to how he had acquired the goods was unbelievable and that the applicant had lied in giving that evidence.

On the hearing of this application, counsel for the applicant made the following principal submissions:
That passages in his Honour's remarks on sentence showed that his Honour had improperly regarded the giving by the applicant of untruthful accounts as to how he had come into possession of the goods as a matter aggravating the objective seriousness of the offences of receiving.
That his Honour had not given sufficient weight to the pleas of guilty.
That his Honour had overlooked that the applicant had spent a discrete period in pre-sentence custody between the time of his arrest on 20 November and 15 December 1995 when he was released on bail.
That the sentences imposed by the sentencing judge were manifestly excessive.
That the sentencing judge had not taken into account that having regard to the total amount of money involved, the offences of receiving could have been dealt with summarily in the Local Court.

I will deal with each of these submissions in turn.

In one part in his Honour's remarks on sentence his Honour said:- "I suspect that the prisoner has been giving evasive and prevaricating answers in his answers to police and in the witness box to protect himself from avoiding revealing the real source of the stolen property. He has, in my view, lied to this Court regarding the acquisition by him of the stolen goods. His version in the witness box is inconsistent, incredible and does not have the ring of truth. It differs markedly on important aspects and differs from the version given by him to police in the record of interview" 
A little later in his remarks on sentence his Honour said:- "Hence the objective factors covering these offences are that the prisoner had been under surveillance, that when spoken to by investigating police he gave an inexact account of his acquisition of that stolen property, and the property is said to be worth an overall value of $9,560. Hence the objective seriousness of this crime is that it is a case of receiving and one in circumstances where the prisoner has been evasive and not to be accepted as a witness giving a proper explanation".

In these passages in his remarks on sentence his Honour does appear to me to have regarded it as a circumstance of aggravation making the crimes of receiving objectively worse, that the appliant had not given to the police or to the Court a truthful account of how he had acquired the goods and in this respect I consider that his Honour erred.

A failure on the part of the applicant to give a truthful account as to how he had acquired the stolen goods which he had received would be relevant to what credit, if any, the applicant should in being sentenced receive for such matters as his pleas of guilty, contrition and assistance. However, any such failure was not relevant to the objective seriousness of the crimes of receiving. If the applicant had not pleaded guilty but had stood trial and had been found guilty, a sentencing judge would not have been entitled to regard the applicant's conduct in defending the charges and in giving an untrue, or at least a prevaricating, account of how he had acquired the goods, as aggravating the objective seriousness of the offences. See for example R v
Ryan (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 18 July 1990) at pages 4 and 5 per 
Hunt J.
I would not infer that his Honour overlooked that the applicant had pleaded guilty to all three offences. However, the fact that he had pleaded guilty will be a matter to be taken into account in determining whether the sentences passed by his Honour were manifestly excessive.
It would appear to be the position that his Honour in his remarks on sentence did not refer to the circumstance that the applicant had spent approximately 26 days in custody between the time of his arrest and the time when he was released on bail.
I have reached the conclusion that the sentences his Honour imposed were manifestly excessive, even allowing for the need , which his Honour stressed, to impose sentences for receiving which will operate as a general deterrent.

His Honour was sentencing the applicant for three offences of receiving, where the total value of the goods received was less than $10,000. The applicant pleaded guilty to all three offences. Although the applicant had a previous criminal history, including a conviction for receiving, that conviction had been recorded twelve years previously and had been dealt with by a recognizance, which had long since expired. The applicant had never previously been sentenced to imprisonment. The applicant had some favourable subjective circumstances, including that he had been in steady employment. The sentencing judge was not entitled to find as a circumstance aggravating the objective seriousness of the offences, as distinct from a circumstance mitigating leniency, that he had found that the applicant had given an untruthful account of how he had acquired the goods.

When regard is had to sentencing information prepared by the Judicial
Commission and to sentences imposed in some other cases of receiving, it can be seen that the sentences imposed by his Honour of 5 years 4 months, in a case having the objective and subjective features of the applicant's, exceeded the upper limit of the range of sentences within a proper exercise of his
Honour's sentencing discretion. Among the recent decisions of the Court of
Criminal Appeal which we were referred to, and which appear to me to be of some assistance, are R versus Williams (unreported 7 March 1994); R v
Lawson (unreported 15 March 1993); R versus Wawrzynik, (unreported 5 October ).
I do not accept that it is always necessary for a sentencing judge to take into account that if the history of the proceedings had been different the matter might have been dealt with summarily in the Local Court. In the leading case of R versus Sanford (Court of Criminal Appeal 7 March 1994), which appears to be unreported on this particular aspect, the Chief Judge at Common Law said at page 59 that "while it is usually appropriate to take into account that an offence could have been dealt with summarily... that is not a universal rule".
However, the fact that the present applicant's offences could have been dealt with summarily underlines that they were not especially serious cases of receiving.

I accordingly am of the opinion that leave to appeal should be granted and the appeal against sentence should be allowed. The Court is accordingly required to re-sentence.

I have already earlier in this judgment summarised the principal objective and subjective features of the case. In my opinion an appropriate total sentence on each of the three counts would be 3 years. I have given consideration to whether I should find that there were special circumstances, but I have reached the conclusion that I should not. Accordingly I propose that leave to appeal against the sentences passed by Judge Twigg on 31 May 1996 be granted, that the appeal against those sentences be allowed, that the sentences passed by Judge Twigg be quashed and that in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced on each count to a sentence of penal servitude for 3 years, consisting of a minimum term of 2 years 3 months commencing on 5 May 1996 and expiring 4
August 1998 and an additional term of 9 months, and that upon the expiration of the minimum term the applicant be released on probation subject to supervision. I have made the sentences commence from 5 May 1996 so as to allow for the discrete period of pre-sentence custody.

BELL AJ: I agree with the proposed orders and the reasons.
 * * * 
