

O'Connor versus Leaw Pty Limited - formerly known as Mac-Corp Pty Limited
Matter No 55024/98 [1998] NSWSC 637 (4 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
O'CONNOR versus LEAW PTY LIMITED - FORMERLY KNOWN AS 
MAC-CORP PTY LIMITED /98 November 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Construction List 
Name of Case: O'CONNOR versus LEAW PTY LIMITED - FORMERLY KNOWN AS MAC-CORP PTY LIMITED 
Proceedings: 55024/1998 
Date of Hearing: 30 October 1998 
Date of Judgment: 4 November 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr B A J Coles QC/Mr B Debuse 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Corrs Chambers Westgarth 
Solicitor for Defendants: Mr K J Tapsell 
Solicitors for Defendants: Watkins Tapsell 
Application for leave to appeal against an Arbitrator's Award pursuant to [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) on the ground that the Arbitrator made an error of law in failing to grant leave to amend.

Held: 
In the circumstances the asserted error did not arise out of the Award, as required by [s.38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html), but out of the arbitration: Abignano Limited versus Electricity Commission of New South Wales (1986) 3 BCL 290; Warley Pty Limited versus Adco Constructions Pty Limited (1989) 5 BCL 141; Donvito versus Diekman (Giles J - 3 March 1989 - unreported) Valoka Pty Limited versus M.J. Horner Builders Pty Limited (Brownie J - 6 March 1991 - unreported); Graham Evans & Co Pty Limited versus SPF Formwork Pty Limited (1992) 8 BCL 147; Promenade Investments Pty Limited versus State of New South Wales [(1991) 26 NSWLR 184] applied.

Assuming there was an error of law the other requirements of [s.38(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) were not satisfied.

As a matter of discretion leave to appeal should not be granted: Natoli versus Walker (Court of Appeal - 26 May 1994 - unreported).

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Present Proceedings 7 
Matters In Issue 11 
The Basis Of The Application For Leave To Appeal 13 
A Review Of The Facts 16 
The Issue 24 
An Excessive Payment 32 
Other Matters 33 
Costs 33 
Orders 34 
O'CONNOR versus LEAW PTY LIMITED - FORMERLY KNOWN AS MAC-CORP PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The disputes between the parties have a somewhat lengthy history, which, although set out in my judgment in O'Connor versus LEAW Pty Limited formerly known as Mac-Corp Pty Limited [(1997) 42 NSWLR 285], bears some repetition. On 3 June 1992, the plaintiff, Mr Lance O'Connor, as the owner, entered into a written cost-plus contract for building works with the defendant, which was then known as Mac-Corp Pty Limited and which changed its name to LEAW Pty Limited, ("LEAW"), on 5 June 1995. The contract was for the carrying out by LEAW of substantial alterations and additions, including the installation of a swimming pool, landscaping and associated works, at premises owned by Mr O'Connor at 8 Kangaroo Point Road, Kangaroo Point. The work, which was to be performed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by an architect, proceeded for some time and, by 8 March 1995, Mr O'Connor had paid
LEAW approximately $2.1m for work done, such payments having been certified by his architect.

When I considered the matter previously the dispute concerned the last two progress claims numbered 25 and 26 for $63,031 from which LEAW deducted $7,544.40, as Mr O'Connor had paid certain sub-contractors, leaving a balance allegedly owing of $55,486.60, which Mr O'Connor refused to pay. In accordance with clause 20 of the contract, LEAW served notice on him that it required the non-payment to be referred to arbitration to which Mr O'Connor agreed. Mr
O'Connor also wished to cross-claim in respect of allegedly defective work and materials.

When the contract was entered into LEAW, which started to trade as a building company in March 1991 and of which Mr David John Mackenzie, the second defendant, and his wife have been, at all material times, the directors, did not hold a builder's licence issued by the Department of Fair Trading pursuant to the Building Services [Corporation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1989154/). Mr
Mackenzie held a licence under the Builders' Licensing Act 1971. LEAW obtained a licence on 25 March 1994 and, on changing its name, a licence issued in the name of LEAW.

I have set forth in my previous judgment the agreement to which the parties came for payment, which was adhered to save in respect of progress claims 25 and 26. The work to which those claims related was carried out in March 1995 when LEAW held a licence.

The matter was referred to arbitration and I set out in my previous judgment the issues raised, which included a defence by Mr O'Connor that at the date of the entry into the contract LEAW did not hold a licence, which LEAW admitted.
LEAW pleaded that if it was found that the contract was not enforceable by it, it was entitled to the same amount "on the basis of quantum meruit and unjust enrichment".

Mr O'Connor sought to set off against the amount claimed by LEAW $90,074, being an amount allegedly required to remedy defective and incomplete work and, by a Cross-Claim, dated 28 October 1996, claimed $40,055.40 being the difference between the total amount claimed by LEAW and the total amount paid by him.

The Arbitrator, Mr B.J. O'Mara, put in place a regime for the hearing, which was to commence in June 1997. Prior to that he had a view and was, accordingly, at least technically, part heard. On 4 June 1997 Mr O'Connor applied to the Equity Division for a declaration that the appointment of the
Arbitrator was in breach of s.10 of the Building Services [Corporation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1989154/), and for an order restraining LEAW from proceeding with or acting in relation to the arbitration. In the alternative he sought leave, pursuant to [s.39](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s39.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), ("the
Act"), to argue a preliminary point of law arising in the course of the arbitration, namely whether the Arbitrator's appointment was in breach of that section.

In the previous proceedings I determined that the words of the arbitration clause were wide enough to allow LEAW to claim in the arbitration on a quantum meruit basis, and that the legislation did not demand that the arbitration be stayed. Accordingly I dissolved the interlocutory injunction and dismissed Mr
O'Connor's proceedings. This decision was not challenged.

In view of the matters Mr O'Connor has raised in the present proceedings it is necessary to consider, firstly, the pleadings before the Arbitrator. In addition to pleadings raising the issues to which I have referred, Mr
O'Connor's Cross-Claim of 25 October 1996 pleaded:- "5. At all material times both before and after execution of the contract Mac-Corp made false, misleading and deceptive representations to the cross-claimant which were likely to mislead or deceive him and were in breach of s.52 [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth).

PARTICULARS 
Before and at the time of entering into the contract Mac-Corp represented to the cross-claimant that it was the holder of a relevant licence under the Builders' Licensing Act 1971 or Building Services [Corporation Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1989154/); 
Arising out of the contract Mac-Corp represented to the cross-claimant that it was the holder of builders' licence number 76482C; 
At all material times Mac-Corp was not the holder of a relevant builders' licence." 
It was then pleaded that the representations were made in trade and commerce; that Mr O'Connor relied upon them in entering into the contract; that the works were defective and incomplete and that the cost of rectifying them was $90,074; and that there was a balance outstanding of $40,055.40. Accordingly, the same amount was claimed on this count as on the adjustment of amounts after allowing for the sum claimed in the Cross-Claim. The pleading continued:- "10. The cross-claimant claims $32,511 under s.52 [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) from Mac-Corp." 
There was an alternative claim for works and materials, which took into account all moneys paid and claimed, including the contract sum of $2,194,157 and the amount paid by Mr O'Connor of approximately $2,131,486, and which left the amount he claimed of $40,005.40. Thereafter the Arbitrator established the programme, to which I have referred, and which was not able to be pursued because of the litigation, which I determined on 1 August 1997.

To that point the matters in issue were the entitlement of LEAW to progress claims 25 and 26, Mr O'Connor's Cross-Claim for defective and incomplete workmanship and the claim under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). On 28
November 1997, the arbitration having been fixed to commence on 9 December , Mr O'Connor's solicitors informed LEAW's solicitors that he wished to amend the Cross-Claim to claim $2.131m as money paid under a mistake of fact on the basis that LEAW did not hold the requisite licence. They furnished
Amended Points of Cross-Claim, which pleaded the claim under [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) in the terms to which I have referred and which limited that claim to $40,055.40.

An alternative claim was made for the same amount based on allegedly defective workmanship and, a further alternative claim was pleaded thus:- "13. Further and alternatively the cross-claimant has paid to the cross-defendant the sum of $2,131,486 in the mistaken belief that the cross-defendant had: a builder's licence; and/or an enforceable agreement with him.
 . In the premises the sum of $2,131,486 has been received by the cross-defendant for and to the use of the cross-defendant. (Sic) . Under this alternative the cross-claimant claims the return of the sum of $2,131,486 as money had and received by the cross-defendant." 
Mr O'Connor, who had obviously been aware since at least October 1996 that
LEAW did not hold a licence, sought leave to amend conformably with this document, which application the Arbitrator refused on 9 December 1997. The
Arbitrator continued with the hearing and, on 29 April 1998, he made an
Interim Award in favour of LEAW in the sum of $63,987.24 to which interest was to be added. On 9 June 1998, after the parties had made certain submissions to him, he made a Final Award in LEAW's favour in the sum of $86,131.20, which comprised the principal sum of $63,987.24 and interest to 1 May 1998 in the sum of $22,143.96. Mr O'Connor's legal representatives made no application to the Arbitrator to amend the amount based on what is now agreed to be an error in the base figure he applied. The Arbitrator also ordered Mr O'Connor to pay his costs and expenses, which he quantified, and LEAW's costs. Thus, so far as the Arbitrator was concerned, arbitral proceedings, which had been on foot for some two years, were concluded.

Mr O'Connor seeks leave to appeal against certain aspects of this decision, the granting of which is opposed. It was not in issue that the application is governed by the provisions of s.38 of the Act. It was not suggested that the appeal was founded on any other provision.

The Present Proceedings 
On 29 May 1998 Mr O'Connor caused a Summons to be filed seeking a declaration that he paid to LEAW $2,076,000 under a mistake of law or fact; alternatively a declaration that he has suffered loss and damage in that amount by reason of the false or negligent representations or the misrepresentations of Mr
Mackenzie; judgment against LEAW and Mr Mackenzie for that amount; interest; and an order that he have leave, pursuant to s.38 of the Act, to appeal to vary or set aside the Interim Award of the Arbitrator received on 29 May 1998.
He sought a further order setting aside the Interim Award and costs.

The matter came before Hunter J on 19 June 1998. He stood it over to 24 July to enable the Summons to be served and, on 24 July 1998, he granted leave to Mr O'Connor to file an Amended Summons by 27 July 1998 to accommodate the making of the Final Award, and directed the defendants to file their Defence and Cross-Claim by 7 August 1998. His Honour also ordered Mr O'Connor to file and serve any affidavits in support of the Summons by 7 September 1998, and that any evidence in reply in support of the Cross-Claim be filed and served by 14 September 1998. He listed the matter for directions on 18 September .

In the Summary of Contentions the Amended Summons pleaded various matters leading up to the payment of $2,131,486, which it asserted was made under the mistaken belief that LEAW had a builder's licence and/or an "unenforceable" agreement with him. In these circumstances the bald assertion was made that the money was paid under a mistake of fact or law.

It was nextly pleaded that Mr Mackenzie represented to Mr O'Connor that LEAW was a licensed builder and that it was entitled to make claims for moneys pursuant to the building contract, and that each of the representations was made either falsely or with reckless indifference to the truth in that Mr
Mackenzie knew that LEAW was unlicensed. In the alternative it was pleaded that each of the representations was made negligently, and that by reason of the false or negligent representations Mr O'Connor "has suffered loss and damage in the sum of $2,076,000".

The Amended Summons went on to plead what transpired at the arbitration, including the Arbitrator's refusal to allow the amendment, and, in paragraph , the following complaints, which were not pursued, were made:- "19. The Arbitrator held that there was no evidence of defects under the building contract. In doing so, he erred in law in: holding that evidence adduced was hearsay; and there was no evidence of the defects or the costs; by not providing reasons for not accepting or holding there was no evidence in respect of the evidence of the plaintiff and his expert, Mr Daniels, in respect of the defects witnessed by them." 
On 7 August 1998 the defendants filed their Defence and a Cross-Claim. The matter came before Hunter J on 18 September 1998 when he ordered Mr O'Connor to pay the costs of the defendants for that directions hearing because of his failure to comply with the directions of 24 July 1998 to file affidavits by 7
September 1998. His Honour gave further directions and listed the matter for directions on 9 October 1998.

On 6 October 1998 two affidavits were filed on behalf of the defendants, one of their solicitor, Mrs Sonja Daley, and one of Mr Mackenzie both sworn 2
October 1998.

On 6 October 1998 the defendants took the course of filing a Notice of Motion seeking an order pursuant to Part 31 rule 2 that certain separate questions be heard and determined:- "1. Whether the plaintiff ought to have leave to appeal against the Award of Mr Barry O'Mara, Arbitrator, of 29 May 1998.
 . If the answer to 1 is in the negative or if the appeal is dismissed whether: .1 The claims against the first defendant are barred by reason of res judicata and issue estoppel; .2 The claims against the first defendant and second defendant ought to be stayed either under the Anshun principle or as an abuse of process of the Court.
 . If the answers to 2 are affirmative the Court pursuant to Part 31 rule 6 make the following orders: .1 Amended Summons dismissed with the plaintiff/cross-defendant to pay the costs of the first defendant (first cross-claimant) and second defendant (second cross-claimant).
 .2 Judgment for the first defendant (first cross-claimant) and second defendant (second cross-claimant) on the Cross-Claim with the plaintiff/cross-defendant to pay the costs of the first defendant (first cross-claimant) and second defendant (second cross-claimant)." 
On 6 October 1998 Mr O'Connor filed an affidavit, to which was exhibited, inter alia, all the pleadings, the transcript before the Arbitrator, the
Interim Award and the Award. On 9 October 1998 I ordered that pursuant to Part Rule 2 there be heard and determined, as a separate question, whether Mr
O'Connor should have leave to appeal against the Award. I gave directions for any further evidence and written submissions, and fixed the matter for hearing on 30 October 1998.

On that date Mr B.A.J. Coles of Queen's Counsel and Mr B. Debuse of Counsel appeared for Mr O'Connor, and Mr K.J. Tapsell, Solicitor, appeared on behalf of LEAW. Mr Coles sought leave to file a Second Amended Summons, which was not opposed, adding as an asserted error on the part of the Arbitrator, that he had awarded an amount in excess of that claimed by LEAW in the arbitration.

All the affidavit material to which I have referred, other than the affidavit of Ms Daly, was tendered without objection and there was no application to cross-examine any deponent.

Matters In Issue 
Mr Coles submitted that there were two errors, which justified the granting of leave to appeal. He did not seek to argue that any other errors pleaded were the subject of the application for leave to appeal. Firstly, he submitted that the Arbitrator erred in refusing to grant Mr O'Connor leave to rely on the cause of action pleaded in paragraphs 13, 14 and 15 of the Amended Cross-Claim of which, as I have observed, notice was first given on 28 November 1997, some ten days before the further hearing of the arbitration was due to commence on December 1997. It was not in issue that Mr O'Connor required leave and, prima facie, the submission involved nothing more than a consideration, if it is appropriate to give consideration to such a matter on an application for leave to appeal pursuant to s.38 of the Act, of the question whether the
Arbitrator's discretion had miscarried in failing to grant leave.

However, no doubt with a view to seeking to make the submission more attractive Mr Coles submitted that the error stemmed from a misapprehension by the Arbitrator of the issue to be raised, which involved, at least in part, where the onus of proof lay, (assuming that Mr O'Connor proved that the payments had been made pursuant to a mistake), of establishing that the refund of the amount of $2,131,486 would be unjust. It was submitted by Mr Coles that once Mr O'Connor established that the payments had been made under a mistake, the onus shifted to LEAW to establish that the amount paid to it, which was certified in the first twenty four progress certificates by Mr O'Connor's architect, should not be repaid. I hasten to add that it was not suggested by
Mr Coles that the full amount should be repaid. Any such submission would have been untenable because Mr O'Connor had the benefit of the work and materials supplied by LEAW. Mr Coles' submission was that the cause of action required the Arbitrator to go back through all the work which had been done to determine whether LEAW was entitled to the sum it had been paid and, to the extent that the Arbitrator found that any overpayments had been made, he was obliged to set them off against any amount to which he found LEAW was entitled arising from the already pleaded issues, i.e. the extent of LEAW's entitlement to payments pursuant to Progress Certificates 25 and 26, and the extent to which Mr O'Connor was entitled to succeed on his cross-claim.

One may be forgiven for thinking, at least prima facie, that as the payments made pursuant to the first twenty four certificates were certified by Mr
O'Connor's architect, and that as the issues before the Arbitrator included not only any further payments to be made by Mr O'Connor, but also his entitlement to succeed on his cross-claim for allegedly defective work and materials, the Arbitrator's decision, without being concerned about the further cause of action sought to be pleaded, would adjust the amounts between the parties. However, Mr Coles insisted that Mr O'Connor was entitled to have all the work carried out by LEAW, notwithstanding its certification, reassessed by the Arbitrator. He submitted, further, that the decision of the
High Court in David Securities Pty Limited & Ors versus Commonwealth Bank of
Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 353] placed the onus of proving the entitlement, once it was established by Mr O'Connor that there was a payment pursuant to mistake, upon
LEAW. This may, or may not be, having regard to the particular facts of the case, correct. The detailed analysis of this submission tended to obscure the matter which the Arbitrator had decided and about which Mr O'Connor was really complaining, namely his refusal to grant leave to amend.

The Basis Of The Application For Leave To Appeal 
It is nextly important to keep steadfastly in mind that Mr Coles maintained that the application for leave to appeal was brought under s.38. He did not call in aid any other provision of the Act, e.g. s.42(1). He submitted that pursuant to s.38(2) the appeal lay on a question of law, which arose out of the Award, and that whilst there was no reference to the refusal to grant leave to amend in the Award, the error, none-the-less, arose out of the Award because the Arbitrator had refused to grant leave and one could not confine considerations of error of law, necessarily, to matters which appeared in the
Award. The basic thrust of the submission was that if the Arbitrator omitted material matter from the Award it would be quite unjust, if the omission of that material amounted to an error of law, for a party not to be able to challenge the Award by reference to the matters in issue, the evidence before the Arbitrator, and what transpired at the arbitration. In this regard, as I understand it, Mr Coles relied on such decisions as Abignano Limited v
Electricity Commission of New South Wales (1986) 3 BCL 290; Warley Pty
Limited versus Adco Constructions Pty Limited (1989) 5 BCL 141; Donvito v
Diekman (Giles J - 3 March 1989 - unreported); Valoka Pty Limited versus M.J.
Horner Builders Pty Limited (Brownie J - 6 March 1991 - unreported);
Graham Evans & Co Pty Limited versus SPF Formwork Pty Limited (1992) 8 BCL ; Promenade Investments Pty Limited versus State of New South Wales [(1991) NSWLR 184]; Update Constructions Pty Limited versus Rozelle Child Care
Centre Limited (1991) 7 BCL 122; and Renard Constructions (NE) Pty Limited v Minister for Public Works [(1992) 26 NSWLR 234.] 
It seems to me that these authorities make it permissible for the Court to consider material not in the Award in circumstances where the submission is that whilst the error of law does not appear to arise out of the Award, because it was not a matter to which the Arbitrator referred in the Award, none-the-less material extraneous to the Award, to which reference has not been made in it, will show that that which appears in the Award is, or is arguably, erroneous in point of law. In those circumstances it is permissible to seek to show that the question of law arises out of the Award, rather than "out of the arbitration". However, in the present case, there was no need for the Arbitrator to refer in the Award to his refusal to grant leave. That refusal arose "out of the arbitration", not "out of the Award". The refusal did not impact on the correctness in point of law of the decision in the
Award, which dealt only with the issues the Arbitrator allowed to be arbitrated. In my opinion, even assuming that the refusal to grant leave was an error of law, it did not arise out of the Award, but out of the arbitration. For that reason alone no application for leave to appeal is available.

However, lest that conclusion is wrong I shall consider the matter on the basis that the alleged error arose "out of the Award". Mr Coles' submission was that Mr O'Connor was entitled to a grant of leave to appeal pursuant to s.38(5)(b)(ii):- "The Supreme Court shall not grant leave under sub-section (4)(b) unless it considers that: having regard to all the circumstances, the determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement; and there is: ...; or strong evidence that the arbitrator or umpire made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add, or may be likely to add, substantially to the certainty of commercial law." 
As I have said, it is, in my opinion, necessary to keep firmly in mind that the matter about which Mr O'Connor was complaining was the refusal by the
Arbitrator to grant him leave to amend. It was not, in my opinion, and could not be said to be, a complaint that the Arbitrator had decided that leave to amend should not be granted because the onus of proving the unjust enrichment lay on Mr O'Connor, rather than LEAW. That was never a matter the Arbitrator had to consider because he did not allow Mr O'Connor to bring forward that claim. Nor did he refuse to allow Mr O'Connor to bring forward that claim because it was one bound to fail and, therefore, it would be futile. As will appear, the Arbitrator made some comments which may indicate that he had formed a prima facie view that the onus lay on Mr O'Connor to prove that he had not been unjustly enriched. However, that was irrelevant because the
Arbitrator never granted leave to bring the further claim, which would have been the stage at which the issue of the onus of proof would have been available for argument. Further, as I have noted, Mr O'Connor bore the onus of proving payment and the mistake on which he relied.

A Review Of The Facts 
I find it convenient to review what had happened up to the commencement of the hearing on 9 December 1997 and when the application to amend was made.
Firstly, prior to the arbitration being halted by the granting of the interlocutory injunction, it was part heard in the sense that the Arbitrator had already held a view and, but for the grant of the interlocutory injunction, he would have proceeded with the hearing. Secondly, the pleadings had been through various amendments and, as I have indicated, in bringing into account the various amounts, Mr O'Connor's pleading had referred to the figure of approximately $2m. Thirdly, the grant of the interlocutory injunction and the necessity to determine whether the arbitration could proceed, together with finding a date thereafter for that to occur, led to delay from June to
December 1997. Fourthly, Mr O'Connor had ample opportunity, prior to 9
December 1997, to bring forward the amended pleading at a time which would not have caused prejudice to LEAW in the sense that it was not ready to meet the new case when the arbitration re-convened on 9 December 1997. As will appear
Mr O'Connor was not ready to prosecute or defend that new case on that date and, as the matter was presented to the Arbitrator, if the amendment had been allowed it would have been necessary for him to grant an adjournment.

It was not in issue before the Arbitrator that if the amendment was allowed prejudice would be caused to LEAW. It was not suggested to the Arbitrator, as it was to me, that that prejudice could have been alleviated by hearing the matters before the Arbitrator and standing over the further matter to be heard at some time in the future. Had that suggestion been made to the Arbitrator it would have been necessary for him to consider the desirability or, perhaps more accurately, the undesirability of fragmenting the hearing, particularly where it was conceded by Mr Coles that on the case as pleaded in the proposed
Amended Cross-Claim Mr O'Connor would have had to give evidence of payment and mistake. This would have made him susceptible to cross-examination on the issue of unjust enrichment at an early stage wherever the onus may have laid.

It was also suggested by Mr Coles that the prejudice could have been overcome by the Arbitrator's refusing to stay any Award he made on the issues then before him, notwithstanding that there was this further issue outstanding.
That submission was never made to the Arbitrator. Finally, it was submitted by
Mr Coles that any prejudice could be overcome by an award of costs. The history, which I have outlined already, shows that LEAW had been seeking to recover quite substantial sums from Mr O'Connor for a lengthy period. An order for costs may be, in some cases, sufficient to remove the prejudice. But, prima facie, in the present case LEAW was seeking to recover moneys it had expended in carrying out work and furnishing materials of which Mr O'Connor had the benefit. The lifeblood of any commercial entity is the receipt of income it has earned, and being kept out of money, which provides the cash flow, is frequently not overcome either by an award of costs or by an order that interest be paid. Businesses depend on cash flow to meet their trade debts. This latter aspect cannot be put too highly, but however large or small the business may be I consider that it is a matter the Court is entitled to take into account when weighing arguments that the payment of costs and orders for interest will sufficiently overcome prejudice. In any event no offer was made before the Arbitrator that Mr O'Connor would pay the costs. All that was said was that instructions would be sought.

Mr Tapsell opposed the application to amend, all the submissions in relation to which were recorded, on the basis that the case previously pleaded, and further confirmed in correspondence, was that the matters in issue involved
Progress Claims 25 and 26 and the cross-claim in relation to allegedly defective work and materials. He said:- "That has been the whole basis on which we have run this case." 
Mr Debuse said that he could not dispute that that was a fair reading of the correspondence, nor that it was a conclusion to which Mr Tapsell was entitled to come on the basis of it, and:- "I certainly wouldn't dispute that in preparing for the case he has asked a question which may have been unambiguously answered, so I think that it is something where he could have certainly come to that conclusion." 
Mr Debuse continued:- "It is not, however, clear from the pleadings that that is in fact the position that is being adopted because the pleadings put in issue, simply say that the money isn't owing and that the contract is unenforceable. What I say obviously flows from that, that they had to prove the value of the work. But Mr Tapsell quite reasonably says, well, I asked what it was that was being required to be proved and I got a response which I read as meaning that 25 and 26 is in issue.

However, the question that is asked is a bit ambiguous because it isn't suggesting or offering to prove the whole of the claim. If you go to Mr Tapsell's letter he is asking about claims 25 and 26 but he hasn't made the corollary of it. I appreciate that he might have understood it that way though, that I don't have to prove the balance of it, therefore I don't have to prove the balance of the claim. Certainly it seems to me that there may have been a missing of minds in respect to what each party was asking and responding to." (My emphasis.) 
In my opinion there was no such thing. The whole purpose of Mr Tapsell's correspondence was to clarify the issue and, as Mr Debuse first put it, he was entitled to assume from unambiguous correspondence what was in issue. The
Arbitrator made it clear that he had the same opinion:- "I will say this, in all my contact with the matter, and at the preliminary conference, I was made aware that that is what the dispute related to, the value of progress of 25 and 26. I was made aware that the challenge would be pursuant to the Builders Licensing Act and for you to come in and attempt to amend the claim, it is my initial opinion that it doesn't mirror the understanding of the other side." 
Mr Debuse replied:- "I appreciate that, and I appreciate there is some basis for the other side having a different understanding to us." 
The Arbitrator said:- "Can I also say, I am concerned at the amount of money we are spending, what it costs, over the amount of money in dispute. I cannot do anything about that, the parties wish to pursue it, but I just draw that item to your attention as well." 
There was further argument and, at Tp.21, the Arbitrator made the very valid point that he would have thought the matters in dispute should have been resolved at a second preliminary conference. Mr Debuse said he appreciated that, but it had not occurred. The Arbitrator asked whether he wished to say anything further before he ruled on the amendment to the cross-claim. Mr
Debuse said, Tp.22:- "Only this, that we say there have been a number of things, there has been an amendment, the defendant to the cross-claim should have been on notice that it would be obliged to prove the whole of its case, though I appreciate from the correspondence that the claimant has tendered that it argues that - I appreciate its point - but it wasn't. We say that it is an amendment that is important, for this reason, that the context in which all of this arises of a claim of a building of a house where $2.1m has been paid for the building of the house in circumstances where there was no contractual obligation to do so, and there is now a falling out between the builder and the proprietor at the end, where there have been significant changes in the costs and the amounts expended by the proprietor, make it a claim that has a legitimate justification, and I reject my friend's argument that it is futile.

It may be one that it is prejudicial, and if you were against me, or it was a condition of the amendment that we would be required to pay costs of any adjournment, then that may be a situation that I would have to get instructions on. But it is a legitimate claim in the sense that someone has paid an extraordinary amount of money for a house .." (My emphasis.) 
The Arbitrator sought further elucidation and, at Tp.23, he said:- "But at the moment I have no evidence or I don't have any indication from you, only a claim that the amount of money paid for the work done up to certificate 24 was unjust. I don't have any documentation coming in by way of a statement saying `And here is where the unjust charges were made'. All I have is an overall statement from you that we are no longer happy with it.

MR DEBUSE: I appreciate that." 
It is necessary to note that immediately before the Arbitrator made those comments Mr Debuse had made a submission based on a case he simply described as "David Securities". He said the High Court said that withholding tax had to be paid back. There was no suggestion that a copy of that decision was ever provided to the Arbitrator, let alone was any specific reference made to it or any structured submissions propounded in relation to it. Mr Debuse then made reference to "Westpac versus ANZ" without apparently producing the authority to the Arbitrator, citing where the authority may be found or presenting any arguments based on it and, he continued:- ".. so what we would say, so that you appreciate our point, is that we are entitled to $2.131m back subject to an accounting of the benefit received by us by the claimant." 
The last few words I have quoted should have read "subject to an accounting of the benefit received by us from the claimant".

The Arbitrator then asked Mr Debuse whether he was prepared to run that case "now", to which he replied that it was "the claimant's case". The Arbitrator suggested that as Mr Debuse was saying he wanted that amount repaid less the amount of any benefit received it was up to his client to provide evidence to show what benefit he had received, to which Mr Debuse replied:- "That isn't evidence we need to adduce. It would be adduced against us, we say, by the claimant. There is a difficulty created by those letters. That is the point my friend is making. He has always assumed he doesn't have to run that case. For reasons that I've taken you to, the parties were missing or not connecting as to the issue, certainly since I've been in the case.

THE ARBITRATOR: You don't think there is a possibility that you may have put a different connotation on the correspondence between Mr Tapsell and Mr Seaton? 
MR DEBUSE: That's possible. I've only seen it this morning, so I'm putting on the connotation that occurs. Because of my appreciation of the legal issues that I am prepared to argue, I wouldn't have amended the claim and I would have told Mr Tapsell if I'd been aware that there was going to be a mistake about it. I am not coming here for the purpose of trying to surprise him. I am coming here for the purpose of saying this something you should have always been ready to prove. He has shown by that correspondence, for understandable reasons, he wasn't prepared to prove it." (My emphasis.) 
To some extent what Mr Debuse was saying was not accurate. I do not say that critically of him but, as Mr Coles acknowledged, the onus was on Mr O'Connor to at least prove the payment and mistake. Mr Debuse did not advert to that matter. He conceded, in effect, and it was agreed by Mr Coles before me that he had conceded, that in the light of the correspondence there would be prejudice.

The Arbitrator asked Mr Tapsell if he wished to say anything, to which he replied that the cross-claim did not disclose a reasonable cause of action:- ".. because his claim is for $2m. What his real claim is is $2m less than (sic) the value he has received." 
The Arbitrator said he understood that and that was the basis of his question to Mr Debuse, and Mr Tapsell continued:- "That is part of his cause of action. This isn't the defence we have to his cause of action; it is part of it. If it is not pleaded it should be struck out immediately. Let's assume he says, `All right, I'll change this'. Then we get to the question of prejudice. He can't prove it because he has no statement. He has no experts' reports and neither do we. We get back to the same thing. For those reasons, Mr Arbitrator, you should dismiss the application immediately." 
That is what the Arbitrator did by saying that he would strike out paragraphs and 10 of the Defence to the Second Amended Points of Claim, and paragraphs , 14, 15 and 16(a) of the Amended Cross-Claim. It was accepted before me that the reference to striking out was equivalent to a refusal of grant of leave, rather than a striking out as failing to disclose any reasonable cause of action.

It is quite clear that the matter as presented to the Arbitrator was that LEAW had come to the arbitration to fight the issues to which I have referred and to which Mr Tapsell made reference to the Arbitrator, and that neither party was ready to proceed on the Amended Cross-Claim. As I have observed there was no suggestion to the Arbitrator that the prejudice, for which Mr Tapsell clearly contended, could be cured in the ways Mr Coles submitted to me.

The Issue 
Once the matters to which I have referred are appreciated it will be seen that the real complaint of Mr O'Connor was that he was refused leave to amend. It was not suggested that the Arbitrator did not have a discretion to refuse to grant such leave and, in my opinion, on a fair reading of what transpired before him he refused to do so because he considered that there was being raised an issue, which had not previously been raised, which was contrary to the issue which was previously raised and specified, and which would cause prejudice. I appreciate he did not say any of those matters directly, but rather they emerged in the course of the submissions which were made to him.
The reasons for the granting or refusing of applications are frequently gleaned from the submissions and the Court's questioning, rather than a formal judgment.

The first requirement, accordingly, is to identify the issue of law. It is clear that a Court, having power to hear an appeal from another Court, may, in certain limited circumstances, determine that the way in which a discretion was exercised, particularly one essentially relating to a matter of practice and procedure, should be reversed. However, the authorities make it clear that the substitution by a supervising Court of that Court's own discretion will be sparingly utilised: House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499]; In re the Will of F.B. Gilbert Deceased <case>; [(1946) 46 SR 318];
The State of Queensland & Anor versus JL Holdings Pty Limited <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 146.] 
As was said in House versus The King at p.505:- "It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the Judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate Court may exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary Judge reached the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate Court may infer that in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law reposes in the Court at first instance. In such a case, although the nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on the ground that a substantial wrong has in fact occurred." 
Similarly in JL Holdings, which was a case concerned with a refusal to grant leave to amend, the High Court reaffirmed the right of the Court to intervene if it considered that there had been a failure to exercise the discretion properly.

At p.155 Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ, in their joint judgment, said:- "In our view, the matters referred to by the primary Judge were insufficient to justify her Honour's refusal of the application by the applicants to amend their defence and nothing has been made to appear before us which would otherwise support that refusal. Justice is the paramount consideration in determining an application such as the one in question. Save in so far as costs may be awarded against the party seeking the amendment, such an application is not the occasion for the punishment of a party for its mistake or for its delay in making the application." 
It must be borne in mind that that was an application to amend made many months before it was likely that the matter would be heard and in circumstances where it was arguable that the subject matter, sought to be raised by the amendment, was pleaded already. It was certainly not an application to amend, which would have caused a hearing, which had been fixed for some time and in relation to which an application could have been made to the Arbitrator at an earlier point of time, to be adjourned.

Kirby J dealt with the relevant principles at length. At pp.170-171 his Honour said:- "6. Considerations which tend to argue against the grant of an indulgence include many which are the counterparts of the foregoing. Thus, the failure of a party to offer anything by way of explanation for a late application has been held relevant. So has the blamelessness of the resisting party and the extent to which the applicant is at fault in its breach of clear directions. Courts now take into account the strain which litigation may place upon those involved and the natural desire of most litigants to be freed, as quickly as possible, from the anxiety, distraction and disruption which litigation causes. In my view this is not a consideration limited to litigation by natural persons or involving private citizens. Because justice cannot be measured solely in monetary terms, costs orders are not necessarily an adequate balm to the other party. Thus the proximity of the hearing is clearly a most important consideration. An opposing party is entitled to have taken into account the consequences of an indulgence, especially where it would cause disarray at the last minute to its preparation at the trial. Similarly, the length of time that the proceedings have been pending before the application is made will often be a relevant consideration. The longer the time, the more reasonable it may be to expect that the parties, or their lawyers, should have early appreciated, and raised, the point in issue. If a consequence of the indulgence is truly a necessity to postpone a trial date, this will be a most important consideration. Its importance increases with the congestion of Court lists and the difficulty, particularly in the case of a lengthy trial, of securing early replacement dates. The extent to which a new issue would give rise to a substantially new case in reply is also relevant." 
Most of these matters are applicable to the present case and, on a consideration of them, they favour, in my opinion, the view adopted by the
Arbitrator.

I have now reviewed the matter in issue, the factual matters relevant to it, and the principles of law which I understand to be applicable. If it is permissible for me to review the Arbitrator's decision I would not be satisfied that his decision contained any error in the way in which he exercised his discretion, such as to justify intervention by me. As I have pointed out many of the ways in which the prejudice to LEAW may have been able to be overcome, which were suggested by Mr Coles, were never put to the
Arbitrator and, in any event, I am not satisfied that they would have overcome the prejudice.

However, the question remains whether the Arbitrator's decision was an error of law. The requirements that there should be an error of law have been heavily emphasised by the Court of Appeal: Promenade Investments Pty Limited v The State of New South Wales [(1992) 26 NSWLR 203] and
Natoli versus Walker (Court of Appeal - 26 May 1994 - unreported), and in many other cases. An applicant must establish that. The policy of the Act is to prevent appeals where an issue of law cannot be demonstrated. In my opinion, the decision to refuse to grant leave to amend, at least in the circumstances of this case, was not an error of law. It was a discretionary decision, which involved a consideration of various factual matters relevant to the grant of leave to amend, and, accordingly, it required the Arbitrator to evaluate those factual considerations. The Arbitrator relied on no assertion which showed that he so misunderstood the circumstances in which it is appropriate to grant or refuse an application for leave to amend that he made an error, which could be characterised as one of law.

However, lest others think this is not correct, I shall express my views on the further requirements of the section upon which Mr O'Connor relied. I am not satisfied that the requirements of sub-s.(5)(a) have been made out. The evidence does not establish that there would be any substantial affectation of the rights of the parties if Mr O'Connor was permitted to run this part of the
Amended Cross-Claim. For all the reasons I have sought to give the only disputed figures, until the last moment, were those on which the Arbitrator has now made findings. Even assuming that Mr O'Connor could prove that he paid the money under a mistake it would still be necessary for him to overcome, at some stage in the evidentiary material, that his architect had certified payment of the first twenty four progress certificates and that he had the benefit of the house. No attempt was made to quantify the extent of any likely loss. Mr Coles contented himself by saying that if Mr O'Connor had been allowed to pursue the Amended Cross-Claim he may have had a set-off approximating the amount the Arbitrator found he was liable to pay. But on this application the onus is on the applicant to show a substantial affectation of rights. This Mr O'Connor failed to do.

Nextly, sub-s.(5)(b)(ii) requires "strong evidence" of an error of law. In my opinion, when one reviews all the facts, there could be no suggestion that there was "strong evidence". It will be appreciated that I am making these comments on the basis that the view is taken that the refusal to grant leave to amend can be "an error of law". On that assumption, there was strong evidence that the Arbitrator was right rather than of an error of law.

Finally, the determination of this Court must be such as to add or be likely to add "substantially to the certainty of commercial law". In my opinion that requirement has not been satisfied. Every case must depend on its own particular circumstances and, once again on the assumption that the refusal to grant leave to amend is an error of law, a contrary determination to that to which the Arbitrator came would do nothing more than say that in the particular circumstances of this case such leave should have been granted.
Every case will turn on its own particular facts and circumstances and no contrary decision to that of the Arbitrator will provide any certainty in this area of discourse for future cases.

Mr Coles appreciated the difficulty with which this part of the sub-section confronted him. His submission was that the certainty would come about from a finding that the onus of proof, in the present circumstances, to prove unjustness, rested on LEAW rather than Mr O'Connor and that in so far as the
Arbitrator had come to a contrary conclusion he should be corrected and, in future cases, this would have the desired statutory effect. In my opinion, that is not the true question, because I do not believe that the Arbitrator made any decision, let alone any error of law, in relation to where the onus of proof lay. He never reached that point because he did not grant leave.
However, even if that be wrong, the High Court has determined where the onus of proof lies. Mr Coles has submitted that it is, in the circumstances of this case, upon LEAW. Mr Tapsell does not accept that. It does not matter that the parties disagree about that. All courts and tribunals are bound by that decision and must apply it to the facts before them. No pronouncement by me will cause it to have any different effect. This only points up the fact that if, contrary to my opinion, the Arbitrator made an error of law, it was not one which related to the onus point.

I would only add that it is not as clear, as Mr Coles suggested to me, that the onus was on LEAW to prove its entitlement to the first twenty four payments by going back through all the work done and all the materials supplied, which justified that. At p.379 in Davids Securities their
Honours said:- "The respondent's submission that the appellants must independently prove `unjustness' over and above the mistake cannot therefore be sustained. The fact that the payment has been caused by a mistake is sufficient to give rise to a prima facie obligation on the part of the respondent to make restitution. Before that prima facie liability is displaced, the respondent must point to circumstances which the law recognises would make an order for restitution unjust. There can be no restitution in such circumstances because the law will not provide for recovery except when the unjust enrichment is unjust. It follows that the recipient of a payment, which is sought to be recovered on the ground of unjust enrichment, is entitled to raise by way of answer any matter or circumstance which shows that his or her receipt (or retention) of the payment is not unjust." 
This raises the question as to what, in a particular circumstance, will be sufficient. For example in the present case it may have been sufficient to prove that the house renovations had been carried out and that payments pursuant to the certificates had been made. It may be that that would have raised by way of answer a matter or circumstance, which showed that LEAW's receipt and retention of the payment were not unjust, and this may have been recognised by reference to the "defence" of "valuable consideration": p.380.

The final matter to which I must have regard is whether, in the exercise of my discretion, this would have been an appropriate case in which, in the exercise of my discretion, to grant leave to appeal: per Mahoney JA in Natoli v
Walker. In my opinion all the matters to which I have referred, and in particular the fact that the financial adjustments between the parties would, in all probability, be worked out by the Arbitrator's determination of the issues which he decided, lead me to the conclusion that, as a matter of discretion, this is not an appropriate matter in which to grant leave to appeal. The application, in so far as it deals with the Arbitrator's refusal to grant leave to amend, is, accordingly, refused.

An Excessive Payment 
Mr Coles submitted secondly that the amount the Arbitrator had awarded was excessive, in that it exceeded the amount claimed. Mr Tapsell frankly conceded that this was so and that the amount to which his client was entitled, based on the reasoning of the Arbitrator and the concession made by him at the hearing before the Arbitrator, was $82,628.41. He submitted, however, that as the excessive amount had been stated in the Interim Award and as the parties had had further debate before the Arbitrator before the Final Award was made, the Court should not interfere with the amount, notwithstanding his concession that it was excessive. He submitted that as a matter of discretion the Court should take the view that there had been ample opportunity for Mr O'Connor to correct the matter at an earlier stage. I have a great deal of sympathy for this submission, but in the light of the concession I think that the interests of justice demand that the Award be corrected pursuant to s.30, it not being disputed that the conditions precedent for doing so have been established. I do not propose to deal with this matter as an error of law, because I am by no means satisfied that it was and, even if it was, that the other requirements of s.38 of the Act were met. However, acting on the various concessions, I propose to deal with it pursuant to s.30 and to order that in lieu of the amount ordered by the Arbitrator in his Award of 9 June 1998 there be substituted the amount of $82,628.41 and that the Award of the Arbitrator dated 9 June 1998 be corrected accordingly.

Other Matters 
Although other asserted errors of law were raised in the Summons they were not pressed. I have dealt with the only two matters which were.

Costs 
Mr O'Connor had a measure of success by having the Award corrected in the manner to which I have referred. By far the greater part of the hearing was taken up with the question as to whether the Arbitrator should have granted leave to amend and, as Mr Tapsell pointed out, other errors of law were raised, but not pressed. In my opinion, the appropriate order for costs is that Mr O'Connor pay ninety per cent of LEAW's costs of the proceedings to date, including the determination of the separate issue. I was invited by the parties to make such an assessment in an attempt to reduce the ambit for further dispute between them. The assessment I have made is based upon the amount of time which was devoted to the two matters and Mr Tapsell's ready concession, subject only to the reservation with which I have dealt.

Orders
I refuse leave to appeal against the Interim Award dated 24 April 1998 and the Award dated 9 June 1998.
Pursuant to [s.30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s30.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) I order that the Award be corrected by substituting for the amounts stated in paragraphs 1 and 2 thereof as being payable by Mr O'Connor to LEAW the sum of $82,628.41.
I order Mr O'Connor to pay ninety per cent of LEAW's costs of the proceedings to date and of the determination of the separate question.
I stand the matter over until Friday, 13 November 1998 for further directions.
 * * * 
