

Regina versus Harrison Matter No Cca 60169/97 [1998] NSWSC 133 (24 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 
REGINA versus MAXWELL CHARLES HARRISON /97 April 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Wood CJ at CL, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus Maxwell Charles HARRISON 
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL - FRESH EVIDENCE - appellant convicted of fire-bombing a dwelling house - appeals on ground of fresh scientific evidence - HELD - the evidence was not fresh as it was reasonably available at the time of the trial and further, upon examination, it did not materially assist the case of the appellant. 
Gallagher versus The Queen <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 392], Mickelberg versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259] applied.

SENTENCING - sentence involving minimum term of 3 years and additional term of 1 year and 10 months held not excessive. 
ORDER Appeal against conviction dismissed.  Leave to appeal against sentence granted; appeal dismissed.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Following a trial before his Honour Judge Downs QC and a jury in the District Court at Bega the appellant was convicted of the offence of maliciously damaging a dwelling house with intent to endanger the lives of the occupants of the dwelling house. 
The appellant was sentenced to penal servitude involving a minimum term of three years and an additional term of one year and ten months. He appeals against his conviction and seeks leave to appeal against the sentence.

The alleged offence took place on 1 March 1996. According to the Crown case, it arose out of a feud within the Wallaga Lake Aboriginal Community.

In March 1996 members of the Campbell family were living at Coolagolite Road,
Cobargo, in a house known as "Foxhill". Richard Campbell was living at the house with his wife and their five children. In the backyard there was a bus which provided extra accommodation for some relatives. Two motor vehicles were parked on the nature strip between the fence and the road. One was a derelict brown Holden Commodore and the other was a Toyota Hi-Lux truck.

According to the Campbells, at about 2.00am on 1 March 1996 four men, including the appellant, drove to the Campbells' house in a motor vehicle recognised as belonging to the appellant's father. The appellant was well known to the Campbells. The people allegedly involved in the incident were members of a small community, and a number were related to one another.

According to the Campbells, the men who arrived at Foxhill threw a number of molotov cocktails. One of the motor vehicles parked outside the premises was set alight, and some grass in the area was burned. Eight of the molotov cocktails were thrown in the direction of the house, but only one of them ended up inside the house. It damaged a bedroom window and landed in the bedroom.

The molotov cocktails consisted of beer bottles partly filled with petrol, and capped, each with a wick running through a hole in the cap. Most of the wicks were made from material later described as appearing to have come from an old singlet.

Members of the Campbell family gave evidence of recognising, by sight and by voice, the appellant and others in his group, and of hearing encouragement to "burn" the occupants of Foxhill. After the bottles were thrown, the men drove off in a hurry.

It was not the Crown case that it could be proved that the appellant himself actually threw any of the bottles. He was charged on the basis that he was an active participant in the venture. Nothing turns on that for the present appeal.

The first police officer on the scene was Senior Constable Hinds, who arrived at Foxhill at about 2.15am on 1 March 1996. He found a number of bottles of the kind described above around the house, and some on the roof. He also found one inside the bedroom of the house. He described it as having a discoloured wick.

There was unchallenged evidence that one of the bottles recovered from the scene bore a fingerprint of the appellant.

Detective Sergeant Pearson arrived at Foxhill at 9.45am on 1 March 1996. He observed a broken beer bottle near the remains of a fire in the Toyota Hi-Lux truck, and saw that the broken bottle was heavily stained with soot. There were pieces of broken glass on the floor of the vehicle, and he formed the opinion that the fire was caused by a molotov cocktail. He also observed two beer bottles near the derelict vehicle and he saw that grass surrounding both bottles was burnt. The bottles smelled of petrol. The lids were intact, and there was smoke and soot staining around the necks of both bottles. There was also a cut in the top of both lids, where the remains of burnt cloth wicks had protruded. These, he said, were molotov cocktails.

Sergeant Pearson also gave evidence of having been shown, at the Bermagui
Police Station, by Senior Constable Hinds, a further eight beer bottles which had been located inside the perimeter of the Foxhill premises. One of them had been found in the house itself; the others were in the surrounding yard or on the roof. Seven of the bottles had cloth wicks protruding from their caps, and contained petrol. Sergeant Pearson said that only one of the wicks appeared to have been lit. He was referring to what appeared to the naked eye. He carried out no microscopic examination.

A number of the residents of Foxhill said that they recognised the appellant as one of the men involved in the fire bombing, either by his appearance or by his voice. Richard Campbell, who had known the appellant for about twenty-five years, said that he recognised the shape of his body. Mrs Marilyn Campbell said that she recognised the voice of the appellant. She had known the appellant for many years, and they had been to school together. Lewis Campbell said that he heard the voice of the appellant amongst the people who were fire bombing the house. He also had been to the same school as the appellant, and they had played football together. Neil Pepper said that he saw the appellant driving the car which arrived at Foxhill. Matthew Hood said that he saw the car arrive and recognised it as belonging to the appellant's father. He recognised the appellant as being amongst the men in the car.

The appellant was arrested on 22 March 1996. After being told that the police were investigating a fire bombing at Foxhill early on the morning of 1 March , the appellant admitted that he had been at Foxhill on the morning, in the company of two other persons whom he named. He repeated the admission in an electronically recorded interview. There was no challenge, at the trial, to the evidence that those admissions had been made. There was an attempt on the hearing of this appeal to suggest that there was something equivocal about the admissions, but, in the context in which they were made, they were quite plain.

The appellant gave no evidence at his trial.

The appellant was tried separately from some alleged co-offenders. We were informed that the reason for the separate trials was related to the admissions made by the appellant, and his naming of other people who were present with him. The co-accused had apparently made no similar admissions, and it was thought to be unfair that they should be tried together with the appellant.

It is not easy, from a reading of the trial transcript, to work out the exact nature of the defence case at the trial.

Some fairly brief questions were asked, in cross-examination, of witnesses who purported to be able to identify the appellant by sight or by voice, but, in the light of the admissions made to the police by the appellant, it is unlikely that the jury would have regarded identification as a major issue.
Indeed, the issue was not so much one of identification as of recognition. The witnesses who professed to be able to identify the appellant knew him well, over a long period of time, and the thrust of the cross-examination that they were deliberately telling lies about having seen and heard the appellant.

In the course of argument in the present appeal, it was suggested that one theory advanced on behalf of the defence at the trial was that the molotov cocktails, or at least those inside the fence at Foxhill, had been planted there by the Campbells in a malicious attempt to blame the appellant and other members of his family for conduct of which they were innocent. The jury might well have regarded this theory as implausible, bearing in mind the unchallenged evidence that a fingerprint of the appellant was found on one of the bottles thrown into the premises. If the Campbells had been sufficiently devious to manufacture a number of molotov cocktails out of some beer bottles and plant them in their own premises, they must also have acquired, for that purpose, a bottle bearing a fingerprint of the appellant.

There are two grounds of appeal against conviction, one relating to what is said to be fresh evidence, and the other relating to directions given by the trial judge on the matter of identification.

It is convenient to deal with the identification issue first.

The trial judge gave the jury a number of directions warning them of the risk of mistaken identification. As was noted above, although mistake was mentioned briefly in the course of the evidence, this was not a case in which the problem confronting the jury, on the issue of identification or recognition, was one of the kind that arises where witnesses are suggested to be honestly mistaken. The people who professed to have seen or heard the appellant amongst those involved in the fire bombing were people who knew him very well, and all claimed to be able to recognise him without any difficulty. It was not denied that they were closely acquainted with the appellant. The suggestion underlying the defence case was that, as part of a family feud, they were putting their heads together to give false evidence. Nevertheless, perhaps unnecessarily, the trial judge set out to warn the jury about the risks involved in identification evidence, including the risks of "tragic mistakes".
He told the jury to look very closely at the evidence and see whether it was reliable. He said it was dangerous to convict in cases of disputed identification where the identification in question is the only evidence.
(Here, of course, it was not the only evidence. There were admissions by the appellant of his presence at the scene. There was also the fingerprint evidence).

Having referred to the need for caution in relation to identification evidence, the learned judge then gave directions about opportunities for identification, including references to the lighting, the capacity of witnesses to see the person, the length of time for which there was an opportunity to see the person, the nature of the locality, and related matters. He reminded the jury that mistakes could result from stress. He pointed out that a number of the witnesses had indicated that they were very concerned at the dangerous situation in which they found themselves.

Later in the summing-up, in going through the evidence of individual witnesses, the judge made specific reference to details of their evidence concerning the circumstances of the identification. Later again, in summarising the arguments of counsel, he reminded the jury of some arguments that had been put by counsel as to difficulties that might have been faced by witnesses in making identification. The primary significance of those difficulties was not that they may have resulted in genuine mistakes on the part of witnesses who said they recognised the appellant, but, rather, that they were said to make it improbable that the witnesses were telling the truth.

The only complaint, or request for redirection, made by trial counsel in relation to the matter of identification was as follows. Counsel said that much of the identification evidence consisted of recognition of a body shape, or a voice, and that, in those circumstances, "a stronger direction should be given in relation to its dangerous when that is the only evidence available" .

The judge responded to that by pointing out that this was not the only evidence available. He no doubt had in mind the admissions made by the appellant and the fingerprint evidence.

No further directions were given.

The complaint that is made on the present appeal is different from the complaint made by trial counsel. What is now said is that the trial judge should have amplified his directions and warnings in relation to the risks involved in identification evidence, and that he failed to comply with the requirements of [s65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s65.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), and with the principles stated in Domican versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 173 CLR 555.] It is said in particular that the judge should have explained to the jury more fully the dangers involved in relying upon voice identification.

The reference to the matter of voice identification provides a good illustration of the difference between the way the issue has been presented on appeal, and the way it was fought at the trial. It was never put to the witnesses who professed to be able to recognise the appellant's voice that they were not telling the truth when they said that they had known him for many years, and that his was a familiar voice. What was being suggested was that they were making up a false story.

It is important to bear in mind three things. First, this was a case of alleged recognition of someone who was indisputably well known to the witnesses in question. Secondly, it was not a case in which the danger for the jury was the potentially seductive influence of the honest but mistaken evidence of a witness genuinely convinced of the accuracy of his or her identification. Thirdly, the specific request that was made to the jury by trial counsel was one that was inappropriate to the circumstances of the case, and no other relevant request was made.

The warnings and directions that are necessary concerning evidence of identification or recognition are to be considered in the light of the circumstances of the particular case. In the present case, the theme of the cross-examination of Mr and Mrs Campbell, for example, was not that they may have been mistaken in their professed recognition of the appearance and voice of the appellant, but that there was a long-standing enmity between their family and the appellant's family and that they were not to be believed in their evidence. The cross-examiner did not suggest to Mr and Mrs Campbell that they were not able to recognise the appellant's voice when they heard it. He was suggesting to them that they were lying when they said they heard it.
There was no occasion for the judge to engage in a discussion about the difficulties of voice recognition evidence.

The warnings given about identification were adequate in the circumstances of the case.

This ground of appeal has not been made out.

I turn now to the matter of fresh evidence.

Reference was made earlier to the difficulties involved in discerning, from a reading of the transcript of the evidence at the trial, the exact nature of the defence case.

There was some questioning of witnesses for the purpose of disputing Crown evidence aimed at proving that at least some of the wicks of the molotov cocktails had been lit.

To put this matter into context it is necessary to note the following matters.

There was no challenge to the evidence that a motor vehicle outside the
Foxhill premises had been set alight, and that this had apparently been caused by a molotov cocktail. Nor was there a challenge to the evidence that two molotov cocktails had been set alight in the vicinity of those motor vehicles.

The police who collected the eight bottles from within the Foxhill yard, including the one which had entered the house itself, did not keep any detailed record of which bottles were found at which location. Constable Hinds produced a rough map which showed the location of the various bottles, including the one in the bedroom but, although the individual bottles were kept and were available at the trial, it was not possible to relate them to any particular locality. It was not possible to say which of the bottles produced at the trial was the one that had gone in through the bedroom window.

The only damage that was done to the dwelling house was that caused by the bottle that had gone through the bedroom window. It was an element of the charge that the damage was done with intent to endanger the lives of the occupants of the dwelling.

An attempt was made at the trial at least to cast doubt upon the Crown's contention that the bottles thrown at the dwelling house, and, in particular, the bottle which had been thrown through the bedroom window, had been intended to cause a fire in the dwelling house. Plainly enough, there was no room for doubt that, if that had been the intention with which the bottles were thrown, then it was easy to infer intent to endanger the lives of the occupants at the dwelling. However, there was a challenge to the Crown evidence that the bottle that had gone through the bedroom window, and, for that matter, the other bottles that were thrown in the direction of the house, had had their wicks lit.

The Crown evidence on that point was as follows.

Mr Campbell gave evidence that his wife screamed after a bottle was thrown through the window and he said that he saw that it had landed near a curtain, and that the wick was smouldering. He said the wick was still lit when he first saw it, but it went out shortly after he arrived on the scene.

Mrs Campbell said that the wick was lit when the bottle hit the bedside table, but "sort of like it had burned itself out".

Senior Constable Hinds, when asked to describe the condition of the molotov cocktail he recovered from inside the bedroom, said it had a discoloured wick.

Detective Sergeant Pearson said that, of the bottles he found in and around the dwelling house, all had cloth wicks protruding from their lids, but only one of the wicks appeared to have been lit. He commented that it can be difficult to ascertain whether a wick had burned because as material burns it drops away. His observation was that only one of the bottles he saw in or around the dwelling house had been "obviously lit". He left open the possibility that others had been lit but it was not possible for him to tell with the naked eye.

It might also be observed that, over time, the colour of the wicks underwent some change. Moreover, the bottles, including the wicks, were handled by various people, and there was evidence in this appeal that burnt or charred material can drop off over time and with handling.

At the trial, no attempt was made, by either the Crown or the defence, to pursue the issue on the basis of any scientific evidence. The Crown would not necessarily have known that there would be an issue about the matter, and the cross-examination directed to the subject was brief and rather perfunctory.

The significance of the issue was explained to us, in the course of argument on the appeal, as follows. It was said that one of the theories advanced by the defence for the consideration of the jury was that, whilst the persons responsible for this attack had deliberately used molotov cocktails to set fire to a motor vehicle, they had not intended to set fire to the dwelling house, and endanger the lives of the occupants, but, rather, had merely intended to frighten them. Consistently with that, they may have thrown unlit molotov cocktails in the direction of the house before decamping.

When the time came for the trial of the alleged co-offenders, the Crown decided to bolster up its case on this issue by requesting Mr Waight, a scientific officer employed in a physical evidence laboratory conducted by a government organisation, to examine the wicks of the bottles found in and around Foxhill. He did so, in May 1997, in circumstances which he said made it difficult, or even impossible, for him to form any concluded view. However, in his report to the Crown, which was repeated in his evidence at the trial of the co-offenders, he said, that whilst he could not be absolutely certain, his examination indicated to him that it was unlikely that any of the wicks had been lit. He found no charring to the ends of the wicks, or any indication of heat damage. He gave the following evidence: "Q As I understand it, there is simply no evidence that you could determine that the wicks in Exhibit D had been lit? 
A Not from the examination I have made so far.

Q You can't, on the examination you have made exclude the possibility there may be some heat damage to it? 
A Yes I would need to have a closer look. I wasn't asked to examine those initially.

Q On balance you would say they haven't been lit? 
A I'd be surprised to find they had been, yes." 
The co-offenders were acquitted, although it is impossible to say whether that evidence had any bearing upon the acquittal.

So far as the appellant, who had by then been convicted and sentenced, was concerned, the evidence of Mr Waight prompted further forensic investigation, by experts, on behalf of both the Crown and the appellant. Ultimately, on this appeal, we had before us expert evidence of Mr Waight, and Dr Barrett, on behalf of the appellant, and Mr Royds, a forensic scientist, on behalf of the
Crown. Mr Royds is attached to the Scientific Unit of the Forensic Services
Department of the Australian Federal Police.

It is that scientific evidence which is now relied upon by the appellant as fresh evidence.

Before coming to the substance of the scientific evidence, it is appropriate to comment upon its freshness.

The molotov cocktails, including the wicks, were at all material times available for examination by the defence before and at the trial of the appellant. No steps were taken, before, during, or after the committal proceedings, to have the wicks examined on behalf of the defence. At the trial, both the Crown and counsel for the accused were content to deal with the issue by reference to the evidence of the witnesses who told what they saw after the fire bombing incident, and by reference to whatever conclusions could be drawn from observations made by visual inspection of the bottles and the wicks. It was the decision of the Crown to attempt (unsuccessfully) to introduce scientific evidence about the matter at the trial of the co-accused that raised, after the completion of the trial of the appellant, the matter of forensic examination of the wicks.

The three expert witnesses who gave evidence on this appeal made written reports, and were cross-examined. The effect of their evidence may be summarised as follows.

Mr Royds, having been informed of the evidence given by Mr Waight at the trial of the co-accused, conducted a detailed examination of the wicks. He came to the conclusion, for reasons which he explained in his report and in his oral evidence, that microscopic examination of the cotton wicks "revealed compelling evidence to support the proposition that three of (the wicks attached to bottles thrown into or at the Foxhill house) had been lit".

It is not necessary to mention his conclusions, or those of the other experts, in relation to the bottles that were outside the fence, although they were relied upon as supporting the Crown case on the present argument.

Mr Royds also conducted some experiments concerning the effect of lighting petrol-soaked cotton material of the kind of which the wicks were made. He demonstrated, for example, that if a piece of cotton were impregnated with petrol and then set alight there would be a resulting blaze, but it would not necessarily leave any residual charring on the wick, after extinguishment, of the kind that could be observed by the naked eye. He showed the court a video of an experiment, and explained the reason why no residue appeared. On the other hand, microscopic examination would reveal heat damage. It was the revelation of heat damage to three of the wicks in question in the present case which convinced him that there was "compelling evidence" that they had been lit.

It was to that specific conclusion of Mr Royds that Mr Waight and Dr Barrett responded. They did not deny that heat damage had been shown.

The response of Dr Barrett was as follows: "I believe the evidence supporting previous ignition of these wicks is at best inconclusive and certainly not compelling." 
The response of Mr Waight was: "I would regard all of the above evidence as being inconclusive rather than significant." 
All of the witnesses went into some detail as to the reasons for their conclusions. Mr Royds was of the opinion that his examination of the wicks in the bottles that had been thrown over the fence and into Foxhill (that is to say, into the bedroom or onto the roof or into the yard) strongly supported the Crown contention that at least in three cases the wicks had been lit. Dr
Barrett and Mr Waight, on the other hand, said that the evidence resulting from his examinations and tests was inconclusive.

Assuming that evidence to have been available at the trial, where would it have left the defence case? 
The expert examinations of the wicks were carried out over a period beginning in May 1997 (more than a year after the incident in question) and ending in
February 1998. Having regard to the time that had elapsed since the incident, the degree of handling of the bottles and the wicks that had taken place, including handling at the trial, and the difficulties involved in determining from unaided visual examination whether material previously impregnated with petrol had once been lit, little assistance was to be gained from the appearance of the wicks to the naked eye. It may be added that, having regard to the circumstances of the occasion, if the wicks had been lit, that may well have been done hurriedly and in such a fashion that they were extinguished during or after flight. (It appears that, for a molotov cocktail to work as intended, the bottle has to shatter; all of the bottles found within the
Foxhill perimeter were intact).

Ultimately the experts were agreed that there was some evidence of some heat damage to some of the wicks. On the question of whether that evidence supported the Crown case, one expert said it did, and the other two said it was inconclusive. Mr Waight did not maintain his original, admittedly rather tentative, opinion that the evidence showed that it was probable that none of the (relevant) wicks had been lit.

The main evidence at the trial in support of the proposition that the wick on the bottle thrown through the bedroom window had been lit was that of Mr and
Mrs Campbell. That evidence received some degree of support from Constable
Hinds and Sergeant Pearson. It also received inferential support from the evidence that the molotov cocktails which had been used or found outside the fence had clearly been lit, from the evidence of what was said by the men who were throwing objects at the house, and from the evidence of a number of witnesses who claimed to have seen the molotov cocktails being lit.

On the view of the scientific evidence most favourable to the defence case, the testing later carried out on the wicks (a considerable time after the relevant events) was inconclusive on the question whether any of the relevant wicks had been lit. On one view of the scientific evidence, the testing supported the Crown case. Neither view would cut down the effect of the evidence upon which the Crown placed reliance at the trial, and one view would bolster that evidence.

The appellant has not shown that a miscarriage of justice occurred because the scientific evidence summarised above was not led at the trial (cf Gallagher v
The Queen <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 392]; Mickelberg versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259.] 
There are two reasons for this conclusion.

The lesser reason is that scientific evidence of the kind now in question could, with reasonable diligence, have been called at the trial. There was nothing to prevent those representing the appellant from pursuing this line of forensic investigation if they had wished to do so. However, I describe this as the lesser reason because a consideration such as this will, in an appropriate case, yield to the imperatives of justice.

The major reason relates to the quality of the evidence. It is not a significant possibility, or likely, that the jury, acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant had the evidence been led at the trial.

This ground of appeal also fails.

The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

The maximum penalty for the offence of which the appellant was convicted was twenty-five years penal servitude.

The objective facts of the case were rightly regarded by Downs DCJ as very serious. Fire bombing an occupied dwelling house with molotov cocktails is a gross breach of the security which people are entitled to expect in their homes and constitutes a serious danger to life and property.

The learned judge gave careful consideration to all the subjective matters urged on behalf of the appellants, including his underprivileged background and his problems with alcohol. He had regard to representations made on the appellant's behalf by highly respected members of his community, and to the fact that, notwithstanding some criminal history, this would be the appellant's first time in custody.

The judge commented that minimal damage was actually caused to Foxhill, and took the view that this indicated that those concerned were not experienced in using molotov cocktails. Counsel for the appellant submitted that if he had received scientific evidence of the kind earlier discussed that would have tended in the same direction, but the judge obviously regarded the episode as a somewhat clumsy and ineffectual attack. He also noted the family feud which formed part of the background and he was told that the appellant's grandmother had been injured in an earlier incident between the families; a matter which had distressed the appellant.

No error has been shown in the reasoning on sentence, and the sentence imposed was not excessive.

Leave to appeal against sentence should be granted and the appeal should be dismissed.

WOOD, CJ at CL: I agree with the reasons and orders proposed by Gleeson CJ. 
BARR J: I agree with the Chief Justice. * * * 
