

Sussman and Anor versus Agc Advances Limited and Anor Nos Ca 40533/91 and Ed /90 Mortgages - Real Property - Equity [1995] NSWSC 86 (18 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), CLARKE(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 16 February 1995 #DATE 30:6:1995 #ADD 18:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:  T M Jucovic QC with B J A Shields 
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Taylor Szekely Kelson 
Counsel for the Respondent:  P G Hely QC with S J Rushton 
Solicitor for the Respondent: Clayton Utz
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs; and 
Cross-appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P:  Before the Court are an appeal and a cross-appeal from a decision of Bryson J in the Equity Division of the Supreme Court. The proceedings raise questions concerning the law of mortgages and equitable priorities, and, in particular, the question whether a mortgagor is entitled to acquire and take the benefit of the rights of an earlier mortgagee so as to defeat or postpone the claims of subsequent mortgagees.
 
Registered mortgages are granted over land
The facts in this case are relatively simple and not in contention. The central issue is a question of priorities between two competing registered mortgages.
The appellant, Mrs Adela Sussman, is one of four registered proprietors of two allotments of land in Randwick, namely 14 Bundock Street and 17 Bundock
Lane. The other registered proprietors are Ms Susan
Sussman, Mr William
Sussman and Mr Alexander Sussman. The four are registered as joint tenants. At the time the mortgages were granted, the two properties were the subject of one certificate of title. However, they have since been subdivided. This subdivision is of no significance to the issues in the appeal.
On 30 January 1987 the first mortgage was granted by the four registered proprietors to Macserv Pty Limited to secure a debt of $280,000 (the Macserv mortgage). This mortgage was registered on 6 March 1987. In fact,
Macserv Pty
Limited took the mortgage as trustee or nominee for three clients of a solicitor's firm, namely Mrs Palmer, Mrs Goldstein and Mrs Horsley. These three women contributed $50,000, $110,000 and $120,000 respectively.
In January 1988 Mrs Palmer informed her solicitors that she wished to secure the repayment of the $50,000 which she had advanced. In compliance with her request, Mrs
Sussman paid the solicitors $50,000 on 8 January 1988. The solicitors passed the money on to Mrs Palmer who, in return, executed a deed of release, releasing Macserv Pty Limited and the four mortgagors from all claims in respect of the mortgage. The trial judge accepted that from that time on, all persons interested in the first mortgage acted on the basis that
Mrs Sussman had taken Mrs Palmer's place as a contributor to the principal and as a beneficiary of the mortgage.
The four registered proprietors gave a second mortgage to the first respondent, AGC (Advances) Limited, on 9 March 1988. This was done in order to secure obligations created by a deed of loan and guarantee of the same date.
The borrowers in this transaction were Mr Alexander Sussman and Ms Louise
Sussman, and the lender was AGC (Advances) Limited. There were four guarantors, namely Mrs Adela Sussman, Mr William Sussman, Ms Susan Sussman, and a company associated with them, Halinka (Sydney) Pty Limited. This mortgage (the AGC mortgage) expressly acknowledged that it was subject to a prior incumbrance, namely, the Macserv mortgage. Clause 35 of the deed of loan and guarantee provided that the liability of the guarantors was to be limited to the value of the securities, which included the Randwick property. It is also important to note that, by Clause 20 of the agreement, the guarantors waived any rights inconsistent with the agreement which they might otherwise have, including rights to contribution and subrogation.
In January 1990 Mrs Horsley, another contributor to the Macserv mortgage requested the repayment of her principal of $120,000. In due course, this money was paid by Mrs Sussman. Similarly, in or about April Mrs Sussman paid $110,000 to Mrs Goldstein, thereby discharging the interest of the latter in the Macserv mortgage.
Thus, after April 1988, Mrs Sussman remained the sole beneficiary of the
Macserv mortgage. This state of affairs was confirmed when, on November , Macserv Pty Limited executed a declaration of trust under seal, declaring that it held its interest under the first mortgage on behalf of Mrs
Sussman. The trial judge concluded that this was a bare trust, and that it would be the lawful duty of
Macserv Pty Limited to comply with any lawful directions given to it by Mrs Sussman relating to the management of the mortgage investment.
The day after the declaration of trust by Macserv, a solicitor acting on behalf of Macserv Pty Limited, and by inference on the instruction of Mrs
Adela Sussman, demanded and obtained possession of the premises from the residents, Mr Alexander and Ms Louise
Sussman. However as soon as they had vacated the premises, the solicitor offered to grant Mr Alexander Sussman and
Ms Louise Sussman a lease on a weekly rental. They signed a rental agreement and went into possession of the property upon this new basis.
Approximately one month after these events had occured, Mrs Adela Sussman and Ms Susan Sussman commenced proceedings by summons in the Equity Division of the Supreme Court. Although the claims in that summons were not ultimately pressed, the first respondent, AGC (Advances) Limited, filed a cross-claim seeking declarations that:
Mrs Sussman had redeemed the Macserv mortgage;
Mrs Sussman and Macserv
Pty Limited were not entitled to enforce or rely upon the Macserv mortgage as against it;
AGC (Advances) Ltd was entitled to exercise its power of sale;
Mrs Sussman's estate in the land included an interest in the Macserv mortgage; and
On the true construction of clause 35 of the deed of loan and guarantee, Mrs Sussman's estate in the land, including her interest in the Macserv mortgage, was subject to the priority of the AGC mortgage.
 
The findings of the Primary judge
The findings made by Bryson J can be summarised as follows:
His Honour accepted that it was the intention of Mrs 
Sussman, or rather of the solicitors whose intentions should be attributed to her, that after she had repaid the amounts contributed by the original contributors, she would stand in the contributors' place as if they had assigned their interests to her.
Thus neither Mrs Sussman nor any relevant person intended that the Macserv mortgage should be discharged or that the mortgagors should cease to be obligated by the mortgage.
Neither Macserv Pty Limited nor Mrs Sussman was under any duty, or commercial need, to disclose to AGC (Advances) Limited the fact that Mrs Sussman claimed to be a contributor to the first mortgage. There were no grounds for interpreting the failure to disclose this information as any form of deliberate concealment.
There was no basis for any finding based on the doctrine of merger or analogies with merger, since the interests of the mortgagors in the mortgaged property and of Mrs Sussman in the
Macserv mortgage were of altogether different kinds. The four mortgagors were joint tenants. As the registered proprietors, they held a legal estate in the property. On the other hand, Mrs
Sussman was the only one of them who had any interest in the
Macserv mortgage, this being an equitable interest which was "markedly different in nature to the registered proprietorship".
He rejected the argument put forward by first respondent that
Mrs Sussman's beneficial interest in the property was caught by clause 35 of the deed of loan and guarantee.
However, he accepted that the case fell within the so-called rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux (1856) 2 K and J 650; De G M and G ; <case>; [43 ER 1381.] Bryson J found that this rule was one of general equitable principle, and was not based simply on contractual considerations (namely the contract between the mortgagor and the second mortgagee). He stated the rule in general terms as being that "a mortgagor who has put his second mortgagee in a position of priority over himself cannot disturb those priorities in any manner, even by a transaction with a person who, in a competition with a second mortgagee, would have priority over the second mortgagee. The first mortgagee can sell his priority to anybody except the mortgagor; the mortgagor cannot buy priority, and no matter what he does will never have a better equity to the mortgaged property or any interest in it than any mortgagee whom he has put before himself."
The basis of the rule which was stated by Lord Cranworth in
Otter versus Lord Vaux as follows was still good law: "the general principle (is) that a mortgagor cannot set up against his own incumbrancer any other incumbrance created by himself. . . "
Bryson J held that the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux applied to land under the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). He cited in support of that conclusion the decisions in Edwards versus McDowell and Ors [(1933) 50
WN 244]
His Honour recognised that there may be important considerations of policy underlying this rule, namely the fact that the unrestrained ability of mortgagors to adopt expedients designed artificially to promote their own interests above those of second mortgagees would, if permitted, have a strong tendency to discourage the granting of second mortgages. However, he made clear that he did not base his decision on this or any other policy consideration but on his understanding of the applicable rule of law.
Bryson J concluded that it was not significant that the payments in this case were made by only one of a number of mortgagors. This was because "(t)here could be no principle which would enable one of several joint mortgagors to achieve a result acting alone which he could not achieve when acting with all the other proprietors".
His Honour considered that "the principle disabling all of them from acting adversely to the interest of the second mortgagee appear(ed) . . . to be equally available to prevent any one of them from so acting."
His Honour rejected the submission made by the cross-defendant that the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux had not been, and should not be, applied to a situation where the mortgagor was not the transferee or assignee but held only an indirect interest in the property such as the beneficial interest held by
Mrs Sussman. Since the rule was based on interests which exist in substance but not form, his Honour found, there was no reason for such a limitation. Furthermore, he concluded there could be no reasonable basis upon which the rule, an equitable principle, should operate on legal interests but not equitable interests.
Finally, his Honour determined that the $50,000 paid by Mrs
Sussman to Mrs Palmer, that is, paid before the creation of the second mortgage, was not affected by the rule in Otter versus Lord
Vaux. The failure to disclose Mrs Sussman's interest in the mortgage principal was of no significance in this regard.
Accordingly, Bryson J made orders declaring that Mrs Sussman had priority in respect of the principal moneys secured by the
Macserv mortgage only in respect of the $50,000 advance together with any interest or otherwise associated claims. AGC (Advances)
Limited had priority over the remaining interests secured by the mortgage.
 
The legal principles to be applied
The principle established by Otter versus Lord Vaux is clear enough. It seems to have been generally accepted in the intervening years since its first expression. The real question in this case is not whether the so-called rule is good law, but whether it should be extended to cover the facts of the present case.
The facts in Otter versus Lord Vaux were as follows. A mortgagor gave a number of mortgages to various separate mortgagees. Subsequently, the first mortgagee exercised his power of sale. After a fruitless attempt to sell the property at auction, he agreed to sell it to a third party. However, before that transaction had been completed, the original mortgagor convinced the purchaser to sell his interest in the contract and allow the mortgagor to purchase the property. The issue in the case was whether the mortgagor could take the property free of the second mortgage.
Lord Cranworth,
LC felt that the principle to be applied in the case was plain: "The general principle, that a mortgagor cannot set up against his own incumbrancer any other incumbrance created by himself, is a proposition that I think has never been controverted.
In Toulmin versus Steere <case>; [(3 Mer. 210)], and one or two other cases I believe that have followed it, that principle was carried to an extent which has been questioned, perhaps it is now considered as settled, but it was carried to an extent that might have admitted of an argument against it. . . . Whether or not that (the decision in Toulmin) was founded upon a correct application of the old rule, we need not now inquire, for that is not the present case, which is strictly the case of the original debtor, the original mortgagor, striving to set up a prior incumbrance created by himself against a subsequent incumbrance also created by himself. This is the case, unless there is a distinction from the circumstances that the title of the mortgagor arose under the power of sale of the first incumbrancer. I confess that I agree with the Vice-Chancellor
Wood and think that to make any distinction on that ground would be sacrificing substance to form. The case is therefore to all intents and purposes that of a mortgagor liable to pay a sum of money to his first incumbrancer paying it and getting a transfer; but that transfer is something which upon general principle he cannot set up against a creditor claiming by a title subsequent to that of the person whose charge he has so paid off. he pays it off for the benefit of the inheritance; and all persons who are entitled to any portion of the inheritance under him are also entitled to the benefit of his having liquidated a demand prior to their title." (emphasis added)
This decision has been applied in a number of subsequent cases. In
Whitely and A nor versus Delaney and Ors [(1914) AC 132 (HL)] at 145 Viscount Haldane
LC stated that". . . a mortgagor purchasing the interest of his first mortgage cannot derogate from his own bargain by setting up the mortgage so purchased against a second mortgage". See also In Re W Tasker and Sons Limited [(1905) 2
Ch 587 (CA)]
I agree with Bryson J that the principle stated in Otter versus Lord Vaux is a general equitable principle. It is neither based on, nor limited by, particular contractual considerations. Rather, the rule is based on the equities which arise from a defined contractual relationship. It would be unconscionable for a mortgagor to pay out a first mortgage, and then attempt to rely on this newly bare security to escape from the burden of subsequent mortgages. That is why equity has established the applicable principle to resist such an obviously unconscionable transaction.
 
Does the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux apply to [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) land?
The land the subject of the present proceedings, is registered under the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). It is therefore necessary to consider whether the principle laid down in Otter versus Lord Vaux, a case concerning old system title, is equally applicable to land under the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/).
This is important question, given the system of priority by registration which is relevantly in force in New South Wales by virtue of the provisions of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). A central policy underlying the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) is that persons dealing with land the subject of registered title should be able to rely on the information contained in the Register: see especially [Real
Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), [s 42.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s42.html) This principle of indefeasibility has been described as "the foundation of the Torrens system": see Bahr and Anor versus Nicolay and Ors (No 2) <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 604] at 613.
If the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux is to apply to Torrens title land, it can only do so on the basis of an exception to the general rule of indefeasibility of registered title. In particular, the rule would need to come within the general exception that prior equities may remain relevant notwithstanding the Register. This exception may, in fact, be the application of a general equitable principle. In Phillips versus Martin <case>; [(1890) 11 LR 153] at 158, Darley CJ said: "It is to my mind a clear principle of equity, and I have no doubt there are abundant authorities on the point, that equity will interfere to prevent the machinery of an Act of
Parliament being used by a person to defeat equities which he has himself raised, and to get rid of a waiver created by his own acts." (emphasis added).
This passage was subsequently approved by th Privy Council in Wilson v
McIntosh [(1894) AC 129 (PC)] at 213, Isaacs J accepted the effect of the Torrens system: "as giving greater certainty to titles of registered proprietors, but not in any way destroying the fundamental doctrines by which Courts of Equity have enforced, as against registered proprietors, conscientious obligations entered into by them."
In The Torrens System in New South Wales, The Law Book Company, Sydney, , R. Woodman and K. Nettle conclude, at p. 349, that the effect of this and other authority is such that the position seems to be that a registered proprietor win not be able to rely on the indefeasibility provisions of the
Act to escape the consequences of his or her own acts, where he or she has created any further interests in the land. Furthermore, the authors consider, at 106-107, that the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux constitutes an exception to the indefeasibility of the Register: "The following incidents of common law conveyancing have been judicially recognised as being applicable to land under the Act, although not expressly mentioned in it: ... 12. The principle in Otter versus Lord Vaux (1856) 6 De G.M.
and G.; <case>; [43 ER 1381:]; [(1952)
VLR 470."]
The first respondent also cited the decision of Holland J in Matzner and
Ors versus Clyde Securities Ltd [(1975) 2 NSWLR 293 (SC)] in support of the proposition that certain general equitable principles survived the advent of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) and applied to land registered under that Act. There are various more recent examples: see e.g. my discussion of the concept of "personal equities" in Mercantile Mutual Life Insurance Co Ltd versus Gosper [(1991) NSWLR 32]
It was pointed out for the appellant that both Edwards and Ex Parte
Watson involved a claim for priority before the transfer of land had been registered. I do not think that this circumstance provides a limitation on the application of the rule to land under the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). Both Edwards and
Ex Parte Watson are authority for a general proposition that the rule in Otter v Lord Vaux applies to Torrens title land. Those decisions have stood for many years. They are accepted in standard texts as stating the applicable law. In matters of land law particularly, this Court should hesitate before questioning long established principles. In any case, the rule is based on equitable notions of fair dealing and justice as between a mortgagor and second mortgagee. Therefore the system of title under which the property is held should not be regarded as a point of differentiation if the system of title by registration can accomodate the rule. Long standing authority in this
State and in Victoria have held that it can. I would not depart from such authority. Like
Bryson J, I would apply it.
 
Does the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux apply in this case?
The principle laid down by Otter versus Lord
Vaux is therefore good law and applies to Torrens title land. The issue in the present proceedings relates to the scope of the rule.
Should it be applied to a case where the first mortgage has not actually been discharged?
The appellant submitted that it should not be. The appellant sought to distinguish this case from the decision in Otter on the basis that this is not a case where the prior mortgage debt, the first mortgage, was actually discharged. That this was so was clearly found by Bryson J: "I am not prepared to find that it was intended by Mrs Adela
Sussman or any relevant person that the mortgagors should cease to be obligated by the mortgage ... No steps were taken which it would be appropriate to take if the mortgage was to be discharged in the formal sense of making it possible to register a discharge of the mortgage, or in any informal sense which would establish that the business was actually being conducted on the basis that the debt was not repayable."
However, so the appellant submitted, in the cases which have applied the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux, and in that case itself, the first mortgage has been actually discharged, and the first mortgagee has dropped out of the picture. The rule applied in such cases because, the debt having been paid, there was nothing on which the mortgagor's encumbrance could attach, and so it would be inequitable for the mortgagor to seek to set up this now defunct mortgage against any subsequent mortgagees. In contrast it was argued, this case could be distinguished by the continued existence of the obligations which the mortgagors owed to the first mortgagee.
The appellant submitted that the duty to observe substance over form in cases such as the present is limited to an acknowledgment that where there has been the exercise of a power of sale, and the subsequent purchase of the property by the mortgagor, in reality the mortgagor has repaid the mortgage debt and discharged the mortgage. In Otter the substance of the transaction was that the mortgagor was discharging his mortgage.
The substance over form distinction cannot apply, so it was argued, where the debt of the prior mortgagee has not, in any sense, been discharged. The appellant argued that it is not possible to extend the notion of substance over form so as to overcome the distinct and separate legal interests present in this case.
In her submissions, the appellant also sought to distinguish Otter, and the cases which have followed it, on the basis that each one of them involved a situation where the mortgagor acquired the title to the property upon exercise of a power of sale. Thus it was contended that the rule in Otter v
Lord Vaux would only apply here if Macserv exercised its power of sale and sold the property to any one of the mortgagors. This it had not done.
It is perhaps easiest to deal with this final point first, if only to dismiss it. It is clear that the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux is a broad equitable principle. It should not be limited to situations involving the exercise of a power of sale. Indeed Lord Cranworth LC held in Otter that, although in that case the mortgagor had acquired the property under a power of sale, "to make any distinction on that ground would be sacrificing substance to form". The whole point of the decision was therefore that, in reality, the mortgagor had paid money to discharge the mortgage, and therefore the transaction fell within the general rule that "a mortgagor cannot set up against his own incumbrancer any other incumbrance created by himself".
Perhaps the only reason why (until now) the cases on this issue have been limited to such a factual situation, is that it would be obviously foolish for a mortgagor to repay directly a mortgage debt thus discharging a mortgage, and then seek to set up this mortgage against subsequent mortgagees. The fact that the situation has only arisen where a mortgagor has purchased after the exercise of a power of sale merely indicates that mortgagors have not generally been unsubtle in their attempts to rid themselves of the burden of subsequent mortgages.
I turn now to the major argument presented by the appellant. The decision in this case really turns on what meaning is to be attributed to the rule of
Equity that substance is given priority over form. The real issue is, how far should this Court go in an attempt to identify the true substance of the mortgage transactions here in question? The appellant argued that the analysis of the substance of the transaction in Otter was limited to drawing an analogy between the purchase by the mortgagor after the exercise of a power of sale and an actual repayment of the mortgage debt by the mortgagor. It would be going too far, she submitted, to attempt to analyse the reality behind the mortgage in this case, given that it has been accepted that the mortgage has not been discharged.
The first respondent, on the other hand, contends that Otter versus Lord Vaux stands for the broad proposition that a mortgagor cannot set up a prior encumbrance created by itself against a subsequent encumbrance, also created by itself. The mortgagor, having placed the second mortgagee in a position of priority over itself, should not be allowed to subvert this priority. In this regard, the first respondent argued that it would be facile to suggest that
Macserv Pty Limited is setting up the first mortgage and not Mrs Sussman, given that Macserv is now a bare trust, subject only to the direct, acknowledged control of Mrs Sussman. The respondent's case therefore relied on an argument that the general equitable principle laid down in Otter rested ultimately on broad considerations of justice and fair dealing. This principle should be blind to legal distinctions which do not alter the substance of transactions. It should examine the substance, the economic reality, of the situation before the court and not be subverted by form.
In my opinion the facts of this case fall within the rule in Otter versus Lord
Vaux. Bearing in mind that the Court must examine the substance of the situation, it is clear that, in substance,
Mrs Sussman has assumed the benefit of the debt and security for her own advantage. She did so by paying out the original contributors to the mortgage. The result was then that she stood in their place as mortgagee. Thus Mrs Sussman, the beneficial owner of the mortgage is trying to set up this security against another mortgage which was also created by her. These circumstances therefore clearly fall within the rule stated by Lord Cranworth LC: "a mortgagor cannot set up against his own incumbrancer any other incumbrance created by himself".
True, the Macserv mortgage has not been discharged. Unlike other cases where Otter has been applied, the mortgage transaction has not ceased to exist. However it is important to remember that Mrs Sussman was jointly and severally liable for the discharge of the obligations of the mortgagors under this mortgage. She has paid out the original contributors. Therefore, in substance, the Macserv mortgage is an empty shell. Mrs Sussman controls when it will, or will not be discharged. In these circumstances it would be inequitable for Mrs Sussman to be allowed to rely on the shell.
The appellant further argued that this case should be excluded from the rule because of the continued obligations of the other three mortgagors to the
Macserv mortgage. Should this make any difference?
Bryson J thought not. In the passage quoted above, his Honour decided that if each of the registered proprietors could not achieve a result acting in concert, it would not make sense to allow them to achieve the same result acting alone. I agree with this conclusion.
It is founded on common sense. I am fortified my conclusion by the reasons of Herring CJ in Ex Parte Watson. In that case, which involved two mortgagors, his Honour said: "The considerations that led equity to intervene on behalf of subsequent encumbrancers would seem just as applicable in the circumstances of the present case as they were in Otter v Lord Vaux, where there was only one mortgagor and he bought in the estate from the first mortgage. After all, the rule is based on the general principle that a mortgagor cannot set up against his own encumbrancer any other encumbrance created by himself, and this principle applies with equal force where there are two mortgagors and either one of them seeks to do so."
In Ex Parte Watson the two mortgagors were tenants in common. Hence that decision extended the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux even further than is necessary in the present case, where the mortgagors are joint tenants who hold one undivided share in the property.
I also agree with
Bryson J that there are important policy considerations which sustain the decision in this case (although his Honour stated that his decision did not ultimately depend upon them). If this Court were to uphold the appellant's claim, it would sanction a relatively simple method for mortgagors to escape the burden of second mortgages. This would clearly have an effect on the availability of such mortgages. As Bryson J said, the result could be "an economic restriction on free alienability of equities of redemption". In my view this is a significant consideration to be taken into account in assessing cases of this type. It reinforces the conclusion which
I would reach anyway by the application of the applicable principles of law and equity.
In summary, I would reject the appeal in this case. Although it is true that the Macserv mortgage has not been discharged, it would be inequitable for
Mrs Sussman, the beneficial owner of the security under that mortgage, to be permitted to set it up against the mortgage to AGC (Advances) Limited.
This case falls within the broad equitable principle laid down in Otter versus Lord
Vaux, namely that a court will not allow a mortgagor to seek to "set up a prior encumbrance created by himself against a subsequent encumbrance also created by himself". The principle is no less applicable because only one of the mortgagors has taken over the benefit of the mortgage. It applies to [Real
Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) land in the circumstances of the present case.
Since I have decided in favour of the first respondent on the basis of their first and major argument, it is strictly unnecessary for me to examine their alternative argument in any detail. This alternative argument was that the mortgage to AGC (Advances) Limited was a mortgage of the mortgagors' entire interest in the property. A mortgage creates an interest in the land.
Moreover an equitable interest in a mortgage is itself an interest in the land. Therefore, so it was argued, Mrs Sussman's entire interest in the property included the equitable interest which she subsequently acquired in the
Macserv mortgage. This equitable interest was therefore subject to the second mortgage. The issues raised by this argument closely parallel the issues raised by the cross-appeal. I will therefore turn at once to the cross-appeal.
 
The issues arising on the cross-appeal
The first respondent cross-appealed against the order of Bryson J giving
Mrs Sussman priority as regards the $50,000 payment which she made to one of the contributors to the Macserv mortgage, Mrs Palmer. The essence of the cross-appeal was that Mrs Sussman's equitable interest in the Macserv mortgage was part of her "estate and interest" in the property within the terms clause of the deed of loan and guarantee, and thus it was subject to AGC
Limited's mortgage.
Bryson J rejected this argument.
His Honour said: "The ordinary and natural interpretation of clause 35 and indeed of all charging provisions of the Deed of Loan and
Guarantee and of the second mortgage is that they deal with and impose a charge on the registered proprietorship, although subject to the prior mortgage; the security was not merely granted over the equity of redemption of the first mortgage, and it was not according to its own words intended to float in the air and fix on future interests which the mortgagors should later come to own."
First, it is important to note that the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux cannot affect the $50,000 in question because Mrs Sussman transferred that money, and took on the corresponding interest, before the second mortgage was created.
The first respondent did not seek to rely on the rule in its cross-appeal.
Therefore the decision on the cross-appeal must be based, not on any broad equitable principle, but upon the proper construction of the second mortgage documents. The appellant argued that the AGC mortgage was simply a mortgage over the interest of the mortgagors as registered proprietors. It gave the first respondent a legally registered interest as second mortgagee and nothing more. They reject the contention that this mortgage was intended to cover any future interests in the property acquired by the mortgagors.
I agree with the conclusion of Bryson J concerning the construction of the mortgage instruments. The first respondent has not convinced me that the
AGC mortgage was intended to cover any future interests that the mortgagors might acquire over the property. The first respondent's interest in the property was limited to a legally registered second mortgage over the mortgagors' interests as registered proprietors. I can see no reason why this mortgage should be construed so as to give AGC (Advance) Limited a mortgage over the equitable interest which Mrs Sussman subsequently acquired as part beneficial owner of the first mortgage.
For the same reasons I would reject the alternative argument mounted by the first respondent on the appeal. However, this is of no practical importance since I favour rejecting the appeal on the basis of the applicability of the rule in Otter versus Lord Vaux, as Bryson J found.
 
Orders - both the appeal and the cross-appeal are dismissed
The orders which I favour are:
Appeal dismissed with costs; and
Cross-Appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA:  The facts in this appeal are quite complex but reduced to their bare essentials they are as follows.
Adela Sussman (the appellant), Susan
Sussman, William Sussman and Alexander Sussman were the registered proprietors as joint tenants of 14 and 17 Bundock Lane, Randwick (the Randwick properties). The Randwick properties have since been sold and the case is concerned with the question of the priorities over the fund which is being held from the sale. Nevertheless, for simplicity, I will continue to refer to the Randwick properties.
On 3 January 1987, the four registered proprietors granted a first mortgage over these two properties to Macserv Pty Ltd ("Macserv") to secure a debt of $280,000 (the Macserv Mortgage). This mortgage was registered on 
March 1987 and it remained registered at the relevant time.
Macserv took the Macserv Mortgage as trustee for Palmer for $50,000,
Goldstein for $110,000 and Horsley for $120,000. In January 1988, at Palmer's instigation, the appellant paid Palmer $50,000 and thereafter stood in
Palmer's place.
In March 1988, the four registered proprietors granted a second mortgage to AGC (Advances)
Ltd, (the AGC Mortgage). The AGC Mortgage, which was registered on 28 March 1988, secured the obligations created by a Deed of Loan and Guarantee of 9 March 1988. The Deed showed that the borrowers from AGC were Alexander Sussman and Louise Sussman and that the four guarantors were
Adela Sussman, William Sussman, Susan Sussman and Halinka (Sydney) Pty Ltd.
The Deed provided for charges on two properties which included the second registered [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) mortgage over the Randwick properties. Clause 35 of the Deed of Loan and Guarantee limited the liability of the appellant,
William and Susan Sussman to the "Present Securities" which included the
Randwick properties.
On 8 February 1990, the appellant repaid
Horsley the amount of her contribution to the Macserv Mortgage. Similarly, in April 1990, the appellant paid out Goldstein's interest in the Macserv Mortgage. These two payments left the appellant as the sole beneficial owner of the Macserv Mortgage. In fact, on November 1990, Macserv made a declaration of trust to this effect, declaring that it held its interest under the Macserv Mortgage for the
Appellant.
Bryson J applied the principle referred to in Otter versus Lord Vaux (1856) 6
De G M and G 638; <case>; [43 ER 1381] (and since known as the Otter and Lord Vaux principle) to find that the appellant could not set up the Macserv Mortgage against the
AGC Mortgage to the extent of the amounts repaid to Horsley and
Goldstein. The principle to which his Honour referred was described by Lord
Cranworth LC in these terms (at 643): "The general principle, that a mortgagor cannot set up against his own encumbrancer any other encumbrance created by himself is a proposition that I think has never been controverted. The case is therefore to all intents and purposes that of a mortgagor liable to pay a sum of money to his first encumbrancer paying it and getting a transfer; but that transfer is something which upon general principle he cannot set up against a creditor claiming by a title subsequent to that of the person whose charge he has so paid off: he pays it off for the benefit of the inheritance; and all persons who are entitled to any portion of the inheritance under him are also entitled to the benefit of his having liquidated a demand prior to their title."
This principle was not challenged in the appeal. The appellant's counsel,
Mr Jucovic QC, sought to distinguish Otter on the ground that it was fundamental to the decision in that case that the mortgagor had acquired the interest of the first mortgagee consequent upon the exercise of a power of sale by that mortgagee. The importance of that factor was that the purchase from a mortgagee exercising power of sale meant that the purchaser took free from later mortgages and charges. (See [s 59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s59.html) [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/).) This had not occurred in this case. Nothing that the appellant did diminished AGC's security as a second mortgagee.
In my opinion, this is not a relevant point of distinction. The principle referred to by Lord Cranworth was not limited in that way. Indeed in response to a submission in Otter that the fact that the first mortgagee was exercising a power of sale took the case beyond the bounds of the rule the Lord
Chancellor said that an acceptance of that proposition would 'be sacrificing substance for form'.
 .
The more substantial ground of distinction proffered by Mr Jucovic was that there were four mortgagors and only one of them was beneficially entitled to the first mortgage. In these circumstances there could be no question of a merger of the interests of the first mortgagee and the registered proprietors and there was no other ground for declining to recognise the continuing priority of the appellant as the first mortgagee.
I think that it must be correct to say that there was no merger. Indeed
Bryson J said just that. But the fate of the submission depends on the rationale for the rule in Otter. This can best be found in the judgment in
Otter at first instance ((1856) 2 K and J 650), and there being no dissent from what the Vice Chancellor had said, it is convenient to refer to it in some detail. At 655-6 Sir W. Page Wood (later Lord Hatherly) said: "Then, what would be the position of the mortgagor if he had simply cleared off the first mortgage by payment of the money due upon it? In such a case, it is settled by authority, as was acknowledged by all parties in the argument, that the mortgagor could not set up the anterior charge so paid off against the second mortgagee, and that the effect of paying off the first mortgage would be that the second mortgage would thereby become the first charge upon the estate. The same observation which was made in argument as to the inability of the second mortgagee to call upon the mortgagor to clear off the first mortgage, applies to the case I have suggested.
The second mortgagee would not have any such right, he could not file a bill, either under the covenant for further assurance or otherwise, to compel the mortgagor to pay off the first mortgage. He can only say, - when once the mortgagor has done this which it was his duty to do, although the second mortgagee could not have compelled him to do it, - that it is impossible for the mortgagor to insist as against the person to whom he has given a second mortgage on his property, that there remains any prior charge on the estate, or that the mortgagor has any right to have the mortgage which he has paid off transferred so as to keep it alive for his own benefit to the extent of the money which he supplied to pay it off. The answer to such a claim on the part of the mortgagor would be, 'You have only discharged your own debt, and you are only doing justice as between yourself and your second mortgagee, by giving the fullest effect to his security that can possibly be given, and you have therefore no claim to set up that prior charge against him."
Pausing there, it is plain that the rule is not confined to cases in which a mortgagor purchases from a mortgagee exercising power of sale.
The Vice Chancellor continued, at 657: "This equity does not depend upon the doctrine of the debt being merged or extinguished. If the mortgagor, on paying off the first mortgage, had taken an assignment to a trustee for himself, he could not set up that mortgage debt outstanding in the trustee against the second incumbrancer; therefore the equity does not depend on the debt being gone by the effect of the payment: if the debt were kept alive in the way I have mentioned, the effect would still be, that the mortgagor would be estopped in consequence of his mortgage from setting up that debt against the second mortgagee."
The reference to a trustee in that passage possibly explains the absence of any submission that as Macserv held on behalf of the appellant Otter didn't apply. The Vice Chancellor then turned his attention to the benefit that may be derived by the second mortgagee (as in this case) by the application of the rule saying: "It may be said that the second mortgagee has a greater benefit than he contracted for, because the charge of the first mortgagee is cleared off by his having exercised his power of sale, and the second mortgagee will have the full benefit of that, although the first mortgagee have been thereby fully paid.
But that would be no argument against the rights existing between the second mortgagee and the mortgagor, which are, that the mortgagor having contracted with the second mortgagee to give him a security upon that particular estate for a certain sum of money, if the prior charge be cleared off in any mode by the act of the mortgagor, it is impossible for him to say, I will hold the estate free from the incumbrances, without fulfilling my contract of giving to the second mortgagee a security upon the estate to the amount of the money which he so advanced."
As it seems to me the rule is based on the equities arising from the contract between the mortgagor and second mortgagee and not on any principle of merger.
This rule has been applied many times and, so far as
I am aware never doubted. For instance, in Platt versus Mendel [(1884) 27 ChD 246], Chitty J said (at ): "... because a mortgagor redeeming cannot stand in the mortgagee's place against other incumbrancers.
If he has paid off a prior encumbrance he can never set it up as against his own mortgage". (See also Brunner and Anor v
Greenslade [(1971) 1 Ch 993] at 599; Manks versus Whiteley [(1912) 1 Ch 735], at 758).
Further the rule is treated by the texts as fully operative and not qualified in any way (see Dr Sykes' "The Law of Securities" 4th Ed, 1986;
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane's "Equity - Doctrines and Remedies", 2nd Ed p 816, para 4006). Waldock, "The
Law of Mortgages", Sweet and Maxwell, 1950, 2nd edition, at 436, had this to say: "Equity, therefore, does not, except in one case, consider a charge to be extinguished by the mere fact of its being paid off, but makes merger a question of intention.
The one exception is that a mortgagor, who pays off an encumbrance, can in no circumstances set it up as a protection against a later mortgage which he has himself created: Otter v. Lord Vaux. Not even an express declaration of intention in the deed of discharge will avail him to keep the encumbrance alive. The reason is that a second mortgage, as between the parties, is a grant of the mortgagors entire interest in the property, saving only the rights of the prior encumbrancer, and the mortgagor cannot derogate from his grant by holding the first mortgage against the second mortgagee. A purchaser of the equity of redemption is not, however, under this disability, for the same considerations do not apply. He may pay off a charge and keep it alive to protect himself against a subsequent encumbrance which he has not himself created, because he has no personal contract with the subsequent encumbrancer. Consequently, in the case of a purchaser of the equity of redemption, the general rule applies, and merger depends on intention."(cf Toulmin versus Steere ((1817) <case>; [3
Mer 210))]
The principle remains alive and well and is based not on any doctrine of merger but on the equities arising from the contractual relationship between the mortgagor and the second, or later, mortgagee. In circumstances where the mortgagor is one of a number of people who contract with the second mortgagee
I can see no basis for denying the existence of the relevant equities (see R v
Registrar of titles: ex parte Watson <case>; [(1952) VLR 470], at 480). Bryson J was, in my opinion, correct in his conclusion.
One other matter should be mentioned before I turn to the cross appeal although it was not relied on by the appellant. That is, whether the enactment of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) destroyed or diminished the effect of the rule.
The question has been considered in two authorities (Edwards versus McDowell [(1933) WN 244] and Watson at 477) and in each case it was held that the rule applied. In the latter case there is a full discussion of the legal position by Herring CJ at 477-9. What should, perhaps, be emphasised is that the second mortgagee's equitable rights arise out of its contract with the registered proprietor and concern only the parties to that contract.
The respondent cross-appealed on the ground that his Honour erred in declaring that the appellant was entitled to priority in respect of the sum of $50,000. At the time that the payment was made there was no second mortgage.
There being no relevant contract no equities arose in the respondent's favour when this payment was made and there was no basis for postponing the appellant's interest to this extent. On the point of construction raised I agree with Bryson J.
I regret having to reach a conclusion adverse to the appellant in the appeal. Her act of benevolence in favour of the other mortgagors, which was done in good faith, has led to her suffering a significant detriment, while at the same time benefiting a second mortgagee who was not disadvantaged in the slightest by her acquiring the whole beneficial ownership in the Macserv
Mortgage. While I appreciate the force of the application of the rule in the cases where a mortgagor buys from its mortgagee exercising power of sale I find it difficult to detect any policy that is served by its application in this case.
The appellant, no doubt, will think the law is strange and unjust.
The facts do, however, fall within the broad rule, explained by
Page Wood
V.C., which has stood for many years. I do not think that this Court can properly decline to follow it.
The appeal and cross-appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA: For the reasons given by Kirby P and Clarke JA in their respective
Judgments, I agree that each of the Appeal and Cross-Appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/86.html  
