

Surgeoner and Ors versus Hogarth and Anor Matter No 600021/96 [1997] NSWSC 553 (11 November 1997) 
Surgeoner & Ors versus Hogarth & Anor /96 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
NR600021/96 - Surgeoner & Ors versus Hogarth & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced in March 1996. As presently constituted, there are eight plaintiffs and two defendants. 
The first plaintiff is the widow of the late John Logan Surgeoner (the deceased). The other plaintiffs are children of the first plaintiff and the deceased.

On 12 November 1986, a motor vehicle accident took place involving a vehicle being driven by the deceased and a vehicle being driven by the first defendant. The fourth plaintiff was a passenger in the deceased's vehicle. The second defendant was, inter alia, the authorised insurer of the first defendant's vehicle under a third-party policy issued in accordance with the
Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act, 1942.

The process propounds a claim under the Compensation to Relatives Act, 1897 and claims for damages founded on allegations of nervous shock.

In August 1997, the plaintiffs filed a Notice of Motion. The plaintiffs now wish to join three additional defendants (the Commonwealth of Australia (the
Commonwealth), the Roads and Traffic Authority (the RTA) and the Council of the Shire of Singleton (the Council)) and file an Amended Statement of Claim.
The application is opposed by all of the proposed defendants.

The plaintiffs rely on two affidavits sworn by Mr Wilson (a significant part of this material did not make it into evidence) and one sworn by the third plaintiff. Four affidavits are relied on in opposition to the application. Mr
Shirvington has sworn an affidavit on behalf of the Commonwealth. Mr Newnham has sworn an affidavit on behalf of the RTA. Messrs Young and McNamara have each sworn an affidavit on behalf of the Council. A copy of the proposed
Amended Statement of Claim is an annexure to one of the affidavits sworn by Mr
Wilson.

The proposed pleading seeks to add a cause of action founded on negligence against each of the three proposed defendants. The Particulars of Negligence involve allegations of breaches in design and construction.

It is alleged that the collision took place on Windsor Road, Howes Valley, at a point approximately 35 metres south of the bridge over Howes Valley Creek.
Further, it is alleged that the road and bridge were designed and constructed between about 1 January 1942 and 31 December 1946.

The Court has a discretionary power to make the order sought. It is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The onus of satisfying the Court that an order should be made rests on the applicants.

In this case, the relevant circumstances include the matters of delay, explanation for delay, prejudice and the futility of making an order.

It is conceded that the process contains claims which are statute barred (the relevant limitation period has expired). It would seem that the first defendant may not be an appropriate party to the proceedings. It was said that the plaintiffs may be filing an amended process in due course.

Certain of the proposed claims are also statute barred. As things presently stand, it would be futile to allow these claims to be advanced.

The evidence placed before the Court concerning the accident itself is sparse.
There is a Statement from the first defendant (Exhibit 2). It supports the view that the accident was caused by the deceased's vehicle coming on to the incorrect side of the roadway. It appears that a Statement was made by the fourth plaintiff. It was not placed before the Court. The plaintiffs have not relied on any of the police material which was submitted to their expert (Mr
Brown).

The plaintiffs rely on reports prepared by Mr Brown (these are to be found as annexures to the affidavit sworn by Mr Newnham). He mentions two curves (almost back to back) on the approach to the bridge from Windsor. In a report dated 1 October 1997 he said:- "It is my opinion that: the accident was a side swipe type of accident with one vehicle being partially across the road centreline at the time of impact.
there is insufficient information to determine the actual point of impact.
there is insufficient information to determine which vehicle was on the incorrect side of the road at the time of the accident.
the two curves to the west of the bridge are of sub-standard design.
if the vehicle driven by John Surgeoner had crossed the road centreline, then the design of the two curves is a contributing factor to this accident.
the width of the road shoulder at the accident location was sufficient so that David Hogarth could have avoided the accident by pulling off the road.
the width of the Isuzu truck did not contribute to this accident." 
There is material which suggests that the Commissioner for Main Roads undertook the construction of the roadway sometime after about August 1939. It was apparently constructed during World War II (possibly as an evacuation route).

There has been criticism of the views expressed by Mr Brown. On one approach, his views may be seen as being little more than speculation as to the factors which may have played a role in the causation of this particular accident.

It seemed that the application to join the Commonwealth was more or less abandoned during submissions. It was accepted that there was little material which concerned the Commonwealth. It seems that it may have merely been involved in providing some funding in respect of the construction of Putty
Road. The Council disputes responsibility for the relevant section of the roadway. There is evidence that supports the contention that the relevant maintenance authority is Singleton Shire Council (Exhibit 1). The RTA has made detailed submissions disputing liability on its part. It is not necessary for present purposes to explore these submissions.

When regard is had to the material placed before the Court, I am not satisfied that there would be sufficient utility in granting leave. Also, I bear in mind that the granting of it may commit numerous parties to a lengthy and expensive trial. The costs of a successful defendant may not be recoverable. Further, it is appropriate to take into account the pressure of business which the Courts are now required to deal with (see State Pollution Control Commission v
Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd [(1993) 29 NSWLR 487] at 493).

The accident took place in 1986. The proceedings were not commenced until early 1996. The affidavits sworn by Mr Wilson do not seek to address questions of delay and explanation for delay. Delay is significant and is not satisfactorily explained.

The circumstances that I have mentioned are sufficient to lead to a dismissal of the application. However, in addition, there is the question of prejudice.

The approach to be taken in dealing with questions of prejudice may be found in the judgments delivered in Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v
Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866.] 
Delay itself gives rise to presumptive prejudice. There is certainly a real possibility of significant prejudice. The affidavits relied on by the proposed defendants found a case for actual prejudice itself.

For present purposes, it suffices to mention just a few matters. The Council does not have any records concerning the design or construction of the relevant section of roadway. The RTA has been able to retrieve some material from archives. There is relevant material that it does not now have (see, inter alia, paragraph 7 of Mr Newnham's affidavit).

In my view, the plaintiffs have not discharged the onus of satisfying the
Court that an order should be made. The Notice of Motion is dismissed. The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion. The proceedings are remitted to the District Court.
 * * * 
