

Sanctuary Investments Pty Ltd versus St Gregory's Armenian School Incorporated
Matter No 4384/98 [1998] NSWSC 788 (18 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 February 1999 `SANCTUARY INVESTMENTS PTY LTD versus ST GREGORY'S ARMENIAN SCHOOL
INCORPORATED` `4384/98` `18 December 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a purchaser's suit for specific performance. 
The parties entered into a contract for the sale of land in the 1996 edition of the standard form, though the contract contained many special conditions.
The contract involved purchase by the plaintiff and sale by the defendant of .327 hectares of vacant land at Kellyville for $3.3 million. A deposit of $400,000 was paid which was released to the vendor. Subsequently on 24 August a further $400,000 was released to the vendor.

Special conditions 29 and 30 are as follows: "29. This Contract is subject to registration by the Land Titles Office as a
Deposited Plan a Plan of Subdivision to be drawn up by the Purchaser at the
Purchaser's expense in accordance with the Plan annexed to this Contract and in the event that such registration shall not have been effected within six months from the date hereof then either party may thereafter by notice in writing to the other party rescind this Contract whereupon all monies paid by the Purchaser by way of deposit shall be refunded to the Purchaser and upon such refund being made neither party shall have any suits actions claims or demands against the other party. The Purchaser shall pay all costs associated with the plan of the subdivision up to and including registration at the Land
Titles Office.
The Purchaser and the Vendor shall use their best endeavours to secure registration of the said Plan without delay." 
The standard form also contains provisions where there are unregistered plans, the most relevant provision being 28.2, which is as follows: "The vendor must do everything reasonable to have the plan registered within 6 months after the date of this contract with or without any minor alteration to the plan or any document to be lodged with the plan validly required or made under legislation." 
Clause 28.3.2 gives the vendor the right to rescind, but only if it has complied with 28.2.

The scheme of the contract was that the purchaser would perform the work necessary to subdivide the plaintiff's land into two lots and that there would then be settlement eighteen weeks after the registration of the plan.

The purchaser left the organisation of the registration of the plan to a company that specialised in engineering and surveying, of which Mr Moore was the principal. Mr Moore employed a registered surveyor, Mr Whitnall, who did the field work and prepared the plans. Unfortunately, Mr Whitnall died in
September of this year without having left adequate contemporaneous notes.
Thus, it is not possible to work out whether Mr Whitnall carried out his task with singleness of purpose or due efficiency, or whether he was so overburdened with other work that he was slow on this job.

The defendant, as its name implies, is a company which conducts an independent school. Its president is Father Anton, and he was the main person involved on the vendor's side in organising the sale of the land. The evidence clearly shows that at the relevant time, and probably today, the defendant was in serious financial problems, particularly problems with its mortgagee,
Suncorp/Metway, who was pressing for complete repayment of the large amount advanced.

Father Anton realised that one way of dealing with the financial problems was to sell part of the school land. He had investigated the possibility of a joint venture, but this came to nothing. However, he was contacted by a real estate agency, Castlehaven Realtors. Mr Morley appears to be the principal of that entity.

Father Anton says that Mr Morley telephoned him some time ago and asked whether the school was interested in selling, and that Father Anton said he would be in contact if it was interested in selling. Earlier this year he telephoned Mr Morley and told him that the school was now ready to sell part of the land and requested a meeting.

On about 6 March 1998 Father Anton and Mr Morley met at the school. Mr Morley told Father Anton that he had purchasers for the property and would try to get "top dollar", which he believed was between $295,000 and $315,000 per acre, and that he would come back with a proposal. On that day, and on subsequent days, according to the uncontradicted evidence of Father Anton, Mr Morley said word such as: "Although my buyers expect to make money out of the deal, in your case, they are willing to lend a hand and pay top dollar. They would like to give back to society some of what they have been receiving." 
It would appear that Father Anton was prepared to trust Mr Morley, and that he did not obtain any independent valuation. The defendant was, however, represented at all material times by a well-known firm of solicitors, which would have had lawyers who were experts in this particular field.

The plaintiff company in fact appears to have a very close connection with
Castlehaven Realtors. Exactly who is in control of the company is unclear. It would appear on the evidence to be a Mr Howard Li and the solicitor Mr Duncan
Li. A developer, Mr Glenn Funnell is the secretary, and Mr Morley himself appears to have a greater role than just as a real estate consultant. At no stage was Father Anton advised that the "buyer" had any close connection with the real estate agency.

The contract that was entered into, if read literally, required registration of the plan no later than 17 October 1998. That was a Saturday. Initially the parties seemed to agree that the plan could be registered within time if registered on the following Monday. This was said to be because of the provisions of cl 21.5 of the standard contract ("that the time for something to be done or to happen is a day that is not a business day, the time is extended to the next business day ... "). I very much doubt whether that provision is applicable. It is not a provision in the same terms as [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s36.html) of the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/), which talks about a period, the last day of which is a non- business day. Clause .5 does not appear to me to apply to a period at all, and I believe that the proper construction is as Scott J said in Oakdown Ltd versus Bernstein and Co [(1984) 49 P & CR 282] at :
 "Twenty-eight days means 28 days. It does not mean 27 days or 29 days or any number of days greater or less than 28. If the last day of the 28 day period falls on a Sunday, or a public holiday, that may have practical consequences for the arrangements that must be made for completion but it does not justify misconstruing the phrase '28 days'".

By parity of reasoning, it seems to me that special condition 29, when it talks about six months, means just that and is unaffected by cl 21.5. However, this is relatively unimportant because the plan was not in fact registered until 20 October 1998, so that whether the last day was 17 or 19 October the condition was not fulfilled.

At the hearing before me yesterday and today Mr P Walsh appeared for the plaintiff and urged that there should be specific performance. His basic propositions were:
The vendor was in breach of special condition 30 and accordingly could not rely on the non-registration of the plan within the six month period;
Alternatively special condition 29 was only triggered where the non- registration was without the vendor's fault under the principles set out in
New Zealand Shipping Co Ltd versus Societe des Ateliers et Chantiers de France [[1919] AC 1] at 7.
That if proposition 1 in either or both its limbs was wrong, then this was a proper case to give relief against forfeiture.

Mr G McNally, who appeared for the defendant, criticised the logic of the proposition put forth by Mr Walsh and said that, in any event, his client was not in breach or in default. As to the second proposition he put that the present was not the sort of situation where the court would give relief against forfeiture.

So far as Mr Walsh's first proposition is concerned, one must look both at the law and the facts of this particular case. As I have said on previous occasions (see for instance Woodcock versus Parlby Investments Pty Ltd (1988) 4
BPR 9568 at 9571) the precise legal analysis behind the rule laid down in the New Zealand Shipping case is obscure. One can think of various different ways of putting the proposition based on the old law of failure of conditions, equity and unconscionability, or various types of implied terms. I will not lengthen these reasons by going further.

Even if one can ascertain the juristic basis, the next question is what must be the cause of the non-performance of the event. Earlier cases, such as
Suttor versus Gundowda Pty Ltd <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 418] at 441, put the proposition very starkly. The proposition put is that there is one party who would be blameable and would be taking advantage of his own wrong if allowed to take advantage of a condition such as special condition 29, and there is another party who is not in default and blameless.

However, life is not always that simple and often the non-registration of a plan or non-fulfilment of a condition comes about through a variety of factors. Probably the last word on the matter, at least for present, was said by McLelland CJ in Eq in Hunyor versus Tilelli (1997) 8 BPR 15,629. His Honour said, at p 15,631: "For the purpose of considering the question of the defendant's default, the knowledge, acts and omissions of the defendant's solicitors or other agents, in that capacity, are to be attributed to the defendant (see CSS Investments
Pty Ltd versus Lopiron Pty Ltd [(1987) 76 ALR 463] at 474-5), although the knowledge, acts and omission of independent contractors otherwise than in the capacity as agents for the defendant are not to be so attributed: see Woodcock versus Parlby Investments Pty Ltd.

His Honour then directed his thoughts to causation at p 15,633 and the particular problem of multiple causes. He rejected the "but for" test and he rejected what he called the "commonsense" approach and analysed the problem, coming to the conclusion that: "A party to a contract is not entitled as against the other party to rely on an event caused or materially contributed to by the first party's own breach of the contract." 
Accordingly, one does not have to see that the default was the whole cause of the non-fulfilment of the condition, nor must the opposing party necessarily be blameless. One has got to look at whether the person seeking to rescind the contract materially contributed to the non-performance of the condition on which it now bases its rescission.

Furthermore, the rule now is that where a party claims an entitlement under a contract to rescind because of a clause, such as special condition 29, the onus of proof as to whether that party induced the occurrence lies on the party resisting rescission: Plumor Pty Ltd versus Handley [(1996) 41 NSWLR ], -35, a decision of McLelland CJ in Eq, which he again applied in
Hunyor's case.

Accordingly, in this case the onus, as he clearly recognised, is on Mr Walsh's client to satisfy the court that there was material default on the part of the vendor.

It is now necessary to look at the facts as to why it was that the condition was not fulfilled.

Mr Walsh says that the matter is very simple. On 15 October the only matter outstanding was that the purchaser had to consent to the registration of the plan in the light of the fact that it had lodged caveat 5213700 to protect its rights under the contract.

That caveat was lodged by Mr Duncan Li because he was concerned about action
Suncorp/Metway might take and he had intended to draft the caveat in such a way that it would not affect the registration of the plan. However, through a drafting error on the part of the plaintiff's solicitors the caveat prevented registration of the plan of subdivision and any other dealing and it was thus necessary for the consent of the caveator to be obtained.

Mr Walsh says that the evidence is that on 15 October the Registrar General's requisition was in the ordinary course of practice put in the delivery box of the law stationer who had a contract with the vendor's solicitors to provide registration services. The requisition, which is AX146, is dated 14 October.
It was apparently picked up by the law stationers on 15 October and faxed through to the vendor's solicitors. Mr Walsh relies on the fact that when Mrs
Tapping, the clerk in the vendor's solicitors' office who was handling the day to day aspect of this matter, saw the requisition she asked the partner in charge what she should do about it and he replied "nothing".

Mr Walsh then says that if there had been some contact on 15 October about the requisition it could have been cleared up on the 15th or 16th because it was a simple matter for the caveator to consent and the plan would have been registered. But for this happening the plan would have been registered. The "but for" part of the argument is what disturbed me when it was made.

However, when one looks at the whole evidence it is not quite as simple as that, even if the events of 15 October were decisive. Mrs Tapping says in her evidence, and she was not challenged on this part of it, that before she spoke to the partner in charge she had in fact telephoned Mr Moore's office and had a conversation with someone employed in that office, and said: "We have received a requisition from the Land Titles Office dated 14 October requiring consent of the caveator. Does the requisition you have received from the Land Titles Office say anything about obtaining the caveator's consent?" 
She spoke to a male person who answered "No".

That is why Mrs Tapping was able to say to the solicitor involved that there was a requisition, which the other side had heard about, but it did not seem to be the same as the one she had.

The evidence shows that Mr Moore was delegated to conduct the business necessary to have the plan registered, so that in fact on 15 October there was some notification to Mr Moore of this particular problem.

However, one really must look at the whole six month period. It is a fallacious argument, with respect, that is put in many of these cases to look to see the position where, because of past delays, it is already difficult to do something, and then some unexpected incident tips the delay to being a fatal one.

Contracts were exchanged on 17 April 1998. Council approval to the plan of subdivision came through on 13 May and Mr Moore's copy shows that he received it on 19 May 1998. Nothing much happened, and part of the reason for this is that Mr Whitnall was probably out in the field doing his survey which would take a couple of months.

However, the evidence shows that there was no great haste in the solicitors' office either, because an indication that Sydney Water needed a fee of $325 to give its necessary consent to the subdivision was made on 19 May 1998 and the cheque was not actually dated until 30 June 1998, assuming that the cheque is a genuine 30 June cheque and not one written for tax purposes some days afterwards.

There is no reason why the cheque to Sydney Water was not sent in May. Other authorities also had to give their goodwill to the subdivision and it would seem that it was not until 3 August that application was made to the electricity authority, road and traffic authority and telephone authority for the appropriate consents. This meant that the original linen plan <case> instrument was not lodged with the council until 5 August 1998, almost four months after contracts were exchanged.

The next problem was that the consent of Suncorp/Metway as mortgagee had to be obtained and Suncorp/Metway had to sign the plan. Suncorp/Metway had indicated that it was unwilling to sign the plan unless there was a relatively early settlement. There was correspondence with Suncorp/Metway's solicitors in
August and negotiations commenced for settlement earlier than eighteen weeks after registration of plan, as had been agreed to by the contract.

The defendant was desperate at this stage to have an early settlement because it was paying something like 13.5 percent interest to Suncorp/Metway and it was being pressed by that body.

Just how it came about is not completely clear, but it would seem that it was suggested to Father Anton that if there was a discount of the purchase price by $60,000 to $100,000 that the purchaser might agree to an early settlement on 30 September. The witnesses for the purchaser say that this discount was volunteered by Father Anton. It might very well be that he made the first offer, but I am quite sure the seed was put in his mind by the purchaser. Even when the offer had been made there was some suggestion that the purchaser might not insist on the discount and, indeed, the evidence shows that both Mr
Morley and Mr Funnell tried as hard as they could to persuade the directors of the purchaser not to insist upon it, but that the Messrs Li insisted and not only insisted but took the maximum amount of discount, $100,000.

The agreement in principle that there would be settlement on 30 September or seven days after the plan was registered, for consideration of $100,000 discount on the price, was reached about 16 September 1998. Thereafter the vendor's solicitors contacted Suncorp/Metway's Brisbane solicitors and
Suncorp/Metway's Sydney solicitors and the relevant consent from
Suncorp/Metway was obtained by 24 September. The plan of subdivision was lodged at the Land Titles Office on 29 September.

On 9 October 1998 the Land Titles Office contacted Mr Moore and indicated that the plan could not be registered because of a temporary road shown on the plan. Mr Moore waited until 15 October to pick up the plan.

When cross-examined as to why he did that it appeared quite clear that the reason was that he was busy doing other things, it was the first time he found it convenient to pick up the plan and he would not entrust that task to anybody else. He re-lodged the plan at 2.15pm on 19 October.

It would appear that the conversation between Mrs Tapping and a member of Mr
Moore's staff was either not noted or forgotten about because the requisition as to the consent of the caveator was also not dealt with.

If, of course, the relevant date is 17 October then the plan was not even re- lodged by that date and the registration was three days late. If, on the other hand, the relevant date is 19 October it was registered one day late because it appears to have been registered in the afternoon of 20 October.

On Thursday 15 October Father Anton was getting very concerned about the matter. He had been trying to see Mr Howard Li, who appeared to be the controlling person in the plaintiff's organisation, without success and he had also been telephoning Mr Morley and found that he was never able to talk to him. This made Father Anton rather exasperated. He wanted to talk to Mr Howard
Li to see if he could talk him out of the $100,000 discount.

On 16 October this exasperation brought Father Anton to ask his solicitor when was the last day for registration of the plan. He was told Saturday 17th
October. After talking to a parishioner, Father Anton came in contact with people who control a company called Kimberley Corporation Pty Ltd.

At 12.20pm on 20 October 1998 the plaintiff gave to the defendant a notice of rescission. This produced a response from the plaintiff's solicitor that the vendor itself was in default and not able to give such a notice of rescission and threatened legal proceedings. At 4.30pm that day the defendant entered into a fresh contract to sell the land to Kimberley Corporation Pty Ltd for $3.3 million. However, there was a collateral deed so that the defendant obtained further benefits to the extent of about $500,000.

In those circumstances can it be said that the vendor caused or materially contributed to the non-registration of the plan by 17 or 19 October? 
I do not consider that that has been shown. Indeed, a lot of the evidence tends to confirm what Father Anton said over and over again in the witness box that the purchaser was playing "the time game and lost".

Although we do not know what Mr Whitnall was doing, because he died without notes, the four months taken to get the various consents from the statutory authorities does not appear to be the work of someone who is pressing hard to get a particular plan registered. Indeed, there was probably little to be gained by getting the plan registered early because completion would have to take place early. Although Mr Funnell said that that just meant that a profit- making enterprise would commence earlier, there was evidence from another witness on the vendor's side that that could not happen because the preparatory work on the adjoining site had to fit in with the work that would be done on the site being sold.

What appears to have happened from the evidence that I have is that a fairly leisurely approach was taken by the purchaser who had control of everything that was happening with respect to the plan up until the time it was delivered to the vendor's solicitors on 18 August 1998. Thereafter there was just insufficient time for the many unexpected things that happen in registration of plans to be dealt with completely before the deadline.

As it has not been shown that the vendor caused or materially contributed to the non-registration, the vendor is not disentitled from relying on special condition 29.

Before leaving this point I should note that the argument that was based on special condition 30 did not appear to me to be a strong one at all. It is quite unclear as to how far special condition 30 is interdependent with special condition 29 and what is more, special condition 30 imposes a joint obligation on both the purchaser and the vendor to use their collective best endeavours. It seems to me that on the proper analysis of the contract, special condition 30 is just exhortatory rather than being a promissory condition which can be enforced by damages. The real argument is the one Mr
Walsh put forward which I have called point 1(b), that is the one based on the
New Zealand Shipping case.

Accordingly, the plaintiff must fail unless the court gives relief against forfeiture.

Mr McNally simply says that this is not a case where relief against forfeiture will be given.

I think that is right. However, I do not want to foreclose the situation that this expanding area of the law might in due course extend that far, and so I will deal with the matter on the merits.

Historically relief against forfeiture commenced with penal bonds whereby a person promised to forfeit a large sum of money if he did not pay a smaller sum or do a certain thing. Equity took the view that the promise to pay a larger sum was just a security and gave relief. Lord Nottingham extended these principles into the law of mortgages and they have since been extended into the law of landlord and tenant.

In Australia, though not in England, the principles have extended further into situations akin to a mortgage, such as Stern versus McArthur <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 489.] Further, at least in exceptional cases (though some judges would not use that word "exceptional") relief against forfeiture is given more widely: see Legione versus Hateley <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 406]; Dillon versus Bepuri Pty Ltd (1988) 4 BPR 9362 and Tang v
Chong (1988) 4 BPR 9507. Those last two cases were both situations where there was a concluded unconditional contract but a notice to complete was given and because of special problems too much time went by.

In England the Privy Council in Union Eagle Ltd versus Golden Achievement Ltd <case>; [[1997] AC 514] indicated that it thought the Australian authorities went too far and that it was better to deal with problems such as arose in those cases by way of restitution rather than relief against forfeiture.

However, none of the cases have gone as far as to give relief against forfeiture with a conditional contract. Indeed, in Woodcock versus Parlby
Investments Pty Ltd (supra) I specifically declined to give that relief.

There is a very real difference between the situation where there is an unconditional contract and the purchaser has an equitable interest in the land which he or she will forfeit if there is non-compliance with a condition, and a situation where there is a conditional contract in which the purchaser only obtains the secured equitable interest when the condition is fulfilled.

One of the ways in which these differences have been illustrated in the past is that it is necessary to give a notice to complete to make time of the essence or, alternatively, state in the contract that time is of the essence for a promissory condition but that it never be necessary in the case of a contingent condition: Aberfoyle Plantations Ltd versus Cheng [[1960] AC ], which although it was partly distinguished by the High Court in Perri v
Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 537] was followed on this point, see p 545.

Traditionally relief against forfeiture has been given to stop someone forfeiting property which an opponent already has. It would be quite an extension to say that the principle could be used to vest in a party something that that party has never securely held. There is, of course, an interest in land in a person who has a conditional contract which will support a caveat, but that interest does not become secure until the condition is fulfilled.

Even if this were a case where the principle of relief against forfeiture could be applied, in my view it is not a case where the court would actually apply the principle.

There are, as Mr Walsh points out, some factors in this case which show that if the purchaser does not get relief against forfeiture the defendant will gain a windfall. The most obvious windfall is that at the start of the exercise the vendor had unsubdivided land, whereas at the end of the exercise it has a separate lot which has got council consent and where all the expensive surveying and other work has been done by someone else. Furthermore, it will under the collateral deed obtain a considerably larger amount of money.

Mr Walsh also says that the case is made stronger because the defendant and its solicitor contributed to the non-registration of the plan, that time did not appear to be curable and there was no wilful default on the part of the purchaser.

Some of these matters are clearly prejudicial to the position of the purchaser. However, the mere fact that there is a windfall is not sufficient.
That windfall must be unconscionable in all the circumstances and usually the case must fit into one of Equity's well recognised categories.

The sort of windfall in the Woodcock case (supra) I did not consider sufficient. When one looks at the general conduct of the plaintiff and the way in which there was delay, the way in which the $100,000 discount was insisted upon, and the conversations with Mr Morley at the beginning that the buyers would want to put something back into the school, it does not seem to me the mere fact that there is now a windfall is something that should make me give relief against forfeiture.

I should note that Mr Walsh says I should not put too much store by what was said about what Mr Morley said because Mr Morley was never cross-examined on these matters, nor was it suggested to him that his conduct was anything other than honest. Father Anton was also not cross-examined on that issue and indeed no-one even suggested Mr Morley was not honest. What was suggested was Mr
Morley had set up a situation which controllers of the plaintiff were not prepared to honour, but rather were insisting on every contractual right. Had they paid Father Anton the courtesy of actually talking to him or answering his phone calls or not being quite so insistent on their rights and delaying early such that they ran out of time, this would not have happened. Any windfall really is the result of the developers, to use the words of Father
Anton, playing the game and losing.

It follows that the plaintiff's claim for specific performance must be dismissed with costs and that on the cross-claim there should be an order that the cross-defendant withdraw caveat 5213700 on or before 24 December 1998.

The exhibits should be retained.
 * * * 
