

Akron Securities Ltd versus Iliffe [1997] NSWSC 106 (4 April 1997) 
AKRON SECURITIES LTD versus ILIFFE /94 APRIL 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MASON P, PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA 
CATCHWORDS Trade Practices Act, 1979. s87-restitutio in integrum - approach to remedies under s.87 - role and application of discretion - damages, collateral benefits consideration of - retention of taxation benefits - Demagogue Pty Limited versus Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] 
Trietel, "The Law of Contract" 9th ed., 1995., p.352.

Skapinker, D "Other remedies under the Trade Practices Act - the rise and rise of section 87" (1995) 21 Mon L Rev 188 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
FACTS 
This appeal arose out of litigation concerning amounts allegedly owing by various people, mostly investors. The investment was of a rather novel kind, viz. in shares in a horse-breeding venture. The appellant, who was plaintiff below, won as against all defendants except the three current respondents, Mr
Iliffe, his company John Iliffe & Associates Pty Limited, and a Mr John
Winston Gundry. The appellant seeks repayment of the loan principle to establish adequate restitutio in integrum for the avoidance of the contracts or in the alternative, a remedy less drastic than avoidance.

HELD 
Mason P, Priestley JA agreeing: 
Section 87 is to be given no restrictive interpretation: Demagogue Pty
Limited versus Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31], and, a court should not restrict the exercise of its discretion upon technical grounds which may defeat the policy of the section:
Mister Figgins Pty Limited versus Centrepoint Freeholds Pty Limited <case>; [(1981) 36 ALR 23.] The scope of s.87 is not restricted by the limitations under the general law upon a party's right to rescind for breach of contract or misrepresentation: Demagogue; Henjo Investments Pty Limited versus Collins
Marrickville Pty Limited <case>; [(1988) 39 FCR 546], the limitations set out in Seddon versus North Eastern Salt Co
Limited [[1905] 1 Ch 326] discussed.

Section 87 provides relief beyond that of pecuniary recovery as allowed for in tort: Wardley Australia Ltd versus Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] and extends as far as the prevention and reduction of loss or damage which is likely to be suffered where "likely" for the purposes of s.87 means "real chance or possibility": Western Australia versus Wardley Australia
Limited <case>; [(1991) 30 FCR 245.] 
Where a remedy is not available under s.82 of the Act, s.87 may be pressed into service because, the availability of orders in the nature of rescission under s.87 is not dependent on proof of loss compensable: : GIO Australia
Holdings Ltd versus Marks (unreported, 21 November 1996), distinguished.

The scope of s.87 provides for a range of relief precluding the inevitable or automatic granting of any one particular remedy. His Honour fell into error when he did not consider the range of remedies available under s. 87. It is for the trial judge having found misleading or deceptive conduct under s.52, in the exercise of his or her discretion, to consider the scope of s.87 and decide an appropriate remedy. This is not to demand of trial judges evidence of a slavish picking over of every part of s.87 to find that remedy which is appropriate. The general approach is to consider the likely extent of loss or damage flowing from the misleading or deceptive conduct and to then tailor the remedy with regard to what is proportionate to that likely loss or damage and any actual loss or damage.

In the circumstances of this case, consideration is to be given to the taxation relief arising from the Venture which induced the respondents to enter the contracts and which relief has been received and retained by the respondents.

Meagher JA dissenting: 
His Honour's primary finding of misrepresentation by the appellant allowed his Honour to make the orders under s.87(1A). Although in a general sense the respondents only received one genuine benefit under the contracts, the duties of the respondents were not delightful nor the privileges great, and the benefit is not enough to satisfy an alleged inadequate provision for restitutio in integrum.

The benefit of a tax deduction in the context of "practical restitution" (Alati versus Kruger <case>; [(1955) 94 CLR 216)], raises a real question as to whether the respondents will be liable to pay income tax on any monies recovered from the appellant. This benefit may therefore be disregarded.

Mason P, Priestley, Meagher JJA agreeing: 
In respect of the appellants submission for repayment of the loan moneys to effect restitutio in integrum, this argument is rejected because it is artificial in these circumstances to regard the respondents as having received the loan moneys from the appellant.

ORDERS . Appeal allowed.
Within 14 days the parties are to file agreed short minutes. If agreement cannot be reached, each party is, within the same time, to file the draft orders proposed by that party, together with written submissions supporting the party's proposed version. Submissions in reply may be filed within a further period of 7 days.
Liberty to apply.
 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: At issue in this appeal is the remedy awarded in consequence of a finding that the respondents were induced to become Investors in the Bernborough 1988 Breeding Venture by reason of a particular item of misleading conduct for which the appellant bore legal responsibility. 
The trial judge (Rolfe J) declared to be void ab initio all contractual arrangements between the parties, thereby relieving the respondents retrospectively of all risks attendant upon a Venture which had failed in circumstances involving no fault on the part of the respondent or the Manager of the Venture. According to the appellant, a more finely tuned remedy should have been awarded.

THE BERNBOROUGH 1988 BREEDING VENTURE 
The promoters of the Venture included the appellant ("Akron") and Bernborough Breeding and Racing Ltd ("Bernborough" or the "Manager"). What was offered in the Investment Proposal issued in early June 1988 may be summarised as follows :
Akron would purchase "appropriate interests" in 38 broodmares at the valuation figure determined by Dalgety Bloodstock International. That figure was $7,245,000.
The Venture would be divided into 200 equal undivided part interests ("Ownership Shares"). 80 of these were to be subscribed for by Bernborough, the company that would become the Manager of the Venture. These Ownership
Shares were in fact undivided interests as tenant in common in (a) the leasehold interests in the 38 broodmares and (b) the ownership of 20 weanlings which had been separately valued by Dalgety at $1,970,000.
The Manager offered to provide all management and control for the mares and progeny, including marketing. Its primary objective was to derive profits from breeding the mares to produce high quality progeny for commercial yearling market sales. All progeny were to be sold: no horses were to be retained or acquired for racing.
The broodmares acquired at the Dalgety valuation were to be mated in 1988 and later years. Investors would derive income from the sale of yearlings each year commencing in 1989 and the sale of all the bloodstock on hand when the business was wound up in the year ending 30 June 1992 (unless extended beyond that date with the consent of all Investors).
Investors would acquire Ownership Shares by entering into a four year fixed interest lease from Akron as Lessor in respect of the broodmare component of each Ownership Share; and either paying cash, or negotiating a loan, to cover outlays totalling $37,986 per share for Fiscal 1988. These outlays for Fiscal 1988 were made up as follows: 
First annual lease rental  $10,754  
Purchase of weanlings  ,850  
Payment of insurance & service fees for the 1988 stud season (which commenced September 1988)  ,928  
Payment on account of other bloodstock related expenses, to be applied to meet those expenses as incurred (agistment, veterinary etc)  ,862  
Commission fees payable by Investors  ,592  $37,986 
Investors were given the option of borrowing this sum of $37,986 from
Akron on certain terms, including execution of a charge over the Investor's interests in the horses. The loan would be an interest-only loan, with interest of $5,900 being payable annually in advance. Thus, if the loan option were taken up (and it was by the respondents), the Investor in one Ownership
Share would pay on that account $5,900 in June 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991 and repay the principal of $37,986 in June 1992.
Investors would be required to pay rentals of $10,754 per Ownership Share in June 1989, 1990 and 1991, with the lease residual of $5,440 being payable in June 1992.
In each of the fiscal years 1989-1992 inclusive, Investors would earn taxable income to the extent that receipts to Investors from the sale of yearlings (together with insurance recoveries) exceeded the total of the lease rentals and running expenses incurred in the relevant fiscal year, and the
Manager's entitlement to 15 per cent of the surplus income over running expenses.
Because the Manager "confidently" expected that receipts from the sale of yearlings would exceed running expenses, the Manager was prepared to carry the risk of any shortfall, but only until termination of the Venture. Accordingly,
Investors were informed that they would not be obliged to make any contribution to running expenses (including stallion service fees) in fiscal , 1990 and 1991.
It was indicated that the maximum outlays required by Investors taking out loans in those years would be: 
Fiscal Lease Lease Loan Loan 
Year Rental Residual Interest Principal TOTAL $ $ $ $ $ 10,754 - 5,900 - 16,654 10,754 - 5,900 - 16,654 10,754 - 5,900 - 16,654 * - 5,440 - 37,986 43,426 93,388 * The guarantee of maximum outlay did not apply to 1992
It was obvious that the Venture offered taxation incentives and that these were a significant inducement to all Investors. Prospective Investors were informed of counsel's opinion that each would be carrying on the business of "primary production" as defined in s6(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act, with attendant advantages. They were also told that for an outlay of $5,900 per share in June 1988 (ie prepayment of the first year's interest on the loan), they would have deductions for Fiscal 1988 totalling $31,174 per share, made up as follows: 
First annual lease rental $ 10,754 
Payment of insurance and service fees for 1988 stud season 10,928 
Commission fees payable by Investors 3, 592 ,274 
Interest on loan 5,900 $31,174 
Rolfe J's findings about the benefits of income tax deductions and deferrals will be referred to below.
The Investment Proposal offered a further feature. In return for an additional payment of $1303 per Ownership Share, payable on entering the
Venture, an Investor could secure Bernborough's agreement that, for each
Ownership Share subscribed, the Investor would receive "MINIMUM RECEIPTS of not less that $43,436 over the life of" the Venture. "MINIMUM RECEIPTS" were defined to mean the positive difference between: ) Receipts from the sale of bloodstock (and bloodstock insurance recoveries) during the term of the Bernborough 1988 Breeding Venture and on termination; and ) Running expenses (including service fees and insurance) incurred in fiscal years 1989, 1990, 1991 and 1992.
 (Each of the respondents purchased this "guarantee".)
The Investment Proposal stated that the Investor might sell, transfer or deal with the Ownership Share, provided that each transfer must be the subject of an election pursuant to s36A(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
The Venture was to continue until the termination date of 2 January 1992, whereupon the Manager was to sell the horses then on hand and pay the proceeds of such sale to the Investor. All horses were to be sold by 30 June 1992. This termination date would only be extended by unanimous agreement of Investors.
An Investor acquiring one share would execute the following contracts: 
An Investment Agreement, regulating the Investor's rights vis a vis the
Manager; 
A Sale Agreement, whereby Bernborough (the Manager) would sell an undivided 1/200th part interest in the weanlings for $9850 per share; 
A Lease Agreement between Akron as Lessor and the Investor as Lessee. This would lease an undivided 1/200th part interest in the mares acquired by the
Lessor for the purpose of the Breeding Venture. The term was four years with rentals of $10,754 payable in June 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991. The Lease stated an agreed residual value of $5,440. Interest accrued on outstanding moneys.
 (If the loan option were taken up) a Loan Agreement between Akron as
Lender and the Investor as Borrower. If the loan was not duly repaid it carried interest at 20 per cent.
 (If the "Minimum Receipts Insurance" offer were taken up) a Minimum
Receipts Agreement with Bernborough, for a "premium" of $1303.

THE RESPONDENTS ENTER THE VENTURE 
Each of the Respondents entered into the Venture. Mr Iliffe took up two shares; his company John Iliffe and Associates Pty Ltd one share; and Mr
Gundry one share. It will be sufficient to detail the steps taken by Mr Iliffe with respect to his acquisition of two shares. There appear to be no material differences with the other transactions, save that the company and Mr Gundry only acquired one share. All three entered the Venture shortly before 30 June .

On about 29 June 1988 Mr Iliffe executed a Thoroughbred Investor Agreement, a
Sale Agreement, a Lease Agreement, a Loan Agreement, and a Charge. He returned these to Akron with a cheque in the sum of $12,416. The cheque represented $11,800 (2 x $5,900, being the advance interest payment on a loan of $75,972, ie 2 x $37,986) plus $616 for stamp and FID duty. He authorised Akron to apply the proceeds of the loan in the following manner:- $13,790 to Bernborough for insurance, service fees and other bloodstock related expenses; $3,592 commission to be retained by Akron; $9,850 to Bernborough, being the purchase price of the weanlings; $10,754 to pay the first annual rental in respect of the broodmare component of each Ownership Share.
 (These four items are those referred to in para 5 of my summary of the
Investment Proposal, item (i) representing the total of the 3rd and 4th figures referred to in para 5.) 
Rolfe J found that: "by entering into various agreements the defendants borrowed money which, prima facie, they came under a liability to repay conformably with those agreements. The money was not received by them but paid, by their authority, to another party in contemplation that they would receive various financial advantages. One of those financial advantages, which was received, was a reduction in the amount of income tax payable by them." (Judgment p63) 
Mr Iliffe also executed a document in relation to the minimum receipts guarantee and paid $1,303 per share for that benefit.

Thereafter payments and receipts by Mr Iliffe (per share) were as follows: 
Lease rental Loan Interest Profits distributed 
June 1989 $10,754 $5,900 
June 1990 $10,754 $5,900 
Nov 1990   ($3,135) $21,508 $11,800 $3,135 was the only distribution made per share in the Venture. In April 1991
Bernborough went into receivership. The Venture was later wound up, but no further proceeds were available to investors. Nor did the investors meet any further of their contractual obligations after 1990. In consequence, Akron terminated the respective Leases in June 1991 and demanded payment of outstanding loan moneys (with interest) in July 1991.

As I have already indicated, similar documents were executed by the other respondents and similar payments and receipts effected. The upshot was that each investor paid to Akron a net $36,073 per share, calculated as follows: 
Lease payments $21,508 (ie 1989 & 1990) 
Loan interest payments 17,700 (ie 1988, 1989 & 1990) 
Distribution 12.11.90 (3,135) $36,073 
TAXATION BENEFITS 
Each respondent also obtained certain tax benefits from the Venture during its currency. In the passage already quoted, Rolfe J noted that one of the financial advantages of the Venture, as represented in the Proposal and as received, was a reduction in the amount of income tax payable by them. Those benefits were immediate and significant.

Each Investor who was sued by Akron, including the respondents, agreed that a factor inducing entry into the Venture was that a lesser amount of income tax would have to be paid, at least in the relevant financial years. Rolfe J held that he did not have: "any particular difficulty, on the facts of this case, in equating the receipt of the loan funds, albeit they were paid to a third party at the direction of the defendants, and the liability to make payments under the lease, with the benefit the defendants received by the reduced amount of income tax they were called upon to pay. As I have said this was one of the major factors in the whole arrangement, and not to have regard to it would be to ignore that to which the parties were directing their attention." (judgment p64) 
Specifically, he found that none of the Investor defendants would have entered into the contracts if there had not been a taxation benefit perceived to be available as a result of so doing (judgment p70). Elsewhere Rolfe J reminded that "one must never lose sight of the taxation advantages as to the obtaining of which there was no risk." (judgment p16). It would be to close one's eyes to reality to overlook the relevance of the fact that all Investors, including the respondents, entered into the Venture on or shortly before 30 June 1988.

The "tax effected loss" was calculated with respect to each respondent, based on their taxable income as returned. The calculation was done by adding and subtracting figures as follows: 
CALCULATION OF TAX SAVING 
Taxable income as assessed/returned 
Add Back: 
Deductions relating to 1988 breeding venture 
Lease of broodmares 
Interest on loan 
Stamp duty on loan 
Commission to Akron 
Minimum receipts insurance premium 
Partnership profit/loss 
Taxable income excluding 1988 breeding venture 
Tax thereon including medicare levy 
Less: 
Tax on taxable income as assessed/returned 
Including medicare levy 
On this approach, Mr Iliffe (who had two Ownership Shares) earned tax savings of $32,949 in 1988, $26,148 in 1989 and $9,381 in 1990. The figures for John
Iliffe and Associates Pty Ltd for those three years were $16,081, $10,147 and $3,714. The figures for Mr Gundry for those three years were $13,776, $13,074 and $4,625. The respective tax savings in 1988 were "earned" by payment of $5,900 per share plus a small outlay for stamp and FID duty.

It was argued below that the avoidance of the transaction for illegality would expose the respondents to tax reassessment by the Commissioner of Taxation.
This was put in the context of a claim by Akron for restitution against the
Investors generally, consequent upon a claim by the Investors that the whole transaction was tainted by illegality which rendered the various contracts void and unenforceable. Although Rolfe J rejected the illegality defence, he also considered Akron's submission that restitution lay. In the course of doing so he said: "The defendants submit also that they may not be able to retain that financial advantage if the arrangement is struck down as being void for illegality, because the Commissioner of Taxation may seek to re-assess them.
There is not a skerrick of evidence before me that this will occur, notwithstanding that the possibility of the Commissioner taking such a course must have been in the minds of the defendants when these proceedings were commenced and defended. Certainly since the commencement of the case I have directed attention to the possible consequence that the Commissioner may take the view that there would be a re-assessment. Yet the defendants have not placed any evidence before me that this will occur. In these circumstances it seems to me that I can only deal with the matter on the evidence and that is quite clear, namely there has been a financial benefit by the reduction in the amount of income tax payable and there is no evidence that the Commissioner will seek to re-assess." (judgment pp64-5).

This argument about potential clawback by the Commissioner was somewhat faintly revived by the respondents in this appeal in the context of debate as to whether receipt and retention of tax benefits by the respondents is to be brought into account in any process of restitutio in integrum. I shall return to the relevance of this finding, which I adopt.

MINIMUM RECEIPTS "INSURANCE" 
As indicated above, the Investment Proposal offered a "MINIMUM RECEIPTS" agreement or commitment by Bernborough. In return for an additional payment of $1303 per Ownership Share, Bernborough promised that, for each Ownership Share subscribed, the investor would receive minimum receipts of not less than $43,436 over the life of the venture. Of course the expression "insurance" is technically inapt, but it fairly sums up the way in which this aspect of the proposal would have been seen by potential investors. The essence of
Bernborough's promise was that, if during the life of the Venture, the investor taking up the offer for MINIMUM RECEIPTS insurance did not receive by way of distribution at least $43,436, being the amount needed to pay out the lease residual ($5,440) and loan principal ($37,986), then Bernborough would make good the shortfall.

This was a significant aspect of what was perceived by all to be a speculative and risky investment. However the flaw was that the promise or "insurance" was offered by Bernborough itself and was only as good as Bernborough's capacity to repay. The collapse of the venture brought about the failure of Bernborough itself and its inability to meet this particular commitment at the very time when it was called upon.

All of the Investors who were sued by Akron argued that the representations made in the investment proposal concerning the minimum receipts "insurance" were themselves misleading and deceptive conduct. This argument was rejected by Rolfe J, who held that Akron was entitled to hold the belief that
Bernborough would be able to meet the obligations relating to minimum receipts assumed by it in the Investment Proposal.

However three of the investors, the respondents, had an additional point, which was ultimately to prove decisive for them, because it was the only defence to Akron's claims that was successful. The respondents argued that it had been represented to them by Miss Bollard, an employee or representative of
Akron, that NZI Securities Australia Ltd ("NZI") effectively backed
Bernborough's minimum receipts guarantee. Rolfe J found in favour of the respondents on this issue and held that they had been led by this representation to enter into the entire transaction.

THE VENTURE FAILS 
Over the life of the Venture the prices needed to be obtained for yearlings to meet expenses were not achieved, and in April 1991 the directors of
Bernborough appointed a receiver to the company. Sales in yearlings had plummeted. The Investors made no further payments. At the end of the Venture the proceeds of sale of the horses were insufficient to provide any surplus and, because Bernborough was itself the minimum receipts "insurer", those who had taken out minimum receipts insurance did not receive its benefit.

THE CLAIMS AND CROSS CLAIMS IN THE COURT BELOW 
Akron sued the respondents and a large number of other Investors for moneys owing to it under the Lease Agreement and the Loan Agreement. Leaving aside statutory interest under s94 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), the sum claimed (per share) from each Respondent was $60,080 made up as follows: 
Lease Agreement rental for 1991 $10,754 lease residual 5,440 $16,194 $16,194 
Loan Agreement interest for 1991 $ 5,900 principal 37,986 $43,886 $43,886 $60,080 
If the Agreements stood these moneys were clearly due. So too was interest on the unpaid moneys due under the loan and lease agreements.

The Investors raised numerous defences to Akron's claims. Except for the three respondents, all defendants failed, and judgment was entered in Akron's favour against each Investor for equivalent of $60,080 per Ownership Share, plus statutory interest. The respondents also failed in all but one of their defences, which paralleled those of the other Investors. As to the attacks made by all of the Investors, including the respondents, about representations made concerning the "quality" of the Venture, the trial judge held : "My evaluation of the totality of the evidence is that when the representations were made they were not fraudulent, did not offend against [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s52.html), even when assisted by s51A, they were not unreasonable and they did not constitute negligent misstatements. Nor did they contravene the provisions of the [Fair
Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). I consider, for reasons I shall seek to give, that on the available information and acting reasonably and properly, the plaintiff was entitled to make the representations it did, ie the statements appearing in the documents in the context in which they appeared.
 
It may be asked why people were prepared to enter into such a Venture if it involved risk factors. The answer is, of course, that it was essentially "tax driven" and, whatever else may happen, the defendants would obtain the benefits of income tax deductions and deferrals. There was no risk element about that." (judgment p320) 
However the three respondents succeeded in one of their claims based on s52 of the Trade Practices Act. It was found that each had relied upon an oral representation made by a Miss Bollard, to the effect that the minimum receipts guarantee given by Bernborough was backed by NZI. Miss Bollard's authority to make the representation on behalf of Akron was not in issue. This representation was false, although it is not suggested that it had been made fraudulently. (It appears that it had been proposed at an earlier stage that
NZI would become the minimum receipts insurer.) Each of the three respondents had entered the Venture believing that the minimum receipts "insurance" would be effective and would hold them safe even if the Venture did not succeed and generate profits. The absence of NZI backing became critical, and costly, because Bernborough became insolvent.

Although this was not the sole inducement operating on the mind of each respondent (taxation advantages and anticipated profits were also in contemplation) each respondent would not have entered into the venture if he or it had been aware that NZI was not banking Bernborough's maximum receipts guarantee that each had purchased for the "premium" of $1303 per share. The trial judge so held, ruling that Miss Bollard's conduct fell within s52 of the
Trade Practices Act. This ruling, made separately with respect to each respondent, is not challenged on appeal.

THE ISSUES IN THE APPEAL 
Akron challenges the remedy ordered by the trial judge in favour of the three respondents who were misled by Miss Bollard's statements. In each case the relevant orders in effect were that: - Akron pay $62,297 to each respondent per share acquired - the Loan Agreement was set aside ab initio - the Lease Agreement was set aside ab initio.
 $62,297 is the sum of $36,073 referred to above as the net payment per share made to Akron by each Investor over the life of the Venture plus $26,224 interest under s94 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/).

Accepting that the analogy of equity's approach to rescission from innocent misrepresentation is not controlling, Akron argues nevertheless that his
Honour should not have avoided the Agreements without having required the respondents to give substantial restitutio in integrum. In particular, it is contended that repayment of the loan principal should have been the price of relief by way of avoidance.

Alternatively, Akron complains that the trial judge appears to have regarded avoidance ab initio (with repayment of net moneys outlaid) as the inevitable consequence of the finding that the respondents were misled in relation to the
Minimum Receipts "guarantee". Akron contends that a less drastic remedy was appropriate.

INTERPRETING ROLFE J'S REASONS AS TO REMEDY 
As to Mr Iliffe and his company, Rolfe J held: "Although I consider there were many matters operating on Mr Iliffe's mind, including his close association with Sir Tristan Antico, which led to his investing in the Venture, I am satisfied that he would not have done so if he had known that the minimum receipts insurance was not supported by NZI as Miss
Bollard had told him it would be. Mr Iliffe was, accordingly, misled or deceived in terms of s52 of the Trade Practices Act and I am of the view that he and John Iliffe Associates Pty Limited, of which he was the alter ego, should be relieved of the contractual liabilities to the plaintiff for that reason."(judgment pp151-2 emphasis added) 
As to Mr Gundry, he held: "I am satisfied that but for this statement, which was misleading or deceptive, Mr Gundry would not have entered into the arrangements. His error was not the product of any wrong interpretation of material put before him, or any unjustified assumption. As Mr Gundry was misled or deceived he is entitled to be exculpated from his obligations under the agreements." (judgment p202, emphasis added) 
Absent any other discussion of the bases upon which those remedies were given, I would interpret Rolfe J as inferring that the remedies flow automatically from the proven conduct and its impact upon the respondents. The portions bolded in these extracts indicate that it appears to have been treated as inevitable that the finding that each respondent was misled or deceived by conduct infringing s52 of the Trade Practices Act meant that the respondent should be relieved retrospectively of his or its contractual liabilities to Akron. On this basis I consider that his Honour was in error for reasons which follow. That error obliges this Court itself to determine how the judicial discretion as to remedy under s87 ought to be exercised in the particular case.

Alternatively, if I were wrong in my interpretation of his Honour's reasoning process, I would still feel entitled to set aside the orders below if other relief was more appropriate. This is because there is no indication that the trial judge considered himself both permitted and obliged to scan s87 in seeking to make the appropriate order. I shall explain below what I consider to be the correct approach for a court faced with the remedial smorgasbord offered by s87.

THE SCOPE OF S87 
Early case law took a narrow approach to s87, with courts fearing to move far from the familiar coastline of traditional common law and equitable approaches. But it is now clearly established that s87 is to be given no restrictive interpretation. In the words of Gummow J in Demagogue Pty Ltd v
Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] at 37, 38, "whilst contractual rights subsist ... between the parties their relationship is not governed simply by the general law as to vendor and purchaser. The legislation regulates the existence and exercise of what would otherwise be the rights at general law and, in addition, itself creates new rights and remedies ....[It] should be no inhibition to giving effect to what, on its proper construction, is provided for in the legislation, that the result may be to achieve consequences and administer remedies which differ from those otherwise obtaining under the general law ...". A court should not restrict the exercise of its discretion "by imposing upon itself technicalities which might defeat the policy of the section":
Mister Figgins Pty Ltd versus Centrepoint Freeholds Pty Ltd <case>; <case>; [(1988) 19 FCR 469] at 473-4; Accounting Systems 2000 (Developments) Pty Ltd v
CCH Australia Ltd [(1993) 42 FCR 470] at 504. The range of cases expounding s87 is explored in Diane Skapinker's article `Other
Remedies' Under the Trade Practices Act - The Rise and Rise of Section 87" Mon L Rev 188.

Unlike s82, which is concerned only with compensation for actual loss or damage, s87 extends to the prevention and reduction of loss or damage which is likely to be suffered. In the phrase "likely to be suffered" the word "likely" speaks of a "real chance or possibility": Western Australia versus Wardley
Australia Ltd <case>; [(1991) 30 FCR 245] at 261. Section 87 goes beyond permitting orders for pecuniary recovery as understood in the law of tort, as Deane J pointed out in
Wardley Australia Ltd versus Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] at 543-4. There he referred to the power to make orders in respect of persons "likely to suffer" loss or damage by conduct in contravention of Part IV or V and to make appropriate orders which will "prevent or reduce" actual loss or damage. These principles were demonstrated in Demagogue, where the Full Court of the Federal Court held that the loss or damage for the purposes of both s87(1) and s87(1A) will include the detriment suffered by being bound to a contract induced by misleading or deceptive conduct in contravention of s52. The Court also decided that entitlement to damages under s82 is not a prerequisite to relief under s87: see <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] at 32-3 (Black CJ), 43-4 (Gummow J), 47 (Cooper J). See also Wardley at 527.

The respondent contended that the recent decision of the Full Federal Court in
GIO Australia Holdings Ltd versus Marks (Unreported, 21 November 1996) meant that neither damages nor any other order effectively making good Miss
Bollard's representation was available under s87. GIO was a case where a brochure promoting a loan facility had been held to misrepresent the contract documents. The latter reserved to GIO the right to vary an interest rate margin whereas the brochure (which said that the margin would be "set at" .25%) conveyed the impression that the margin was immutable. Finding that the misrepresentation had been relied upon, the trial judge had granted relief under s87 by ordering damages based on the difference between the "set" marginal rate of 1.25% and the rate of 2.25% to which the marginal rate had been increased pursuant to the contractual terms. There had been no evidence that the borrowers could or would have borrowed more cheaply elsewhere.

In the Full Court, GIO was successful in having the order for damages set aside. It was held that the borrowers were seeking no more than an order making good their expectations as represented in the brochure, and that s87 could not be used for that purpose. The Court reasoned that the normal measure of damages for misrepresentation was the difference at the time of purchase between the real value of what was acquired, and the price paid: Potts v
Miller <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 282] at 289, 297; Toteff versus Antonas <case>; [(1952) 87 CLR 647] at 650-1, 654; Gould versus Vaggelas [(1984) 157 CLR ]
at 220. The borrowers' inability to prove that an alternative facility (with a "set" margin) could have been purchased on the market meant that no damages were recoverable under s82. Section 87 was said to be unavailable to circumvent this result, because the reasoning in Gates versus City Mutual Life
Assurance Society Ltd (1986) 160 CLR 1 precluded it.

With respect to their Honours in the Full Court, I have real difficulty in construing s87 in this way. Granted that no damages under s82 were recoverable in GIO in the light of Gates, at least as that case is currently understood, it simply does not follow that s87 could not be pressed into service according to its terms. That appears to me to be expressly what s87(1) provides (cf "whether or not it ... makes an order under section ... 82") and expressly what was decided in Demagogue. Foster J recognised this in
GIO when he said that "the borrowers' inability in the present case to demonstrate any financial loss resulting from the misrepresentation is no bar to their seeking relief under s87" (p30). Section 87(2)(d) speaks in terms of "an order ... to pay ... the amount of the loss or damages" (contrast s45D(1)(a) referred to in a passage from Barneys Blu-Crete Pty Ltd v
Australian Workers Union <case>; [(1979) 43 FLR 463] at 473 cited by Foster J in GIO). I find it difficult to see that Gates stands in the way, because relief under s87 was not sought in that case, and because the passages cited by the Full Court from
Gates (160 CLR at 7, 12-13 & 14-15) do not, in my respectful opinion, establish that s87 offers nothing but rescission in cases such as the present.

That s87 is available without proof of loss compensable according to Gates principles is patent by the unchallenged resort to it for orders in the nature of rescission, as in the present case. Yet if absence of proof of s82 damages is no bar to one part of s87, I see no reason why it should bar resort to other parts. In Kitzbeau Pty Ltd versus WG & B Pty Ltd <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 281] at 299 the High Court illustrated how, in a proper case, an award of damages may be married to an order pursuant to s87 rewriting a contract so as to put the innocent party "in the same position that it would have been if there had been no misrepresentation".

Whether or not this Court should follow rather than question the Full Court in
GIO need not ultimately be decided. In my view GIO is distinguishable because the absence of (solvent) NZI's backing of (insolvent)
Bernborough's "guarantee" is self-evidently detrimental. Such backing was procurable (at a price) witnessed by its availability from NZI for earlier
Bernborough Ventures. Whether or not the price would have been more than $1303 per share does not matter so long as it is clear that such sum would have purchased some "insurance" from a stable corporation such as NZI.
Ultimately counsel for the respondents conceded that s87 would have supported an order effectively requiring Akron to compensate for the respondents' expectation loss. At the same time, he stoutly maintained that rescission, not compensation, was the remedy previously adopted by the Federal Court, and the appropriate remedy in this case.

In granting a remedy under s87, the Court is not restricted by the limitations under the general law upon a party's right to rescind for misrepresentation.
Relevant to the present case is the availability of s87 to support remedies dismantling a series of interlocking contractual arrangements, not all of which involve the immediate parties to the s52 breach. This means that "unlike the position at general law with the administration of the equitable remedy of rescission of contracts, orders under s87 may be made not only against parties to the contract but also against third parties, being persons involved (within the meaning of s75B) in the contravention as a result of which the plaintiff entered into the contract": Demagogue at 43 per Gummow J. See further
Lezam Pty Ltd versus Seabridge Australia Pty Ltd <case>; [(1992) 35 FCR 535] at 547-8, 552. Nor is the Court restricted in granting a remedy under s87 by the general law's limitations upon a party's right to rescind for breach of contract or misrepresentation: Henjo Investments Pty
Ltd versus Collins Marrickville Pty Ltd <case>; [(1988) 39 FCR 546] at 564, 571. These include the limitations deriving from the much criticised decision in Seddon versus North Eastern Salt Co Ltd [[1905] Ch 326](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1905%5d%201%20Ch%20326 "View LawCiteRecord" ), and possible blindness in the sharp eye of equity to collateral taxation advantages (to mention two matters of present relevance, to which I shall return).

In short, the power conferred by s87 is (in subsection (1)'s own words) to make "such order or orders as the Court thinks appropriate". Proven contravention of s52 is the "passport to ... extensive relief": Farrow
Mortgage Services Pty Ltd versus Edgar [(1993) 114 ALR 1] at 6 per
Lockhart, Gummow & Lee JJ.

The very scope of s87 means that the Court "must consider all the circumstances before it in the exercise of its discretion": Henjo at 564 per Lockhart J. In Reg Russell & Sons Pty Ltd versus Buxton Meats Pty Ltd [(1994) ATPR (Digest) 46-127], 53,614 Ipp J of the Supreme Court of Western Australia said: "The court has a very wide discretion under s87(1) ... In exercising its discretion the court will take into account whether there is a causal link between the loss or damage suffered or likely to be suffered by the plaintiff, whether and to what extent the plaintiff is the author of his or her own misfortune, and whether another remedy is or was at hand to recover the loss or damage in question." 
There is no point in having a remedial smorgasbord if the table is not scanned at least briefly to see what is best on offer. In this, the task of a judge whose findings of detrimental reliance have presented the key to s87 is not unlike that facing a trustee of a discretionary trust who has a power to distribute: cf Lutheran Church of Australia South Australia District
Incorporated versus Farmers' Co-operative Executors and Trustees Ltd <case>; [(1970) 121 CLR 628] at 639, 652.

That there may be a range of arguably appropriate remedies is shown by s87 itself. An order declaring a contract (or arrangement) to be void ab initio is by no means the only remedy available under s87. Without being exhaustive, the court may alternatively choose to declare only part void (s87(2)(a)); select some other date than the date of inception of the contract, provided the date precedes the date of the court order (ibid); vary the contract (s87(2)(b)); refuse to enforce any or all of the provisions of the contract (s87(2)(ba)); order the refund of money (s87(2)(c)); or order payment of the amount of loss or damage (s87(2)(d). The court may visit different orders on different defendants: Heydon versus Jackson [(1988) ATPR 40-845] at p49,107. "It is therefore important to distinguish clearly between the need to establish the factual circumstances necessary to enliven the power of the court to grant relief and the circumstances which are relevant to the nature of the relief which it is appropriate to grant": Demagogue at 46 per
Cooper J. "The words `if it thinks fit' make explicit that, in a case where the court is of the view that a declaration of invalidity should be made, the court possesses a further judicial discretion to decide whether it is appropriate, in the particular case, to declare the time from which the whole or any part of a contract or of a collateral arrangement relating to a contract has been void." Trade Practices Commission versus Milreis Pty Ltd [(1977) 29 FLR 144] at 168 per Deane J.

This is not to demand of trial judges evidence of a slavish picking over of every part of s87 before a suitable remedy is selected. And the onus of establishing judicial error in the exercise of discretion remains firmly on the shoulders of a disappointed appellant. Some cases may cry out for one solution only. In my opinion this was not such a case.

The principles surrounding the remedy of rescission for innocent misrepresentation are clearly available to give guidance in the exercise of the statutory discretion: see Munchies at 708, 714; Henjo at -5. At general law, the questions for the Court in determining whether to allow rescission and restitution are "whether restitutio in integrum is substantially possible and whether rescission is timely and just and fair":
Senanayake versus Cheng <case>; [(1995) 94 CLR 216] at 223-4 where it was stated that equity is concerned with what is "practically just between the parties". I will say more about equity's guidance in the present case later in this judgment.

I now turn to Akron's specific challenges to the orders made.

SHOULD THE LOAN PRINCIPAL HAVE BEEN SET OFF? 
I would reject Akron's submission that avoidance ought to have been subject to repayment of the loan principal. Whether or not equity would have imposed this on the respondents as part of its requirement of restitutio in integrum is not controlling, for the reasons given above. In any event, it strikes me as artificial to regard the respondents as having received the loan moneys from
Akron. The Loan Agreement was part of a package of interlocking contractual arrangements (all induced by Miss Bollard's misrepresentation). More importantly, the money "advanced" to the borrowers was instantaneously directed by them to be applied towards the Venture. Some of that money went back to Akron (as commission and the first annual rental instalment), with the balance going to Akron's co-venturer and co-promoter, Bernborough. To require the respondents to reimburse Akron with the loan principal as the price of rescission would therefore add to the loss or damage flowing from reliance upon the conduct in breach of s52, whereas a primary purpose of an order under s87 is to negate such loss or damage.

DID THE TRIAL JUDGE ERR IN AVOIDING THE TRANSACTION 
RETROSPECTIVELY? 
Earlier in this judgment I concluded that, in addressing the issue of relief, Rolfe J treated retrospective avoidance as the automatic response to the finding of reliance upon the misleading or deceptive conduct. Alternatively, I construed his Honour's approach as not appearing to have at least considered whether alternative relief was more appropriate. 
In my opinion, either approach involved appealable error. That is because his
Honour did not consider the range of options offered by s87. Rather he appears to have regarded avoidance ab initio as the only (or at least the automatically) appropriate remedy. Faced with findings of reliance by the innocent party upon misleading or deceptive conduct, and clear evidence of loss or damage that would attract s87, a trial judge should in my view scan the range of available remedies, recognising that s87 may allow the defendant's as well as the plaintiff's interests to be taken into account in moulding a just response to a proven contravention.

One corollary of what is discussed earlier in this judgment about the scope of s87 is obvious, but central to the disposition of this appeal. Rescission is not the only or inevitable remedy for the victim of conduct infringing s52 who invokes the Trade Practices Act. In that Rolfe J appears to have proceeded on this basis he was, in my respectful view, in error.

The need to consider all circumstances relevant to remedy includes an obligation, as a general rule, to have some regard to the extent of loss or damage flowing from the misleading or deceptive conduct. After all, proof of loss or damage is the key that unlocks s87's copious door. Where that loss is said to be the very entry into a series of contractual obligations, it does not follow that release therefrom is the inevitably appropriate remedy.
For example, a misrepresentation may have touched only a minor aspect of the total arrangement, with the consequence that specific negation of the misrepresentation may be a more appropriate remedy than total dismantling of the parties' relationship ex post. The remedial response should be proportionate to the wrong, without necessarily having to reflect the extent of the plaintiff's (likely) loss or damage: cf Demagogue at 33 per Black
CJ.

It may be asked: why shouldn't the plaintiff get, at his or her option, the best remedy available? Does the availability of s87 exclude a remedy available in equity if that is the plaintiff's choice? I think that the answer is probably "yes", because s87's obligation to find the "appropriate" remedy means that, if it is engaged, then it governs, whatever equity might have been prepared to do if standing alone. Rescission is clearly one of the options offered by s87 itself. In expressing this tentative view I acknowledge the force of the contrary one, which proceeds upon the premise that very clear statutory language is necessary to withdraw existing legal and equitable rights: see Minister for Lands and Forests versus McPherson [(1990) 22 NSWLR ]
at 698-700. If plaintiffs can, by resort to s87, avoid some of the inadequacies of equitable rescission, I find it difficult to see why defendants should not be able to resist some of its possible excesses. But it is not necessary to express a final view on this matter. The simple answer to the question posed at the start of this paragraph is that the respondents invoked s87 and not equity. For all I know, they may have perceived provisions such as ss75B and 87 as critical to their ability to dismantle all of the contractual arrangements in consequence of Miss Bollard's conduct. And they may have feared that the rule in Seddon versus North East Salt Co Ltd [[1905] Ch 326](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1905%5d%201%20Ch%20326 "View LawCiteRecord" ) barred the path to equitable rescission. (Fortunately I do not have to decide whether Seddon remains good law, or whether it applies to a case such as the present. Although the case has, and probably deserves, its academic detractors, it was recently cited with apparent approval by the High
Court in Krakaowski versus Eurolynx Properties Ltd (1995) 183 CLR 563 at 585.
It is clear from the argument in this (the Akron) case that the application of Seddon is a live issue.) 
THE APPROPRIATE ORDER 
My conclusion that the trial judge erred in the exercise of his discretion does not mean that the appeal is allowed automatically. Rather, this Court must exercise the discretion afresh. It would be open to it to come to the same conclusion, albeit by a different path.

This said, I would set aside the orders made by Rolfe J in favour of the respondents, provided Akron tenders to them (or otherwise secures payment to them of) the monetary equivalent of the "guarantee" represented by Miss
Bollard. This amounts to $40,201 (ie $43,436 less $3135) per share plus interest pursuant to s94 calculated from the date of termination of the
Venture. The precise sum would have to be calculated and Short Minutes brought in. I link the upholding of the appeal to Akron actually tendering or securing payment of the value of the true expectation loss for two reasons: (a) Nothing less than effective payment would provide the same level of "guarantee" as was represented by Miss Bollard's statements about NZI backing the guarantee; and by putting in Akron's own hands the option of avoiding the more draconian remedy of rescission I avoid (for a second reason) the "problem" of having to rule whether or not the Full Federal Court was correct in GIO in precluding resort to s87 to order compensation.

My reasons for proposing orders along these lines are fourfold: 
This would put both sets of parties in the position they would have been - no more, no less - had the misleading or deceptive conduct not taken place. To pull the whole transaction down would relieve the respondents from all risks attendant upon a venture freely entered into which had failed in circumstances held by Rolfe J to embody no fault on Akron's part. To say that equity would have been prepared to have done this in a case of rescission for misrepresentation leaves me unmoved in the light of my understanding of s87 set out above. In any event, I have doubts whether equity's concept of restitutio in integrum would do substantial justice, because of (4) below.

The matter misrepresented by Miss Bollard went to a discrete aspect of the whole transaction. More significantly it was one whose precise value can be calculated. What the respondents lost - no more, no less - was a "guarantee" by a financially sound institution that the return of receipts less running expenses would be not less than $43,436. Assuming that Akron is prepared itself to shoulder this burden, then the respondents could hardly complain that the monetary value of the guarantee comes from a source other than NZI.

The respondents made no attempt to prove a case for damages in accordance with the principles expounded in Gates. No evidence was tendered to suggest that what they got for entering the Venture was worth less than what paid at the date of entry: cf Potts versus Miller <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 282] at 296-300; Kizbeau Pty Ltd versus W F & B Pty Ltd <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 281] at 291.
One is therefore entitled to conclude that the only "loss or damage" suffered by them in consequence of the particular conduct that offended s52 was being locked into an otherwise proper set of contractual arrangements that lacked the promised minimum receipts "guarantee" by NZI. That "loss or damage" is real and actual, and it can be remedied precisely by the orders which I propose. Since "loss or damage" is the stated key to s87, it is proper that the extent of the loss should be taken into account in the choice of remedies.
In saying this I am not suggesting that the remedy must always be directly proportionate to the loss or damage (likely to be) suffered. But here the total unravelling of the transaction after the respondents have enjoyed the taxation and other benefits (including the benefit of possible gain) during the life of the Venture strikes me as remedial overkill. It was not
Akron's fault that the value of the bloodstock brought into the Venture at the
Dalgety valuation fell dramatically during the life of the Venture.

The orders made by Rolfe J leave entirely out of account the taxation benefits which the Venture was intended to deliver, did deliver to the respondents, and which are not prejudiced by the overturning of the orders made below. Here I refer to the discussion about taxation benefits earlier in this judgment, in which I referred to evidence and findings by Rolfe J concerning the extent of the tax benefits enjoyed by the respondents and the unlikelihood of them having to be disgorged upon a reassessment by the
Commissioner of Taxation. I see no reason why Rolfe J's conclusion on the latter point (albeit in the context of discussion relating to restitution and illegality) should not apply in the present context. I do not consider that the court is required to shut its eyes to the reality of the respondents' position when considering what remedy is "appropriate" see Neilson v
Hemston [(1986) 65 ALR 302.] 
It was contended by counsel for the respondents that equity would not have required these collateral benefits to have been disgorged as part of restitutio in integrum as the price of rescission. I am inclined to think that this submission is correct, because restitutio in integrum is primarily concerned with preventing the representatee from being unjustly enriched at the representor's expense: see Treitel, The Law of Contract 9th ed 1995 p352. Cf the principle that, in giving compensation for deterioration of a property returned by purchaser to vendor consequent upon rescission, the rescinding party need only give allowance for deterioration for which he or she was responsible. That party is not responsible for deterioration in value resulting from a fall in property values: see Balfour versus Hollandia
Ravensthorpe NL [(1978) 18 SASR 240.] 
If this is a correct assessment of equity's position, it adds a further reason why equitable rescission is not the most appropriate remedy in this case.

For these reasons I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed.
Within 14 days the parties are to file agreed short minutes. If agreement cannot be reached, each party is, within the same time, to file the draft orders proposed by that party, together with written submissions supporting the party's proposed version. Submissions in reply may be filed within a further period of 7 days.
Liberty to apply.

Obviously, the orders should address issues of costs and the restitution of any moneys paid under the orders of Rolfe J. If it is practicable to do so, the Court would proceed to make final orders without further hearing oral argument.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with the reasons given by Mason P for concluding that the trial judge erred, in the circumstances of the present case, in granting relief in the form of complete retrospective avoidance of all relevant transactions. This court must therefore consider for itself what relief should be granted to the respondent. In this regard I agree with the relief proposed by Mason P and his reasons for proposing it.
 
MEAGHER JA: This appeal arose out of litigation concerning amounts allegedly owing by various people, mostly investors. The investment was of a rather novel kind, viz. in shares in a horse-breeding venture. The appellant, who was plaintiff below, won as against all defendants except the three current respondents, Mr Iliffe, his company John Iliffe & Associates Pty
Limited, and a Mr John Winston Gundry. It appeals against the orders made in favour of these three respondents.

The venture in which the three respondents participated was called "the
Bernborough Venture", because its manager was Bernborough Breeding and Racing
Limited. The appellant was the financier of the venture.

The members of the venture purchased from Bernborough Breeding and Racing
Limited weanlings as a result of which all members owned them in common. In addition, the appellant Akron Securities Limited leased to the venture a herd of mares for a term of four years, so that each member of the venture would have had a proportionate interest in that herd.

The respondent Mr Iliffe had two shares, the other respondents had one share each. As there is no relevant difference between the respondents, I shall restrict my remarks to Mr Iliffe, although they are equally applicable to the other two respondents.

The appellant made finance available to members who wanted it. In Mr Iliffe's case, it made a loan of $75,972. Interest on that loan ran at 15%.

The venture was intended to generate income by the annual sale of yearlings.
At the time the venture was commenced the yearling sales were buoyant. In due course the yearling sales plummeted, and the revenue generated by sales was less than the costs of the venture. When this happened a Receiver was appointed to Bernborough Breeding and Racing Limited (by its Board of
Directors). Thereupon the investors stopped repaying their loan and stopped paying the rent owing on their lease. In this litigation the appellants sought to recover all amounts owing under both lease and loan from the various investors.

In the case of Mr Iliffe, the appellant's case may be summarized thus: 
Lease: residual $11,880.
 rent arrears $21,508. $32,388 
Loan: principal $75,972.
 interest arrears $11,880. $87,772 
Total: $120,160 
Another, and, in the present case, a very important, matter is the so-called "minimum receipt insurance". I say "so-called" because it has nothing to do with insurance. That was a contractual promise by Bernborough Breeding and
Racing Limited that, if an investor paid to it a certain sum per share, it would pay to the investor the difference between the amounts received by that investor by way of distribution over the life of the scheme and the sum of $43,426. The figure of $43,426.00 was chosen because it was the aggregate of the lease residual and the loan repayment. Mr Iliffe paid that sum in respect of each such share.

The last point, which is of more than passing interest, is that one of the attractions of the scheme as a whole is that it offered to the investors an opportunity for considerable tax deductions. To some investors this was its most important attraction. To all investors it was attractive to some extent.

In only one year of the unhappy Syndicate's existence was there any distribution generated by the sale of yearlings. In that year there was a distribution of $3,135 per share. As a result, Mr Iliffe was paid $6,270 in respect of his shareholding.

When Mr Iliffe was pondering whether or not to enter the Scheme, a Miss
Bollard said to him (according to his evidence): "The minimum receipts guarantee is backed by NZI. It will ensure that you will at least receive back the residuals under the lease agreement and the loan agreement, if you take out a loan." 
His Honour believed Mr Iliffe that Miss Bollard did say that. His Honour held that she was the appellant's servant, that she was authorized to make such a representation, and indeed that she knew that such a representation if made would be false. It would be difficult to imagine a more startlingly false representation, as can be seen by comparing what Miss Bollard said with the relevant promise made by Bernborough Breeding and Racing Venture Limited. It was an extremely important misrepresentation. His Honour found that the misrepresentation induced Mr Iliffe to enter into the venture and that Mr
Iliffe would not have entered into it at all if he knew that Miss Bollard's statement was a falsity.

On his Honour's findings, what is true of the whole venture is equally true of each ingredient in it: if the representation had not been made, Mr Iliffe would not have bought the weanlings or leased the mares or allowed Bernborough
Breeding and Racing Limited to manage his affairs or borrowed any money from the plaintiff.

In these circumstances his Honour made orders which, in effect, reversed the transaction: he "rescinded" the deal; he put Mr Iliffe back into the position he would have been in if no misrepresentation had been made. Granted his
Honour's primary findings, there is nothing surprising about this. His Honour gave judgment to Mr Iliffe in the appellant's case against him, and allowed Mr
Iliffe to recover from the appellant all moneys he had paid to it whilst giving the appellant credit for the distributions. His Honour had power to do all this under s.87(1A) of the Trade Practices Act, 1979.

On the appeal, learned senior counsel for the appellant, Mr Coles QC, submitted in a variety of ways that an order for rescission of the contracts constituting Mr Iliffe's entry into the venture could not be justified, and this because no provision (or no adequate provision) had been made for restitutio in integrum. On the whole, I do not think this submission has been made good. In a general sense, it can be said that Mr Iliffe only received one genuine benefit under the contract, and that was the receipt of one of the envisaged annual distributions. His Honour made allowance for this when making his orders. Otherwise, in the venture Mr Iliffe did not find his duties were delightful nor his privileges great.

Two alleged benefits, in particular, it was submitted were not properly taken into account. One was the benefit of tax deduction, which Mr Iliffe certainly had. In this regard, and bearing in mind that restitutio in this context is used as "practical restitution" (Alati versus Kruger <case>; [(1955) 94 CLR 216)], there must be substance in Mr Bathurst QC's submission on behalf of Mr Iliffe that a real question must arise whether Mr Iliffe will be liable to pay income tax on any monies recovered from the appellant. The benefit may therefore be disregarded.

Finally, there was some argument about whether or not he should, as a condition of relief, be ordered to repay the loan from the appellant. I do not see why. It was not as if the loan were in any way independent of the venture.
It was integral to the venture, and loan moneys were used for the purpose of the venture, like making payments of rent. The loan, whilst genuine enough, never went into Mr Iliffe's pocket, and he retains no property representing it. It was a loan which, on his Honour's findings, was an integral part of his entry into the venture, and was as much a result of the misrepresentation as any other part of the venture.

In my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
