

G T Pettersen versus V Bacha Nos Ca40584/94 and Cld13104/90 [1995] NSWSC 25 (4
September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CLARKE(1), HANDLEY(2) AND COLE(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 27 and 28 February #DATE 9:3:1995 #ADD 4:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:  J Poulos QC and P Jenkyn and M Baird 
Solicitor for the Appellant:
G M Meadows 
Counsel for the Respondent:  A S Morrison SC and D J Hooke 
Solicitor for the Respondent: Stacks - The Law Firm with Goudkamp
Mahony
ORDER
Appeal dismissed.
JUDGE1
CLARKE JA:  I agree with Cole JA.
JUDGE2
HANDLEY
JA: In this appeal I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of
Cole JA in draft form. I agree with it and wish only to add some brief remarks in relation to the appellant's submission that the size of the judgment alone entitles this Court to interfere.
The judgment is indeed for a very large amount. One is naturally disturbed by the possibility that the respondent who was nearly eight at the date of judgment may die, as one doctor thought, during adolescence so that the balance of his fund held by the Protective
Commissioner will then pass as a windfall to others. The judgment was computed on the basis that the plaintiff would live to age fifty eight but he only recovered 68% of this amount. Unless great care is taken both in investing the judgment and disbursing moneys from the fund the money awarded for future care will run out when the plaintiff is forty (68% of 58). The balance of the money will run out a few years later. He will then be in a desperate and life threatening situation.
The trial Judge was exercising an awesome responsibility in determining the plaintiff's probable life expectancy. A significant underestimate could amount to a sentence of death imposed by a civil court. On the other hand, if the Judge overestimated the plaintiff's life expectancy the result would be a windfall for others. He was faced with opinions ranging from 64 years (Dr
Middleton) to 10 years (Dr Lee). There were as many opinions as experts and no two agreed.
In these circumstances one might have thought that the Judge should have been able to make an order for interim periodic payments to cover the cost of the plaintiff's care until he was perhaps eighteen. The Court could then either determine his probable life expectancy on the available evidence or if this was inappropriate, it could make orders for further interim payments. The
Court has power to make such orders under Division 2 of Pt V of the [Supreme
Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) inserted by the Courts Legislation (Civil Procedure) Amendment Act
However <case> in that Division provides that it does not apply to an award of damages in a case such as this to which [Pt 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p6) of the [Motor Accidents
Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) applies. Hansard reveals no reason for this exclusion but it would be reasonable to suppose that the Government had consulted with the Motor
Accidents Authority and licensed insurers.
Section 76H was not enacted because the [Motor Accidents Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) contains its own provisions authorising interim judgments. [Part 4A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p4a) of that Act authorises payments by a licensed insurer or the Nominal Defendant to public and private hospitals, medical practitioners and registered nurses etc. for treatment provided to an injured person. These are useful provisions which were availed of in the present case but they do not cover the provision of care by persons other than registered nurses. Moreover they do not authorise interim judgments. Section 81 authorises structured judgments, including future periodic payments, but it only applies if both parties agree (subs (1)). The
Court has no power to force such a judgment on a reluctant insurer or plaintiff. The Court was informed that there are practical difficulties under this section where a plaintiff recovers only part of his full damages.
Since both parties did not agree to <case> being applied, the Court was required by this legislation and the common law to award a single lump sum judgment and thus to make what could be little more than an informed guess about the plaintiff's life expectancy. Section 76H of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) and [s 81](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s81.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) demonstrate that licensed insurers, despite the difficulties, prefer to make a single lump sum payment in cases such as this to achieve certainty and finality rather than make periodical payments over many years perhaps for a plaintiff's lifetime.
In these circumstances the risk of premature death and consequent windfalls for others provides no reason for deliberately undercompensating plaintiffs or risking their lives by adopting a pessimistic view of their life expectancy.
The Court is not authorised to act on the basis that the high cost of maintaining the lives of badly injured persons such as this plaintiff is a waste of money which the community could spend to greater advantage in some other way. It has a duty to respect and enforce the rights of this plaintiff.
The Court cannot operate a surreptitious scheme for the euthanasia of the plaintiff and people like him by awarding damages which do not cover the high cost of the care reasonably needed to maintain life and ensure some dignity and independence.
If the community considers that it cannot afford to pay damages at this level for badly injured plaintiffs that value judgment must be translated into legislation before the Court can give effect to it. The Court is not authorised either to make or to give effect to such a judgment itself. In the meantime, it must faithfully apply the existing law.
Parliament, if it wished, could modify the practical operation of the existing law without reducing the damages awarded to badly injured persons by providing that funds held for their benefit by the Protective Commissioner and others should revert to the insurer or pass to the State on their premature death. This would ensure that moneys intended for the benefit of a plaintiff do not become a source of windfall gains for others.
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
COLE JA:  This is an appeal from the judgment of Hunter J who awarded $4,812,018 to Vincent Bacha for injuries suffered by him in a motor vehicle accident. Liability was not in issue it having been determined by agreement between the parties, which agreement was approved by the Court, that the defendant was liable for 68% of the plaintiff's damages. The sum of $4,812,018 was the damages awarded after deduction of the 32%.
The plaintiff was 21 months of age when struck by the defendant's motor vehicle on 26 August 1988. The injuries suffered by him were catastrophic.
They may be briefly described as rendering him an incomplete quadriplegic coupled with brain damage.
The amount of the verdict is indeed large. Whilst recognising that there may be cases in which a court may set aside an award if it be grossly disproportionate to the injury even though no other error be shown ((1) See
Planet Fisheries Pty Limited versus La Rosa <case>; [(1968) 119 CLR 118], it is difficult to apply such a concept where the injuries and disabilities are as gross as those suffered by the present respondent, and where the sum awarded is justified mathematically by evidence before the trial judge. Hunter J accepted evidence that the respondent had a normal life expectancy less 15%, giving a life expectancy of 58 years. The evidence presented before Hunter J, and accepted by him, established that, if the respondent does live to the age of 58 years, the cost of care needed to achieve that, he being totally dependant for his care and thus his life, will exceed that sum. Whilst recognising that the parties agreed that the appellant was responsible for only 68% of the damages suffered by the respondent in consequence of the accident, where, as here, the costs of care and support established before the trial judge show a firm mathematical base for the sum awarded upon the assumptions of life expectancy accepted by the trial judge, in my view there is little room for application of a concept that, absent specific appellable error, the award of damages can be set aside as being "grossly disproportionate to the injury" ((2) Moran versus McMahon [(1985) 3 NSWLR ] at 703 per Kirby P.). In this instance in my opinion there is no scope for the application of that principle.
It is thus necessary to turn to the specific errors which the appellant asserted and sought to establish. I shall deal with each separately.
 
LIFE EXPECTANCY
Hunter J's finding was: "However, I have come to the conclusion that the life expectancy of the plaintiff should be geared towards the bottom end of Dr
Middleton's range i.e. a life expectancy of 58 years giving due consideration to the importance of the statistical indicia as well as the considered opinion of the other medical specialists, in particular Doctors Yeo and Jones. At the other end of the scale, the opinion of Dr Lee, no matter how impressive his experience, has to be weighed against the body of evidence which is far more optimistic an optimism which is reflected in some measure in the conclusion reached in this case as to the plaintiff's anticipated life expectancy." (3) Appeal Book, page 1938.)
The argument of the appellant contained in 10 grounds of appeal may be briefly stated. It was contended that the trial judge, by following Dr
Middleton's opinion as to a percentage reduction against a normal life span, failed to make his own estimate as to the possibilities of death occurring given the acknowledged risks. It was argued that Malec versus J C Hutton Pty
Limited ((4) <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 638] at 642-643.) required that the court forms its own assessment of the degree of probability of an event occurring, in this instance the period during which the respondent would continue to live. It was said that had not been done. Further, it was said that had the trial judge taken into account factors operating towards the determination of the respondent's life, the trial Judge could not reasonably have reached the conclusion that the respondent had a life expectancy of 58 years, and awarded damages on that basis.
The factors said to lead to a much diminished life expectancy were the following:
The lung problems common to all quadriplegics.
Scoliosis, constituting degeneration of the spine, with a consequential deleterious effect on lung capacity and function.
The risk of sudden death due to a defective swallowing mechanism in consequence of brain damage. This might be exhibited by an incapacity to clear secretions due to lung incapacity producing effective coughing or expectorating mechanisms, or by food entering the lungs either in swallowing or in consequence of regurgitation.
Sleep apnoea.
Excessive body weight producing coronary heart disease and hypertension.
Skin disorders in the nature of bedsores common to all quadriplegics (trophic skin ulceration).
Urinary tract infection.
The possible development of asthma from hayfever.
This was but lightly pressed.
Possibility of future epilepsy.
Lack of communication skills resulting in inability to summon necessary help when required.
It was submitted that a consideration of all of these matters should have resulted in a finding that the probability was that the respondent's life expectancy did not exceed 40 years.
In my view the appellant's submission should be rejected.
There was much evidence before the learned trial judge regarding life expectancy. Experts in various fields expressed different opinions varying greatly. Dr Lawson, qualified by the appellant, suggested a reduction from normal life expectancy of not more than 10% ((5) Appeal Book, page 1411.). Dr
Lee, also qualified by the appellant thought the respondent was unlikely to survive beyond adolescence, although the risk of death could be reduced by high standards of care ((6) Appeal Book, page 510.). The treating pediatrician, Dr Harris, saw no reason, given "high performance care", why the respondent should not get "into his sixties" ((7) Appeal Book, page 190.), although he acknowledged that, if recurrent pneumonia was suffered, he might reach "his fifties or forties" ((8) Appeal Book, page 198.). Dr Vanderfield thought the respondents life expectancy should be reduced by -50% from the norm ((9) Appeal Book, page 726.). Associate Professor Jones thought that optimistically the respondent would not live beyond his fourth decade ((10)
Appeal Book, page 824.). Dr Sommerville thought it inconceivable that the appellant would live beyond his early forties ((11) Appeal Book, page 614.).
Dr Voss thought the respondent would not live beyond the middle of his sixth decade but would not survive beyond the middle of his fourth decade if he had continuing respiratory tract problems ((12) Appeal
Book, page 682.). Dr Yeo thought the discount from normal life expectancy should be 25% although that percentage based on survey figures, might be "a little harsh" ((13) Appeal
Book, page 326.). And Dr Middleton, whom the trial judge accepted, thought that the reduction from normal life expectancy should be between 5 and 15% ((14) Appeal Book, page 793,1313.).
Dr Middleton had regard to the various factors relied upon by the appellant as likely to diminish life expectancy((15) Factor (a) - Appeal Book, page 1312, -8; Factor (b) 798; Factor (c) 798; Factor (d) 798; Factor (h) ; Factor (i) 810; (j) 800-801.). She rejected the contention that one should assume a 15% life reduction in consequence of quadriplegia alone and then add an additional percentage of reduction due to brain damage ((16)
Appeal Book, page 812-815.). Her reduction of 5-15% from normal life expectancy took account of all of the factors upon which the appellant seeks to rely to diminish life expectancy to a lesser figure than that which she advanced.
It follows, in my view, that there was abundant evidence upon which the learned trial Judge could reach the conclusion he did.
It is not correct to state, as the appellant's submission does, that the trial judge failed to make his own estimate as to the possibilities of death occurring given the acknowledged risks. The passage quoted above from the judgment made clear that his Honour did so. Further, his Honour did not, as the appellant contended, simply accept Dr Middleton's opinion. Her opinion was a range of reduction of life expectancy of between 5 and 15%. His Honour selected as his assessment the bottom of that range having weighed the views of the other medical experts.
Malec versus J C Hutton Pty Limited ((17) <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 638] at 643.) requires the Court to assess the degree of probability regarding an uncertain future event which is incapable of proof, namely, the duration of the appellant's life. That does not mean, however, that where one expert gives evidence that a reasonable assessment is normal lifespan less, say, 15% and, for example, three others express the view that the range is normal life expectancy less -50%, a judge must make an additional assessment on some percentage basis of the probability of the first expert being correct because others hold a different view, and then further adjust the life expectancy as propounded by the first expert whom the judge accepts. In finding, as here, a life expectancy of normal life less 15%, the trial judge is making his own assessment of expectancy taking into account the possibilities and probabilities as best he can having regard to the totality of evidence placed before him.
In my opinion the first 10 grounds of appeal relating to life expectancy fail.
 
PAST AND FUTURE CARE
For past care Hunter
J awarded the cost of 12 hours registered nursing care per day from 12 September 1992, at rates charged by Dial-an-Angel and
Drake
Maddox, amounting to $144,086.
The appellant contended at the trial that a lesser degree of care than from a registered nurse was adequate when coupled with services provided by an experienced carer. Further, the appellant contended that the lesser rates charged by Macquarie Nursing should have been accepted rather than the higher rates charged by Dial-an-Angel. The learned trial Judge accepted the respondent's contentions.
In relation to future care the parties agreed that a nominal change of regime when the respondent reached 18 years was appropriate it being assumed for damages calculation purposes that, at that time, the appellant would move into accommodation independent of his family. Both parties advanced contentions in respect of the period before and after his attainment of 18 years on that basis.
Prior to age 18, the respondent contended that 12 hours nursing by a registered nurse per day was required seven days per week, and that provision should be made for a relief nurse for a similar period per day during the permanent nurse's annual and public holidays. Further in respect of the other hours per day there should be an attendant carer seven days per week with provision being made for a relief attendant during the permanent attendant's annual and public holidays.
Appropriate loadings for superannuation, annual leave and workers compensation were included. In addition, agency fees were claimed.
The respondent's regime was thus 24 hour care.
The respondent's costs of care to the age of 18 was $4,266 per week whereas the appellant's regime was costed at $1,141 per week.
The appellants regime was different. It was suggested there be a qualified nurse from 7a.m. to 9a.m. and a "carer with necessary skills between p.m. and 7p.m. Between 9a.m. and 3p.m. the appellant was to be cared for by the special school he attends. Between 9p.m. and 7a.m. an overnight carer was proposed. Those services were to be charged at lesser rates advanced by
Macquarie Nursing.
After the age of 18 years, the respondent proposed there be a live-in house couple with the respondent. The house-couple would comprise the primary and secondary carer. It provided for relief for those carers whilst they were on annual leave, public holidays or sick leave. Appropriate amounts for annual leave, superannuation and workers' compensation were included together with the keep for the house couple. A registered nurse was to be provided four hours per day each week. Including agency fees the respondent's proposals were costed at $3,740.
The appellant proposed one live-in carer with the service provided by two persons working four or five days and three or two days respectively. In addition a qualified nurse was to be provided for two hours each morning and a carer with nursing experience for two hours each afternoon. The proposal was costed at Macquarie Nursing rates and totalled $1,592 per week.
There was thus a significant dispute before the trial
Judge regarding the level of care required. Hunter J accepted the respondent's contentions.
There was one incident which is of relevance to the issue of the level of care required. On 26 November 1992, whilst at school, the respondent became in. His face began to turn blue. The physiotherapist was called to help the respondent, oxygen was applied and suction was administered by a trained nurse who, fortuitously, was present as the nursing attendant of another child at the school. ((18) Appeal Book, page 1931.) Neither the school staff nor the physiotherapist were sufficiently qualified, trained or experienced to avert the near fatality which was averted by a trained nurse.
Hunter J identified the correct test to apply in determining damages for care. It was stated as: "The level of care which is reasonable, having regard to the cost and appropriate qualifications of attendants and the allocation of periods of attendance between different qualified attendants." ((19) Appeal Book, page 1925.)
The appellant, however, contended that the learned trial judge was in error in that his Honour adopted a test of "what is an ideal level of care, rather than the appropriate test of a reasonable level of care in au the circumstances, doing justice to both parties" ((20) Written Submissions, paragraph 4.2.). Reliance was place upon Sharman versus Evans ((21) <case>; [(1977) 138 CLR ] at 338.). The assertion that Hunter J adopted the test of "an ideal level of care" rather than the test of "the level of care which is reasonable", which his Honour said he was applying was, as I understood it, based upon two premises. The first was that the evidence showed that the lesser degree and standard of care advanced by the appellant was in truth reasonable so that the respondent's regime must be regarded as excessive or ideal, and, second, that a comparison of the costs of the two regimes indicated such a divergence that it could be said that the amounts advanced by the respondent and awarded by the Judge "were disproportionate to the loss suffered by the respondent" ((24) Written Submissions, paragraph, 4.).
In my view it is sufficient to dispose of the appellant's contentions to note that the learned trial Judge stated the correct test for awarding of damages for care and purported to apply it. The question of what constitutes reasonable care is a question of fact to be determined by the trial Judge having regard to his assessment of the witnesses and other evidence called before him. The circumstances in which an appellate court should interfere with such a finding of fact are extremely limited ((25) Abalos versus Australian
Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] The level of care required, and the reasonable cost of providing that level of care, was dependent very much upon the trial judge's assessment of and acceptance of witnesses. No basis was able to be pointed to by the appellant to suggest that the trial Judge had failed to use or palpably misused his advantage or had acted on evidence inconsistent with facts incontrovertibly established by the evidence or upon glaringly improbable evidence ((26) Devries versus Australian National Railways Commission <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 472] at 479.). For this reason alone the appellant's contentions regarding error in respect of necessary care and its cost must be rejected.
I should note, however, the submission that the trial Judge failed to have regard to the interests of the appellants so that justice was not done to both parties. Reference was made to the passage in Sharman versus Evans ((27) <case>; [(1977) 138 CLR 563] at 573.) where Gibbs and Stephen JJ said: "The touchstone of reasonableness in the case of the cost of providing nursing and medical care for the plaintiff in the future is, no doubt, cost matched against health benefits to the plaintiff. If cost is very great and benefits to health slight or speculative the cost-involving treatment will clearly be unreasonable, the more so if there is available an alternative and relatively inexpensive mode of treatment, affording equal or only slightly lesser benefits."
It is to be noted, however, that the passage in the judgment continues: "When the factors are more evenly balanced no intuitive answer presents itself and the real difficulty of attempting to weigh against each other two incomprobables, financial cost against relative health benefits to the plaintiff, becomes manifest. The present case is however one which does to our mind allow of a definitive answer; it is a case of alternatives in which the difference in relative costs is great whereas the benefit to the plaintiff of the more expensive alternative is entirely one of amenity, in no way involving physical or mental well being."
In this case where two regimes of care are advanced the difference between them is not one of amenity: it is one which involves the risk to the life of the respondent. If the regime advanced by the respondent was reasonably necessary to sustain and preserve the life of the respondent, as the trial judge found, the appellant must demonstrate on appeal either that the respondent's regime was not reasonable in the sense of being unnecessary to preserve the welfare and life of the respondent, or that the regime it proposes, or some intermediate regime, could preserve that welfare and life but at a lesser cost.
The appellant was unable to do either.
That is not surprising in the light of the evidence. The regime of care which his Honour accepted as necessary and reasonable was that advanced by Dr
Yeo ((28) Appeal Book, page 1260,329,). Dr Yeo's proposed regime was adopted by Dr Middleton as being "a quite reasonable regime" ((29) Appeal Book, page .). The trial Judge accepted that evidence ((30) Appeal Book, page ,1944.). There is no basis for this Court of Appeal interfering with the trial Judge's assessment of that evidence.
The appellant stressed two matters in relation to the level of care. The first was that additional care was unnecessary whilst the appellant was at school because the staff were competent to treat any emergency. The proposition is denied by the events of 26 November 1992. The appellant's life was saved by a nurse, not by the school staff. Following this incident the school requested the respondent be accompanied ((31) Appeal Book,page ,203,1732.). Further, Doctors Yeo, Middleton and Voss were each of the view that the respondent should be accompanied to school by a qualified carer ((32)
Appeal Book, 402, where Dr Yeo rejected the regime proposed by the appellant; -817 where Dr Middleton also rejected that regime; 660 Dr Voss.). The trial judge was clearly entitled to find that additional care at school was required.
The second matter related to a person acting as a "sleep over carer" as proposed by the defendant for night care. Ms Honour rejected the concept, stating: "It seems clear that at night a lesser level of skill is called for. However, the idea of a sleep over carer as proposed by the defendant would be of small comfort to parents having foremost in their minds the care their disabled child requires. Inevitably, if the night carer is one who is permitted to sleep during the night, it is inevitable that the night care will fall back onto the shoulders of the parents. That is clearly unacceptable and, in any event, having regard to the evidence of the need to turn the plaintiff some three or four occasions a night quite apart from other times when more restless conditions are encountered, there should be provided a carer who is on duty throughout the night." ((33) Appeal Book, page.1943-1944.)
The sleep over carer concept was advanced by Mrs Wruck from Macquarie
Nursing. Her evidence was that such a carer would check the respondent at about 10.30p.m.
and then go to sleep, getting up once or perhaps twice during the night. The sleep over carer would be expected to have another part-time or full-time job during the daytime. She also said that if the sleep over carer was required to rise more than once or twice during the night, the shift would be regarded as an "ordinary awake shift" and a different cost regime would apply. What that different cost regime would be was not made clear but obviously the cost would increase diminishing, if not eliminating, the differential between the night-time regime proposed by the respondent up to the age of 18 years and the "sleep over carer" regime proposed by the appellant.
Accepting Mrs Bacha's evidence as his Honour did, that the respondent required attention three or four times each night ((34) Appeal
Book, page 68-69.), costs savings by a "sleep over carer" may be minimal or perhaps illusory. In any event, the evidence quite entitled the learned trial
Judge to reject the concept as unacceptable.
The remaining matter of consequence advanced by the appellant related to the comparative costs of provision of services. The contest before the trial
Judge was between the evidence of Mrs Blackman from Dial-an-Angel whose rates of charge were higher, and that of Mrs Wruck of Macquarie Nursing. The trial judge found that Mrs
Blackman's rates were reasonable and should be preferred ((35) Appeal Book, page 1948.). Ms Honour advanced sound reasons for preferring the evidence of Mrs Blackman. First, Sister Wruck proposed rates for a live-in house couple less than those advanced by Mrs Blackman in circumstances where Sister Wruck's organisation had not previously provided such a house couple. Second, Sister Wruck's rates were based on the assumption that one of the couple would have an external job, a condition Hunter J found unacceptable. Third, her rates were structured on the assumption that the couple would vacate the house each weekend, a suggestion Hunter J thought "impractical".
Fourth, in relation to sleep over attendant rates, Sister
Wruck's rates were based on the attendant sleeping at night rather than being awake. As previously indicted those rates were unlikely to be applicable.
These are all sound grounds for the trial
Judge forming the view that he preferred the evidence of Mrs Blackman. He accepted her evidence. There is no basis upon which this
Court should interfere with that acceptance.
The appellant's fifteen grounds of appeal in relation to past and future care fail.
 
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT
Hunter J allowed $276,538 for provision of computer equipment to aid the respondent during the assumed balance of his life to age 58 years. His Honour found that such sum would provide for "the plaintiff's reasonable requirements in his educational and social activities". His Honour found, accepting the evidence of Mr Smith, an expert in the provision of computers for the disabled, and that of Miss Ernst, a physiotherapist, and Mrs Woodhill the respondent's teacher, that: "The computer is clearly the lifeline of the plaintiff in respect of his prospects of cognitive improvement, development of communicative skills and in the ongoing process of learning. The evidence is unqualified that these aids will be of considerable help in these respects to the plaintiff ..." ((36) Appeal Book, page 1961.)
In reaching his view, Hunter J acknowledged that the allowances were "at the top of the range" in rejecting the appellant's contention that the cost could be reduced by the purchase of second hand equipment. His Honour adopted that approach because of "the strong view I have formed as to the basic importance of this requirement to the plaintiff" ((37) Appeal Book, page .).
The appellant called no evidence regarding either the absence of need or excessiveness of the proposed provision of computers advanced by Mr Smith. Nor did it call any evidence regarding cheaper alternatives.
In substance the appellant raised three contentions. First, that at present commuters compatible with those used at school by the appellant can be purchased cheaply second hand. Undoubtedly that is so. However the submission overlooks the evidence that the model used at the respondents school is "about to get the chop" ((38) Appeal Book, page 283.) as being outmoded.
It overlooks the evidence that equipment updated from time to time is necessary run the advanced and improving software packages developed for persons in this area.
Further it diminishes the importance which the trial Judge, on the evidence, found should be attributed to the place of computers in the respondent's life both now and in the future.
The second submission was that, given the respondent's mental and physical disabilities and his limited capacity to use a computer, it was an error to award the cost of state of the art computer equipment and software for the rest of the respondent's life.
This submission neglects the unchallenged evidence, obviously accepted by
Hunter J, of the benefits that the provision of computer equipment would have for the respondent, it being "the lifeline of the plaintiff" in important respects ((39) See the evidence of Dr Middleton, Appeal Book, page ; Miss
Knight (psychologist) 437; Dr Yeo 318-319 and Miss Ernst (occupational therapist) 128-129.). The evidence of the advantages and necessity of appropriate computer equipment for the respondent was unchallenged. It was not put to the experts by the appellant that any incapacities or deficiencies of the respondent would prevent him from using computers to derive the advantages found by the trial Judge.
Third, is was submitted that Malec versus Hutton required the Court to discount the established cost of computers to take into account the contingency as to the respondent's disabilities preventing him in the future from being able to access the hardware and software contemplated. Given the importance of computers to the respondent, this is not a case for any added discount.
The evidence of Mr Smith ((40) Appeal Book, page 281-282.) indicates that future developments in computer technology, both hardware and software, such as the application of virtual reality through computers for people with disabilities, may result in computer facilities being appropriate for and required by the respondent, but no allowance is made in the costing for those additional aids. In addition, the appellant did not point to any evidence in which it was suggested to the experts that, whilst ever the respondent survived, his disabilities were likely to render him unable to take advantage from computers.
The appellant should be granted leave to argue the second ground of appeal in the further amended notice of appeal in relation to computers, but the four grounds of appeal should be dismissed.
 
FUND MANAGEMENT
There was no dispute that the respondent will always be incapable of managing his affairs, or that his estate would be managed by the Protective
Commissioner under the [Protected Estates Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pea1983200/). Hunter J in those circumstances allowed fund management charges as a future out-of-pocket expense.
The appellant contended that Hunter J erred in "failing to find that fund management was a head of damage to be included in the assessment of damages before the percentage deduction was made re liability". That issue was resolved contrary to the appellant's submission in Nicholson versus Nicholson and
Anor" ((41) (unreported) Court of Appeal 8 December 1994.). The appellant formally contended that that decision was incorrect.
However this Court must follow that decision.
The other ground of appeal was that his Honour erred in failing to deduct from the fund for investment, and thus for management charge purposes, items identified as being likely to be spent for the advantage of the respondent immediately.
That submission overlooks the circumstances that the verdict monies, less some past outgoings, must be paid to the Protective Commissioner, that it is for the Protective Commissioner to decide when and what monies will be spent in the interest of the respondent, and that neither the respondent, nor the
Protective Commissioner, had he been called, would have been able to indicate the amount or timing of such expenditure.
Both grounds in relation to fund management fail.
 
INDEMNITY
COSTS
Hunter J award indemnity costs from 31 May 1991 in circumstances where the respondent had on that date offered to compromise his claim in the sum of $2,500,000 inclusive of payments made to that date plus costs. The appellant did not respond to that offer which remained open for 28 days. In circumstances where the respondent obtained a verdict for $4,812,018, [part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pea1983200/index.html#p52)
A [rule 24(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pea1983200/s24.html) entitles the respondent to an order for costs on an indemnity basis from that date unless the Court exercises a discretion to otherwise order. Hunter J declined to otherwise order ((42) Appeal Book, page 1971.).
The appellant contended that the Court, in exercising the judicial discretion to otherwise order and thus deprive the respondent of the indemnity costs contemplated by the Rule, must consider "all relevant facts and circumstances of the case. Where the defendant establishes on the probabilities that he acted reasonably on the information available at the time in not accepting the offer, then no order has to indemnity costs should be made" ((43) Written
Submissions, paragraph 10.3.)
The decision of Hunter J, and of this Court, makes clear that the appellant did not act reasonably in rejecting the offer of compromise. The argument that the appellant acted reasonably because it had available to it a report from
Associate Professor Jones expressing the opinion that the respondent would not live to adulthood neglects the evidence that it also had available to it the report of Dr Lawson suggesting a normal lifespan less 10%, and Dr Yeo's report containing the view that the respondent would live a normal lifespan less 25%. The fact that the appellant had available to it a range of estimates of life expectancy does not mean that its decision not to accept an offer of compromise equivalent to approximately 52% of the verdict obtained was reasonable. That the appellant was not acting reasonably in relation to settlement was demonstrated by its subsequent offer to settle for $1.75 million, some 36% of the verdict obtained.
There is no basis for this Court disturbing the trial judge's exercise of discretion.
I propose that the appeal be dismissed and that costs of the appeal be reserved for further argument.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/25.html  
