

R versus Ahamid Ibrahim [1996] NSWSC 630 (18 December 1996) 
R versus AHAMID IBRAHIM /95 
WEDNESDAY 18 DECEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, NEWMAN J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Ahamid Ibrahim seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence of a minimum term of 15 years and an additional term of five years for the murder of a fellow prisoner on 1 May 1994. His sentence was cumulative upon a minimum term of three years with an additional term of two years for an offence of armed robbery.

The applicant and the deceased (Clarence William English) were fellow inmates at the Cessnock Correctional Centre and worked in the kitchen. Lunch preparations had been completed and there was a lull in the work.

They, another inmate and a senior catering officer were playing cards. The applicant speculated whether the Catering Supervisor was being allowed to win and there was evidence that the applicant called the deceased a "screw lover" or at least insinuated that.

The deceased objected to the applicant so reflecting upon him. The judge was entitled to make the following finding - "words were spoken by the prisoner which led English to ask if the prisoner was accusing him of being a screw lover. The prisoner responded in a way which led English to punch him in the face more than once knocking the prisoner to the ground." 
The evidence also suggested that the deceased kicked the applicant in the back. It was open to the judge to take the view that the applicant precipitated the incident. The applicant lost an upper front tooth and had blood around his face. The applicant was let out of the kitchen area by the senior catering officer, saying that he was going to get someone or something.
The officer believed that the applicant was agitated and upset. The applicant was recalled later and in due course both the applicant and the deceased were engaged in serving lunch. They were seen talking together and at one stage they seemed moderately civil. There was, however, other material suggesting continuing arguments and that the applicant was agitated and that his anger and agitation had not subsided.

After lunch, when the inmates had returned from the dining area to their cells in A Wing, the applicant was observed pacing up and down outside his cell which was five cells away from that of the deceased. The applicant obtained from his cell a knife produced by grinding a stainless steel knife into a dagger with the handle formed by binding it with masking tape, a roll of which was found in the cell. The knife was 26 centimetres in length overall with the blade 10 centimetres long. The applicant entered the deceased's cell and stabbed him.

The deceased, who was unarmed, fought back and the fight continued in the quadrangle of the cell block. The deceased was bleeding profusely when he and the applicant disengaged. The deceased sustained five stab wounds, of which two were fatal. The deceased died from blood loss before he could be conveyed to hospital.

At first the knife could not be found. It was eventually located under the lip of the toilet bowl in the applicant's cell.

The applicant, at all times, denied that he had killed the deceased. His case was that another person stabbed the deceased. The judge, after briefly but adequately reviewing the evidence, was satisfied that the murder of the deceased was premeditated and that the stab wounds were inflicted by the applicant with intent to kill the deceased. There was ample material to support the judge's view. Even allowing for the applicant being very upset and greatly agitated, he resolved in the time between being severely assaulted by the deceased and going to his cell with the knife, to kill him.

In his written submissions the applicant referred to the evidence of a number of the inmates or former inmates and that of the senior catering officer and four prison officers. It was submitted that the applicant was subjected to severe and repeated punching, including punching while he was on the ground coupled with kicking to his back. The applicant was greatly distressed by what occurred, humiliated by it and had never cooled down. It was submitted that the judge did not have sufficient regard to these factors which substantially reduced the applicant's culpability.

The applicant, contended that while the judge recited the basic facts which encompassed, in a general way, the matters just mentioned, he did not address them specifically nor consider how they affected the applicant's culpability.
It was further submitted that the judge's assessment of the offence as premeditated, violent murder strongly suggested that he failed to consider the matters mentioned and this was also reflected in the excessively high penalty.
I interpolate that these matters were relevant and required consideration.

Early in his remarks the judge referred to the serious assault by the deceased upon the applicant. The judge noted that the applicant did not fight back but just moved away. The judge did not attach as much importance to the earlier serious assault as the applicant would wish or take the view of it urged on behalf of the applicant. The fight between the applicant and the deceased at the card game involved no weapons. The fight in the cell block involved the applicant wielding a knife and the deceased being unarmed. I am unable to agree that the judge's assessment of premeditated violent murder meant that he had failed to consider the deceased's acts earlier that day. Those acts were not inconsistent with the applicant forming such an intention.

It is unsound to suggest that a judge, who has presided over a long trial where the facts were canvassed in much detail and the points on which the applicant relies were covered by a number of witnesses, did not give them sufficient weight. The judge's summary of the facts indicated that he was alive to them. The judge was much better placed than this court to assess the facts and to decide correctly what weight should be given to the acts of the deceased in the kitchen between 10.00 am and 10.45 am. The view which the judge took was open to him.

The judge's task was not facilitated by the attitude taken by the applicant that he had not killed the deceased and the absence of any useful reports on his behalf. The secreting of the knife did not advance the applicant's case.

Complaint was made that the judge did not have sufficient regard to the principle of totality. It was submitted that that principle applied to past custodial history and to the question of special circumstances. It was submitted that the judge should have found special circumstances.

The complaint was that, overall, the applicant would be spending a total of 18 years in gaol by way of minimum terms and that there was only an additional term of five years. It was submitted that this departed from the normal ratio of an additional term being not less than one quarter of the total term.
Allied to this compliant was the further complaint that sentences totalling 25 years or perhaps 23 years and a minimum term of 18 years were excessive.

The judge's approach essentially involved treating the sentence for armed robbery as one, in effect, of a fixed term of three years which was due to expire in less than one month after he imposed the sentence for murder. The judge was alert to the question of special circumstances but felt that he should not make an alteration to the sentence which he otherwise thought would be appropriate. The judge was also alert to the principle of totality and the effect of cumulative sentences. The judge took these matters into account.

The judge also attached importance to the principle that violence by prison inmates towards other inmates and officers will be dealt with sternly.

In my opinion, the sentence imposed by the judge was within the permissible range for premeditated murder, even allowing for the circumstances earlier on the day of the murder.

I would grant leave to appeal but dismiss the appeal.

NEWMAN J: I am of the same view. I agree with the orders proposed by the learned presiding judge.

HIDDEN J: I also agree.
 * * * 
