

Shalhoub Holdings Pty Ltd and Ors versus Donnelly Matter No 1804/92 [1998]
NSWSC 391 (3 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 `SHALHOUB HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ORS versus MAX CHRISTOPHER DONNELLY` `1804/92` `3 September 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I heard these proceedings in 1992 and gave judgment on most issues on 25 June 1992. 
On 23 April 1998 the plaintiffs filed an amended statement of claim to deal with issues that were not the subject of my earlier reasons. On 3 July, for reasons I then gave, I dismissed most of those claims, but left in the claims made under paragraphs 26, 27, 27(d), 28, 29, 29(a), 30, 31 and 32 because it seemed to me then that they did plead a cause of action. However, I ordered that all the evidence to support the remaining issues be filed by a date in
August and stood the motion over to today.

Today Mr Newlinds for the defendants submitted that the evidence that had been filed did not support the remaining paragraphs and the whole of the balance of the statement of claim should be struck out.

It is agreed that the extra material is that set out in DX1100, which consists of seven affidavits. I have read all of them on the basis that what they say is correct. I have also read the statement of claim as most recently amended (to which no defence has been filed on these issues) in the way most favourable to the plaintiffs.

Mr Abdul-Karim, who appears today for the plaintiffs for the first time, says that Mr Shalhoub wishes to have his day in court very, very much and that the matter requires a full hearing. He says that when the matter is fully investigated it will be seen that there were significant breaches by the second defendant bank in respect of its duty of good faith to its customer by securing its own position with respect to certain foreign currency loan transactions and thereby sacrificing the interest of its customer. He says also that there is a breach in respect of a stop loss agreement that there was between the plaintiffs and the bank.

The court, however, can only deal with the case as it is pleaded, especially remembering that this is a case commenced in 1992 and, apart from certain postponed issues, was determined in 1992. The pleadings do not in any way suggest that the loan agreements as varied should be set aside because of any unconscionable conduct. On the contrary it is put that the plaintiffs have suffered damage by breach of the loan agreements.

When asked what the evidence of breach was under para 30 of the amended statement of claim, Mr Abdul-Karim said that it was inseparable from the events of 4 October, 1990 which were the subject of the challenge to the appointment of receiver and were dealt with in my judgment of 1992. If this is so, and I assume it is, then I was probably wrong in my decision in July, 1998 in letting the matter proceed further because the reason why I struck out the other parts of the amended statement of claim was that I accepted the submission of Mr Newlinds that the matter had already been determined in my earlier judgment.

I appreciate what has been said by courts over the years that people are entitled to have their day in court and that it is only in the clearest of cases that judges should deny them that prima facie right. However, one must look at these things in a balanced way. Where as here one can see (a) that the plaintiffs have had their day in court in 1992, apart from certain reserved issues; (b) that they have been asked to plead those issues precisely and to forward to the court all the evidence on which they rely; and (c) there is no case being pleaded on that material, then it is in the interests of everybody that the litigation should be finally determined without further expenditure of costs.

Accordingly, the balance of the amended statement of claim should be struck out. There should be a verdict for the defendants in the proceedings, so that the suit should now finally be dismissed with costs. The further exhibit should be retained.
 * * * 
