

C W C Rogers versus Valosi P/L T/as Bikebiz [1996] NSWSC 580 (29 November 1996) 
Christopher William Campbell ROGERS versus VALOSI P/L T/as BIKEBIZ /92 
Friday 29th November, 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings arise as a result of injuries sustained by the plaintiff on 24 January 1990 while riding a motor cycle which he had purchased from the defendant.

The plaintiff was born on 26 January 1973 and at the time of his accident he was two days short of his seventeenth birthday. The plaintiff's parents separated when he was eighteen months old and they were divorced when he was four years old. He lived most of his life with his mother but at the beginning of 1987 when he was just turning fourteen and entering Year 9 at school he moved to Dubbo to live with his father on a small hobby-farm.

The plaintiff lived with his father until approximately six weeks before the accident giving rise to these proceedings. He then moved into Dubbo to live with a family in circumstances which I shall describe later.

The plaintiff was keen on motor cycles and while living with his father he started saving to buy a motor cycle. He worked at a number of casual jobs and his father supplied the balance of the purchase price as a loan to enable him to purchase a Yamaha DT175 motor cycle about a year before the accident.

The plaintiff said that this motor cycle sat in a shed on his father's property for the first six months that he had it and he then started riding it around the property.

In July 1989 the plaintiff obtained a learner's licence to drive cars and on 3
November 1989 a learner's licence for motor cycles.

After obtaining a learner's licence he began riding his motor cycle on the roads but his evidence was that he had limited experience on roads. He described it as "not much at all, a couple of trips into town, a couple of trips to a friend's house and all in that period under three months." It also appears that he rode to school on a number of occasions.

To obtain his learner's licence the plaintiff was required to pass a test of his knowledge of certain matters but was not required to undergo any physical test or any test of his ability to ride or control a motor cycle.

The case was conducted on the basis that it was illegal for the plaintiff to have ridden a motor cycle with a capacity greater than 250cc at any relevant time until Exhibit J was tendered on the third day of hearing. Exhibit J consisted of a copy of the relevant regulations applicable at the time of the accident causing injury to the plaintiff. Those regulations provide for learners' licences and provisional licences.

Regulation 12 of the Motor [Traffic
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/) provides that a learner's licence may be granted, on the payment of the prescribed fee, for any period to a person who is at least sixteen years and nine months to learn to ride a motor cycle.

Sub regulation (5) provides: "The holder of a learner's licence shall not ride a motor cycle upon a public street - if the motor cycle is being used for the carriage of any person, except the learner or a person who holds, and has held for a period of at least two years, a licence or the equivalent of a licence to ride a motor cycle (not being a licence or learner's licence to learn to ride a motor cycle) issued under the law for the time being in force in any State or country and who is safely seated on a pillion seat or in a sidecar; unless there is displayed conspicuously at, and so as to be clearly visible from, the rear of the motor cycle a sign, issued or authorised by the Commissioner, displaying the letter "L" in black on a yellow background." 
The regulations also provided that the holder of a learner's licence should not exceed 70 km/hour on a public street.

Regulation 12A provided, at the relevant time, that a provisional licence may be granted to a person who has not previously held a licence for a continuous period of twelve months or more and that the provisional licence was subject to the condition that the licensee should not drive any motor vehicle - at a speed in excess of 80 km/hour; if it is a motor cycle with an engine capacity greater than cc.

It should be noted that [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s12.html) does not impose any restriction upon the engine capacity of any motor cycle which the holder of a learner's licence may ride on a public road whereas such a restriction is imposed on the holders of provisional licences. On 1 March 1993
Regulation 12A was amended to alter the engine capacity restriction to a power to weight ratio restriction.

Counsel for the parties agreed that:
There was no express provision as to the engine capacities of motor cycles that learner licence holders could ride.
 (The transcript incorrectly refers to "provisional" licence holders).
There was no prohibition on the sale of the motor cycle to the plaintiff.

The plaintiff had had some friction with his father for about six months before the accident and approximately six weeks before the accident he had moved out of his father's home and had gone to live with a family in the city of Dubbo.

At some time after the school year ended in 1989 the plaintiff went to Windsor to visit his mother and stayed with her for some time. After arriving at his mother's home the plaintiff went to the defendant's premises on the Great
Western Highway where the defendant carried on the business of selling used motor cycles under the name "The Bike Biz".

On that visit the plaintiff saw the Yamaha RZ350 motor cycle which he ultimately purchased. The plaintiff saw it and, he said, "thought it looked pretty good".
 
He returned to look at the motor cycle again accompanied by a former school friend who he said "knew a bit more about bikes than me." 
On his third visit on 9 January 1990 he was accompanied by his mother and he purchased the motor cycle he had been looking at.

The plaintiff's version of what occurred on the visit in company with his mother was as follows:
The plaintiff saw a salesman, Peter Condon.
The plaintiff looked at the motor cycle he was interested in and showed it to his mother.
The plaintiff, his mother and Mr Condon went inside the office at the defendant's premises and sat down at a desk.
The plaintiff said he was keen about the bike.
The mother said "It's too big. You are not allowed to have it. It's against the law. The capacity is too low (sic)."
Mr Condon said that didn't matter and he could sell a bike to a two year old.
The plaintiff's mother again argued, inter alia, that the plaintiff should not have the bike as its capacity was too big, it was illegal and she didn't want him to have a bike that was that big and that fast.
Mr Condon said that it was the plaintiff's decision and that "he could sell a bike to anyone."
The plaintiff said that he intended reducing the capacity of the bike from 350cc to 250cc himself when he could afford it after he had returned to
Dubbo with the bike.
There were discussions as to price which resulted in the price being reduced from near to $3,000 to $2,550.
Two forms were then completed, the first entitled "Dealer's Notice (Motor
Cycles)" (Exhibit A) and the second entitled "Vehicles Transfer Advice".
(Exhibit B)
The Dealer's Notice (Motor Cycles) was completed by Mr Condon except that: .1 the odometer reading and sale price in the middle of the form were inserted by the plaintiff .2 the Plaintiff signed the form.
The Vehicle Transfer Advice was completed by Mr Condon except that the plaintiff completed his name, address, the "City or Town of Usual Garaging " and signed and dated the form.

Both the space for the plaintiff's date of birth and the space for his driver's license number were left blank.

The plaintiff said that when he came to complete the form he said to Mr
Condon "I can't fill out the driver's license box because I don't have one".

He said in relation to the date of birth box "If I did, it would be clear I was under 17 and couldn't ride the bike legally".

The plaintiff said that Mr Condon had told him to leave those boxes.
The plaintiff did not take the motor cycle on 9 January 1990 after completing the formalities. His mother asked him to collect the motor cycle at some other time because she was concerned about the amount of traffic on the road and the weather conditions.

The plaintiff's mother, Nancy Caulton, gave evidence of accompanying the plaintiff to Bike Biz and that:
She told the plaintiff in the presence of Mr Condon that she was opposed him buying the bike.
She told Mr Condon that the plaintiff was unlicensed, that he was on learner plates and that he was still 16 years old. She asked him whether the sale was legal.
There were discussions between the plaintiff and his mother about her opposition to him buying the bike.
Mr Condon said that the plaintiff was not a baby and that he did not want to get involved in a family feud. He further said "I can sell a bike to a three year old if they have the money. A three year old can buy it if they want." 
The plaintiff's mother said that this discussion may have occurred when the forms which were completed in relation to the sale were being filled in.

There was also discussion relating to the completion of the forms and what should be done in relation to completing the parts of the form requiring the plaintiff's license number and date of birth.
There were discussions about reducing the capacity of the engine from 350cc to 250cc.
There were discussions about the price to be paid for the motor cycle during which the plaintiff informed Mr Condon that he did not have sufficient funds to pay the transfer fees which were payable and that he had no money after he paid the purchase price of the bike.
Mrs Caulton said that she told Mr Condon that the plaintiff would ride the bike to Dubbo if he bought it.
After the purchase she asked the plaintiff to collect the bike later as it was raining.

It was put to Mrs Caulton in cross-examination in various ways that she allowed the sale to proceed and did not stop the plaintiff purchasing the bike. However it is clear in my view that she forcefully expressed her view that the plaintiff should not have the bike to both the plaintiff and Mr
Condon but her wishes were ignored by both of them.

Peter Condon, the defendant's salesman, gave evidence to the following effect:
The business had approximately twenty-five to thirty used motor cycles in stock at the time of the plaintiff's purchase. The stock included motor cycles of various types from 100cc upwards. It also included approximately ten 250cc bikes including one Yamaha RZ250.
The plaintiff visited the business on or about 8 January 1990 in company with a friend. The plaintiff was alleged to have said something like "They've got one here" and to have gone straight to the RZ350 which he ultimately bought.
Mr Condon then had a conversation with the plaintiff relating to the price of the bike. He also ascertained that the plaintiff was not a licensed driver.
The plaintiff told him that he had owned a Yamaha DZ175 motor cycle.
The plaintiff had told him that if he bought the RZ350 motor cycle he intended to convert the engine to a 250cc capacity so he would only have to buy one motor cycle. He could reconvert it to a 350cc when he obtained a full license.
The plaintiff told Mr Condon that he was going to take the biketo his mother's place and that it was not going to be ridden until it was converted to 250cc.
That afternoon the plaintiff telephoned Mr Condon and a price of $2,550 was negotiated over the telephone. During this call Mr Condon offered to deliver the bike to the plaintiff's mother's home but the plaintiff said that his sister would pick it up.
After the telephone call Mr Condon made enquiries to ascertain whether it was legal to sell the bike to the plaintiff. He was told it was legal to do so by two sources as well as by a person at the Motor
Traders Association who indicated, in effect, that if someone is paying cash and wants to buy a motor cycle it had to be sold to them.
The plaintiff came to the shop the following day accompanied by his mother. The plaintiff's mother asked whether it was illegal for the plaintiff to ride the bike and Mr Condon said that it was (incorrectly as it now appears). His mother asked Mr Condon whether it was legal to sell the bike to the plaintiff and Mr Condon told her that it was. There was them some discussion between the plaintiff and his mother during which the plaintiff told his mother to "shut up", and that he knew what he was doing.
Mr Condon denied that he remembered the plaintiff's mother saying anything in relation to whether or not the plaintiff should purchase the bike or that she said that she was unhappy with the plaintiff purchasing the bike.
He denied that she did anything to prevent the sale being completed and said "If she didn't want me to sell the bike to her son I wouldn't have sold it to him."
In relation to completing the Vehicle Transfer Advice form Mr Condon denied writing was placed on the form by the plaintiff in Mr Condon's presence. He said he was unable to recall any discussion in relation to the plaintiff's date of birth or filling in the license number on the form.
Mr Condon said that there was no conversation on 9 January 1990 which altered his belief that the plaintiff intended to take the motor cycle to
Windsor and carry out the conversion there and that the plaintiff would not be riding the motor cycle until it was converted. He said he was not told that the plaintiff would be riding the bike back to Dubbo.
Mr Condon said that he had no recollection of any conversation on 9
January 1990 relating to the plaintiff's financial situation.
He said the plaintiff did not take the bike on 9 January because he said his sister was going to pick it up. Mr Condon had no recollection of it raining on that day and indeed claimed a positive recollection that it had not rained that day which was his birthday.

From the manner in which the evidence was given by these three witnesses it appears to me that they each were genuinely trying to give their best recollections of what had occurred and the differences which appear in the evidence resulted from misunderstanding and inaccuracies of recollection rather than from any attempt at conscious dissembling although because of the horrific consequences of the accident in which the plaintiff was involved I believe Mr Condon has persuaded himself of some matters which may not have been the case at the time.
 
In my view the evidence establishes that the plaintiff went to the defendant's premises on 9 January 1990 with his mind made up that he intended to purchase the motor cycle which he had previously inspected and which he in fact purchased with the intention of converting it to an engine capacity of 250cc and later back to an engine capacity of 350cc..

He had seen the motor cycle on two earlier occasions and had clearly satisfied himself that he should buy it.

I accept that during the visit on 9 January 1990 the plaintiff's mother forcefully indicated and expressed her opposition to the purchase of the motor cycle by the plaintiff to both the plaintiff and the defendant's salesman Mr.
Condon but the plaintiff ignored her wishes and Mr Condon proceeded to sell the motor cycle to the plaintiff knowing of her objections. I do not accept the evidence of Mr Condon to the effect that if the plaintiff's mother had not wanted him to sell the motor cycle to the plaintiff he would not have done so.
It appeared to me that this was evidence of which Mr Condon had come to believe subsequent to the accident.

I accept Mrs Caulton's evidence to the effect that Mr Condon said to her that the plaintiff was not a baby and that he did not want to get involved in a family feud. This evidence reinforces the affect of Mrs Caulton's evidence of voicing her opposition to the purchase but being overborne or disregarded by the plaintiff.

I also accept the evidence of Mrs Caulton and the plaintiff to the effect that
Mr Condon said words to the effect that he could sell the bike to a two or three year old if they had the money. In relation to this aspect of the matter
I accept Mr Condon's evidence that he had obtained advice from a number of sources including a person at the Motor Traders Association that it was legal to sell to anyone wishing to buy a motor cycle.

At the time of the sale the plaintiff, the plaintiff's mother and Mr Condon all believed, incorrectly, that it was illegal for the plaintiff to ride the motor cycle he was purchasing on a public road.

I accept that during the course of the discussions the plaintiff made it clear to both his mother and Mr Condon that he intended to alter the engine capacity of the motor cycle from 350cc to 250cc although there is some confusion about where this was to be done, Windsor or Dubbo.

I accept that during the course of the discussions between the plaintiff, his mother and Mr Condon the plaintiff indicated that he intended to return to
Dubbo with the bike but it may well be that Mr Condon did not appreciate this fact during the course of the discussions. However I accept the evidence of the plaintiff to the effect that spaces on the Vehicle Transfer Advice form for the plaintiff's date of birth and license number were left blank after he told Mr Condon that he couldn't complete the license number because he didn't have one and that if he completed the date of birth box it would disclose that he was under seventeen years of age and it would disclose that he couldn't ride the bike legally and Mr Condon indicated that he could leave this blank.
 
Collection of Motor Cycle 
The plaintiff gave evidence that he returned to the defendant's premises to collect the motor cycle with his older sister a few days after its purchase.

Mr Condon was aware that he was riding the motor cycle away but there was no illegality in the plaintiff doing so.

The plaintiff rode the motor cycle away from the defendant's premises to his mother's home at Windsor. While at Windsor he said he rode the bike a couple of times, to Mount Druitt (about 30 kilometres each way) and back and "more than likely a couple of rides around Windsor." During this time he rode the motor cycle at over 100 kilometres per hour on a number of occasions.

He said that he didn't have any major problem riding his motor cycle and was competent at negotiating traffic at 60 km/hour or so.
 
The plaintiff was stopped by police on one occasion while driving without L-plates. The police required him to collect L-plates from the police station and to put them on. The plaintiff said the police officer noticed he was riding a 350cc bike and that the plaintiff then told him that he was intending to reduce the capacity of the engine when he could afford it. The police took no action and may well have known the true position in relation to the regulations.

The plaintiff said that he covered the "350" insignia on the bike with masking tape to avoid being stopped by police on his trip back to Dubbo.

The plaintiff's mother gave evidence that he had covered the insignia with masking tape against her objections. She also said that she told the plaintiff not to ride the motor cycle but he disobeyed her.
 
Return to Dubbo 
A few days after collecting the motor cycle from the defendant he rode it to
Dubbo. Again he travelled at speeds in the order of 100 km/hour. He said that after arriving in Dubbo he rode the motor cycle around Dubbo and in the few days after his return he rode it at speeds approaching its limits apparently experimenting with it.
 
When the plaintiff returned to Dubbo he returned, not to his father's home, but to the home of the family where he had been living for a short time before he went to Windsor.

The plaintiff rode the motor cycle around Dubbo and in the few days after his return he rode it at speeds approaching its limits apparently experimenting with it.

The plaintiff was apparently attracted to one of the daughters of the family where he was staying but his feeling was not reciprocated although they were "still talking and friendly." 
As a result of his unrequited feelings in relation to this young girl the
Plaintiff wrote a letter on 23 January 1990 which became Exhibit C. That letter was in part in the following terms: "To everyone: 23/1/90 
I've been thinking about it for a while now and I've decided to kill myself.
It is not something to be sad about and I don't want anyone to cry or miss me.
Especially you mum cause you know I love you.

I don't think I was meant to be on the world and honestly believe that God is all bullshit. Or else he's just an asshole, why else would he make my life so hopeless. I only want to know what the hell I did to deserve this.

I was going to have a bad crash on my bike but that would be wasteful. There are lots of people who would love to have a bike like mine. I am also scared that I might accidentally survive and suffer terrible injuries. And of course euthanasia is illegal so all the "do-gooders" would keep me alive even if I begged them to turn the machines off. They just don't understand that's' all.
Tomorrow I will go home to Dad's house, get my rifle and then shoot myself.
 .............

I can't be bothered to live now. I don't want to live in Windsor, I don't want to live in Dubbo. I don't want to live anywhere I'm just sick of it. I don't want to go back to school cause I can't work at anything anyway. I couldn't work through the end of Yr 11 either. That's why my marks went down the drain.
I feel like there is an emptiness right in the middle of my heart like there is a piece missing in a jigsaw and the pain and hurt won't go away. It's been like this for a long time now and I can't hack it anymore. I keep hoping but it doesn't change. Now my stomach is tied in a knot. It goes away some times but only for a while and it always comes back............

So the only solution left now is for me to die. And I'll never know what it means to feel love.

I'll get the gun tomorrow, but I'll wait the next few days until ............ goes.

I can only hope. But when she goes. I go too.

Cop that everyone, now do you understand that I've got to die to ever rest!
Bloody ironic isn't it.

I love you ............ Why......? 
CR." 
In page 1 in the letter after the sentence "Tomorrow I will go home to Dad's house, get my rifle and then shoot myself" the plaintiff interrupted his letter writing to set out his "Will".

He indicated that he was aware that being under 18 he could not make a legal will but asked that his wishes be respected so that his belongings were distributed to friends and relatives in accordance with the very detailed instructions which he then wrote.

The letter displays an emotional turmoil within the plaintiff, but his "will" which he included in the letter showed a considerable degree of sophistication for a young man. This sophistication was consistent with the impression he made in the witness box some five years later of an intelligent, competent young man and I have no reason to believe that that would not have been the way he presented to persons he encountered before the accident.

The Plaintiff left the letter referred to above on the kitchen table of the home where he was staying, probably in the morning before he left the home the next morning.

He said that when he left he intended to travel to a friend's home some distance out of Dubbo. He was wearing full motor cycle leathers and a helmet.
He said that he was "feeling a bit upset" as he rode and that he was going to his friend's home to discuss things. From the terms of the letter referred to above the plaintiff was no doubt in an emotional turmoil although he said that when he rode out of Dubbo he said he "seemed confident and okay" handling the motor cycle.

The accident happened on the roadway as depicted in the seventeen photographs contained in Exhibit D some distance from Dubbo. The roadway passed Whylandra
Creek and there was then a straight section about one kilometre long leading to a curve to the right. This curve was visible from Whylandra Creek.

The plaintiff failed to negotiate the right hand curve in the road, he left the road and struck the embankment on the left hand or southern side of the road.

The plaintiff told a police officer who interviewed him sometime after the accident that he did not take the corner because "I was not paying enough attention to what was going on." 
The plaintiff gave evidence that "he was travelling at 100 km/h or maybe " as he reached the Whylandra Creek sign next to the roadway and that he then accelerated and "the bike peaked at about 180km/h." 
He said that "I pretty much did it because it was so easy to do". He said the bike accelerated "very fast from 100 km/h, very very fast." 
He then realised that he should slow down. He released the accelerator and coasted down to "around about 160 is my best guess". He said that as he approached the corner he realised he was going too fast. The motor cycle left the road and he has no recollection of anything further until he woke up receiving medical attention. He gave no evidence of applying the brakes but the motor cycle left skid marks one hundred metres long leading to its final resting place.

The plaintiff said that he did not intend to maintain the speed for any great period of time. He said "I enjoyed it. I guess that's the reason that I did it." He said that he knew that there was a risk of serious injury if he had an accident.

After the accident the plaintiff was taken to Dubbo Base Hospital. Later the same day he was transferred to The Royal North Shore Hospital by air ambulance. He remained there until he was transferred to Moorong Hospital on or about 1 May 1990 where he remained until 1 August 1990.

After leaving Moorong Hospital he went to his mother's home at Windsor and in he completed his Higher School Certificate at Hawkesbury High School. In he commenced a Bachelor of Engineering in Computer Science course in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of
Wollongong.

On 3 June 1991 he pleaded guilty to a charge of driving at a speed dangerous to the public at Dubbo Local Court.

The Motor Cycle 
The motor cycle the plaintiff purchased from the defendant was a Yamaha RZ350 which had an engine capacity of 350cc. Counsel for the plaintiff expressly disavowed any entitlement to succeed against the defendant had the motor cycle sold by the defendant to the plaintiff had an engine with an engine capacity of 250cc regardless of its performance characteristics and founded the plaintiff's claim on the fact that the motor cycle sold had an engine capacity of 350cc and consequently had performance characteristics which rendered it unsuitable for use by the plaintiff.

A consulting engineer, Mr Boris Osman, gave evidence on behalf of the plaintiff relating to performance characteristics of RD and RZ series Yamaha motor cycles of 250cc and 350cc capacities.

Mr. Osman had had fifty-nine years experience riding motor cycles including riding competitively for a time. During World War II he ran an advanced dispatch riders course for army personnel. He was also a director of the
Australian Automobile Racing Company which conducted the motor racing circuit at Warwick Farm where a number of motor cycle events were held.

At various stages of his career Mr Osman has given evidence in a professional capacity relating to the performance characteristics of different types of bikes. There was no challenge to his expertise.

Mr. Osman gave evidence that RZ series Yamaha engines with a capacity of 250cc produced a maximum of power of 35.6 kilowatts or 47.7 brake horsepower and the cc capacity engines produced 43.5 kilowatts or 58.3 brake horsepower. This equates to 22.19 percent more power being produced by the 350cc engines.

He further gave evidence that the maximum torque for the 250cc capacity engine was 3.6 kilogram metres or 34.8 Newton metres and for the 350cc capacity engine 4.6 kilogram metres or 45.5 Newton metres. This equates to 27.78 percent more torque.

The RZ series bikes of 250cc capacity and 350cc capacity were virtually identical except for the cylinder capacity of their engines. The result of this difference was, according to Mr. Osman, about a 28 percent increase in accelerating power. There was no evidence to indicate whether that increase in accelerating power translated into a 28 percent increase in the rate of acceleration or into some other increase in the rate of acceleration other than a question in cross-examination referring to "the estimate you made of percent increase between the acceleration of the Yamaha 250 and 350, that was based upon theory I take it?" The evidence given in fact related to "accelerating power" not "acceleration rate".

An elementary understanding of the laws of physics and mechanics leads to the conclusion that a 28 percent increase in accelerating power would not lead to a 28% increase in the rate of acceleration. The correctness of this is shown by analogy with the effect of a 22.19 percent increase in power only producing an increase in top speed of somewhere between approximately six and twelve percent.
 
In respect to top speed Mr Osman said that a Yamaha RZ250 motor cycle in good running order, properly maintained would have a top speed of about 160 or 180 kilometres an hour. He said a Yamaha RZ350 motor cycle would probably do "more" and would attain that speed in a shorter time. In re-examination he fixed "more" as being ten to twenty kilometres per hour but he did not fix any increase in the rate of acceleration.

He said that comparing the performance of 250cc motor cycles with 350cc bikes generally involved many variables such as weight, design efficiency and the state of maintenance so that there was a range of performance characteristics of 250cc motor cycles. He said that at the relevant time there were 250cc motor cycles available which were capable of exceeding the speed and acceleration of a Yamaha RZ350 motor cycle.

Reduction of the engine capacity of the motor cycle 
The evidence established that the Yamaha RZ250 motor cycle was identical to the RZ350 purchased by the plaintiff in all significant respects except for the bore of the cylinders of the engine. The stroke was identical.

In order for the plaintiff to ride the motor cycle which he purchased on the road legally once he obtained a provisional licence it was necessary to reduce the capacity of its engine from 350cc to 250cc.

Mr Osman gave evidence that this objective could be achieved by fitting an appropriately sized set of cylinders. This was done by removing the cylinders, cylinder heads, pistons, gudgeon pins and piston rings and replacing them with a set of the same parts giving the lesser capacity. The engine was designed in such a way as allow this change to be carried out without any alteration to the structure of the engine. All that was needed was the purchase of a kit of parts and their installation.

In relation to the cost of carrying out the conversion in 1990 the plaintiff tendered a letter from The Outrider Pty Limited which showed the total cost of new parts for the conversion was $886.55 and the labour costs for five hours work was $200.00. This gave a total cost of $1086. The letter also indicated that a used RZ250 "top end" had a quoted price of $300 to $400. This would give a total cost of $500 to $600 if used parts were used.

It was agreed between the parties that there would be no cross-examination of the writer of the letter and that a statement by counsel for the defendant that used parts would have cost $260 to $310 and that there was "rough agreement" as to the other figures would be treated as evidence.

Accordingly the competing contentions for the cost of conversion using used parts are $500 to $600 on behalf of the plaintiff and $460 to $510 on behalf of the defendant if the work was carried out professionally and $300 to $400 on behalf of the plaintiff and $260 to $310 on behalf of the defendant if the work was carried out by the plaintiff.

There was nothing to suggest that the task involved any significant degree of complexity nor that the plaintiff would not have been able to finance it in the near future if he adopted the cheapest course even though he had no funds after purchasing the motor cycle.

The Plaintiff's Claim 
The Plaintiff has sued the Defendant alleging that the Plaintiff's injuries, loss and damage resulted from the negligence of the Defendant.

The negligence alleged was particularised in the Statement of Claim as follows: "16. Particulars of Negligence 
Permitting the plaintiff to purchase and ride a bike which had an engine capacity in excess of 250cc when the defendant knew that riders such as the plaintiff who held a learner's licence were not permitted at law to ride bikes with an engine capacity greater than 250cc.

Failure to instruct and warn the plaintiff concerning the dangers of riding a motor cycle with an engine capacity over 250cc given that the defendant knew that the plaintiff held a learner's licence and not a full licence for the riding of motor cycles.

Failure to advise the plaintiff not to buy the bike until its engine capacity had been reduced from 350cc to cc.

Failure to inform and advise the plaintiff that the plaintiff would have great difficulty in himself adapting the engine capacity of the said motor cycle from a 350cc capacity to a 250cc capacity.

Failure to pay due heed of the foreseeable risk that the plaintiff would ride the bike with its capacity being 350cc, pending him being able to afford or manage to obtain reduction of the engine capacity down from 350cc to 250cc.

Advising the plaintiff, or permitting the plaintiff to infer, that the plaintiff would be able to adapt the engine capacity." 
It is clear that there was no regulatory prohibition on the plaintiff purchasing or riding the motor cycle which he purchased from the defendant and there was no evidence which established that the plaintiff would have difficulty in converting the engine size or that he would not be able to do so.

Accordingly the plaintiff's claim, as particularised depends upon Particulars (b), (c) and (e).

Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the defendant was negligent in selling the motor cycle to the plaintiff in its unaltered state because of the real possibility that the plaintiff would ride the motor cycle in its unaltered state and by reason of his incompetence to safely handle the motor cycle, suffer injury.

It was submitted that the negligence took the form of negligent entrustment of a chattel which was likely to be dangerous or foreseeably able to be dangerous to the plaintiff who was then an incompetent minor or infant.

It was further submitted that there was a failure by the defendant to warn the plaintiff not to buy the motor cycle. The plaintiff alleged that the defendant should have discouraged him from buying the motor cycle to the point where there was a refusal to sell to him if he persisted in his desire to purchase it.

The plaintiff referred first to Dixon versus Bell (1816) <case>; [5
M&S 198] which was said to be the leading English case on negligent entrustment.

The facts of that case were that the owner of a gun which he knew to be loaded sent a thirteen or fourteen year old female servant to collect it. While the young woman had custody of the gun she carelessly discharged it causing injury to the plaintiff's son and servant. It appears that before the gun was handed to the young girl the priming was removed at the request of the defendant.

The Attorney-General moved for a new trial on the ground that the defendant had used every precaution which he could have been expected to use on such an occasion and therefore was not chargeable with any culpable negligence.

The judgments as reported were in the following terms: "Lord Ellenborough C.J. The defendant might and ought to have gone farther; it was incumbent on him, who, by charging the gun, had made it capable of doing mischief, to render it safe and innoxious. This might have been done by the discharge or drawing of the contents; and though it was the defendant's intention to prevent all mischief, and he expected that this would be effectuated by taking out the priming, the event has unfortunately proved, that the order to Leman was not sufficient; consequently, as by this want of care, the instrument was left in a state capable of doing mischief, the law will hold the defendant responsible. It is a hard case, undoubtedly; but I think the action is maintainable.

Bayley J. The gun ought to have been so left as to be out of all reach or doing harm. The mere removal of the priming left the chance of some grains of powder escaping through the touch-hole." 
The plaintiff then referred to Donoghue versus Stevenson, (1932) AC562. At page Lord Atkin recited an outline of Dixon versus Bell as being one of the cases which had been referred to in the courts below as laying down the proposition that no duty of care is owed to consumers in the circumstances of
Donoghue versus Stevenson.

At page 595 Lord Atkin said: "I do not find it necessary to discuss at length the cases dealing with duties where the thing is dangerous, or, in the narrower category, belongs to a class of things which are dangerous in themselves. I regard the distinction as an unnatural one so far as it is used to serve as a logical differentiation by which to distinguish the existence or non-existence of a legal right. In this respect I agree with what was said by Scrutton L J in Hodge & Sons v. Anglo-American Oil Co. (2), a case which was ultimately decided on a question of fact. "Personally, I do not understand the difference between a thing dangerous in itself, as poison, and a thing not dangerous as a class, but by negligent construction dangerous as a particular thing. The latter, if anything, seems the more dangerous of the two; it is a wolf in sheep's clothing instead of an obvious wolf." The nature of the thing may very well call for different degrees of care, and the person dealing with it may well contemplate persons as being within the sphere of his duty to take care who would not be sufficiently proximate with less dangerous goods; so that not only the degree of care but the range of persons to whom a duty is owed may be extended. But they all illustrate the general principle." 
It was submitted that at this stage of the development of the law a tortious obligation existed to take reasonable care in relation to persons entrusted with chattels which were potentially dangerous to them.

It was submitted that the above obligation was imposed on manufacturers and retailers. It was submitted that negligent entrustment can occur by virtue of a sales transaction so as to render the seller liable in negligence where he knows or ought to know that there is a forseeable and unreasonable risk of injury to the person who obtains the chattel by reason of that person's inexperience, incompetence or youth.

In support of this submission the Plaintiff referred to an English publication
Product Liability (1977) C.J. Miles and P.A. Lovell. At Page 21 the learned authors said: "Although a vendor's liability will normally be contractual, it will be seen later that a more widespread liability may also be incurred in tort. Thus liability may be imposed for deceit, for failing to disclose known dangers, supplying a dangerous article into incompetent hands, omitting to inspect or to warn that an inspection has not been undertaken, and for representing that a product is safe for its intended use when it is not. In all such cases fraud or negligence must be established." 
Footnote 3 refers to Burfitt versus Kille (1939) 2KB 743 and Dixon versus Bell [(1816) 5 M&W 198.] 
At page 303 the learned authors said: "The duty not to supply a dangerous article into irresponsible hands 
There is also a general duty not to supply a potentially dangerous article into the hands of a person who one knows or has reason to believe is not competent to handle it safely. Dixon versus Bell was an early case imposing liability for the supply of a loaded gun into the hands of a young child who discharged it and injured a companion in play. Other more recent cases have involved the supply of a pistol, petrol and matches to children, whilst
American cases have followed a similar path and extended the principle to cover the supply of a car to a driver known to be incompetent through inexperience, intoxication or a medical condition such as epilepsy.

Liability may also be incurred through the misdelivery of a potentially dangerous substance or through leaving it in a position where it is accessible to a person who could not be trusted to handle it safely." 
In Burfitt versus A and B Kille [(1939) 2 KB 743] a retailer was held liable for selling a "safety-pistol" and fifty blank cartridges to a twelve year old boy who injured another child when using the safety-pistol.

At page 746 Atkinson J said: "The first matter to determine is whether the defendants were under any and what duty towards the plaintiff. The question when a seller of a chattel owes a duty of care to persons other than the purchaser has been repeatedly debated, and no one can pretend that the law is clearly settled. It is clear in the present case that there was no duty based on contract, but in my opinion the cases establish the following propositions: Firstly if A places in the hands of B a chattel which belongs to a class of things dangerous in themselves in the hands of such a person as B, as distinguished from a chattel which is dangerous only because of some defect peculiar to the particular chattel handed over, a duty of care rests on A not only towards the recipient but also towards all such persons as may reasonably be contemplated as likely to be endangered. In Dominion Natural Gas Co., Ld. v. Collins (I) Lord
Dunedin said: "It has, however, again and again been held that in the case of articles dangerous in themselves, such as loaded firearms, poisons, explosives, and other things ejusdem generis, there is a peculiar duty to take precaution imposed upon those who send forth or install such articles when it is necessarily the case that other parties will come within their proximity."
In Donoghue versus Stevenson (2) Lord Macmillan said: "The exceptional case of things dangerous in themselves, or known to be in a dangerous condition, has been regarded as constituting a peculiar category outside the ordinary law both of contract and of tort. I may observe that it seems to me inaccurate to describe the case of dangerous things as an exception to the principle that no one but a party to a contract can sue on that contract. I rather regard this type of case as a special instance of negligence where the law exacts a degree of diligence so stringent as to amount practically to a guarantee of safety."
Lord Atkin said (3): "The nature of the thing may very well call for different degrees of care, and the person dealing with it may well contemplate persons as being within the sphere of his duty to take care who would not be sufficiently proximate with less dangerous goods; so that not only the degree of care but the range of persons to whom a duty is owed may be extended. But they all illustrate the general principle." He then referred to the case of
Dominion Natural Gas Co., Ld. v. Collins (I), and what Lord Dunedin said, and went on, after reading the quotation I referred to: "This, with respect, exactly sums up the position. The duty may exist independently of contract. Whether it exists or not depends upon the subject-matter involved; but clearly in the class of things enumerated there is a special duty to take precautions." 
The seller of goods who is not the manufacturer cannot control the manufacturer but it rests with him to determine to whom he will sell or not sell. The duty resting on him may, in some cases, be adequately performed by a proper warning. If it cannot be, the duty must be to refrain from the sale. In
Bottomley versus Bannister (I) Scrutton L.J., quoting what he had said in
Hodge & Sons versus Anglo-American Oil Co. (2), said: "I go on to say: `It is not quite clear what is the distinction between the other agency, which is no excuse, and the conscious act of volition, which is an excuse. Probably the owner fulfils his duty if he entrusts the dangerous thing to a competent person who knows or is warned of the danger. I think that if the danger is caused by: (I). the negligence of the defendant in handing without warning a dangerous thing to a third party; (2) the act of that third party in dealing reasonably with the thing, in ignorance of its dangerous character, the defendant would not be excused.' " Those words seem exactly to cover this case. " `If, however, the defendant hands the dangerous thing, with warning of its character, on to a competent person who knows of its character, though neither the warning nor the knowledge is of the exact amount of the danger, I do not think the defendant is liable to third parties for the action of the receiver, which is unreasonable in view of this knowledge or warning. His action is, I think, nova causa interveniens.' ". This seems to recognise that a warning is not a sufficient discharge of duty if the person to whom the chattel is delivered is not a competent person." 
The plaintiff submitted that in the present case the item itself was not defective or dangerous per se or should not have been in anyone's hands but rather the claim arises from the foreseeable misuse of the item having regard to the age and inexperience of the user. It was said that young persons would not treat the machine with the prudence and caution with which a more mature person and a more experienced person would treat the machine.

Counsel for the applicant then referred to the Restatement of the Law,
Second, Torts 2d of 1965 and in particular to s.390 which provides: "390. Chattel for Use by Person Known to be Incompetent 
One who supplies directly or through a third person a chattel for the use of another whom the supplier knows or has reason to know to be likely because of his youth, inexperience, or otherwise, to use it in a manner involving unreasonable risk of physical harm to himself and others whom the supplier should expect to share in or be endangered by its use, is subject to liability for physical harm resulting to them." 
The commentary to s.390 states: "390. This Section deals with the supplying of a chattel to a person incompetent to use it safely, irrespective of whether the chattel is to be used for the suppliers' purposes or for the purpose of him to whom it is supplied. In the one case as in the other, liability is based upon the rule stated in ss 302, 302A, and 302B, and elaborated in Comment j under S302, that the actor may not assume that human beings will conduct themselves properly if the facts which are known or should be known to him should make him realise that they are unlikely to do so. Thus, one who supplies a chattel for the use of another who knows its exact character and condition is not entitled to assume that the other will use it safely if the supplier knows or has reason to know that such other is likely to use it dangerously, as where the other belongs to a class which is notoriously incompetent to use the chattel safely, or lacks the training and experience necessary for such use, or the supplier knows that the other has on other occasions so acted that the supplier should realise that the chattel is likely to be dangerously used, or that the other, though otherwise capable of using the chattel safely, has a propensity or fixed purpose to misuse it. This is true even though the chattel is in perfect condition, or though defective, is capable of safe use for the purposes for which it is supplied by an ordinary person who knows of its defective condition.

Illustrations:
A gives a loaded gun to B, a feeble-minded girl of ten, to be carried by her to C. While B is carrying the gun she tampers with the trigger and discharges it, harming C. A is subject to liability to C.
A permits B, a boy of ten, who has never previously driven a motor car, to drive his motor car on an errand of B's own. B drives the car carelessly, to the injury of C. A is subject to liability to C.
A permits B, his chauffeur, who to his knowledge is in the habit of driving at an excessive speed, to use his car to take B's family to the seashore. While driving the car for this purpose, B drives at an excessive rate of speed and harms C. A is subject to liability to C.
A lends his car to his friend B for B to use to drive a party of friends to a country club dance. A knows that B has habitually become intoxicated at such dances. On the particular occasion B becomes intoxicated and while in that condition recklessly drives the car into the carefully driven car of C, and causes harm to him. A is subject to liability to C.
A rents an automobile to B, a young man who announces his purpose to drive it from Boston to New York on a bet that he will do so in three hours. A is subject to liability if the excessive speed at which the car is driven causes harm to travellers on the highway.
A sells or gives an automobile to B, his adult son, knowing that B is an epileptic, but that B nevertheless intends to drive the car. While B is driving he suffers an epileptic seizure, loses control of the car, and injures
C. A is subject to liability to C." 
All of the cited examples show a requirement for knowledge or "reason to know".

It was submitted that the plaintiff was one of a class legally recognised to be so incompetent as to prevent them from being legally responsible for their actions. The analogy put forward in support of this proposition was of a loaded gun being instructed to a child of tender years.

I do not accept this submission.

When the terms of the relevant section of the Restatement are examined they clearly require knowledge or "reason to know" that the person to whom the goods are supplied is likely to use the goods in a manner involving unreasonable risk because of his "youth, inexperience, or otherwise." 
In Small versus St. Francis Hospital, 581 North Eastern Reporter, 2nd Series the Appellate Court of Illinois held that an action for negligent entrustment lies against the seller of a car when the seller had reason to know that the buyer is underage, unlicensed or otherwise incompetent.

The above case is an example of the decisions of United States courts applying s.390 of the Restatement which maintains the requirement for knowledge or reason to know matters which would give rise to a relevant risk. The purchaser of the car in that case was below the minimum age for acquiring a licence and did not hold a licence. In the present case the plaintiff was above the minimum age and held a licence.

The plaintiff also referred to s.401 which is in the following terms: "401. Chattel Likely to be Dangerous 
A seller of a chattel manufactured by a third person who knows or has reason to know that the chattel is, or is likely to be, dangerous when used by a person to whom it is delivered or for whose use it is supplied, or to others whom the seller should expect to share in or be endangered by its use, is subject to liability for bodily harm caused thereby to them if he fails to exercise reasonable care to inform them of the danger or otherwise to protect them against it." 
The Restatement is not part of the jurisprudence of New South Wales and the claim brought is founded in the classic terms of a claim on negligence.
However even if the Restatement did set out the law in New South Wales the factual question of whether the defendant knew or had reason to know it was likely that the plaintiff would use the motor cycle in a manner involving unreasonable risk of physical harm because of his youth, inexperience or otherwise would require determination.

In my view this has not been established for the reasons which I will elaborate later in this judgment.

The plaintiff then referred to Akers versus P & Anor(1986) Aust. Torts
Reports (80-035) which was a case where police officers ordered the plaintiff to ride his motor cycle away from the scene of an altercation although he was clearly significantly affected by alcohol. The plaintiff was injured and successfully sued the police officers.

It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that this case in some way establishes the existence of a duty of care on the part of a supplier of a motor cycle to prevent injury to a person by preventing him having the use of a motor cycle. It does not seem to me that this decision is of any assistance in determining the obligations cast on a seller of motor cycles whether directly, by analogy or otherwise.

It was submitted that the discharge of the duty of care which was said to exist involved not selling the plaintiff the bike, exercising powers of persuasion to achieve that result, warning him not to buy the bike or alternatively stipulating that the bike had to be altered (at the cost of the plaintiff) before the plaintiff would be given the bike.

Counsel for the plaintiff then referred to Preston versus Dowell (1987) Aust.
Torts Reports (80-079). This case dealt with a claim by an unlicensed, inexperienced driver who was injured while driving under the guidance of a friend in circumstances where she drove in an inappropriate way and was not properly guided by the person having authority over the motor vehicle, that person having actual knowledge of the lack of experience and skill of the driver. In my view this decision is of no assistance to the plaintiff.

The first question to be determined in considering the plaintiff's claim in negligence is whether there was any duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff.

The Court of Appeal dealt with the question of the existence of a duty of care by a vendor to a purchaser in Laundess versus Laundess & Anor (1994) Aust.
Torts Reports (81-316).

That case dealt with the liability of the vendor of defective goods to the purchaser in negligence and concluded that the mere relationship of vendor and purchaser does not give rise to a duty of care but that there must be something more than foreseeability and proximity. The Court concluded that the circumstances in which a duty of care will be imposed on a vendor will depend on the nature of the goods, the risk involved and the circumstances of the case. It was said by Mahoney JA (page 61, 876), that the existence of the duty will depend upon the judgment of individual judges.

The injury to the plaintiff in that case was caused by a defective striker pin in one of the doors of a car which had been sold by the defendant to the plaintiff's husband. It was submitted that the defendant had a duty of care which required the examination of the car before sale to ensure it was not subject to defects. It was held that the possibility that the door mechanism might be defective is not sufficient to impose a duty on the vendor to inspect the car and that to impose such a duty there must be something to suggest to a reasonable vendor that the risk actually existed i.e. that the door mechanism was defective.

In the present case the defendant was the vendor of a motor cycle to the plaintiff. The defendant was aware that:
The plaintiff held a learner's licence which entitled him to ride a motor cycle on public roads.
The plaintiff had previously owned a motor cycle and no doubt that he had ridden it.
The plaintiff was nearly seventeen years old.
The plaintiff intended to convert the motor cycle engine by reducing its capacity from 350cc to 250cc with consequent effects on its performance and rendering it legal for the plaintiff to ride. Both the plaintiff and the defendant incorrectly believed that the defendant was not able to ride the motor cycle lawfully with a learner's licence but would be able to ride it lawfully both as a learner and the holder of a provisional licence if its engine capacity was reduced.

The defendant had no basis for any belief that the plaintiff was not able to handle the motor cycle sold which he purchased safely provided he complied with the regulations applying to the holders of learners' licences. Indeed the plaintiff's own evidence was that he could handle the motor cycle at speeds within the speed limit for the holders of learners' licences.

There was no evidence that young riders are less able to handle a motor cycle of the type he purchased than riders of greater age and of the same riding experience. The submissions put on behalf of the plaintiff essentially reduced to the proposition that the defendant had reason to believe that the plaintiff, although of an age which the legislature recognised as being sufficient to allow persons to ride motor cycles on public roads, was of such an age that he would deliberately disobey the speed laws relating to his use of the motor cycle to such an extent that there was a risk of injury which exceeded that which was occasioned by the lawful use of a motor cycle.

It is clear from the evidence that there are motor cycles available which approach or even exceed the performance of the motor cycle sold which it is conceded if any one of them had been purchased by the plaintiff he would have no claim against the defendant because there would be no breach of any duty of care in relation to the sale of such motor cycles to the plaintiff.

As I have indicated there was an express disavowed of any entitlement to succeed had the motor cycle purchased by the plaintiff had an engine capacity of not more than 250cc even though its performance may have been greater than motor cycles with larger engine capacities.

There was no information available to the defendant to enable it to form any view as to ability of the plaintiff to handle any motor cycle safely if he did not comply with those regulations and no information to enable it to form a view that his ability differed in any or in any significant way from the ability of other riders of motor cycles.

The plaintiff was a member of a class of persons recognised by the community as being permitted to engage in the activity of riding motor cycles if he obtained a licence to do so. The plaintiff had attained an age which was recognised as being appropriate to obtain a learner's licence and he had obtained a licence from the appropriate government instrumentality.

The licence which he obtained permitted him to ride the motor cycle sold to him by the defendant without breaching any regulations imposed by the law.

The defendant was not aware of any fact or circumstance which would have alerted it to any particular disability of the plaintiff. It was put on behalf of the plaintiff that his age was a factor which required the defendant to act in a way in which it would not have been required to act had the plaintiff been of more mature years.

I do not accept that the law would impose a duty on retailers to refrain from selling a product to persons who had attained an age prescribed by the law which permitted them to purchase the product absent some special knowledge of or reason to know of attributes of the particular purchaser. For example the law would not impose liability on a retailer of alcohol or cigarettes for selling to a person who had just attained the age of eighteen and was legally entitled to purchase such commodities simply because of that person's age in the absence of some particular knowledge or reason to know of the person's attributes or propensities.

There are clear cases where the mere fact of the tender age of the person who is given dangerous goods is sufficient to give rise to a duty not to provide the goods. An example of such a case is Yachuk & Anor versus Oliver Blais Co
Ld. [(1949) AC 386.] In that case the supplier of gasoline to children aged seven and nine was held liable for injuries sustained by the children igniting it having no knowledge of its peculiarly dangerous explosive quality.

In my view, in the present case there are no circumstances which gave rise to a relevant duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff.

In the event that there was a duty of care owed by a vendor to a purchaser who is licensed and legally entitled to purchase goods then the question would arise as to whether that standard of care has been breached.

I do not accept the proposition that the seller has any responsibility to refuse to sell in the absence of knowledge of or reason to know of some particular matter relating to the purchaser or any responsibility to discourage the purchaser from purchasing to the point of refusing to sell.

In the circumstances of this case the plaintiff was aware of the opposition of his mother to his purchase of the motor cycle and chose to proceed with the purchase. The defendant's salesman was present when the plaintiff's mother expressed her views and when the plaintiff rejected them. The plaintiff was aware that the motor cycle required conversion and expressed his intention to carry out that conversion.

Accordingly the defendant was aware of the plaintiff's determination to purchase the motor cycle and to carry out appropriate work on it in the relatively near future. It is true that the defendant was under the mistaken belief that the plaintiff may breach the Motor [Traffic
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/) by using the motor cycle before the work was carried out but in my view that does not lead to the conclusion that he had any basis for believing that the plaintiff was incapable of properly handling the motor cycle or would use it in a way which was dangerous to himself or other members of the public.

The standard of care imposed on the seller, if there be a relevant duty of care is the standard of the reasonable care in the circumstances of the case (Cook versus Cook <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 376], 382).

In my view that standard was not breached by this defendant. It sold a motor cycle which it was entitled to sell to a person who was legally entitled to buy it and use it and in respect of who there was no basis for the defendant knowing that there was any particular matter relating to the plaintiff which required it to seek to avoid selling or to not sell the motor cycle to the plaintiff.

After the plaintiff acquired possession of the motor cycle he in fact conducted himself in a way which showed complete disregard for the regulations controlling his entitlement to use the motor cycle. He did not display "L" plates, he repeatedly rode the motor cycle at speeds greatly in excess of km/hour around Windsor, on the way to Dubbo and around Dubbo. The fact that the plaintiff conducted himself in this way does not give any basis for concluding that the defendant should have proceeded on the basis that that was the way he would conduct himself.

From the evidence it appear that most motor cycles are capable of exceeding km/hour and there are some motor cycles whose engine capacity does not exceed 250cc which can outperform the motor cycle supplied to the plaintiff in regard to both speed and acceleration.

In my view it was not a breach of any duty of which may be owed to the plaintiff by the defendant (and in my view there is none) to supply the motor cycle sold in the knowledge that the plaintiff was licensed and accordingly was of an age recognised as being able to use the motor cycle sold and that he had had experience riding another motor cycle and where there was nothing giving rise to any knowledge or reason to know of possible individual characteristics of the plaintiff.

The plaintiff submitted that there was a duty of care imposed on the defendant required it to
Refuse to sell the motor cycle to the plaintiff.
Warn the plaintiff and actively discourage him from buying the motor cycle.
Refuse to supply the motor cycle to the plaintiff until it was converted to a 250cc engine capacity.

In my view each of these requirements is outside any duty which would be imposed on the defendant when dealing with a purchaser such as the plaintiff.
The plaintiff was licensed and of an age which was recognised as sufficient to ride a high powered motor cycle on public roads provided that he complied with the regulations relating to speed, displaying notices and pillion passengers.
There was nothing before the defendant to require it to take any of the steps submitted on behalf of the plaintiff.

The defendant breached no statutory or regulatory prohibitions and in the circumstances of this case owed no relevant duty of care to the plaintiff or if there was a relevant duty of care the conduct of the defendant in the circumstances of this case did not breach any such duty.

There will be judgment for the defendant.

Plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs.
 * * * 
