

State Rail Authority of New South Wales versus Thorpe Matter No Ca 40167/97 [1998] NSWSC 110 (23 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 April 1998 
STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES versus WAYNE THORPE 
CA 40167/97; CC 19714/95 March 1998 
Meagher JA, Handley JA, Cole JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Compensation Court (Burke CCJ) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40167/97; CC 19714/95 
DELIVERED: Monday 23 March 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: Monday 23 March 1998 
PARTIES: STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES versus WAYNE THORPE 
JUDGMENT OF: Meagher JA Handley JA Cole JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: R E Montgomery 
Respondent: C J Wynyard 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Dibbs Crowther & Osborne 
Respondent: McIntosh Emerton & Thomas 
CATCHWORDS: 
WORKERS' COMPENSATION - INJURY - CAUSATION - NO QUESTION OF PRINCIPLE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Extempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
NO OF PAGES: 4 
STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES versus WAYNE THORPE 
WORKERS' COMPENSATION - injury - causation - no question of principle 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs. 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an appeal by the State Rail Authority from a decision of Burke CCJ who made a continuing award against it on the basis of the worker's total incapacity. 
The worker was employed as a fettler and on 21 July 1995 when cleaning the back of a railway truck, he slipped and fell heavily on his back. He was paid compensation until October 1996 when payments were terminated. This provoked the worker's application to the Compensation Court.

The facts surrounding the original injury and the worker's present incapacity for work were not in dispute. What was in dispute in the proceedings was the causal nexus between the fall at work on 21 July 1995 and the worker's continuing incapacity after October 1996.

The employer argued, on the basis of some medical evidence, that the worker's incapacity was due to an organic condition unrelated to his work described as an inflammatory demyelinating lesion in his spine.

There was a substantial body of medical evidence in report form before the
Judge which he described as "a little bit confusing" which was intended to be an understatement. He approached the case by looking in the first instance at the objective facts and, as he said, from a lay point of view the inference from these was fairly striking: "One would tend, if a layman, to infer that he did something to his back and legs, probably indirectly, in the fall, and he has continued to suffer the consequences of that incident".

The Judge found support for that view in some of the medical evidence and said that the probabilities were that the worker, when he had his fall in 1995, did cause himself some low back injury. He then considered the evidence, principally from Dr Hughes, about the alternative hypothesis based on an organic condition in the worker's spine.

The Judge was not persuaded that this was the cause although the progress of this condition may lead to that result, saying "it could turn out to be that way, who knows". He found that the worker had an organic injury to his low back but acknowledged the presence of a psychogenic reaction to that condition. He concluded that as a result of his injury the worker was at all times and remained totally incapacitated.

The appellant undertook the onerous task of demonstrating that the Judge's reasoning was vitiated by an error of law. In the end the error, if I properly understood it, consisted in finding that the fall at work was a continuing cause of the worker's incapacity after March 1996 in light of the fact that the medical evidence relied upon by the Judge did not in terms extend beyond that date.

In my judgment this contention does not raise a question of law. There is a well known presumption of fact that existing conditions continue, and if his
Honour was entitled to find the existence of a causal nexus in March 1996, it could not be said, in my view, that there was no evidence on which he could find such a causal nexus in October 1996 and later, or that he misdirected himself in law in coming to that conclusion. His Honour was not bound to accept the opinion of Dr Hughes that the worker's organic condition was responsible for his incapacity. In those circumstances, I have reached the conclusion that his Honour did not err in law in the reasoning process that he followed.

In my opinion, therefore, the appeal fails and I would propose that it be dismissed with costs.

MEAGHER JA: I agree. 
COLE JA: I also agree. 
MEAGHER JA: The order of the Court will be the appeal is dismissed with costs. * * * 
