

Regina versus Newland Matter No Cca 60119/97 [1997] NSWSC 621 (5 December 1997) 
Regina versus John Paul Newland /97 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, McInerney J, Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus John Paul NEWLAND 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PRACTICE - EVIDENCE - Jones versus Dunkel direction - appellant convicted of being accessory to offences of break enter and steal - two principal offenders, who were alleged accomplices of appellant, not called as witnesses either by Crown or defence - trial judge gives Jones versus Dunkel direction - HELD - direction inappropriate both in substance and in form - new trial ordered. 
R versus Buckland [1977] 2 NSWLR 452 applied.

ORDERS Appeal allowed.
 Convictions and sentences quashed.
 New trial on both counts.

REGINA versus John Paul NEWLAND 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The principles considered by the High Court in Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] apply to criminal, as well as civil, trials. However, as Street CJ explained in R versus Buckland [1977] 2 NSWLR 452 at 459, there are a number of reasons for caution in applying those principles to a criminal trial. The present case provides a good illustration of the point. 
Following a trial before Nield DCJ and a jury, the appellant was convicted of two offences of being an accessory after the fact to a felony. The alleged perpetrators of the felony were two young men named Michael Collins and
Matthew Floyd, who were associates of the appellant's son, Paul Newland. The alleged felonies were two acts of breaking, entering and stealing from a dwelling house at Mount Druitt owned by Mr and Mrs Spargo. Both offences occurred on 25 July 1994.

Following his conviction, the appellant was sentenced to concurrent terms of penal servitude involving a minimum term of one year and an additional term of one year. The appellant, who has a substantial criminal record, is currently serving a term of imprisonment in relation to another offence, and the minimum terms are not due to commence until 9 February 1998. The appellant appeals against his convictions.

The grounds of appeal complain that there was a miscarriage of justice arising out of certain Jones versus Dunkel directions given by the trial judge.

There was no contest at the trial as to the commission of the principal offences by Floyd and Collins, who had entered pleas of guilty and been dealt with. It is, therefore, possible to state the nature of the Crown case fairly briefly.

On 25 July 1994 Collins and Floyd, who were juveniles at the time, broke into the Spargo family home. Collins had been a friend of the daughter of Mr and
Mrs Spargo, and had obtained a set of keys to the house. At the time Floyd was living at the appellant's house. He was a friend of the appellant's son Paul
Newland.

It was known to Collins and Floyd that there were two safes at the Spargo house.

According to the Crown case, Collins and Floyd, in the presence of the appellant, made plans to break into the Spargo house. When they got in they found that the first safe was heavier than expected. They telephoned the appellant's house, and arrangements were made for Paul Newland to drive to the
Spargo house and help them transport the safe back to the appellant's house.
This was done, and the safe was broken into in the presence of the appellant.
It contained documents and papers. The appellant advised the young men about the destruction of evidence and suggested a means of disposal of the safe.
Later the same day, Floyd and Collins returned to the Spargo house to obtain the other safe. Once again they telephoned the appellant's house and arrangements were made for Paul Newland to drive over and help them bring the safe back to the appellant's house. This safe, which was also opened in the presence of the appellant, contained money and jewellery. The appellant also assisted in the disposal of the safe.

Ultimately the police found one of the safes in a dam less than a kilometre from the appellant's house, and the other in a nearby industrial area.

The Crown case depended entirely upon the evidence of Floyd. Floyd gave an account of the facts substantially as outlined above. It was put to him in the cross-examination that, although he was telling the truth about the activities of Collins, Paul Newland and himself, he was lying about the appellant. He acknowledged in his evidence that he believed it was the appellant who informed on him to the police. He admitted in cross-examination that he had lied to the police about certain aspects of the matter. It was also demonstrated that there were some inconsistencies between what he had told the police and aspects of his evidence against the appellant. In due course the jury were given an appropriate accomplice warning.

The appellant gave no evidence.

Apart from Floyd, the only other witness at the trial was a police officer,
Senior Constable May, who gave evidence about the finding of the safes. He also gave another piece of evidence to which further reference will be made below.

At the commencement of the proceedings, the Crown Prosecutor, in the absence of the jury, informed the judge, and counsel for the appellant, that he did not propose to call Collins as a witness. The Crown Prosecutor said: "In relation to the names of the witnesses that I read out, I have, during the adjournment, spoken to the two prospective witnesses Michael Collins and
Matthew Floyd. Michael Collins has indicated to me that he does not wish to give evidence. It would be simply my intention, subject to anything that Mr
Lungo (counsel for the accused) says and any rulings your Honour makes to lead evidence of the fact that Michael Collins has been interviewed and has declined to give evidence for the prosecution and that he has been dealt with by the court." 
The Judge asked counsel for the appellant whether he saw any problem with that. Counsel said he did not. Counsel applied for, and was given access to, the record of the Childrens Court in relation to the proceedings against
Collins.

Floyd gave his evidence and that was followed by the evidence of Constable
May. In the course of his evidence in chief Constable May said: "Q I think, are you able to tell the court that both Matthew Floyd and
Michael Collins were dealt with at the Cobham Childrens Court on 25 July 1994 in relation to charges arising out of their entry into the Spargo residence and the taking of safes and contents ...

Q They were dealt with on the 15 August 1994? 
A That's correct.

Q And they both pleaded guilty in relation to their respective involvements in those matters? 
A Yes they did.

Q What about, was Paul Newland charged in relation to his involvement? 
A Yes he was.

Q And has he been dealt with by the court? 
A Yes he has.

Q And I think Michael Collins was here at court today? 
A Yes he was.

Q And did he indicate that he was not prepared to give evidence for the prosecution? 
A That's correct." 
At the conclusion of the Crown case counsel for the appellant stated that there would be no evidence called by the defence. The Crown Prosecutor then addressed.

Towards the end of the Crown Prosecutor's address he put the following argument to the jury: "One last matter that I want to say ladies and gentlemen is this. You heard from Detective May that the other young fellow, Michael Collins, was here yesterday. You heard from Detective May that Collins refused to give evidence for the prosecution. The accused says to you through his barrister and the way the case has been conducted, `I know nothing about this. I wasn't involved in any way with the opening of the two safes. I wasn't involved in any way with the property that came out of the two safes.' Who could tell you, who could support the accused when he says that? The person that was here yesterday,
Michael Collins. The fellow who refused to give evidence for the prosecution.
The evidence is that he's been dealt with, pleaded guilty, been dealt with by the court. Do you think the accused might have been able to call Michael
Collins, who's got nothing to lose, to go into that witness box and tell you the accused had nothing to do with it? The basic principle of the law is this in this regard. That if there is a witness who is not called by either party and there is no reasonable explanation or no acceptable explanation so far as you're concerned as to why that witness has not been called, you're entitled to assume that the witness would not have assisted the case of the person you would have expected to call. And you might contemplate why the accused didn't call Michael Collins who was here yesterday to tell you that he the accused, had nothing to do with this." 
Immediately following that, in the absence of the jury, counsel for the appellant protested about what the Crown Prosecutor had put to the jury. He applied unsuccessfully for a discharge of the jury.

The ground upon which counsel made his complaint was as follows. Counsel informed the trial judge that, as a result of a conversation that had taken place between him and the Crown Prosecutor, he had been left under the impression that Collins was unwilling to have a conference with him. He asserted that, by reason of what he understood to be his inability to have a conference with Collins, he was not in a position to call Collins as a witness.

The Crown Prosecutor made a statement to the trial judge in which he contradicted the assertion that he had said anything to counsel for the appellant which might have given the impression that Collins was unwilling to have a conference with counsel for the appellant. The judge declined to discharge the jury and observed that it was not for him to resolve differences between counsel.

As both the Crown Prosecutor and counsel for the appellant knew, Collins had been interviewed by the police. They were both aware of what he had said to the police. The trial judge did not know, and this court does not know, what, if anything, Collins had told the police about the involvement of the appellant. In the circumstances of the case, including the friendship between
Collins and the appellant's son, the association between the appellant and
Collins, and the knowledge of whatever it was that Collins had told the police, the suggested inability of counsel to confer with Collins on the morning of the trial may have been something of a red herring. A reading of the transcript indicates that counsel was surprised and concerned at the
Jones versus Dunkel argument that had been put against him by the Crown
Prosecutor, but the argument which he advanced in support of his application for a discharge of the jury was not a strong one. Moreover, the trial judge was left with assertions from the Bar table by the respective counsel which were somewhat contradictory. It is one thing for trial counsel to suggest, argumentatively, possible explanations for not calling a witness which may be taken into consideration. It is another thing for counsel to make categorical assertions as to why he has not called a witness. There is usually no way those assertions can be investigated. Let it be accepted that it was true that, in this case, counsel was under a misapprehension about the willingness of Collins to confer with him. Without reflecting on counsel, that may not have been the whole truth. The judge could not interrogate counsel about what, if anything, had passed between his client and Collins, or about what counsel knew or believed Collins had told the police. The judge was right to regard the matter as one that could not be dealt with on the basis of assertions from the Bar table.

It might also be remarked that it was unfortunate that defence counsel acquiesced in the Crown's proposal to lead evidence that Collins had "declined to give evidence for the prosecution". That evidence was pregnant with possible confusion.

After the judge refused to discharge the jury, counsel for the appellant addressed, and in the course of his address made no answer to the prosecutor's
Jones versus Dunkel argument.

When Nield DCJ came to sum-up to the jury he said: "Finally, members of the jury, you have heard reference to the absence of Mr
Michael Collins and also, although it has not been specifically mentioned, Mr
Paul Newland, the accused's son.

There is a principle of law that, and this is the principle to which counsel, the learned Crown Prosecutor, referred, there is a principle of law that, if a witness who could have been called either by the Crown in the course of proving the guilt of the accused, and you must remember that the Crown bears the burden, onus or obligation to prove the guilt of the accused and the accused does not have to prove anything, or by an accused in his or her defence against the Crown's case and that witness is not called and a satisfactory explanation is not given for the absence of that witness, then the opposing party, be it the Crown or the accused, is entitled to comment on the failure to call that witness and to suggest to the jury that the inference that can be drawn by you as the judges of the facts from the failure to call the witness is that nothing that the witness could say would assist the party who would have been expected to call the witness.

So, what you have got to ask yourselves, members of the jury, could either Mr
Michael Collins or the accused's son, Mr Paul Newland, give evidence concerning the events about which Mr Floyd gave evidence. You heard from the
Crown Prosecutor through Constable May that Mr Collins had declined to give evidence for the prosecution. That means it would be pointless for the prosecution to have called Mr Collins because he would not have said anything.
Mr Collins is a compellable witness. Compellable means he can be compelled to come to court and to give evidence. Of course, even though he is compellable, if the Crown called him to give evidence and he said nothing then his evidence would be useless.

The accused could have called Mr Collins to give evidence. You know that Mr
Collins was here yesterday. He was outside court. There is evidence of that fact. You know that he told Constable May that he did not want to give evidence for the prosecution therefore you might think, and it is for you to decide, because you are the judges of the facts, there is a reasonable explanation for his not being called to give evidence by the Crown Prosecutor.
You have not been given any reason as to why he was not called on behalf of the accused. You might think that he could give evidence about the matters about which Mr Floyd has given evidence.

Members of the jury, if you think that the Crown should have called him to give evidence , and if you are satisfied with the explanation of Constable May as to why he was not called to give evidence, then you put the fact that he did not give evidence to one side. If you think the accused should have called him to give evidence, and in the absence of any explanation as to why the accused did not call him to give evidence, then you can conclude that nothing that he would have said would have assisted the accused's case. You do not have to draw that inference but as the judges of the fact you are entitled to, if you wish to.

As to the accused's son not being called to give evidence, the comment that I have made concerning Mr Michael Collins and the absence of his giving evidence applies. However, I have got to point out to you, members of the jury, that the mere fact that the accused's son, Mr Paul Newland, who has been referred to by Mr Floyd in his evidence, did not give evidence cannot be used by you to think that he believed his father to be guilty of the offences with which his father is charged." 
Counsel for the appellant made no complaint about those directions. It is likely that he assumed that the trial judge's refusal to discharge the jury at least implied acceptance at the time of the validity of the Crown Prosecutor's
Jones versus Dunkel argument, and that there was no point in complaining further.
However, the Crown Prosecutor invited the judge to correct what had been said about Paul Newland. In the absence of the jury the Crown pointed out, somewhat inaccurately, that Paul Newland was "not a compellable witness". He referred to [s18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s18.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) . The effect of that section was that, because Paul Newland was a child of the appellant, he could object to being required to give evidence. There would then be a discretion in the trial judge to decide whether or not to require him to give evidence. Nield DCJ made the following addition to his summing-up.
He said to the jury: "I commented upon Mr Michael Collins being a compellable witness. I omitted to comment that Mr Paul Newland is not a compellable witness having regard to the law. So in relation to the absence of any explanation being given by the
Crown for his not having given evidence, I tell you that under our law a member of an accused's family, a spouse or child, is not a compellable witness." 
Insofar as the present appeal involves a complaint about the legal inaccuracy of that lastmentioned direction, the appellant should not have leave to take the point. The inaccuracy could have been corrected if counsel had raised the matter at the trial. However, the appellant should have leave to argue that the case was not a proper one for a Jones versus Dunkel direction, and that in any event the direction that was given about Collins was misleading.

The primary submission made on behalf of the appellant is that this was not a case in which it was fair for the Crown to put, or for the trial judge to leave for the jury's consideration, a Jones versus Dunkel argument against the appellant. It is also submitted that the problem was compounded by the terms in which the trial judge instructed the jury.

On the Crown case, Michael Collins was an accomplice of the appellant. If he had been called as a witness the judge would have been obliged to warn the jury, under [s165](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) , about the potential unreliability of his evidence. The reason for that warning would have been the well known propensity of accomplices to give an account of the circumstances of an offence minimising their own culpability.

It was not unreasonable of the Crown Prosecutor to seek to deflect a Jones v
Dunkel argument against the Crown by explaining why he was not calling
Collins as a witness, although the manner and terms in which the explanation was given were capable of creating a false impression. When Constable May told the jury, without objection, that Collins had indicated "that he was not prepared to give evidence for the prosecution" he was making it fairly clear where the sympathies of Collins lay. However, legally, Collins had no choice as to whether to give evidence. He had been interviewed by the police, and had been dealt with in court. If he had been called by the Crown it is possible that he could have been questioned under [s38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). We do not know what scope there might have been for effective questioning. Neither did the trial judge.

There is a further problem in relation to the terms in which the trial judge ultimately directed the jury. He told the jury, correctly, that Collins was a compellable witness. However, he also indicated to the jury that if the Crown had called Collins he could have chosen to say nothing. The evidence of
Constable May, and the language of the directions given to the jury, would have given the jury to understand that it was open to Collins to choose whether or not he would give evidence for the prosecution, and it was also made clear that he had chosen not to do so. This was at least a partially misleading impression.

If one reason why the Crown Prosecutor was unwilling to call Collins as a witness was that he was regarded as unreliable, (cf R versus Apostilides <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 563)] then that would have been a proper reason for not calling him. (R versus Su [1997] 1 VR 1.) It would have been appropriate to seek to protect the Crown from a Jones versus Dunkel comment for failing to call him, though it does not follow that the proper way to do that would have been by evidence given to the jury (cf R versus Yaari [(1995) 101 C.C.C. (3d) ).] It was another thing, however, to go further and press a
Jones versus Dunkel argument against the defence on the basis of the defence's failure to call Collins as a witness.

The terms in which Nield DCJ directed the jury themselves exacerbated the problem. His Honour ultimately asked the jury whether they thought the Crown "should have called him to give evidence" or whether they thought the accused "should have called him to give evidence". How were the jury to decide whether, in the circumstances, the Crown or the accused "should have called him to give evidence"? The jury knew nothing about the principles governing the obligation of a Crown Prosecutor to call evidence. They had received no instruction about the provisions of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) which might have been called in aid by the prosecutor had Collins been recalcitrant. They knew nothing about what Collins had said to the police, or to the court which dealt with him, concerning any involvement of the appellant in the crimes committed by Collins and Floyd.

This is a case in which there were only four people who were in a position to give direct evidence of the guilt or innocence of the accused: Floyd, Collins,
Paul Newland and the accused himself. The Crown called Floyd, and the judge gave the usual accomplice warning. The accused exercised his right to silence.
The jury were told they could not treat that as an admission of guilt, but that they could take into account the fact that Floyd's evidence was uncontradicted. (No complaint was or is made about that direction). Neither side called Collins or Paul Newland. They were both accomplices, in respect of whom a warning would have been required.

This was a case in which what was called for was, not a Jones versus Dunkel direction, but an instruction to the jury to refrain from speculation as to why Collins and Paul Newman were not called, or what evidence they might have given, and to decide the case on the evidence that was before them.

Furthermore, even if, contrary to that view, it was proper to give a Jones v
Dunkel direction, the jury were misled about what course could have been taken by the Crown if Collins had been called but had been recalcitrant. The jury were led to believe that the Crown could not have done anything about that. The jury were invited to decide who "should" have called Collins without proper guidance as to how they might arrive at such a decision. In the particular circumstances of the present case, there were complex considerations that might have affected that question. In some cases the question of who might reasonably be expected to call a witness might be answered simply as a matter of common sense. In other cases, of which the present is an example, it might be a question the answer to which is far from simple. Cases of that kind require a deal of caution before Jones versus Dunkel is involved.

The appellant's complaint about what occurred at the trial in relation to the
Jones versus Dunkel direction has been made good.

Having regard to the fact that the Crown case depended entirely upon Floyd, and to the fact that some aspects of his evidence were shown to be unsatisfactory, it cannot be said that no miscarriage of justice arose from what occurred.

The appeal should be allowed. The convictions and sentences should be quashed.
There should be a new trial on both counts.

REGINA versus John Paul NEWLAND 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY J: I agree with Gleeson CJ. 
REGINA versus John Paul NEWLAND 
JUDGMENT 
ABADEE J: I agree with the judgment of Gleeson CJ and his reasons therein. * * * 
