

Regina versus Ernest Edward Greig [1996] NSWSC 585 (29 November 1996) 
REGINA versus Ernest Edward GREIG /96 
Friday 29 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, McINERNEY J, IRELAND J 
CRIMINAL LAW - MURDER - MENTAL ILLNESS 
The appellant, following a trial at which he set up a defence of mental illness, was found not guilty on the ground of mental illness. He deemed to contend that there should have been a verdict of not guilty - HELD - The Court of Criminal Appeal had no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal against the verdict.

R versus Foy [(1922) 39 WN 20] applied.

O R D E R S 
Appeal dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In October of 1995 the appellant, Ernest Edward Greig, stood trial before Hunt CJ at CL and a jury of twelve at Newcastle on a charge of murder. The charge arose out of the death in June 1994 at Morisset of a man named Robert Wright Rourke. At the time Robert Wright Rourke met his death, which was the result of strangulation, he and the appellant and a number of other men were the occupants of a dormitory at Morisset hospital.

There was no direct evidence that it was the appellant who had strangled Mr
Rourke but the Crown relied upon a circumstantial case. The circumstances upon which the Crown relied were summarised by the learned trial judge in his summing up to the jury as follows: "1 The doors of the dormitory in which the deceased was residing were locked and access to the dormitory was available only to members of the staff with a special key.
 There were bars on the bottom half of the windows where they actually opened.
 The deceased was found lying on the accused's bed strangled and with his legs tied.
 The deceased was strangled with a mackintosh from the accused's bed.
 The sheet tied around the deceased's legs came from the accused's bed.
 The accused, according to the evidence of Dr Darcy, was at the time a strong and healthy person who was physically capable of strangling the deceased.
 The accused was standing near the bed in question when the body was discovered.
 No one else in the dormitory was stirring when the body was discovered.
 Blood was found on the accused's right hand which was consistent with the blood of the deceased and inconsistent with that of the accused.
 That the accused heard an instruction that he was not to be allowed to wash his hands and he wiped his hands on his pyjamas.
 The accused gave a false account of the source of the blood on his hands.
 The accused said shortly after the discovery of the body that he had killed chooks before by strangling them, and that he had killed hundreds of people in the war.
 No other patient in the dormitory had any scratches or bruising to their faces or hands when seen at a time later that morning after they had showered." 
There were no signs of any blood in any part of the dormitory, apart from the area immediately in the vicinity of the appellant's bed.

The appellant had previously been found unfit to be tried. The trial was a special hearing conducted under s19 of the Mental Health (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1900.

The appellant, who was represented by counsel, pleaded not guilty. The appellant, in his case, by his counsel, and by evidence, set up a defence of mental illness. The evidence in support of that defence was led from two psychiatrists, Dr Davey and Dr Barclay.

The trial judge directed the jury that if they were not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had strangled the deceased they must simply find the appellant not guilty. The jury were also directed in relation to the defence of mental illness. Ultimately, they brought in a verdict of not guilty on the grounds of mental illness.

As a consequence the learned trial judge then dealt with the appellant pursuant to the provisions of s39 of the Mental Health (Criminal Procedure)
Act 1900, those provisions being mandatory in their terms.

The appellant now appeals to the Court of Criminal Appeal against what is described as the conviction and sentence. The appeal is in fact propounded on behalf of the appellant by the appellant's son, who is his legal guardian.

The Crown, in response to the appeal, takes the preliminary point that this
Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal against conviction, and that there is no basis for the appeal against the sentence, the order made by the trial judge being mandatory under the relevant statutory provisions.

The Criminal Appeal Act in s2, gives a definition of the term "conviction" which includes a finding or verdict under or in accordance with certain provisions of the Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act but which, by its terms and its effect, excludes a case where an accused person has set up a defence of mental illness, and the result of the trial has been a verdict of not guilty on the grounds of mental illness (see the provisions of the Mental
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1900; R versus Foy [(1922) 39 WN ).] 
In my view this Court has no option but to uphold the Crown objection to jurisdiction. The appeal against conviction is incompetent. The appeal against sentence cannot succeed because, as I have said, the order made by the learned trial judge was an order that was made pursuant to the mandatory provisions of the relevant legislation.

The appellant's son has made it plain in his submissions to the Court that he and members of his family take the view that the appellant has been the victim of an erroneous finding and of an injustice and that they would wish to dispute that it was the appellant who strangled the deceased. Their feelings in that regard are understandable human feelings. But the statutory provisions under which this Court operates and by which it is constrained gives the court no option but to uphold the submissions which have been made on behalf of the
Crown.

For those reasons I would propose that the appeal should be dismissed.
 
McINERNEY J: I agree.
 
IRELAND J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court is the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
