

Iona Corporation P/L versus Relativity P/L [1996] NSWSC 63 (4 April 1996) 
IONA CORPORATION PTY LTD versus RELATIVITY PTY LTD /95 
THURSDAY 4 APRIL 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by motion for an order that four representatives of the plaintiff be permitted to enter and inspect four sets of premises for the purpose of photographing and identifying property which is referred to in the schedule to the motion. The motion has been brought on at short notice. Only one of the opponents to the motion was served.

The plaintiff is a company in liquidation and Mr H J Wily is its liquidator.
The plaintiff corporation was in its lifetime associated with Messrs Melbourne and Martin, a Ms Munro and at least three other corporations and a series of business names, including Bad Dog Entertainment Corporation Pty Ltd and
Coachland Pty Ltd, and one or other of those entities conducted business at 27
Military Road, Watsons Bay, being a restaurant known as The Gap Tavern.

Mr Bingham is a former director of Iona Corporation Pty Ltd. He has been assisting the liquidator in endeavouring to obtain the property of that corporation. There have been proceedings in this Court for some time, not only this suit but also suit 4001/95, which have been in Simos J's list.

In proceedings 4001/95 the persons with interests opposed to Mr Bingham, who include Mr Lance Melbourne, Mr Craig Martin and Ms Sandra Munro, have filed affidavits indicating that the relevant goods and other property are owned either by Mr Melbourne personally, by "Bad Dog" or by the lessor of the premises in which the fittings were contained. They also show that Iona
Corporation Pty Ltd had very little property of its own.

Mr Atkin, for the plaintiff, says that those affidavits are vague and that the entity "Bad Dog" is a cover for a whole series of possibilities, including property that might have been owned by Iona. However, the orders which the plaintiff seeks today are that either Mr Wily be appointed receiver of the goods or, alternatively, that there be an order pursuant to Pt 25 r 8 of the
Supreme Court Rules for inspection of the property.

These are fairly draconian orders. If the court felt that its officer needed assistance in obtaining what was clearly the property of the company then an order may well be made that the liquidator be appointed receiver at least with security for a short period of time, provided that there was some evidence that the property was in jeopardy. However, the evidence that this property is the property of the corporation is, on the material before me, extremely weak.
On the balance of probabilities, on the material before me, it is not.
Furthermore, the evidence suggests that there is at least a lien over the property held by the removalists, a firm identified in evidence as Carmen
Removals.

Thirdly, it would seem that the property is in Carmen Removals' yard at
Wetherill Park and there is no suggestion that Carmen Removals is going to dispose of it quickly. Indeed, there would appear to be a dispute as to the payment of Carmen Removals' bill and Carmen Removals is holding the property pending resolution of that dispute. Again, Carmen Removals has never been added as a party to this motion.

Mr Martin says that this evidence is not in accordance with the facts and that the goods in fact were taken by a firm called Ambrose Removals, which has been paid in full, but I will just note where the evidence is at the moment.

I do not consider that on this evidence I should appoint a receiver.

Part 25 r 8 is really designed for cases at Common Law where one of the documents or the property in question is in the hands of a non party. The cases, such as Evatt versus Australian Consolidated Press Ltd (1970) 90 WN (Pt 1) 384, show this to be so. It is not really meant for a situation where a liquidator wishes to assure himself that the property still exists. The liquidator's purpose is not a purpose in litigation for which rules, such as the rule I have cited, exists. The liquidator should have sufficient powers, if he can identify the property of the company, under the Corporations Law to protect the interests of the company.

The problem in the instant case is that there is precious little evidence that the property concerned is the property of the company.

Accordingly, I am not prepared to make any order on the notice of motion and it should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
