

Westpac Banking Corporation versus Murray Matter No 50088/97 [1998] NSWSC 648 (17 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION versus MURRAY /97 September 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION versus MURRAY 
Proceedings: 50088/1997 
Dates of Hearing of Adjournment Application: 14, 16 September 1998 
Date of Judgment: 17 September 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr P J Dowdy/Ms Delhunty 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Minter Ellison 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr R I Bellamy 
Solicitors for Defendant: Charles F Shirley 
Counsel for Second Cross-Defendant: Mr M K Minehan 
Solicitors for Second Cross-Defendant: Walter & Associates 
Application for the adjournment of a part heard matter on the ground that applicant was unable to obtain legal representation.

Application granted in the particular circumstances of the case.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Amended Defence And Cross-Claim 5 
The Interlocutory Proceedings 11 
The Present Application 15 
The Position Of Mr Abdul-Karim 20 
The Position Of Mr Aitken 27 
Matters To Be Considered On The Application 
For The Adjournment 30 
Orders 38 
WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION versus MURRAY 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Summons issued on 22 April 1997 the plaintiff, Westpac Banking
Corporation, ("Westpac"), for which Mr P.J. Dowdy and Ms Delhunty of Counsel appeared, sued Mr John Alan Murray, for whom Mr M.S. Abdul-Karim of Counsel originally appeared but for whom Mr R.I. Bellamy of Counsel appeared on 14 and September 1998 for the purpose only of seeking an adjournment, seeking to recover judgment for $299,031.88, being money allegedly owing by Mr Murray to
Westpac pursuant to a Guarantee, dated 8 February 1993, given by him to it to secure the indebtedness of Dodson Bull (Australia) Pty Limited, ("Dodson
Bull"). It is the application for an adjournment by Mr Murray of these part heard proceedings with which I am presently concerned.

Dodson Bull, at all material times, carried on business in the Berry District on the south coast of New South Wales, inter alia, of importing and selling slate. The company was established by the second cross-defendant, Mr Edward
Tissiman, for whom Mr M.K. Minehan of Counsel appeared, and Mr Tissiman's wife. However, by 8 February 1993, it was controlled by Mr Murray. The
Guarantee, Exhibit A, was executed by Mr Murray in the presence of an officer of Westpac, Mrs Kathleen Therese Talty, who witnessed his signature.

Westpac also seeks possession of the whole of the land comprised in Folio
Identifier C/416247 and known as 45 Agars Lane, Berry, which is Mr Murray's home, pursuant to a Memorandum of Mortgage registered number I197790, which was given to it by Mr Murray on 8 February 1993 to secure the payment of moneys owing pursuant to the Guarantee. It was signed by Mr Murray in the presence of Mrs Talty, who once again witnessed his signature, and became
Exhibit B. It incorporated registered Memorandum number V581852, which became
Exhibit C.

Mr Murray gave two further mortgages to Westpac on 8 February 1993 to secure the payment of moneys owing under the Guarantee over properties known as 42
Anglers Parade, Fisherman's Paradise and 54 Kurrajong Crescent, Lake Conjola.
They were also signed by Mr Murray in the presence of Mrs Talty, who witnessed his signatures. Westpac pleaded, in paragraphs 15 and 16 of the Summons, that on 5 May 1996 and 15 March 1996 it received $95,609.24 and $153,237 from Mr
Murray following the sale by him of those two properties respectively, such amounts being received in consequence of the mortgages over them and in reduction of his indebtedness. These were not sales by Westpac in exercise of its powers under the mortgages, although Mr Murray asserted, and it did not seem to be in issue, that Westpac had required him to make the sales and reduce the indebtedness. Westpac has also acknowledged receipt of $7,140, being a dividend paid to it pursuant to a Deed of Company Arrangement entered into on 29 March 1994 by the Administrator of Dodson Bull. Credit has been given to Mr Murray for these three amounts.

On 10 March 1995 Westpac gave written notice to Mr Murray demanding the payment of $469,691.18 under the Guarantee and various mortgages, which demand became Exhibit D. On 23 October 1996 Westpac gave written notice to Mr Murray pursuant to s.57(2)(b) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) in respect of the mortgage over 45 Agars Lane, which became Exhibit E.

Clause 10 of the Guarantee provided:- "That a certificate signed by for or on behalf of any Manager stating the amount of the moneys hereby secured at the date mentioned in any such certificate shall be conclusive evidence against the Guarantor that the amount so stated is the amount of the moneys due by the Guarantor under this instrument at the date mentioned in the said certificate and is the amount of the moneys hereby secured as at such date." 
Clause 24 of the Memorandum, (Exhibit C), was in essentially the same terms.
Exhibits F and G were certificates given pursuant to clauses 10 and 24 respectively on 1 June 1998 by Mr Graeme Francis Matheson, who stated he is a manager, and that pursuant to those clauses the amount secured under the
Guarantee and the Mortgage was $411,909.44. No objection was taken to the tender of these certificates.

The essential issues in these proceedings arose out of an Amended Defence and
Cross-Claim filed by Mr Murray against Westpac, as the first cross-defendant, and Mr Tissiman, as the second cross-defendant.

The evidence is that Mr Murray acquired the various properties and assets from the proceeds of a substantial judgment against the Commonwealth in proceedings brought against it by him and a company he controlled, Belle Fleur Pty
Limited. Those assets have now been substantially depleted by the sale of the two properties, the failure of Dodson Bull, and the making of a substantial property settlement to Mr Murray's first wife. In the result the property at Agars Lane is his only asset and unless he is successful in these proceedings he will lose that also. The significance of the proceedings to Mr
Murray is, therefore, obvious. The evidence is that he has no money to pay for legal representation and, accordingly, is dependent on a grant of Legal Aid or his legal representatives acting on a pro bono or speculative basis.

The Amended Defence And Cross-Claim 
By his Amended Defence and Cross-Claim Mr Murray sought declarations that at the time he executed the documents referred to in paragraphs 6 to 8 of [Part
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/index.html#p100) of the Summons, being the three mortgages I have identified but not the
Guarantee, he did so without negligence on his part and he did not understand their contents, nature and effect; that those documents were unjust in the circumstances relating to them at the time they were executed; that they are null and void; that the cross-defendants engaged in misleading and deceptive and/or unconscionable conduct within the meaning of ss.51AA, 51AB or [52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s52.html) of the Trade Practices Act 1980 ; and an order pursuant to s.7(1)(d) of the
Contracts Review Act that Westpac execute and deliver up a discharge of the security documents it holds.

An order was sought pursuant to s.7(1)(c) of the Contracts Review Act "limiting the sum guaranteed and mortgaged pursuant to the Bank documents to half the original debt", for rectification "of the said documents", and for damages pursuant to the Fair Trading Act and the Trade Practices Act.
An order was sought that Mr Tissiman indemnify Mr Murray against any liability of his found to exist in favour of Westpac. Mr Murray sought ancillary relief.

In his Defence Mr Murray admitted that Westpac had received the proceeds of the sale of the Fisherman's Paradise and Lake Conjola properties and the dividend pursuant to the Deed, and asserted that, in addition, it had received five further payments, one in the sum of $4,370.40 and four each in the sums of $23,275.10.

Mr Murray admitted receipt of the Demand dated 23 October 1996; his failure to pay the amount demanded, although he did not admit an obligation to do so; and the execution of the Guarantee and the Mortgages. He did not admit the amount payable.

In his Cross-Claim he asserted that in and prior to 1983 he suffered brain damage and other mental disabilities as the combined effect of military service in Vietnam, two motor vehicle accidents and subsequent medical treatment; that he was not aware of these disabilities; and that on or about 8
February 1993 Westpac provided an advance to Dodson Bull in consequence of which he granted to it "certain mortgages referred to in the summons" and "executed guarantees of the said advances".

Under the heading "Unconscionable Conduct" it was pleaded that Mr Tissiman represented to Mr Murray in January to 8 February 1993 that Mr Murray should cause Dodson Bull to obtain an advance from Westpac; that Mr Tissiman would remain with Dodson Bull as managing director, and would co-guarantee that
Dodson Bull could repay the advances and interest thereon; that Mr Tissiman would look after Mr Murray's interest in relation to the advance and "nothing would happen to cause" Mr Murray "to be liable for Dodson's debts"; and that
Mr Murray should execute the Mortgages and Guarantees "and it was in his interest to do so". These matters were pleaded as "the first representation".

It was pleaded that Westpac made the first representation by its agent, Mr
Tissiman, and, further, that it represented, by its manager Mr Goodman, that it was in Mr Murray's best interests to execute the Mortgages and Guarantee:- ".. that there was no risk to him in doing so, that the documents were required as a formality only and that Mr Tissiman would look after the matter on his behalf (`the second representation')." 
It was pleaded that Mr Murray did not "truly" understand the legal and practical nature and effect of the Mortgages and Guarantee and, in the particulars, it was asserted that he was not given the opportunity of reading the documents; that no explanation of them was given to him; that he was not given a copy of them; that he was not advised to obtain independent legal or other advice; and that he was misled by Westpac and Mr Tissiman as to their nature.

It was pleaded that Westpac knew or ought to have known, and, in any event it was the case, that Mr Murray believed the first and second representations; relied upon and trusted Westpac in relation to the documents; that the documents were imprudent in so far as they related to Mr Murray in that they provided security of unlimited amounts to Westpac in respect of business debts; that Mr Murray was not in a position to make a worthwhile judgment as to what was in his best interests in relation to the documents; and that if Mr
Murray had obtained proper independent legal advice in relation to the documents, it would have been that "he should seriously consider whether or not to sign" them.

It was pleaded that in these circumstances Mr Murray was at a serious disadvantage in dealing with Westpac in connection with the documents, and that it was unconscionable at law or, alternatively, within the meaning of s.51AA of the Trade Practices Act for Westpac to obtain or accept the documents from him.

An allegation of statutory unconscionable conduct, based upon an alleged contravention of s.51AB of the Trade Practices Act, was pleaded. It also was said to have arisen out of his entry into the documents.

The pleading then turned to the Contracts Review Act and made various allegations in relation to the execution and provision of the documents, including an allegation that Mr Murray suffered a mental disability.

The next section of the pleading dealt with misleading and deceptive conduct and, essentially, relied upon the first and second representations. It was pleaded that neither Westpac nor Mr Tissiman had reasonable grounds for making those representations and that, in the premises, they were misleading and deceptive or likely to mislead and deceive. Pursuant to these allegations various relief was sought.

The Cross-Claim nextly pleaded non est factum and, in paragraph 24, asserted that at the time Mr Murray executed the documents he did so "without knowledge of their contents, nature and effect and without negligence on his part was unaware of their terms". It was pleaded that in the premises the documents "are null and void".

Allegations of negligence were pleaded, it being asserted that it was foreseeable to Westpac and Mr Tissiman "by reason of the proximate relationship they had with" Mr Murray, that if Mr Murray executed the documents "there was a serious risk that he would suffer loss and damage", such that they owed him a duty to take reasonable care to avoid damage to him and to advise him with reasonable care about the documents. In breach of that alleged duty it was pleaded that Westpac and Mr Tissiman negligently failed to advise Mr Murray of the risks attendant upon the execution of the documents and of the true nature of the Mortgages and Guarantee, and that he should seek independent legal or other advice in relation to those documents before he executed them, and of the liability or potential liability he may incur as a result of executing them. It was further pleaded, as a particular of negligence, that Westpac and Mr Tissiman misled Mr Murray as to the nature and effect of the documents. He pleaded that but for those acts and omissions he would not have signed the documents and, in consequence of doing so, he has suffered loss and damage by becoming liable to Westpac.

Mr Murray nextly pleaded a case based on rectification asserting that it was his intention, to Westpac's knowledge, that any documents signed at the time by way of Mortgages and Guarantee would be signed on the basis that Mr
Tissiman would be a co-guarantor of the debts of Dodson Bull; that Westpac would prepare such documents as were necessary for execution by the parties; that the documents signed "by the parties" were a written contract which was intended to embody the said oral agreement; that the documents were signed by
Mr Murray in the belief that the agreement was embodied "but it does not in fact contain or embody the said agreement"; and that there was a mutual, or alternatively, a unilateral mistake of fact.

The final pleading asserted, under the heading "Indemnity", that Mr Tissiman owed a duty to take care to ensure that Mr Murray was accurately advised regarding the documents and did truly understand the true purport and effect of them; that in breach of that duty he failed to so ensure; and that Westpac now relies on the documents and if Mr Murray is unable to successfully defend the proceedings he will have suffered loss and damage for which Mr Tissiman is alleged to be responsible.

The Defence and Cross-Claim are verified by an affidavit sworn by Mr Murray on June 1997 in which, in relation to the allegations of fact, he deposed that he believes them to be true.

A review of the pleadings discloses that the allegations for determination in these proceedings concern the circumstances in which Mr Murray admittedly signed the Guarantee and Mortgages on 8 February 1993 and the consequences of his having done so; and, further, that they are, generally speaking, matters on which Mr Murray carries the onus of proof. I was informed that there are proceedings in the Equity Division between, at least, Mr Murray and Mr
Tissiman in relation, put very generally, to the purchase by Mr Murray of Mr
Tissiman's shares in Dodson Bull, and certain alleged misconduct of Mr
Tissiman in relation to the running of the affairs of Dodson Bull. Those are not issues before me.

The Interlocutory Proceedings 
Conformably with the practice in the Commercial Division the Summons came before the Court on 9 May 1997. Giles J made an order that Mr Murray file and serve his Defence, an affidavit or affidavits setting out the facts, matters and circumstances on which he relied in support thereof, and any Cross-Claim, by 28 May 1997. He stood the proceedings over to 6 June 1997.

On 6 June 1997 the matter came before his Honour when he noted that the
Defence and Cross-Claim had not been filed, apparently without any fault on the part of Mr Murray, and he gave further directions for the conduct of the matter. He stood it over until 18 July 1997 on which date he gave further detailed directions in order to ready the matter for hearing and adjourned it to 19 September 1997. On 19 September 1997 his Honour was informed that
Westpac and Mr Tissiman had complied with their obligations under the timetable, but that Mr Murray had not served any document, save for his
Defence and Cross-Claim. There was some argument about where the fault for this lay and why medical reports were not available. His Honour considered that the defaults on the part of Mr Murray were such that he ordered him to pay the costs of Westpac and Mr Tissiman "of the directions hearing today". On October 1997 his Honour gave further directions, the substance of which was to extend the time for Mr Murray to comply with various requirements and, on November 1997, his Honour gave further directions.

On 27 February 1998 his Honour gave directions and, on 24 April 1998, he fixed the matter for hearing on 2 June 1998 with an estimate of eight to ten days.
He noted that the proceedings would not continue on 12 June 1998 or the following week "due to the ongoing commitments of counsel, but will be adjourned, if not concluded by 11 June, to a date which will then have to be fixed". It is not usual for a matter to be fixed for hearing on that basis in the Commercial List. Obviously his Honour, with the extensive knowledge he had of the proceedings, considered this was an appropriate case in which to deviate from that practice.

The hearing commenced before me on 2 June 1998, and, continued on 3, 4, 9, 10, and 11 June 1998. Conformably with what had been said previously on 11 June the hearing was specially fixed to continue on 14 September 1998, a date convenient to the parties, counsel and the Court. Ten days were set aside, although I made it clear that if the matter was not concluded within that time it would continue until it was.

On 20 April 1998 Mr Rodney Shields of Messrs Rodney Shields & Co entered an Appearance, which was filed on 20 April 1998, although it is dated 8 May
On 20 April 1998 Mr Shields also filed a Notice of Ceasing to Act and, thereafter, Mr Murray retained Mr C.F. Shirley as his solicitor. A Notice of
Appearance by Mr Shirley was filed in Court on 3 June 1998. Mr Abdul-Karim made it clear that he had only been briefed shortly before the hearing was to commence.

At the commencement of the hearing on 2 June 1998, Mr Abdul-Karim applied to further amend the Amended Defence and Cross-Claim. For reasons I gave at that time, I refused the application. However, in the course of so doing, I stated:- "It has been submitted on behalf of Mr Murray that those now representing him have only recently been retained and have not had the opportunity to become fully aware of all the matters until, perhaps, now, or even perhaps not even at this stage, and that it would result in an `injustice' to Mr Murray if he was not allowed to rely upon the Further Amended Defence and Cross-Claim, and he should not be subjected to the prejudice of not being allowed to rely upon it. I should add that Mr Abdul-Karim made clear that he was not seeking an adjournment for any reason." (My emphasis added in these reasons.) 
Mr Abdul-Karim did not suggest that the last sentence I have just quoted did not state the position accurately. In declining to grant leave to amend I referred to a number of matters, two of which are presently relevant. One was the lateness with which the amendment was brought forward and I would interpolate, as appeared later in my judgment of 2 June 1998, that this was after various opportunities had been afforded to Mr Murray to amend; and the second was that there was no evidence that if the amendment was allowed and orders for costs were made against Mr Murray, he would be able to meet them. I also referred to the fact that if there was an indebtedness to Westpac it was, and still is, continuing to increase by virtue of interest accruing and that there was no evidence that Mr Murray would be in a position in the future to meet that increasing indebtedness. Thereafter the matter proceeded on the pleadings to which I have referred.

At the conclusion of the hearing on 11 June 1998, and notwithstanding that parties always have liberty to apply on short notice in matters in the
Commercial List, I stated, Tp.357:- "I will adjourn this matter now until Monday, 14 September 1998. I grant leave to any party to apply on three days' or such shorter notice as a Judge of the Court may allow." 
The purpose of granting this leave was, obviously enough, to enable any problems which emerged to be dealt with prior to the resumed hearing.

I should also note that on 11 June 1998, Tp.338, the cross-examination of Mr
Murray concluded and I noted that neither Mr Dowdy nor Mr Minehan objected to
Mr Abdul-Karim's conferring with Mr Murray with a view to facilitating and, hopefully, expediting his re-examination. The rest of that day was taken up with other evidence and Mr Murray has not been re-examined.

The Present Application 
On 14 September 1998 Mr Bellamy appeared for Mr Murray for the purpose only of applying for an adjournment. He informed me that Mr Abdul-Karim is no longer instructed in the matter and I granted him leave to file in Court a Notice of
Motion seeking an adjournment, and an affidavit sworn by Mr Murray on 14
September 1998 in support thereof. The application was opposed by Mr Dowdy and
Mr Minehan.

In his affidavit Mr Murray deposed that he was seeking an adjournment for a period of two months:- ".. for the purposes of pursuing an application for Legal Aid in this matter and/or retaining new counsel." 
He stated that a dispute had arisen with Mr Abdul-Karim about "certain terms of his engagement as my counsel", which he asserted to have been "on a conditional basis", namely that Mr Abdul-Karim "would be paid only on a successful outcome in the matter". He deposed, in paragraph 6, that on 16 June Mr Abdul-Karim indicated to Mr Shirley that he required certain moneys before he would continue to act in the matter and he annexed various correspondence between Mr Abdul-Karim and Mr Shirley, much of which was deleted on the basis of client professional privilege.

Mr Murray deposed that following this dispute he approached the Consumer
Credit Legal Centre Inc on or about 22 July 1998 with a view to retaining new counsel, and that since that date his solicitor and he have communicated with approximately twelve barristers with a view to having them appear in the matter on a conditional basis "namely, that counsel will be paid only on a successful outcome in the matter". Such attempts were unsuccessful and, on 28 August 1998, Mr Murray made an application for Legal Aid. In paragraph 13 he said:- "Up to 28 August 1998, I was not aware that an application for Legal Aid had any prospects of being approved." 
He annexed a copy letter from the Legal Aid Commission dated 4 September 1998, which authorised Mr Shirley to prepare and submit a brief to certain named counsel for an opinion as to whether Mr Murray had reasonable prospects of success. The letter made clear that it was not a grant of Legal Aid and that the application would be further considered upon receipt of an opinion from counsel. Mr Murray deposed that he intended to proceed with that application and that if it is refused to appeal against that determination.

In paragraph 16 he said:- "At this time, Mr Abdul-Karim has custody of the brief forwarded to him in this matter. He has declined to return the brief to my instructing solicitor. I have instructed my solicitor to take steps to have the brief returned." 
Thereafter he set forth matters relating to his lack of finances, which made it impossible for him to instruct Mr Shirley to brief counsel, save on the conditional basis he proposed, and in paragraphs 20 and 21, an objection to paragraph 21 being overruled by me, he deposed:- "20. In these proceedings, the plaintiff, and the second cross-defendant, have each been represented by counsel. If I am granted the adjournment sought, I propose to pursue my application for Legal Aid. I will also use this time to have other counsel contacted to seek to have the brief accepted on a conditional basis.
 . I respectfully say that by reason of my unrepresented status before the Court, my medical condition and the complexity of the proceedings, if the proceedings are not adjourned, I will be denied an opportunity to fully and adequately present my defence to the claim, and my legal position will be prejudiced." 
The essential bases on which the application is made are:- 
Mr Abdul-Karim, who originally appeared in the matter, is no longer appearing.

Mr Murray is unable to retain other counsel unless such counsel is prepared to accept a brief on a pro bono basis or on what I shall describe as the speculative basis that no payment will be made unless the proceedings are successful and Mr Murray obtains an order for costs.

Mr Murray has not been able to retain counsel on this basis at this stage.

Mr Murray has made an application for a grant of Legal Aid. He proposes to pursue this and, if it be unsuccessful, to appeal against that decision.

These bases have to be considered against the background of the fact that the matter is part heard and, on 11 June 1998, was adjourned to 14 September 1998 with the concurrence of the parties and their legal representatives. A further matter arose in the cross-examination of Mr Murray, which was not referred to in his affidavit and of which account must also be taken. Mr Murray said that on 22 or 23 July 1998 he and Mr Shirley conferred with Mr L.J.W. Aitken of
Counsel and that he agreed to represent Mr Murray at the resumed hearing. This evidence was given in answer to a question of Mr Murray, which I asked, as to why he had not applied for Legal Aid before 28 August 1998. Mr Murray stated that it was on or about that date that Mr Aitken informed him that he would not be able to appear. The reason for my question was, of course, to ascertain why an application for Legal Aid had not been instituted once Mr Abdul-Karim had no longer been retained or had ceased to be prepared to continue with the matter. In essence the further basis advanced was that counsel, namely Mr
Aitken, who, according to Mr Murray, had agreed to act in the matter on 22 or July 1998, had stated on or about 28 August 1998 that he would not be able to do so. The evidence of Mr Aitken, to which I shall refer in more detail, was that he had agreed on 22 or 23 July 1998 to accept a brief to appear for
Mr Murray on 14 September 1998 free of charge. That was subject to a lengthy matter in which he was briefed concluding by 14 September. On about 24 August Mr Aitken advised Mr Shirley and Mr Murray that this would not occur and, accordingly, that he would not be able to appear.

It can be seen immediately that the various bases for the necessity to make an adjournment application centred around Mr Abdul-Karim's ceasing to act further in the matter, and the fact that Mr Aitken had agreed to act, but had then stated he would be unavailable approximately three weeks before the resumed hearing in the circumstances to which I have referred. As there can be no suggestion that either Westpac or Mr Tissiman has made necessary any adjournment, which I may feel obliged to grant, prima facie, a term thereof must be that Mr Murray pays the costs of those parties of and occasioned by the adjournment. Bearing in mind that ten days has been set aside those costs may be quite considerable.

However, if a legal representative is responsible for the need to have the adjournment then an order may be sought under Part 52A rule 43A. Indeed, Mr
Bellamy has stated that such an application will, in all probability, be made against Mr Abdul Karim. In those circumstances, and whilst I make it clear that I am not determining, nor purporting to determine, any such application which may be made, it seemed to me, and it still does, totally inappropriate to determine the adjournment application without affording Mr Abdul-Karim, Mr
Aitken and Mr Shirley the opportunity of being heard. I formed that view because if the assertions of Mr Murray are correct his present inability to be represented by Counsel is not a matter for which, on one view, he can be held responsible. If that is so it may well be an important consideration in the way in which I exercise my discretion as to whether or not to grant the adjournment. Mr Bellamy raised some objection to this course but, in my opinion, it was appropriate not only for the reasons to which I have just referred, but also because in a highly regulated and case managed list it is appropriate for the Court to be made aware if the conduct of officers of the
Court, which Counsel are, has led to the necessity for an adjournment, and, if it has, the relevant circumstances.

The Position Of Mr Abdul-Karim 
The matters to which I shall now refer in relation to Mr Abdul-Karim are taken from the correspondence annexed to Mr Murray's affidavit. On 21 May 1998 Mr
Abdul-Karim wrote to Mr Shirley stating that he was not prepared to undertake representation "on spec", but that in the circumstances he would accept a brief provided Mr Murray signed a Costs Agreement "which provides for a minimum payment of $12,000 in the event of an unfavourable outcome and payment of proper fees in the event of a verdict in favour of Mr Murray. Enclosed herewith is such an agreement". That document, which was headed "Fee
Disclosure", set out the basis on which Mr Abdul-Karim would appear and, in paragraph 5, it stated:- "In the event of an unfavourable verdict against Mr Murray a minimal of $12,000 fee is payable within fourteen days of handing down of verdict." 
Mr Murray did not sign the agreement and, in subsequent correspondence, Mr
Shirley asserted that he and Mr Murray had met with Mr Abdul-Karim, advised him that Mr Murray could not agree to make any such payment because he would not be able to do so if he was unsuccessful and that Mr Abdul-Karim was, in effect, prepared to proceed on the basis that he would only be paid if the proceedings were concluded successfully to Mr Murray. I do not propose to seek to resolve that evidentiary issue, if there be one, at this stage.

It is quite clear from paragraph 1 of the document that Mr Abdul-Karim understood that the matter may proceed after the time allocated up to and including 11 June 1998: paragraph 1.

On 16 June 1998 Mr Abdul-Karim wrote to Mr Shirley stating, inter alia:- "As I advised Mr Murray on the conclusion of the last day of hearing in the foyer of the Supreme Court I simply cannot afford to be involved in a matter of this magnitude especially in a situation where I did not have conduct of the matter from the start and without the benefit of reading the full documentation without the payment of money up front. If this matter was a normal brief my fees to date would be in the vicinity of $25,000 - $35,000. I am sure that is what Mr Dowdy and Mr Minehan's fees would be since this matter began on 3rd June (sic). Given Mr Murray's situation I am prepared to accept $15,000 within the next seven days and some up front payment on the 1st September. That is the lowest I am prepared to come. I simply cannot afford to be any lower given the work that needs to be attended to almost immediately.

Please advise of payment and your instructions as soon as possible." 
A copy of the letter was sent to Mr Murray. This letter was consistent with no agreement having been reached in accordance with the fee agreement, unless Mr
Abdul-Karim was attempting to change unilaterally the terms of that agreement.

On 25 June 1998 Mr Abdul-Karim wrote to Mr Shirley, with a copy to Mr Murray, repeating what he had said, in essence, in his letter of 25 June 1998, and concluding:- "Please note that should I not hear from you within the next seven (7) days regarding payment strictly as outlined and specific instructions I can only assume that my services are no longer required and you will attend to the further conduct of this matter." 
On 3 July 1998 Mr Abdul-Karim again wrote to Mr Shirley with a copy to Mr
Murray stating that he could only assume that his services were no longer required "and accordingly I do not regard myself to be briefed to attend Court when the matter next resume (sic) on 14th September".

The letter continued that Mr Abdul-Karim was happy to hand documents in his possession to Mr Shirley's nominee, but stated that Mr Abdul-Karim thought it would only be a fair and reasonable request on his part to ask for his disbursements and fees for conferences "to be paid prior to the release of the documents".

On 15 July 1998 Mr Abdul-Karim wrote to Mr Shirley referring to a failure to comply with the previous request. He continued:- "Unless you are prepared to give irrevocable undertaking and accept responsibility for payment of my fees to date and have money in trust for payment of fees for the two weeks hearing commencing 14th September then please accept my previous advice as per my last letter to you that I do not consider myself to be any longer briefed in this matter. Please confirm your acceptance of this advice in writing and convey the same to Mr Murray." 
On 23 July 1998 Mr Abdul-Karim wrote again to Mr Shirley, by registered mail, stating that he had received no reply and that he intended to obtain a ruling from the New South Wales Bar Association in relation to the return of the brief "and recovery of fees for hearing to date".

This letter stimulated a reply from Mr Shirley on 27 July 1998. It outlined some history of the matter, including the terms of the letter of 21 May 1998.
It also asserted that on 28 May 1998 Mr Murray and Mr Shirley had attended a conference with Mr Abdul-Karim at which he was advised that Mr Murray could not enter into the costs agreement, because in the event of an unfavourable result he would not be able to pay $12,000. The letter continued that the matter "proceeded on the basis that you would be paid fees only in the event of a favourable outcome". On 28 July 1998 Mr Shirley wrote a further letter to
Mr Abdul-Karim disputing that there was any costs agreement of the type for which Mr Abdul-Karim contended. There was no request by Mr Shirley to Mr
Abdul-Karim to deliver his brief to any other Counsel or to return it to him.

Mr Abdul-Karim sought advice or guidance from the New South Wales Bar
Association and, by letter dated 5 August 1998, Mr I.G. Harrison of Senior
Counsel, who was apparently requested by the Association to make a ruling on the right of Mr Abdul-Karim to return his brief, wrote to him stating, inter alia:- "Assuming that your fee agreement was accepted as the basis upon which you would be retained in the matter, clause 2 provided that your fees would be payable within fourteen days of conclusion of the hearing. Unless that expression was intended to have some other meaning, it would seem to me to mean that you are not entitled to payment of fees howsoever calculated or whensoever rendered until fourteen days after the conclusion of the hearing of the matter, which has not yet occurred. It is not possible upon the information provided meaningfully to examine the question of whether or not the agreement was vitiated by some form of misrepresentation or misleading conduct concerning the ability of Mr Murray to pay your fees.

Included among the letters you have provided me is your letter to your solicitor dated 16 June 1998. In that letter you draw attention to significant matters of further preparation which need to be attended to. You do not appear to have received any reply suggesting that your advice about the further preparation of the matter has been heeded.

In the circumstances I consider that you are entitled to return the Brief pursuant to New South Wales Barristers' Rule 99(a) and (b). I do not consider that you are entitled to return the Brief pursuant to Rule 99(c) for reasons already stated." 
Although Mr Harrison made reference to clause 2, he did not make any reference to clause 5, which would seem to confirm that it was not part of any agreement, or, perhaps more accurately, that Mr Harrison was not advised that it was part of any such agreement. However all that may be, the fact is that by 22 July 1998 it was accepted that Mr Abdul-Karim would no longer be appearing in the matter, notwithstanding that Mr Shirley wrote letters on 27 and 28 July 1998. This afforded Mr Shirley and Mr Murray almost eight weeks in which to brief other counsel. Even on the basis that the matter was pro bono, or that an application would be made for Legal Aid this, so it seems to me, was adequate time to obtain other representation and, on the evidence, that was done.

In cross-examination, Tp.373, Mr Murray said that Mr Aitken gave the opinion that he was happy to carry on with the case "provided he was able" and:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. So I understand that answer, did a barrister agree to undertake the case subject to those qualifications that you refer to? 
A. No, not at that stage. He was going to do it on a pro bono basis, that is he would get paid at the end." 
Mr Murray said the arrangements were made around 22 or 23 July 1998 with Mr
Aitken, who did not tell Mr Murray that he would not be able to appear until "around 28 August".

At Tp.374 it was put to Mr Murray by Mr Dowdy that Mr Aitken never accepted a brief to which Mr Murray responded:- "A. That is totally wrong. I would like to call Mr Atkins (sic) if you disbelieve me or you could call Mr Shirley.
 ...

Q. Mr Atkins (sic) never accepted any brief from you to appear at the hearing starting today? 
A. That is totally wrong.
 ...

Q. He told you that he was unavailable to appear on the resumed hearing date being 14 September didn't he? 
A. I don't think so.

Q. There is no doubt that he told you that? 
A. I don't think so.

Q. He indicated to you didn't he that he was unable to appear on 14 September and the subsequent days in this case didn't he? 
A. Not at that stage. It wasn't until August that he told us that." 
Mr Murray said that Mr Aitken did not mention Legal Aid "at that stage", and he was not sure whether he mentioned it at all.

At Tp.380 Mr Bellamy said:- "I am instructed Mr Aitken did agree to appear today, but by reason of subsequent events, would be unable to appear." 
Subsequently Mr Abdul-Karim stated that the brief was in his chambers and those representing Mr Murray were at liberty to collect it, which he said had always been the position.

The Position Of Mr Aitken 
I have referred briefly to Mr Aitken's involvement. By letter dated 11
September 1998, Exhibit 3 on the application for the adjournment, Messrs
Minter Ellison wrote to Mr Shirley in the following terms:- "We refer to a conversation between Mimma Barila and Lee Aitken of counsel on 9 September 1998. 
At that time Mr Aitken indicated that Mr Murray had sworn an affidavit in support of his application for an adjournment of this matter. We asked that any such affidavit be served on us as a matter of urgency so that the application may be dealt with expediently (sic) on Monday, 14 September 1998." 
I was informed by my Associate on 9 September 1998 that Mr Aitken had telephoned on the evening of 8 September 1998 and stated, inter alia, that
Mr Abdul-Karim was no longer appearing for Mr Murray and that an application for an adjournment may be made on behalf of Mr Murray. Mr Aitken's evidence was that although he sought instructions from Mr Shirley as to whether such an application should be made before 14 September 1998, none were received.

Mr Aitken gave evidence, which was not challenged, that on 22 or 23 July 1998 he conferred with Mr Shirley and Mr Murray. He was briefed with the Summons and some pages of the transcript and gave certain advice. He told Mr Shirley and Mr Murray that he was prepared to appear on the resumed hearing, without fee, provided that a case in which he had been involved for a long time, and the hearing of which was to commence on 27 July 1998 with an estimated hearing of five weeks, was concluded. That matter remains part heard. Mr Aitken gave evidence that on or about 24 August 1998 Mr Shirley and Mr Murray, who were apparently in Sydney in connection with a case in the Federal Court, attended unannounced in his Chambers. Until then no attempt had been made to provide Mr
Aitken with a complete brief. On that day Mr Aitken told Mr Shirley and Mr
Murray that he would not be able to appear because the other matter would not be concluded and he advised that steps be taken to brief other Counsel. This brought about further activity on the part of Mr Shirley and Mr Murray to obtain other Counsel and the application for Legal Aid was made on 28 August .

As I have said, Mr Aitken's evidence was not challenged. Thus it was accepted that on 22 or 23 July 1998 he agreed to appear, subject to the qualification to which I have referred, and at no fee. The argument, which Mr Dowdy and Mr
Minehan mounted, was that Mr Shirley, for whose conduct Mr Murray was responsible, should never have briefed Counsel on this basis because it may turn out, as it did, that he would not be available. I think this submission only gains force with the benefit of hindsight. On the estimate there was ample time for the case commencing on 27 July 1998 to conclude before 14
September 1998. That would have occurred if it had taken seven weeks. Nextly,
Mr Shirley was not in a position of great strength. Mr Murray had no money to pay Counsel and he had a Counsel, who is experienced in this type of litigation, offering to do the matter on a pro bono basis, but flagging the possibility of a problem. Finally, there was no suggestion to Mr Aitken that he had warned Mr Shirley that he would, in all probability, not be able to appear. I consider that Mr Aitken, while properly making the qualification, was not acting unreasonably in accepting the brief for Mr Murray. Not only was the time estimate of the other case such that if met, it would have concluded, but Mr Aitken gave some evidence that the matter commencing on 27 July 1998 may have settled. When the whole of the evidence is viewed I do not consider that it can be said, in all the circumstances of this case, that either Mr
Aitken or Mr Shirley acted unreasonably.

The fact that Mr Aitken was not ultimately available does not reflect in any adverse way on either of them, nor upon Mr Murray. After Mr Aitken advised of his unavailability there proved to be insufficient time to obtain other
Counsel on the only basis that Mr Murray could do so. But that, in my opinion, was a consequence of factors, which could not reasonably have been foreseen earlier. I should also add that Mr Aitken attended Court in Canberra in another matter on Monday, 14 September 1998. Unexplained that may have led to an adverse inference. Mr Aitken explained that he accepted the brief in the matter, which commenced on 27 July 1998 in which he is being led, on the basis that he could attend to briefs he already held of which the Canberra matter was one. He also said that if he had not previously returned the brief in the present matter, he would have appeared in it before me on 14 September 1998 and foregone the Canberra brief. His evidence was accepted by all parties and totally negated any adverse inference, which might otherwise have been thought to be available. Mr Aitken's approach to this matter was not only completely reasonable, but his agreement to take Mr Murray's brief on a genuine pro bono basis reflected the highest traditions of the Bar. However, I venture to suggest that had I not taken the course I did these matters may not have been disclosed so quickly and emphatically.

Matters To Be Considered On The Application For The Adjournment 
The application for the adjournment has to be viewed in the light of the fact that neither Westpac nor Mr Tissiman is in any way responsible for the need for the making of the application. Each has opposed the application and is ready to proceed with the hearing. The application must also be viewed in the light of the fact that the matter is part heard, the hearing dates commencing on 14 September 1998 being set as long ago as 11 June 1998. A further matter, which must be taken into account, is that whatever may be the rights and wrongs of the dispute between Mr Murray and Mr Abdul-Karim, it was known by those representing Mr Murray and by him, as long ago as 22 and/or 23 July , that Mr Abdul-Karim would not be appearing further for him. Nextly it is quite clear that at no time did Mr Murray have the funds to prosecute either his defence of Westpac's claim or the Second Cross-Claim against Mr Tissiman.
He was dependent upon counsel accepting the brief on a pro bono or speculative basis, or on obtaining Legal Aid. In the latter regard he recognised the difficulty of being granted Legal Aid. Indeed his evidence was that he did not think he would be granted Legal Aid and, speaking from my experience in relation to a number of matters which have come before me, I am aware that in the past the Legal Aid Commission very rarely grants Legal Aid in respect of commercial matters.

The position so far as Westpac is concerned is, according to the affidavit of
Mr Graeme Francis Matheson, sworn 14 September 1998 that it is now owed $493,318.18, which amount includes additional interest and costs on a solicitor/client basis, and that it only has recourse, if it has any recourse at all, against the property at Agars Lane, which is valued at between $450,000 and $460,000. The substantial increase in the indebtedness since 2
June 1998 is that costs have been added, I assume pursuant to the terms of the mortgage. The longer the matter proceeds, once again on the assumption that
Westpac is entitled to succeed, the higher the debt will become and the less of its ultimate debt it will recover. The obverse of this is that because of any delay Mr Murray's equity in that property has now been eroded. There is no suggestion, save for the contingency of some other litigation, which is to be heard in the Federal Court and from which Mr Murray may benefit, that he will receive any amount sufficient to enable him to discharge the debt in full, if he is found to be liable. In all these circumstances not only will Westpac, if it is entitled to succeed, not recover the full amount of its debt, but also it will not recover its costs. On the figures presently before me that is the position, and it will only become worse if, which has to be established,
Westpac is entitled to succeed.

The position so far as Mr Tissiman is concerned is that if he is to succeed he will not, essentially for the reasons to which I have just referred, be able to recover his costs. However, as with Westpac, that is now and will remain the position. Further, the longer the matter proceeds the more strain is imposed on Mr Tissiman. Exhibit T1 is a medical report from Dr B.K. Chambers of 8 September 1998, which states that he suffers from ischaemic heart disease and atrial fibrillation, and has undergone cardio version once and been hospitalised a number of times with irregular heart rhythms. Dr Chambers concluded:- "A protracted court case or court appearance would be very stressful for Mr Tissiman, and if these are necessary he may need periodic respites." 
It seems to me that any person engaging in litigation is subjected to some degree of stress, but the evidence of Dr Chambers makes it clear that Mr
Tissiman is more susceptible to the effects of it. The Court can take steps to alleviate that.

The statement of Mr Tissiman of September 1998, Exhibit T3 on the application, also demonstrates financial prejudice which Tissiman is suffering whilst the litigation remains on foot. However, that is a detriment or prejudice he would suffer in any event, although obviously enough, it will be exacerbated somewhat by the grant of an adjournment.

Essentially, those are the prejudices Westpac and Mr Tissiman will suffer. To the extent to which I have referred they presently exist.

The position of Mr Murray requires, obviously enough, very careful attention.
Prima facie he owes Westpac the amount claimed. I say prima facie because it is not in issue that he executed the security documents and the amount claimed has been established. However, he has raised the various defences to which I have referred and he has sought to be acquitted from his liabilities not only by virtue of those defences and cross-claims, but also by the cross- claim he has brought against Mr Tissiman. He is fighting to protect his only remaining asset. The simple facts are that unless he obtains a grant of Legal
Aid which, for the reasons to which I have referred, would seem to be somewhat unlikely, he is only able to pursue the litigation, unless he does so in person, if he can obtain legal representation on a pro bono or speculative basis. He is having obvious difficulties in obtaining counsel on either of those bases. He had the advantage of counsel for the first part of the hearing, for the purposes of which statement I leave aside any dispute as to the basis on which Mr Abdul-Karim was appearing. He was entitled to believe and indeed it was the fact, until 24 August 1998, that Mr Aitken would be appearing. Since learning that he would not be, he has attempted, unsuccessfully, to retain other counsel.

Against the prejudice Westpac and Mr Tissiman will suffer I must weigh the prejudice to Mr Murray of not granting an adjournment, which would mean that he would be required to conduct the proceedings personally. It may be that even if an adjournment is granted he will not receive Legal Aid, or he will not be able to retain counsel on a pro bono or speculative basis. However an adjournment will give him the opportunity to be represented properly, which would alleviate the prejudice he would probably suffer by being required to conduct the proceedings himself.

It was submitted by Mr Dowdy and Mr Minehan that the real reason why Mr Murray is not represented by Counsel is Mr Shirley's acceptance of an unacceptable arrangement with Mr Aitken. Essentially for the reasons I have given, I do not accept this submission. They submitted, nextly, that their clients were not at fault, with which I agree. However, on the overall view of what transpired I am not satisfied that Mr Shirley or Mr Murray were. As between the parties Mr
Murray was at fault. But that was not, in the view I take, because of relevant fault on the part of either Mr Shirley or Mr Murray.

Nextly it was submitted that there was no evidence that there would be any utility in granting an adjournment because Mr Murray may neither obtain a grant of Legal Aid, nor the services of Counsel on a pro bono basis. That may be so. However, I have come to the conclusion that it is appropriate, in all the circumstances of this case, to allow Mr Shirley and Mr Murray a further opportunity. As I made very clear in my remarks at the conclusions of submissions if they are not successful, it will require a most powerful case, which, as presently advised, will not be made out by Mr Murray having to appear in person, for me to grant any further adjournment. One can never fetter the future exercise of one's discretion, because relevant circumstances may change. But my present view is that whether or not Mr Murray has legal representation on the next occasion the case should go ahead. Thus he and Mr
Shirley, to the extent to which Mr Shirley is retained, must give full attention to the obtaining of Counsel. I very much doubt, irrespective of the bona fides of the withdrawal of Counsel in the future, that that will provide a ground justifying any further adjournment. I assume that any Counsel briefed will be made aware of these comments. Similarly I doubt that any other change of legal representation would necessarily justify an adjournment.

Further I do not consider, as presently advised, that an outstanding application to or appeal against an adverse decision by the Legal Aid
Commission would cause me to grant a further adjournment. I assume that these remarks will be drawn to the attention of that Commission and, whilst I have no doubt that there are many claims on its time, I would appreciate it if this matter receives its urgent attention. I appreciate that requires urgent co- operation from Mr Shirley and Mr Murray. As it is there is some ten weeks for a consideration of the matter and the briefing of Counsel to prepare and present the case.

It was also submitted that the adjournment application was made very late, but that will be reflected in the costs' order I propose to make, and that there has been no offer by Mr Murray to pay interest in the meantime. However, he denies the obligation to do so.

In all these circumstances it seems to me that the proper exercise of discretion to achieve justice requires that an adjournment be granted. I propose to adjourn the matter until Monday, 30 November 1998. That is a date to which the parties raised no objection. In doing so I make it clear, and those presently representing Mr Murray should ensure that he fully understands this, that on that day I expect the matter to proceed irrespective of whether
Mr Murray has been able to obtain legal representation. His application was for an adjournment for two months and the time I have allowed, which has been made necessary by virtue of other matters in the list, exceeds that period.
Accordingly, as matters presently stand, Mr Murray should not be in any doubt that the matter will proceed to a hearing on 30 November 1998 and will continue until it is concluded.

In my opinion the granting of the adjournment in the circumstances of this case demands that Mr Murray pays the costs of Westpac and Mr Tissiman of and occasioned by the adjournment. Mr Bellamy submitted that such an order should not be made on the basis that some prior notice was given of the application, and on the basis that where a party is deprived of legal representation, without fault on his part, an adjournment should be granted. In my opinion notice of the application was given too late and, in any event, the evidence is that Mr Aitken was not given instructions to make the application in the week prior to the hearing. As to the second point, the reasons why Mr Murray did not have representation were not disclosed fully in his affidavit and only emerged during the hearing. In all the circumstances Westpac and Mr Tissiman were fully entitled to oppose the application.

I have said that there was no relevant fault on the part of Mr Murray. That, in my view, entitles him to the adjournment. However, as there was absence of any fault on the part of Westpac and Mr Tissiman, they are entitled to their costs.

Mr Minehan has submitted, firstly, that costs should be awarded on an indemnity basis, and, secondly, that there should be a stay of the cross-claim against his client until they are paid. I do not consider that the circumstances are so gross as to justify the awarding of costs on an indemnity basis and, in the exercise of my discretion, I refuse to make that order. I consider that staying the cross-claim, which raises matters closely related to
Westpac's claim, would render otiose, in practical terms, the grant of the adjournment and, for that reason, I do not propose to make that order.

I say nothing about the entitlement of any of the parties to seek an order pursuant to Part 52A rule 43A.

Orders 
Mr Murray has agreed to the following conditions to the grant of the adjournment and has instructed Mr Bellamy to give the following undertakings to the Court on his behalf, viz:- that he will prosecute diligently and with all due expedition an application for Legal Aid (including satisfying any conditions imposed by the
Legal Aid Commission to enable it to determine the application); that he will provide to Westpac or Mr Tissiman upon request any information as to the status of the application for Legal Aid; and that he will advise Westpac and Mr Tissiman within forty eight (48) hours of his receiving advice as to the outcome of his application for Legal
Aid.

Upon Mr Murray by his Counsel giving those undertakings to the Court I order that:- the hearing of the proceedings be adjourned until Monday, 30 November ;

Mr Murray pay Westpac's and Mr Tissiman's costs of and occasioned by the adjournment, on a party and party basis; any party have liberty to apply on three days' or such shorter notice as a
Judge of the Court may allow.
 * * * 
