

Regina versus Strachan Matter No Cca 60504/96 [1997] NSWSC 229 (3 June 1997) ``Regina versus Gregory Stuart Strachan /96 June 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Mason P, Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Blanch DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60504/96 
DELIVERED: Tuesday 3 June 1997 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday 3 June 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus GREGORY STUART STRACHAN 
JUDGMENT OF: Gleeson CJ, Mason P, Grove J 
COUNSEL 
APPELLANT: In person 
RESPONDENT: L M B Lamprati 
SOLICITORS 
APPELLANT: - 
RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SEVERITY OF SENTENCE - NO SPECIAL POINT OF
PRINCIPLE - SENTENCE WITHIN DISCRETIONARY RANGE 
NO OF PAGES: 8 
REGINA versus GREGORY STUART STRACHAN 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I ask Grove J to give the first judgment. 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against severity of the sentence imposed by the Chief Judge, Blanch DCJ on 30 August 1996. On that occasion the applicant, then aged twenty-eight years, appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to six counts of sexual intercourse with a child under the age of sixteen years. The six counts involved two victims; four counts in relation to one and two in relation to the other. 
His Honour sentenced the applicant to a minimum term of penal servitude for one year and eight months dating from that date together with an additional term of two years during which he would be eligible for release on parole.

The course of hearing the appeal has been a little unusual and I should recount some matters pertaining to it.

The applicant is without legal representation for the appeal and, pursuant to the Registrar's directions for written submissions, he provided a letter from
Mr Mark Blows, a clinical psychologist, which he signed and endorsed as representing his written submissions. The content of that letter is before the court. Nevertheless, Mr Blows himself was in court when the appeal was called on and without objection by the Crown he has been permitted by the court to address it on behalf of the applicant.

Further, although the applicant did not tender written submissions in accordance with the Registrar's direction, other than in the circumstances that I have related, he has today brought to court a written submission which each of us has had the opportunity to read. I shall refer to some parts of that written submission in due course. He also addressed the court.

The points made by Mr Blows were several. He indicated candidly that he had not had the opportunity to read the remarks on sentence of the sentencing
Judge and that disadvantage is quite apparent.

One of the matters which he raised was a suggestion that too much weight had apparently been given to a prior conviction of the applicant. To the contrary,
Blanch DCJ took the view that he would treat the applicant as having no relevant criminal history and he expressly said that for all intents and purposes the applicant would be entitled to be looked at as a person of unblemished record coming before the court in respect of these offences.

The submission that too much weight was given to a prior conviction cannot be sustained.

Mr Blows also drew the court's attention to his opinion that the offences were committed when the applicant was under severe psychological strain. That material was before the sentencing Judge, contained in a report previously given by Mr Blows and is, of course, repeated in the letter which was endorsed by the applicant.

In my view, it cannot be said that his Honour failed to take this matter into account and, again, a reading of his remarks on sentence shows that he made express reference to it and weighed those circumstances together with the objective circumstances of the offences.

At the risk of prolixity, I consider it appropriate to recapitulate some of the facts found by his Honour in relation to these offences. I do so in order that there can be no doubt about the matter and also in response to a comment by Mr Blows that he had been present in court during the hearing of the previous hearing - a Crown appeal Regina versus Priestley. By coincidence, that appeal related to offences of a similar nature. There can be, in my view, no comparison whatever between the two cases.

The facts found by Blanch DCJ which are not the subject of challenge are these. In relation to the first ground, the victim was living with the family of the applicant. She had previously run away from home and had been in a refuge. These things were known to the applicant. There was some marital dispute between the applicant and his wife and he took the victim for a drive at about 8.30pm. On that drive he opened his pants and put her head on his penis and got her to suck it. After he finished that he masturbated and they went home.

In relation to the second charge the applicant was said to have asked the victim to go into his room where his wife said words to the effect, "Greg wants you and I to have foreplay so that he can get stimulated". The applicant's wife and the victim took their clothes off and in the course of that incident he said "Suck her tits and at the same time put your finger up her". There follows a description, which I need not repeat, given by his
Honour of the sexual activity involving the parties.

The third charge involved an incident which also included the second complainant, where the applicant and the two young girls removed the bottom parts of their clothing, were kissing each other and then he got the girls to sit on him so that in succession his penis entered their respective vaginas.

The fourth count related to an event in which the applicant was with the victim in an area near the Tuggerah Lakes. He told her to lie down where he had intercourse with her in some reeds close to the water.

In relation to the second victim I have already mentioned her participation in one of the events concerning the first victim. The second count involving that complainant occurred when that girl had been at the applicant's place after school and he volunteered to drive her home. On the way he pulled into a beach car park surrounded by trees. He started kissing her and undid the top buttons of her blouse, started playing with her breasts, then undid the zipper of his pants, pulled out his penis and got her to suck it.

The sentencing judge came to the conclusion that the offences were serious and he listed a number of factors which led to that conclusion. None of those in my view could be the subject of successful challenge. He noted that there were six offences; that they extended over a period between January 1994 and
November 1995; that there were two complainants and that the first complainant, the victim in four of the counts, had been in a vulnerable position and that one of the offences had involved the activities of multiple persons.

The written submissions brought to court today by the applicant challenge his
Honour's finding that the first complainant was in a vulnerable position. It is important to note what his Honour's finding was and the use that he did and did not make of that finding. What his Honour said was simply this: "The other matter of some significance is that the complainant, (whom he named) was someone who was in a vulnerable position, having left home, having been in a refuge. From the evidence that she gave, she was clearly concerned about where she might live and there was a degree of vulnerability about her position. That is a matter which should be taken into account, although I stress that I am not taking it into account on the basis of the prisoner having been charged with an offence of being in a position of trust, so I do not elevate the offence beyond the one which is charged, but nonetheless, it would be artificial not to take account of the vulnerable situation of the complainant on that occasion." 
For my part I see no demonstrated error in his Honour's remarks or in the approach which he adopted.

I have read the balance of the written submissions advanced by the applicant today. They involve reassertions of fact which were the subject of analysis and determination by the trial judge. It suffices to say that no error by the sentencing judge has been shown. When one takes into account the factors which his Honour found and the circumstances of the offences which I have described, it seems to me impossible to say that the sentences imposed were outside the range of the sound exercise of judicial discretion.

I propose that the application for leave to appeal be granted, but that the appeal be dismissed and the sentence confirmed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree. 
MASON P: I agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Grove J. * * * 
