

Abdallah versus Newton Matter No Ca 40209/97 [1998] NSWSC 547 (19 November )

Last Updated: 2 December 1998 
WADIAA ABDALLAH versus MARK NEWTON 
CA 40209/97; DC 1233/96 November 1998 
Meagher JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES - Sweeney ADCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40209/97; DC 1233/96 
DELIVERED: 19 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: 19 October 1998 
PARTIES: Wadiaa ABDALLAH versus Mark NEWTON 
JUDGMENT OF: MEAGHER JA, BEAZLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: T G R Parker 
Respondent: D A Wheelahan QC/E G Romaniuk 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: M T Bechara 
Respondent: Sparke Helmore 
CATCHWORDS: 
NEGLIGENCE - motor vehicle accident - principle of `agony of the moment' -whether defendant's conduct was reasonable in the circumstances 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 9 
Wadiaa ABDALLAH versus Mark NEWTON 
The appellant was a passenger in a motor vehicle driven by her nephew when it was hit from behind by a car driven by the respondent. The appellant claimed damages for injuries arising from the collision.

The trial judge accepted the respondent's unchallenged evidence of the events surrounding the collision. The evidence was that the appellant's nephew, after cutting the respondent off on the M5 motorway, had stopped in front of him on the exit ramp, had approached his car in a threatening manner and had kicked and damaged the side of the car with karate sticks. In his haste to drive away, the respondent collided with the car in which the appellant was a passenger. The appellant claimed damages for injuries to the left side of her face, neck and shoulders.

The judge, despite accepting that the respondent would have been in an understandably frightened state, concluded that the respondent's negligence had caused the collision. She also concluded that the appellant had not discharged the onus of proving that the injuries occurred in or were caused by the accident.

On appeal: 
The appellant challenges her Honour's findings that she failed to establish that her injuries and disabilities resulted from the collision. The respondent cross-appeals challenging the finding that his conduct, in the circumstances, had been unreasonable and that his negligence had caused the collision.

Held: 
The reasonableness of a defendant's conduct must be judged according to the circumstances of the case. In the circumstances, the actions of the respondent accorded with the conduct of a reasonably prudent person. There was no negligence by the respondent and the cross-appeal should be allowed. In the absence of a finding of negligence against the respondent, it is unnecessary to consider the issues raised by the appellant.

Leishman versus Thomas [(1957) 75 WN 173] applied 
ORDERS . Appeal dismissed with costs.
 . Cross-appeal allowed with costs.

Wadiaa ABDALLAH versus Mark NEWTON 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Stein JA. 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Stein JA. 
STEIN JA: This appeal and cross-appeal arises from a claim by Mrs Abdallah (the appellant) for damages for injuries received in a motor vehicle accident on 28 August 1994. The cross-appeal challenges the finding of Sweeney ADCJ on 21 March 1997 that the negligence of Mr Newton (the respondent) caused the collision. The appellant challenges her Honour's finding that she failed to establish that her injuries and disabilities resulted from the accident. Accordingly a verdict for the defendant was entered. 
Before turning to the substantive issues arising on the appeal, it should be noted that the appellant made an application on the Friday afternoon before
Monday's hearing seeking to have the hearing date vacated. It was indicated on her behalf that she was unable to obtain counsel. The application was refused by the Court and, no doubt at short notice, Mr T G R Parker has appeared for the appellant. In the best traditions of the bar, he has presented the appellant's case in a capable and thorough manner, canvassing every issue that could reasonably be addressed.

For reasons which will become evident, it is convenient to consider the issues raised by the cross-appeal. The cross-appellant challenges her Honour's finding that, in the circumstances, his conduct had not been reasonable and that it followed that he had breached his duty of care to the appellant. As noted by Mr Parker, the challenge to her Honour's finding of negligence would have been more appropriately the subject of a notice of contention rather than of cross-appeal. However, nothing turns on this.

Evidence concerning the collision was given by both the appellant and the respondent. Her Honour accepted the respondent's evidence with regard to the events surrounding the collision. She found him to be an impressive witness, noting that as he was not cross-examined, his evidence was unchallenged. The evidence he gave was that, while driving on the M5 motor-way, a motor vehicle (in which the appellant was a passenger and which was driven by her nephew) swerved in front of him, bumping the front of his vehicle. Shortly after, the respondent took the exit ramp at Stacey Street. He became aware that the car which had cut him off was ahead of him on the exit ramp. The driver of that car (the nephew) pulled over and the respondent stopped approximately 5 m behind. The respondent, observing the driver climb out of his car and walk towards him wielding two karate sticks, wound up his window and locked the doors of his vehicle. The nephew demanded, in threatening terms, that the respondent get out of the car. When he failed to do so, the nephew proceeded to smash the external wing mirror of the respondent's car and then to hit and kick the windows, doors and along the side of the car.

The respondent stated that he feared for his safety and decided to depart the scene as quickly as possible. He admitted that by this stage he was panicking.
As he moved his vehicle out into the stream of traffic he was obliged, in the absence of the wing mirror, to look over his right shoulder. In doing so, he failed to notice the distance between his car and the car ahead and he collided with the rear of that car. He then backed up and drove off.

Her Honour described the test to be applied as `what the reasonably prudent driver would have done in the circumstances'. She found that the respondent had decided the best thing to do was to leave the scene and that `one cannot blame him for that'. She also accepted that the respondent was in a frightened state when he made the attempt to move off and was not in possession of the faculties he would be under normal circumstances. Nevertheless, she concluded that it had not been beyond the respondent, even in the circumstances, to have made sure he left a safe distance between the cars as he moved off into the stream of traffic. She found that, on the balance of probabilities, the respondent's negligence had caused the collision.

The reasonableness of a defendant's conduct must be judged according to the circumstances of the particular case. Mr Wheelahan QC, counsel for the respondent, submits that her Honour erred in holding that the conduct of his client had been unreasonable in the circumstances. He points to the findings of her Honour concerning the respondent's state of mind at the time he drove off and submits that they were the actions of a reasonably prudent person.

In Leishman versus Thomas [(1957) 75 WN 173],
Street CJ considered the question of whether a defendant may rely on the principle of the "agony of the moment" in answer to a claim that he had acted negligently towards another. He stated: 
This so called principle of acting in the "agony of the moment" is merely an application of the ordinary rule for ascertaining whether or not the conduct of any party has been negligent by looking to all the surrounding circumstances and ascertaining whether the defendant behaved in such a fashion as a reasonably prudent man, in the light of those circumstances, would not have behaved. It is a circumstance, and one possibly of great importance, that the defendant charged with negligence, may have been forced to act in a sudden crisis or emergency, unexpected and unheralded, without that opportunity for calm reflection which makes it easy after the event to suggest that it would have been wiser if he had done something else. The jury are required to judge his conduct in the light of the happenings of the moment, and a man is not to be charged with negligence if he, not being the creator of the crisis or emergency which has arisen, finds himself faced with a situation which requires immediate action of some sort and if, in the so-called "agony of the moment", he makes an error of judgment and makes a step which wiser counsels and more careful thought would have suggested was unwise. [at 175] 
I am unable to agree that the actions of the respondent, as found by her
Honour, were unreasonable in the circumstances. The respondent was in a situation that was not of his making. Undoubtedly, if he had not felt threatened and if his mirror had not been smashed, he would have taken greater care in driving off. However, he was intimidated and believed the situation required immediate action. His reaction was entirely reasonable. It is true that the action which he took resulted in the collision. However, given the circumstances he faced, his actions were perfectly reasonable and accorded with the conduct of a reasonably prudent person.

It follows that there was no negligence by the respondent and the cross-appeal should be allowed. In the absence of a finding of negligence against the respondent, it becomes unnecessary to consider the issues raised by the appellant on the appeal. Her Honour entered a verdict for the defendant and this should be left undisturbed, as should the order for costs of the trial.
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

ORDERS ) Appeal dismissed with costs ) Cross-appeal allowed with costs * * * 
