

Stone versus Government Insurance Officer of NSW [1996] NSWSC 59 (1 April 1996) 
STONE versus GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /92; CL 311/87 APRIL 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY P, PRIESTLEY JA, POWELL JA 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - Motor vehicle accident - Discrepancies in evidence - Credibility of witness 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: This is an appeal arising from a judgment of his Honour Mr Justice Finlay given on 4 February 1992. The plaintiff was injured in a motor cycle accident on 26 September 1986. The matter came to trial in Wollongong on 4 February 1992.

The plaintiff, riding a motor cycle had driven into the front of a motor vehicle driven by (as I shall describe him somewhat inaccurately) the defendant, that is, the person whom the defendant Insurance Office represented.

His Honour considered whether there was evidence on which he could or should find for the plaintiff in a claim by the plaintiff on the ground of negligence. His Honour held that he should find for the defendant. An appeal has been brought to this Court. The grounds of appeal have been amended and the matter has come before this Court upon the basis of the amended grounds of appeal.

Ordinarily I would be of the opinion that it would be sufficient to indicate that I accepted the reasons of the trial judge and need add no more. However the matter has been argued before this Court orally for an hour and three quarters and a written submission has been lodged on behalf of the appellant- plaintiff of some sixteen or seventeen pages. In the circumstances and having regard to what has been said recently as to such matters, I shall add some observations of my own.

The trial judge had first to determine what evidence he accepted from amongst the evidence given before him. His Honour indicated the evidence which he accepted in the following terms: "I have reservations as regards the reliability which can be given to her [the plaintiff's] recollection. More importantly, however, is that the evidence of
Mr Baxter, as he finally came to give it, supported (sic) in all the critical parts of the evidence of the defendant. The onus is of course on the plaintiff to establish conduct on behalf of the defendant which amounts to negligence.
It is sufficient for me to say that on the material which I accept, and I do accept the evidence of Mr Heycox and Mr Baxter, I do not find negligence has been established and there must be a verdict accordingly for the defendant." 
Mr Baxter was a passenger on the back of the motor cycle driven by the plaintiff and Mr Heycox was the driver of the other vehicle into which the motor cycle came in collision.

The evidence given by Mr Baxter and by Mr Heycox - I put the matter generally - was to the effect that Mr Heycox's utility was stopped when it was hit. His evidence and the evidence of Mr Baxter - again I put the matter in general terms - was that the utility was well over on its correct side of the road when the motor cycle hit it. It is not necessary for me to detail the whole of the evidence. We have had a painstaking examination of the evidence, the submissions, the documents and the like. But the substance of the matter is, in my opinion, clear: his Honour accepted that the accident happened generally in the manner to which I have referred.

It is to be expected that there would be, at least that counsel could find in the cross-examination, some discrepancies or suggested discrepancies in the evidence given by the witnesses at the trial and between evidence given by one witness at one time and the same witness at another time. These were matters the effect of which it was for his Honour to judge. In my opinion his Honour came to the correct conclusion. I shall not lengthen this judgment by detailing all of this evidence, the substance of which his Honour set out in his judgment. In my opinion, when one reads the evidence, when one reads the judgment that his Honour gave, and when one has regard to the findings he made as to credibility, it is clear why his Honour came to the conclusion that he did. It was correct for his Honour to do as he did. I say so with respect to the long and detailed argument that, as I have said, has extended over about an hour and three quarters in relation to the factual material. It is not necessary to refer to each of the arguments advanced. It is necessary to say no more than I simply do not agree with them. The reason why the judge decided as he did is, as I have said plain, from a reading of the judgment and the evidence.

A matter was put towards the end of the submissions in relation to the rejection of a document which had been tendered at the trial by Mr Puckeridge
QC for the plaintiff. The document (copy of which has been tendered to this
Court for the purposes of the Court understanding its effect) was a statement made by Mr Baxter presumably on 7 October 1986.

In the course of the trial, Mr Baxter had given evidence for the plaintiff. He was cross-examined for the defendant and the contents of a statement had been put to him step by step seeking his agreement to what had been said in that statement. He gave evidence accepting the substantial parts of the statement as far as they were relevant to the decisions of this matter. It appears that that statement was tendered for the defendant. The plaintiff then sought to tender a further statement, namely the statement here in question.

In re-examination, Mr Puckeridge elicited from Mr Baxter that he did not recall that he had been to "the solicitor's office". He could not remember how long after the accident; he said, "It wasn't long after it, about I do not know couple of weeks to a month or something". He was then asked if he had given a statement to the solicitor and he accepted that he did. Mr Puckeridge then submitted that the statement, which presumably he sought to tender, should be admitted upon the following basis: "I would be seeking to show the statement this witness signed and simply to tender that statement. We would say it arises because of the date of the statement to the police on 1 August 1987 and a suggestion that could be made that it might purport to be a statement of, perhaps recent invention, and I would be seeking to identify this statement and tender the document. I raise it at this stage because I take it my friend might have some objection. That would be the basis upon which we would be seeking to put it forward.

His Honour said: "I cannot see any basis for its admissibility. I reject it." 
I have read the terms of the statement. Having regard to the witness's evidence and to the agreement that he gave to the various passages from the other statement to which I have referred, I do not think that there was any basis for the admission of the document upon the basis on which it was tendered. There was, I think, no suggestion at all that there had been any recent invention or any change in the witness's evidence of any significant kind. The witness's evidence was, as it has been suggested in argument, enthusiastically adopted on behalf of the defendant and I do not see any basis in the circumstances of the case for the admission of this other document.

Even if the other document was admitted, I do not see that it could or would alter the view which the judge took or that this Court on a rehearing would take in relation to the matter. I do not think that there is any substantial difference between what appears in the statement now sought to be tendered and the evidence which has been given previously. Reference has been made to matters of detail but in the end I do not think these would affect the acceptability of Mr Baxter's evidence or the correctness of it. I do not think that any basis has been made out for the admission of that document upon the basis that it was tendered before the Court.

In all of the circumstances, I am of opinion that the appeal should be dismissed and it follows that it should be dismissed with costs.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree.

POWELL JA: I also agree.

MAHONEY P: The order of the Court will therefore be that the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
