

Regina versus John Alan Marceau [1997] NSWSC 178 (7 May 1997) 
REGINA v. John Alan MARCEAU /96 
Wednesday 7 May 1997 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART, NEWMAN, HIDDEN JJ 
CATCHWORDS: SEXUAL ASSAULT - SUFFICIENCY OF 
EVIDENCE - NUMEROUS COUNTS 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed in part 
Relist for re-sentencing 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: John Alan Marceau, by his Amended Notice of Grounds of Appeal challenges both his convictions and sentences on sundry offences. He was convicted on 1 count of indecent assault on a female under 16 years (s.76 [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)), 2 counts of committing an act of indecency towards a person under 16 years (s.76A), [7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s7.html) counts of sexual intercourse without consent with a person under 16 years (s.61D(i)), [1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s1.html) count of buggery [(s.79)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s79.html) and [3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s3.html) counts of carnal knowledge by a step-father of a girl between 10 and 17 years [(s.73).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s73.html) By direction he was acquitted on a charge of indecent assault on a female under 16 years. Two alternative counts of attempted carnal knowledge did not arise for consideration. Effectively, he received a minimum term of 6 years and an additional term of 3 years. The judge had regard to the total criminality.

The counts covered various periods during the years November 1977 to June
The complainant was born on 25 November 1969. The case has some extraordinary features. These include the complainant, after years of sexual abuse, which she took to be her lot, agreeing to bear and bearing the appellant two children.

The Crown contended that the appellant formed a relationship with the complainant's mother and moved into the family's home at Gray's Point in 1976 when the complainant was aged 6. The appellant married the mother in 1980. The mother worked different hours from the appellant who, at Gray's Point, generally did not start work until about 2 pm. The mother left home prior to 9 am and did not return until after 5 pm. The appellant was often responsible for the complainant and the other children. There were occasions in those early years when the appellant did not allow her to go out and visit her friends until after he had kissed her, putting his tongue in her mouth, and touched her on the vagina. He took down his pants and made her touch him on the penis, giving her instructions to do so. He told her that it was their secret and that she was not to tell anybody. She said that she did not tell anybody because she was scared of him. She detailed unpleasant domestic conduct on his part towards her, designed to ensure that she complied with his wishes.

The incidents the subject of counts 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 took place between late November 1977 and December 1982 while the family lived at Gray's Point and included indecent assault, removal of her clothes, touching her vagina, photographing her while naked, committing an act of indecency, sexual intercourse without consent (insertion of fingers in the anus), buggery, sexual intercourse without consent (cunnilingus) and committing an act of indecency (masturbating and ejaculating onto her stomach). The incidents in counts 1, 3, 4 and 5 allegedly occurred while she was in primary school and those in counts 6 & 7 while she was in first year high school. She gave evidence of other incidents in this period which were not the subject of any counts.

In January 1984, when the complainant was aged 14, the family moved to
Lithgow. The mother worked in Sydney and came home about every second weekend.
Within a short time the appellant took the complainant into his bedroom and removed her clothes and his clothes, kissed her on the mouth, including inserting his tongue in her mouth, and licked her breasts. He performed cunnilingus upon her (count 8), placed his fingers inside her vagina (count 9) and inserted his penis a short way into her vagina (count 10). He stopped and ejaculated onto her stomach. The family lived at Lithgow for about 8 months.
There were other similar incidents. The complainant said that she did not tell anyone because she was scared of the appellant.

In August 1984 the family moved to Porter's Retreat near Oberon. Between
August and November 1984 the appellant allegedly made oral contact with the complainant's vagina and inserted his fingers into her vagina (count 12). The
Crown alleged that he also inserted his penis into her vagina (count 13). The evidence as to this will need consideration.

After the victim had turned 15, and at the end of 1984 or the beginning of , the appellant is alleged to have gone into her room, kissed her on the mouth and licked her breasts. He performed cunnilingus upon her (15th count - sexual intercourse without consent). The Crown alleged that he placed his finger in her vagina (16th count but the evidence as to this requires review).
The Crown also alleged that he penetrated her vagina with his penis (17th count). She said that there were many similar incidents while they lived at the house at Porter's Retreat. She said that she did not tell anyone about what was happening because the appellant controlled her life.

She said that in 1985, when the appellant asked her whether she wanted the sexual relationship to continue, she replied in the negative. She said that he became dejected and lost weight. He used to cry beside her bed at night and masturbate. Eventually she gave in and resumed having sex with him.

In 1987, when she was 17, the appellant asked her to have a baby for him. The relationship continued and she became pregnant three times. The first resulted in a miscarriage and the other two resulted in the birth of two boys.
According to the complainant's mother it was the appellant who told her that her daughter was pregnant. When the mother inquired as to the father, the appellant told her it was none of her business. She accepted that she could not take the matter further. On the birth of the second boy the mother (and the appellant's wife) asked the appellant if he was the father. He did not answer directly but grabbed the quilt of the bed and said how dare she stoop so low as to even think of that. She was so embarrassed that she sought his forgiveness.

After the birth of the second boy in June 1992 the complainant continued to live at Porter's Retreat in the home of her mother and the appellant. The complainant applied for and had received Housing Commission accommodation in
Oberon prior to the birth of the second son but the appellant insisted that the Housing Commission do a lot of work on the house before he would let her take the boys to live in it. She moved into that house in November 1992. From that time until December 1993 the appellant visited her frequently and had intercourse with her.

By December 1993 the complainant had become friendly with Mr K Fenwick who lived in the house behind her home. About 28 December 1993 she told him that the appellant was the father of the two boys and that he had been having intercourse with her for years. This friend was the first person whom she had told about the appellant's sexual activities with her. A few days later she discussed the matter with her mother. In January 1994 she reported the matter to the Bathurst Police. Subsequently, she became engaged to that man and was living with him at the time of the trial. He was aged 26 and the appellant was aged 26.

The victim said that prior to late December 1993 she never disclosed the name of the father of the boys to the authorities as she did not want anyone to know who was their father.

She explained that after the birth of the first boy she did not discuss with anybody at the hospital the circumstances which had resulted in her becoming pregnant to the appellant because she believed that "that was the way life was." She was asked why she had resumed having sexual intercourse with the appellant after a miscarriage and the birth of the first boy and in the house in which her mother lived. She replied: "I didn't know any better, it's the way he brought me up. I thought that was the way my life was." 
Porter's Retreat is a small and isolated place with a few houses some 38 km from Oberon. The complainant's mother was often working or out and the appellant controlled the complainant's movements tightly. He pressed his attentions upon the complainant from an early stage and ultimately prevailed upon her to provide him with children. He had a rough, dominant and forceful personality. That also emerged in his conduct and comments during the hearing of the appeal. During the trial he became very emotional and agitated. He was deeply affected. The mother seems to have been somewhat quiescent and to have reposed considerable authority and trust in the appellant.

In a lengthy cross examination of the complainant, counsel for the appellant sought to establish the extent of the complainant's knowledge of sexual matters over the years and wrongful conduct and that there were members of staff at her various schools and friends to whom she could have spoken. From her evidence it appeared that there was no-one to whom she wished to speak or felt she could speak prior to Mr Fenwick, her present fiance. Counsel sought to capitalise upon her refusing to tell her doctor and the Social Security
Department who the father was. Counsel secured admissions from her that she had accordingly deceived her doctor, her mother and the Department and then put to her that she was deceiving the court, just as she had previously deceived others. She claimed that she did and said what the appellant told her.

She claimed that she had no choice but to continue having intercourse with the appellant after she moved into the Housing Commission house as he still had control of her life. She said: "He had my key card, he controlled my money, he controlled where I went. If he came into the house and I wasn't there, if I had walked down town he would go off at me. I couldn't go anywhere because he had a vehicle and I didn't. He wouldn't let me get my driver's licence. He wouldn't let me get a car.
Anything to do with the children it was his decision, not mine. He still had control of my life." 
She agreed with counsel for the appellant that there was discussion about her having a child so she could seek a permanent form of income. It was the appellant's idea. He said that she would receive a sole parent's pension in her name but he would use the money.

She believed that he was anxious not to have to pay maintenance for the two boys.

Counsel for the appellant pointed out areas where her memory was general and not detailed. The suggestion was that she was being untruthful. Counsel sought to establish that her mother was in the small house at Porter's Retreat when some of the alleged incidents occurred, thus making the complainant's evidence less probable. She stated that her mother went out frequently.

She claimed that the appellant had punched her on occasions. This was part of the dominance which he exercised over her.

Counsel for the appellant challenged much of the complainant's evidence but she adhered to her allegations. The cross examination, which was not an easy one, did not make any inroads of consequence.

On 18 February 1994 the appellant admitted, in an electronically recorded interview, that acts of cunnilingus occurred at Lithgow when the complainant was 14 years old but claimed that they were consensual acts. He said that on the night he moved into the Gray's Point home the complainant's mother had gone out for the evening to a friend's wedding and the complainant had asked him if he wanted "a fuck". The appellant said that this made him feel sick. He declined and explained to her that she was much too small to understand these things. The appellant said that he was working, hardly ever saw the children and that his relationship with his wife was not what he expected it to be.

The appellant said that his wife was not at Lithgow for 5 out of the 8 months the family was there. He continued "I did orally molest (the complainant). I didn't do it against her will... She came into the bed with me. I did not ask her too." He affirmed later in the interview that he performed cunnilingus on the complainant on several nights (about 6) while at Lithgow and also masturbated. He said that he never attempted to have intercourse with her while in Lithgow. The appellant told the police that he may have ejaculated on her stomach once after masturbation.

The appellant said that he only massaged the complainant while she was 15. He said that after she turned 16 they started a relationship and more often than not he performed oral sex. He said that when she was 21-22 she told him about other relationships which she had between the ages of 16 and 18. He insisted that he had never forced himself upon the complainant. The appellant described their subsequent relationship, its development and strength, and how the complainant wanted children with him as the father.

The appellant said that his relationship with his wife had just about finished. He referred to his efforts to have the Housing Commission make the house allocated to the complainant livable, explaining that the complainant had applied for a house because she and her mother could not live amicably.

The appellant told the police that he had not behaved indecently with the complainant and had not inserted anything inside her until she was over 16. He attributed her incorrect allegations to her desire to stop him seeing his sons. His wife had remarked to him that a paedophile suicidal madman would not be allowed to see his sons.

The appellant said that he did not control the complainant's life.

In his statement from the dock the appellant said that what he had told the police was the truth. The relationship which he did have had been twisted and used against him to cause the loss of his 2 sons. He insisted that nothing was ever forced. He asserted that for 7 years he worked extended hours - up to 12 hours per day on afternoon shifts and 6 to 7 days per week. He had to pay off the mortgage. He was struggling to provide a home. Thus he had little time to spend with his step children. He made an impassioned plea as to not seeing and losing his children.

Ground 1 - No Evidence of 16th Count 
The appellant contended that there was no evidence which would entitle the jury to return a verdict of guilty to the 16th count.

The 15th, 16th and 17th counts related to a period after the complainant attained the age of 15. Initially, the Indictment alleged that the offences occurred between 1 January 1985 and 30 June 1985. The Indictment was amended on the third day of the trial by substituting 25 November 1984 for 1 January 
The judge dealt with these counts twice in his Summing Up. At SU 11-12 he said: "The fifteenth charge between 25 November - that is when the girl turned fifteen - and 30 June 1985, it is alleged that there was first of all an act of intercourse, sexual intercourse, oral intercourse, cunnilingus is alleged, without her consent and knowing that she was not consenting and at the time the girl was fifteen years of age. What I have said about knowledge and recklessness applies to all of these charges of sexual intercourse without consent knowing that the girl was not consenting.

The next offence, the sixteenth, between the same dates alleging that the accused had intercourse, sexual intercourse, in this case the penetration of her vagina by the finger, knowing that she was not consenting, without her consent, she then being fifteen years of age.

The last alleges between the same dates that she being the step-child, he being the step-father, that the accused unlawfully and carnally knew her.
Again, some penetration by the penis of her vagina is required and must also be proved that she was at that time fifteen years of age and, again, as I have said before, the question of her consent is irrelevant.

Those are the elements of the charges, members of the jury. I will very briefly go through the evidence that she has given with regard to these matters but it will be in a very short compass." 
At SU 16-17 the judge said: "The fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth charges allege events which occurred, she said, when she turned fifteen, the fifteenth being the oral cunnilingus - the fifteenth charge; the sixteenth placing the finger in the vagina; and the seventeenth the alleged carnal knowledge of the girl when she was then, of course, under the age of seventeen years.

She told you about what occurred after those events. She said that the sex stopped in 1985 for a while." 
The first passage quoted related to the terms of the counts, the judge at SU 3 having invited the jury to have regard to the copy Indictment which they had as he took them through the charges. The second passage was intended to be a brief reference to the complainant's evidence.

She gave evidence that after they moved to Porter's Retreat in August 1984 and between August and November 1984 the appellant continued with the same acts of sexual endeavour as he had practised at Lithgow. They included cunnilingus and partial insertion of his penis. She also said that he inserted his finger into her vagina. This does not seem to have been the subject of any charge.

She stated (T 21) that after she had turned 15 in November 1984 the appellant "kissed me in the mouth and put his tongue in my mouth and he licked my nipples and licked my vagina and that and then he got his penis and he pushed his penis all the way into my vaginal passage and then he went in and out for a while and then he pulled out and then he ejaculated on my stomach". She said that this incident occurred at either the end of 1984 or the beginning of .

When she was speaking of the period November 1984 - June 1985 she did not mention the appellant inserting his finger in her vagina and her attention was not directed to this point.

The judge incorrectly summarised her evidence. No-one at the trial appears to have realised that the evidence as to the appellant inserting his finger into her vagina related to the periods at Lithgow and at Porter's Retreat prior to her attaining 15 in November 1984. At T 21 she dealt with the incident after she turned 15. She was then directed back to the period August - November 1984 and gave evidence as to what happened during that period. She was next asked a further question about the incident which occurred after she attained 15 years.

If either party or the judge had realised the true state of the evidence it is probable that either count 16 of the Indictment would have been amended or the jury would have been directed to acquit the defendant on that count. Because the point was missed the matter was left to the jury in general terms and their attention was not directed to the point. If the Crown had realised the gap while the complainant was giving evidence her attention would have been directed to the point.

The Crown conceded correctly that there was no evidence of the appellant inserting his finger in the complainant's vagina between November 1984 and
June 1985. As this was initially alleged to have been part of the incident which occurred at the end of 1984 - early 1985 the Crown accepted that it was not safe to treat the evidence of insertion of the finger a few months earlier as being the subject of the 16th count. The incident at the end of 1984 - early 1985 was the first one in which there had been full penile penetration into her vagina.

A verdict of acquittal must be entered on the 16th count.

Ground 2 - Verdicts as to Counts 12 & 13 Unsafe 
The appellant contended that the verdicts as to counts 12 and 13 were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

As to these counts, the judge in his Summing Up said at SU 11: "Now count 12 is the first offence alleged to have occurred at Porter's
Retreat between 1 August 1984 and 30 September 1984 when the girl was then fourteen years of age. It is alleged that the accused had sexual intercourse with her - in this case cunnilingus, the licking of her vagina. It is alleged it was without her consent and further that the accused knew that she was not consenting and what I said about recklessness again applies.

The thirteenth charge between the same dates at Porter's Retreat it alleges that the accused being the step-father unlawfully and carnally knew the girl.
That is, that he had penile penetration of her vagina. It must be proved that there was full penetration or some penetration and that at the time the girl was fourteen years of age. If you find those elements proved beyond reasonable doubt then the question of consent is irrelevant." 
At SU 16 the judge in summarising the complainant's evidence said: "She told you about moving to Porter's Retreat in August of 1984. She told you about incidents which occurred there when she was fourteen, being kissed on the mouth and then the vagina - being the subject of the twelfth charge.

The thirteenth charge she said that the accused pushed his penis into her vagina..." 
The complainant stated that she had sexual contact with the appellant between
August and November 1984 at Porter's Retreat. She said, "It was just the same as Lithgow". At Lithgow she said that the appellant kissed her on the mouth, inserted his tongue in her mouth, licked her nipples, put his fingers inside her vaginal passage and tried to insert his penis but it would only go in a little way. He ejaculated onto her stomach.

After she had replied, as to the period mentioned at Porter's Retreat that it was "just the same as Lithgow", she said that at Porter's Retreat, late at night when her mother was asleep, he tried to put his penis inside her vagina and then ejaculated onto her stomach, that he made oral contact with her vagina and that he inserted his fingers into her vagina. She was unable to remember whether there was any occasion prior to her turning 15 that the appellant had inserted his penis fully into her vagina. She remembered him trying and inserting his penis a little way but not fully.

The appellant complained that there was no reference to an actual concrete identifiable event as opposed to a course of conduct and relied on the remarks in S v. The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 266] of Dawson J at 276 and Gaudron & McHugh JJ at 287-288 to the effect that a charge must relate to an identifiable incident and not to conduct during a period, especially where there are several events or a continuing series of events to which the charge could apply and it is not possible to say to which one the charge applies. In S. further particulars had been sought and refused. No objection was taken at the trial as the evidence was led nor was further particularity sought. The judge at SU 11 identified count 12 as the first offence alleged to have occurred at Porter's
Retreat between 1 August 1984 and 30 September 1984. The jury had a copy of the Indictment and I do not think that the jury would have been misled by the question during evidence referring to the period between August and November .

Counsel for the appellant pointed out to the judge at the trial that there was no evidence to support count 2. He made no application as to counts 12 and 13.
It is readily understandable why counsel for the appellant did not want the complainant to give evidence in greater detail and at greater length.

There was ample evidence to support counts 12 and 13 from the complainant and there was no good reason not to accept it. The appellant did not give evidence. The verdict on these counts was not unsafe or unsatisfactory.

Ground 3 - Verdict as to Count 4 Unsafe 
Count 4 alleged that between 14 July 1981 and 31 December 1981 at Gray's Point the appellant had sexual intercourse with the complainant without her consent, knowing that she was not consenting, she being aged 12. It was alleged that the appellant had placed his fingers into her anus. The charge was laid under s.61D(i) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). That section was introduced into that Act by the Crimes (Sexual Assault) Amendment
Act 1981 and commenced to operate on 14 July 1981. That section was amended in 1985 and 1987 and repealed in 1989. Before 14 July 1981 the appellant would have had to be prosecuted under a different provision of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) for a different offence.

At T 14 of 29 January 1996 she described the incident in which the appellant took her into her bedroom and placed his fingers inside her anus. She said that she was eleven and in her final year at St Catherine's School. When asked if she recalled in what part of the year the incident occurred she replied, "I think it was towards the end, I'm not sure." 
In cross examination (T 17 of 30 January 1996) counsel referred to her giving evidence about that incident occurring when she was nine. While counsel described the incident correctly, he was incorrect in putting to the complainant that she had said the incident happened when she was nine. The gist of his attack was that the incident was such a bad one, counsel using the word "horrific", that it was inconceivable that she would not tell anyone.
Dates were not treated as being important.

At SU 5 the judge said as to the 4th count: "The next count is one alleging sexual intercourse without consent and knowing that the girl was not consenting and the allegation here is that the accused placed his finger into the girl's anus. That is in law an act of sexual intercourse. You would have to find that the act was done without her consent and that the accused knew that she was not consenting, at the relevant time also that she was under the age of sixteen years, that is about twelve years." 
At SU 15 the judge continued: 
She said that the last year that she was at St Catherine's at Gymea, Mary
Immaculate College, she was then eleven years of age. She told you about an incident when she said that the accused put vaseline on his finger, placed it in her anus - that is the subject of the fourth count;" 
It seems that at the trial neither the judge nor counsel for the appellant paid attention to the date on which the offence was committed and the effect of the legislation. Counsel for the Crown took the matter as far as he could.

On the complainant's evidence the act of inserting the fingers in the anus took place on the same occasion and just before the appellant put some vaseline on his penis and put that inside her anus. The latter event was the subject of the charge of buggery under [s.79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s79.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which comprised the 5th count. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s79.html) was unaffected by the 1981 amendments. As to this count it did not matter exactly when in 1981 the incident occurred. The incident itself was clear enough. As to the 5th count (but not as to the 4th count) the judge at SU 6 told the jury that they would have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that that occurred between 14 July 1981 and 31 December 1981. When the judge referred to the 5th count again (SU 15-16) he referred to the complainant's evidence that he put some vaseline on his penis and penetrated her anus and the subsequent observation by her of blood and some creamy fluid in the toilet.

There was no specific challenge to the verdict on the 5th count (although it was included in the general challenges to be mentioned later). The judge did not tell the jury that it was important that they be satisfied as to the 4th count that the incident happened on or after 14 July 1981 as distinct from a little before 14 July 1981, nor did he direct their attention to the complainant's evidence on the point.

Bearing in mind that it was crucial to the 4th count that the incident happened on or after 14 July 1981, the complainant's evidence that she thought that the incident occurred towards the end of the year but she was not sure, does not meet the standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt.

The verdict of guilty on the 4th count must be set aside and a verdict of acquittal entered on this count.

Ground 4 - No direction as to need to scrutinise complainant's evidence with great care.

Ground 5 - Consequently convictions of appellant unsafe.

The appellant sought leave to argue that the trial judge should have warned the jury that as the Crown case against the appellant depended wholly or substantially upon the evidence of the complainant alone, her evidence must be scrutinised with great care.

The appellant further submitted that as a result of the failure to give any such direction the convictions of the appellant were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

In brief, the judge explained to the jury that the appellant was not bound to establish his innocence and that the Crown had to prove beyond any reasonable doubt the elements of the charge being considered. If, after carefully considering all the circumstances of the case including the statement of the appellant, there still remained a reasonable doubt in their mind, then the appellant must be acquitted. The directions given explained the law adequately.

In his review of the complainant's evidence the judge mentioned the points of criticism relied on by the appellant, including the lack of complaint for so very long and her association with Kevin Fenwick.

The judge summarised the appellant's case and read his dock statement to the jury. The judge reminded the jury that it was not evidence in the same sense as the statement of a witness given on oath and that the appellant's statement was not subject to cross examination. The judge told the jury to take the accused's statement as a possible version of the facts and consider it with the sworn evidence.

The Summing Up read as a whole is balanced and fair. Neither counsel sought any further directions of law or of fact.

The jury retired at 2.58 pm and returned to the Court at 4.22 pm with this question: "Could you please explain to us again about the concept of `beyond reasonable doubt' when it is his word against her word without supporting evidence?" 
The judge replied: "...the law recognises that...a court should not try and explain those words `beyond reasonable doubt' beyond saying that what is meant by `beyond reasonable doubt' is what you as a jury accept as being `beyond reasonable doubt'. It is for you to decide whether in a particular situation you accept certain facts to establish a situation `beyond reasonable doubt'. It is what you believe in the particular circumstances whether that establishes the fact beyond reasonable doubt or not.

Perhaps I should link it up with what you have posed specifically in this case `when it is his word against her word without supporting evidence'. Quite clearly if you are considering a particular count in which there is simply his word against her word, to put the usual phrase, you would have to consider this situation - do you accept what she says happened beyond reasonable doubt?
If you did so, having considered what the accused says, then you would be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the offence having been proved. Obviously if you accepted what he said, the verdict clearly should be one of not guilty.
If on the other hand you are simply left in doubt because you have one word against another, the verdict again should be one of not guilty because the onus is on the Crown to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and if that were the situation it is not to be accepted that you say `We believe him rather than her'. The fact is you would simply be left in doubt. You would not accept either version and be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the account that she gave, but you would simply be left in the situation where you could not make your mind up and, bearing in mind where the onus of proof lies on the
Crown, the appropriate verdict in that situation would be one of not guilty." 
The judge enquired of counsel whether they wanted anything further. Their reply is said to be "not transcribable". The judge immediately thereafter asked the jury to retire and continue their deliberations.

The appellant relied on these remarks of Lee J in R v. Murray [(1987) 30 A
Crim R 315:] "In all cases of serious crime, it is customary for judges to stress that where there is only one witness asserting the commission of the crime, the evidence of that witness must be scrutinised with great care before a conclusion is arrived at that a verdict of guilty should be brought in." 
The appellant accepted that R v. Glencourse [(1995) 78 A Crim R 256] established that a "Murray" type direction was not required in every case of two conflicting versions but he contended that one was required in the circumstances of the present case. These included the lengthy delay in complaining, the appellant voluntarily ceasing sexual relations in 1985, the complainant resuming sexual relations when the appellant became adversely affected by the drought and asked for them to resume, their sexual relationship between 1986 and 1993, including her agreeing to have and having children, permitting the appellant to continue the relationship after she moved into the house at Oberon, the association with Kevin Fenwick, the complaint to him, then her mother, the trip to Queensland with Fenwick, reporting the matter to the police, her conduct being motivated by her desire to prevent the appellant having access to the children, the complainant and her mother having different views as to the state of their relationship and the complainant's allegation that he controlled her life. The appellant complained that her evidence was too general and not sufficiently particular.
The appellant emphasised the sexual relationship since 1986.

The evidence in the trial occupied a little under two days with the appellant's statement being made on the morning of the third day. Counsel addressed, the judge summed up and the jury retired to consider its verdict at .58 pm on the third day. Of the 84 pages of evidence in the trial, the complainant's evidence occupied 68 pages, of which the greater portion was cross examination devoted to canvassing the various points on which the appellant seeks to rely. The cross examination amounted to a sustained attack on her credibility. No jury listening to it would have been left in the slightest doubt that the appellant's case was that she was untruthful and unreliable. The cross examination amounted to a detailed scrutiny of her evidence. As earlier mentioned, few, if any, inroads were made upon her evidence in cross examination.

The Crown replied in detail to each of the matters upon which the appellant relied. I will touch upon those replies briefly. The complainant explained the delay in complaint as being due to the appellant's insistence that she was not to tell anybody, being "scared" of him and his curtailment of her movements and control of her life. The complainant's mother stated that the appellant only let the complainant go out "very rarely". The resumption of sexual relations was due to the pressure he exerted upon her of which she gave a number of nauseating instances. She explained the subsequent sexual relationship as arising from a belief that this was her lot in life. As she was cross examined the detail and extent of his control emerged. Her replies were simple and direct but telling. She explained that she went to Queensland because of what others had told her of the threats made by the appellant and that while she was away with Fenwick, her brother and two of his friends, she made the decision to have the appellant charged. She told her mother on her return from Queensland and her mother drove her to the police station because the complainant did not have a licence or a car.

The complainant's mother confirmed that the complainant did not confide in her about any of her problems. The complainant said that she and her mother used to fight a lot. The mother thought that they got on like a mother and teenage daughter. They had their differences. This is a difference of emphasis.

The case had unusual features. These included the mother's absences and the opportunities which the appellant had. He took advantage of the complainant at least in the manner he admitted. The family was living in a remote area. He controlled her will and her life. There are not too many men who would make their step-daughter pregnant three times while living with her mother.

The appellant conceded that he performed acts of cunnilingus on the complainant in 1984 when she was 14 and she came into his bed. He told the police that he masturbated while with the complainant. He may have ejaculated on her stomach on one occasion. He estimated that there were about six occasions on which he performed acts of cunnilingus upon her and masturbated.
She referred to such an incident occurring at Gray's Point. He claimed that once she turned 16 he had sexual intercourse with her but not before.

There was nothing which pointed to her evidence being inherently or otherwise unreliable. There were no discrepancies of consequence and she furnished credible explanations in response to the attacks made upon her. There were aspects of the mother's evidence and the appellant's statement to the police which provided some support for some of her evidence, albeit not the critical aspects.

With her evidence, the relationship and the background and his not giving evidence, it is not surprising that the jury found the offences proved beyond reasonable doubt. It would be surprising if they had not.

In the present case, a "Murray" direction was not required to avoid a perceptible risk of miscarriage of justice arising from the circumstances of the case: Longman v. The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79], Bromley v. The Queen [(1986) 161 CLR 319], Carr v.
The Queen <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 314] at 330. Counsel for the appellant did not seek it. The jury's question as to reasonable doubt indicated that the jury was alive to the central issue.

I have considered the quality and sufficiency of the evidence in detail. The verdicts were not unsafe or unsatisfactory. The problems which have arisen relate to two of the periods specified in the Indictment as those in which some of the offences were allegedly committed not marrying sufficiently as to time with the evidence. The jury's attention was not drawn to the problems.
The judge told the jury without objection at SU 14: "You will remember... that the girl gave accounts of specific acts at relevant times which are the subject of the charges." 
Thus, those at the trial thought that, except for the 2nd count, there was evidence to support the charges preferred. That is correct except in the two instances earlier mentioned. Nobody at the trial treated the periods mentioned in the two counts in question as being of importance.

The complaints which are the subject of grounds 4 and 5 fail.

Ground 6 
Leave be granted to argue this ground; 
The judge erred in not fully directing the jury on the concepts of consent and recklessness.

The appellant submitted that the judge gave no direction on the concept of consent. The complainant's evidence on the first day of the trial was that she had to do what the appellant required, that he insisted that she keep his activities secret and that she was scared of him. Her evidence painted a picture of her being under his control and subjugated to his sexual desires and practices and in which there was no room for her consent to arise.

At the start of the second day of the trial in response to some specific questions directed to the issues of consent, the complainant said that prior to agreeing to have the appellant's first baby she had not given the appellant permission to touch her in a sexual way and in the way in which he did. She did not indicate in any way that she consented to what occurred. She did not assist the accused in any way. She resisted him by holding her legs very tightly together and keeping her lips really tight. She stated that he forced her mouth open and forced his tongue into her mouth. He also forced her legs open.

The gist of the cross examination was that the incidents which she alleged occurred prior to her attaining the age of 14 years did not happen and that she was deliberately telling lies and concocting those incidents. The cross examination sought to buttress this approach by pointing to her failures to complain for so long and her failure to disclose the name of the father of the child to doctors and various authorities. She refuted the suggestion that no acts of sexual intercourse took place prior to her attaining the age of 16 years and that what she was saying was untrue. The appellant attached importance to some of the alleged sexual activity taking place in the family home while the mother was asleep in another bedroom. It was not suggested in the extended cross examination that the complainant had consented to the appellant's activities. The appellant claimed that apart form some "oral sex" at Lithgow, to which the complainant consented, the incidents charged did not happen.

The question of consent was irrelevant to counts 1, 3, 5, 7, 10 (+11), 13(+14) and 17 and the jury were so told.

As to count 4 (placing his finger in the girl's anus) the judge instructed the jury that they would have to find that the act was done without her consent and that the accused knew that she was not consenting. The judge further stated at SU 5-6: "The law is that if a person acts recklessly that reckless act, if it involves the question of the accused's knowledge as to whether she was not consenting, can be regarded as amounting to knowledge of lack of consent. The law is that a person who has sexual intercourse with another person without the consent of the other person and is reckless as to whether the other person consents to the sexual intercourse is to be taken to know that the other person does not consent to the sexual intercourse.

The Crown says you could take the view here, when looking at the accused's state of mind, that even if he did not actually know that she was not consenting, then that can only have been because he did not care one way or the other whether she consented but was determined to have sex with her regardless of her consent. If you are satisfied that she did not in fact consent and that it must have been apparent that at least there was a risk that she was not consenting, then you would be entitled to accept that argument by the Crown. That is, if the accused was acting recklessly, determining to have sex regardless of what her attitude was, if in fact she was not consenting, then you would be entitled to find that he knew that she was not consenting." 
In the context of the present case, where the issue was whether the incident occurred, that direction was sufficient. An elaborate direction as to consent was not required. When the direction is read in full in its context, the jury would not have been led to apply an objective test for consent rather than look at the appellant's state of mind. With the appellant's position and attitude to the complainant, the suggestion of consent has an air of unreality.

The judge identified those counts where the Crown had to prove the absence of her consent and that the appellant knew that she did not consent. The judge also drew to the jury's attention the appellant's contention that she had consented to the "oral sex" at Lithgow.

Leave should not be granted to raise this point. The trial was conducted on a different basis. If any further direction was sought by the appellant this should have been done at the trial. For good reason this did not happen. There has been no miscarriage of justice. This ground fails.

Ground 7 - Failure to Discharge Jury - Chance Acquaintance - 
Remainder of Jury Unaffected 
The appellant contended that the trial judge should have discharged the jury on the third day of the trial when it emerged that Elizabeth Marceau, the sister-in-law of the appellant, had been in court that morning and had recognised one of the lady jurors. Ms Marceau, who was visiting a friend at her home on 21 January 1996, eight days before the trial commenced, met two other ladies, one of whom was the lady juror. During general conversation in the backyard there was mention of the complainant having lived in the residence next door and the charges against the appellant. Ms Marceau said that the boys were his, that she knew about everything after the girl was 14 but did not agree with everything charged while she was under 14. Ms Elizabeth
Marceau said that she was introduced only by her first name of "Liz" and that she raised the topic of the complainant living next door and charging the appellant. Ms Marceau stated that there was no danger to the children and that the appellant loved the complainant. Ms Marceau was sure that the lady juror heard some of the conversation but said that at one stage the lady juror went from the backyard into the house and returned. Ms Marceau said that at the time the conversation took place she did not know when the appellant was to stand trial. The conversation arose because the complainant had lived next door.

The lady juror stated that she was present on the occasion in question, that there was reference to the lady who had lived next door and her husband. Her name was not mentioned nor was there any reference to the name "Marceau". The lady juror said that she was present at the conversation for just a couple of minutes and that she did go into the house. She did not remember what was said about the children. She was not aware of the person next door. The lady juror stated that she had told the other jurors that she had seen the lady in the back row of the court room (Mrs E Marceau) a couple of weeks ago at Oberon.
She said that she had so spoken to the other jurors about two minutes previously when she went back out to the jury room and as she was being separated from the other jurors by the sheriff's officers.

In cross examination the lady juror said that she had not previously heard about the appellant being charged with the offences in question or of him being the father of two children. The lady juror had not seen the complainant prior to the trial. The lady juror stated that she had not communicated to the other jurors that she had some prior knowledge of the events nor that the appellant loved the complainant, that she had lived at the premises next door, that the appellant was the father of the boys or that he had admitted to any incidents before or after the complainant attained the age of 14.

The judge discharged the lady juror but refused to discharge the jury as a whole. The judge said as to the lady juror: "The only discussion she had with the jurors was that when she was asked to speak to the sheriff's officer to confirm if she was the person signified by
Mrs Elizabeth Marceau, that she said that perhaps it was something to do with someone sitting in the court whom she had seen on an earlier occasion." and continued: "I am satisfied that I should accept the evidence of the juror, that she has had no discussion with the other jurors about the matter. She was also cross- examined about her general knowledge of rumours in the area relating to the accused, and she says that she didn't know the accused. She's a working lady fully occupied in her work and looking after her young children.

I have no hesitation in accepting this, and I have no hesitation in accepting that there's been no discussion with the other jurors, such that there is any possibility that they could be infected by any information which this particular juror might have." 
The judge investigated what had occurred. A fair reading of the evidence reveals that the lady juror had no prior knowledge of the events which had occurred between the complainant and the appellant and did not know anything about them. She had said nothing to the other jurors until counsel for the appellant raised the matter of the visit on 21 January. Even then, what was said by the lady juror was innocuous and had no bearing upon the case.

The trial judge did not err in declining to discharge the jury as a whole.

Ground 8 - Wrongful Receipt of ERISP Comment 
Question 128 of the Electronically Recorded Interview conducted by the police reads: "Q128:In the course of this statement she outlines that while she was 6 there was some kissing, some fondling of the penis, fondling of her brother and some photos taken of her. Do you know anything about those allegations?" 
There was no answer. When the tape of the interview was played to the jury in Court this question was played in full. Prior to the tape being played in Court it had been agreed by the Crown and the appellant that the words "fondling of her brother" would be deleted from the tape played to the jury. The instructing solicitor for the Crown and Detective Hoseman had taken the tape to a commercial establishment in Bathurst to have the tape edited. How the mistake happened and why the words remained on the tape played to the jury was not explained.

The judge thought that it was probable that the jury would have heard the offending words and proceeded on that basis.

The interview lasted about one hour. The tape as played did not contain all the questions and answers. About 11 questions and answers were deleted. The tape as played probably lasted for about 50 to 55 minutes. The transcript extended over about 28-29 pages, allowing for omitted parts. When the jury was provided with a copy of the transcript of the tape for use as an aide memoire the offending words were deleted. The copy of the tape sent to the jury room did not contain the offending words. Nothing was said in the Summing Up about the offending words.

At the trial the appellant contended that as the words could have caused some prejudice to the accused the jury should be discharged. The words dealt with an unrelated matter which had not been the subject of any evidence at the trial.

The judge thought that as the question had not been answered there was no prejudice to the accused.

There was nothing attention-catching about the four offending words. They formed part of a summary of a police officer of part of the allegations the complainant had made in her statement. There were many more serious allegations. The jury would not have attached any importance to the four words. No details were given. They were just a passing allegation in an interview of some length. Further, the whole of the trial was devoted to the conduct of the appellant towards the complainant and her credibility. The jury by their question indicated that they were alive to the major issue of whether they could be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt upon her evidence.

While the mistake was unfortunate it had no impact upon the proceedings and the result. It did not cause a miscarriage of justice. The judge was correct in refusing to discharge the jury.

The question of sentence was stood over pending the outcome of the appeal against conviction. The appellant would have to be resentenced if the appeal against any of the convictions was allowed. I propose the following orders:
Appeals against conviction on counts 4 and 16 allowed and judgment of acquittal entered on these counts;
Appeals against conviction on the other counts dismissed;
Leave to appeal against sentence granted;
Direct that: the appellant lodge his submissions as to sentence within 10 days; the Crown lodge its submissions as to sentence within 7 days of receipt of the appellant's submissions; the appellant lodge any submissions in reply within 4 days of receipt of the Crown submissions; within 4 days thereafter the Crown and the appellant each advise whether a further oral hearing is required. If no such request is received the court will deal with the question of sentence on the basis of the written submissions if this is practicable.
 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form, the judgment of 
Smart J. I agree with both the reasons he gives and the orders and directions he proposes.
 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Smart J.
 * * * 
