

Regina versus Nolan [1996] NSWSC 396 (2 September 1996) 
REGINA versus NOLAN /96 
MONDAY 2 SEPTEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
McINERNEY J, SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY J: Mr Justice Sully will deliver the first judgment in this matter.

SULLY J: It ought, I think, be acknowledged at once that this is a deeply troubling matter. The views which I think to be appropriate to the just disposal of the present appeal will achieve an end result which accords, as I think, with the strict requirements of the law; but which no reasonable mind could think to be, in a more general sense, what we ought to be doing in such a case in a supposedly enlightened society.

The applicant seeks leave to appeal against sentences of imprisonment imposed upon him by his Honour the Chief Judge of the District Court on 29 January last. The applicant had pleaded guilty before his Honour to a charge of robbery in company and to a cognate charge of having used an offensive instrument to avoid apprehension.

It is not necessary to dilate upon the serious criminal culpability of both of those offences. All that needs to be said in that regard has been said many many times by variously constituted Benches of this Court.

His Honour was asked to take into account as well four scheduled matters. They cover a miscellany of petty criminal activity spread over 10, 11 and 12
October 1995. The two serious matters to which the applicant pleaded guilty occurred on 13 October 1995, that is to say, upon the day on which, or the day after which, he was released to bail in respect of the four scheduled matters.

It is not necessary to canvass in fine detail the facts of the principal offences. That too has been done as thoroughly as might reasonably be asked in the remarks on sentence of the Chief Judge.

His Honour imposed upon the applicant concurrent sentences of penal servitude for three years, which his Honour apportioned between a minimum term of two years and an additional term of one year; and, with regard to the scheduled matters, his Honour fixed a term of two years' penal servitude as a fixed term. It, too, was to be served concurrently with the other sentences to which
I have referred.

Subjective features apart - and I will come to them presently - the offences in question were, in terms of their own objective facts, very serious matters.
Once again it is not necessary to rehearse the detail of what the Chief Judge had to say in that regard. It is sufficient to say that I agree entirely with what fell from his Honour in that regard.

The difficulty that confronted his Honour, and the difficulty that confronts this Court, is a difficulty deriving from the subjective features particular to the applicant's case. They are compelling and troubling features. Because he is himself present before the Court this morning, it seems to me better not to spend a great deal of time raking over the details of the applicant's condition; it being sufficient to say that he has deep-seated and continuing psychiatric and psychological problems which undoubtedly explain the sad course of his life to date, and the apparently dreadful record that he has accumulated over the years.

The particulars of trial exhibit in that regard a record running to some forty-five separate entries, not a few of them multi-itemed entries. His
Honour, the Chief Judge, put his finger upon the nub of the present problem, as it seems to me, in commenting, as his Honour did: "In order for there to be any rehabilitation of this prisoner, some very specially crafted program of rehabilitation would need to be worked out".

I do not see for myself any particular thing said or left unsaid in the reasons of the Chief Judge that would demonstrate error such as to require the intervention of this Court. The difficulty with the approach taken by the
Chief Judge is a difficulty inherent in the limited powers that his Honour was exercising, as it is inherent in the even more limited powers that this Court is able to bring to bear upon the present matter.

For myself, I think it is a hopelessly inadequate overall response to suggest that nothing more can be done with a man in the applicant's position, other than putting him into prison for more or less short periods of time, only to turn him loose without any effective support and rehabilitation at all, to do exactly the same sort of thing again, and so go back into prison the same way again.

As I said when I began, I cannot think that in any supposedly enlightened society we cannot manage things somewhat better than that. Be that as it may, the law by which this Court is bound, as was his Honour the Chief Judge, makes available a very limited range of sentencing options. That they are hopelessly inadequate in a broad philosophical sense to deal with a situation of the present particular kind, does not lessen the obligation of the Courts to administer justice according to law, as Parliament has seen fit to enact the law.

That means, as it seems to me, and as I apprehend it seemed to his Honour the
Chief Judge, that the proper protection of the public, - which is, after all, the steady and paramount objective of all penal sentencing, - requires that, as matters stand in the community, Mr Nolan must be detained in some effective custody for some further time, and in respect of the significant offences which he committed on the occasions to which I have earlier referred.

Notwithstanding the philosophical dissatisfaction that I, at least, feel with what is entailed in that approach, it seems to me that a correct approach in point of law does not demonstrate such an error as would permit this Court to interfere with that approach taken by his Honour the Chief Judge.

Out of deference to the exigent circumstances of the applicant, I would grant leave to appeal; but I think that as matters stand the appeal itself cannot succeed and should be dismissed. I propose orders accordingly.

McINERNEY J: I agree. The orders of the court will therefore be those proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
