

N R McDougall versus Nestle Australia P/L [1996] NSWSC 526 (1 November 1996) 
NORMAN ROBERT McDOUGALL versus NESTLE AUSTRALIA PTY. LIMITED /92 
FRIDAY 1 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 23 September 1986, the plaintiff, then approaching his 25th birthday, commenced employment with S. Sali & Sons Limited as a truck driver driving semi-trailers between Shepparton in Victoria and Newcastle and Sydney. On 10 April 1987, in the course of that employment, he delivered a load to the premises of the defendant at Smithfield. He was not immediately able to unload because there was another vehicle ahead of him, and he went to the assistance of the driver of that vehicle to remove the tarpaulin cover off the load. Whilst he was doing that and at a time when he happened to be in a bent forward position, he was struck on the left buttock by pallets being transported on a forklift truck. He was thrown and/or leapt through the air about seven feet, rolling or somersaulting as he landed on the ground. He sues the defendant company for damages for negligence in respect of injuries which he claims to have sustained as a result of that accident. Liability has not formally been admitted, but nothing has been placed before me to suggest anything other than that the accident was entirely due to negligence on the part of the driver of the forklift vehicle and/or negligence in the defendant's management of its premises and of the activities carried on therein. Nothing has been put to me on behalf of the defendant as to why there should not be a verdict in the plaintiff's favour.

On 4 March 1993 (almost six years after the date of the accident), the plaintiff was admitted to hospital in Melbourne in the care of Dr. Carey, an orthopaedic specialist with a particular interest in problems of the low back and he underwent a lumbo-sacral fusion. He was again in hospital in July of the same year, for about a fortnight, for intensive physiotherapy; on 25 May , he was admitted to Bethseda Hospital for about one week when an operation was performed to remove the plates and screws used in the original surgery and for further bone grafting to reinforce the fusion. He has not worked as a long distance truck driver since 30 September 1994.

The plaintiff's case is that the fusion of the L5/S1 intervertebral joint was necessitated by the severity of his symptoms, arising principally but not only from that level of the spine and produced by the effect of the trauma of the accident upon his spine which was already the site of fairly widespread degenerative changes. That is the opinion of Dr. Carey who said that the presence of degenerative changes throughout the plaintiff's lumbar spine (and indeed elsewhere in his spine) did not necessarily mean that he must have been experiencing symptoms arising therefrom; but that trauma to the spine had the capacity to render those pre-existing degenerative changes symptomatic. The defendant criticised Dr. Carey on the basis that he had, in his earlier reports on the plaintiff, to the referring doctor, made no reference to any supposed role of the accident in the production of the plaintiff's symptoms. I accept Dr. Carey's explanation for that omission - the history was already common ground between himself and the referring doctor, Dr. Mackellar, who had given him that history in a letter of October 1991; what was relevant as between the doctors at that time was not a question of causation but a question of diagnosis and treatment. It was only when medico-legal considerations intruded that it was necessary for Dr. Carey to express his opinion as to causation although I have no doubt that had he been asked earlier about that issue his opinion would have been no different.

The defendant's case, on the other hand, is that the long lapse of time between the accident in respect of which the plaintiff sues and his admission to hospital for the spinal fusion procedure precludes a finding that the condition in respect of which the operation was performed was the result of that accident, and renders far more likely the proposition advanced by Dr.
Matheson, that the plaintiff's symptoms are unrelated to the accident but attributable to Scheuerman's Disease, or alternatively, the proposition advanced by Dr. Opie, that the plaintiff's symptoms are primarily the result of a degenerative condition of the spine which would in any event be likely to be symptomatic, to which symptoms the accident makes only a relatively small contribution, assessed by Dr. Opie as in the order of 25%.

Dr. Matheson's diagnosis of Scheuerman's Disease is not supported by any other medical witness and I reject it. The presence of Schmorl's nodes throughout the spine, is accepted by all of the medical experts but neither Dr. Carey, the radiologist, Dr. Houang nor (as I would understand the substance of his opinion) Dr. Voss was prepared on the basis of that finding alone to concur in a diagnosis of Scheuerman's Disease. On the other hand, it is I think common ground that there is clear evidence of the presence of Schmorl's nodes. I accept the opinion expressed by Dr. Carey that, that being the condition of his spine, he may have been symptom free until the occurrence of significant trauma such as occurred in 1987.

Counsel for the defendant conceded that, however valid from a medical point of view might be the analysis of Dr. Opie, his analysis is not the relevant one from a legal point of view. If in fact the happening of the accident in 1987 was a material contributing factor to the development of symptoms in the plaintiff's spine, the severity of which symptoms required him to undergo surgery and to endure the consequences of that surgery, the plaintiff will have overcome the causation barrier, and the question of the percentage contribution of the accident, in conjunction with other causes, to his condition is legally irrelevant. The relevant question, if causation has been established, posed by the existence of degenerative changes themselves capable of producing similar disability without the 1987 accident, is a question as to the degree of likelihood that, absent that accident, the plaintiff would in any event at some stage have become effected by similar symptoms.

Dr. Carey related the condition which existed in March 1993, and which gave rise to the need for surgery, to the 1987 accident on the basis of a history of a continuity of symptoms through the intervening years. As I would understand, Dr. Opie would also accept such a connection, on the basis of an acceptance of the history of a continuity of symptomatology. So too, the defendant's witness Dr. John Voss was prepared to attribute the condition, immediately before and requiring surgery, to the 1987 accident provided that there was adequate evidence of a "complaint of back pain (not present with some regularity beforehand) within a week of the accident ... and its continuation up to about August 1988". The significance of the latter date is that it was then, for the first time, that the plaintiff consulted a medical practitioner about his back and was referred for a CT scan by his then doctor,
Dr. Omarjee. Such being the state of the medical evidence, (leaving aside the unsupported opinion of Dr. Matheson which I reject), the causation issue resolves into an issue of fact - did the plaintiff suffer low back pain (as distinct from local pain in the left buttock where the impact occurred) sufficiently close to the time of the impact to be attributed to it; and if so, did he continue to suffer symptoms in his low back from that time onwards, sufficient to support the medical opinion of a link between that incident and the diagnosis of an L5/S1 disc injury which led Dr. Carey to the decision to operate.

Ultimately that issue resolves into a question whether the plaintiff's evidence can be accepted. In short, his evidence is of the onset of pain in the low back at latest early in the course of his journey back to Shepparton on the day of the accident, and of a continuity of symptoms thereafter.

I have not the slightest doubt that the plaintiff was, throughout his evidence, doing his best to give an honest and accurate account of the relevant events. Both in his evidence in chief and in cross-exanimation, counsel endeavoured to elicit details of pre-accident history, now many years in the past and understandably, as to some matters of detail, the plaintiff's memory failed him. It was nevertheless clear to me that he was doing his very best to give a truthful and accurate account and I accept him without hesitation as a truthful witness in every respect. He did not claim to have an accurate recollection of all of the details of the history, in particular as to dates or periods of time and in relation to such matters as those, contemporary documentary material is obviously to be preferred. However, the existence of discrepancies between his account and such contemporary documentary material does not in any way cause me to doubt his honesty; and no submission otherwise was advanced on behalf of the defendant.

The plaintiff's evidence was that he suffered immediate pain and severe bruising in the area of the impact. Later in the day (the accident having occurred at about 7.30 am) and his vehicle having been unloaded, he commenced the return trip to Shepparton. He says, and I accept, that by that time at least, whether or not earlier, he was conscious of pain in his lower back, that is to say in the area of the spine and/or pelvis, not merely in the soft tissue of the left buttock. He says, and again I accept, that he consulted a pharmacist at Liverpool who gave him, without prescription, a strong analgesic which the plaintiff believes, rightly or wrongly, contained morphine. I accept that it was only by virtue of strong analgesia that he was able to complete the journey to Shepparton that night.

On 13 April 1987, the plaintiff consulted a masseur, Ian Collier, who manipulated his low back. About a fortnight after the accident, 25 April 1987, he consulted Mr. Albert Goegan who carried on practice at Mooroopna as a manipulative masseur. Mr. Goegan recorded bruising to the left hip and a complaint of pain in the low back at the L4/5 level, and instituted massage treatment. The plaintiff says that he continued to experience symptoms in his low back from that time onwards, notwithstanding that for the most part he was able to carry on his ordinary work as a long distance truck driver. Mr. Goegan confirms that he treated the plaintiff from 25 April 1987 until 26 September ; the precise dates of those consultations are recorded in Exhibit C, a document prepared by the plaintiff, and it appears from that that he saw Mr.
Goegan four or five times a year. I accept that the treatment was directed to the low lumbar spine and I regard Mr. Goegan's evidence as significant corroboration of the plaintiff's account of a continuity of symptoms during the relevant period.

The plaintiff frankly conceded that his back and upper spine had not been entirely symptom free during the years before the accident. He gave evidence of an incident when he was about 15 years of age when he lifted a drum of oil in the course of his employment at an orchard at Ardmona and suffered low back pain for which he sought chiropractic treatment. He acknowledged that on occasions during his footballing years (his teenage years) he had experienced pain between the shoulder blades and in the neck, for which he had from time to time sought chiropractic treatment. However, after those incidents he had continued in heavy physical work in the orchard in the employ of Mr. Plunkett.
The plaintiff's evidence was that before he became employed by Mr. Sali, and in the course of his employment by Mr. Sali, he had worked without difficulty for more than six months prior to the accident in question. The evidence of
Mr. Plunkett and Mr. Sali corroborates that account.

The plaintiff's complaint of a continuity of symptoms from the time of the accident until he gave up truck driving work in September 1991 was adequately corroborated, not only by Mr. Goegan's evidence to which I have already referred, but also by the evidence of the plaintiff's then employer Mr. Sali.
At about the time when he ceased work, the plaintiff consulted Dr. Mackellar about his back; a claim for workers' compensation was made; and he was seen not only by doctors of his own choosing but by Dr. Morley and Dr. Wilson on behalf of WorkCare Compensation Services (administering the workers' compensation legislation in Victoria). Dr. Morley diagnosed a discogenic problem at L4/5 and, accepting a history of a continuity of symptoms, was prepared to relate that to the accident; he thought it likely that the symptoms had been aggravated by his continuing employment as a truck driver in the interim. Dr. Morley diagnosed disc damage at L4/5, confirmed by a finding of numbness over the inner aspects of the big toes which suggested pressure in the lower lumbar spinal canal, and he too, on the history, attributed that to the work accident.

Upon a consideration of a whole of the medical evidence and the plaintiff's own evidence, which I accept, as to his history of symptoms from the time of the accident, I am satisfied that the disabling condition in his back at the time when he came under the care of Dr. Carey was attributable to the accident in April 1987 in respect of which he sues; that that accident inflicted trauma upon a spine which was already the site of degenerative changes, causing symptoms which had never remitted up to the time of the operation; and that it was the existence and severity of those symptoms which dictated the need for surgery.

In those circumstances, the question whether the surgery performed by Dr.
Carey was the most appropriate form of treatment is an academic one. There was a condition which was disabling and which required treatment; the plaintiff was placed in the hands of highly skilled specialist medical advisers; the treatment was carried out in good faith and not negligently; and the treatment and its aftermath were clearly, in my view, a reasonably foreseeable and not remote consequence of the accident.

Liability and causation being established, I turn to the question of the assessment of damages. The plaintiff continued in his ordinary work from the date of the accident to 26 September 1991; but I accept his evidence that there were occasions during that period when he was unable to accept a long distance trip which was available to him and that it is incidents of that kind, entirely attributable to his symptoms, which account for the difference between his earnings and the earnings of comparable employees of Mr. Sali's company. He is, in my view, entitled to be compensated for a loss of earnings during that period measured by the difference between the earnings of those comparable employees and the earnings of the plaintiff himself.

The plaintiff was totally incapacitated for work by reason of his back injury from 26 September 1991 until 10 August 1993 when he returned to work with S.
Sali & Sons, again as a driver, but at a reduced level of work activity.
In particular, he was no longer driving Shepparton/Sydney/Newcastle/Shepparton but was limited to the easier Shepparton/Melbourne/Shepparton run. During the period when he was totally unable to work, his loss of earnings is appropriately measured by reference to the earnings of comparable employees of
S. Sali & Sons. Following his return to work on restricted duties, the measure of his loss is the difference between his earnings and those of the comparable employees.

When he returned to work, he continued to experience back trouble which limited his activity and he continued to see Dr. Carey who eventually concluded that in part, at least, his troubles were attributable to the fact that one of the screws inserted at the time of the original surgery had broken. His symptoms became too severe to enable him to continue work and he ceased on 18 February 1994. On 25 May 1994, he was again admitted to hospital for removal of some of the metal inserts associated with the original procedure and for further bone grafting to reinforce the fusion. He was in hospital for about a week. He attempted to resume work on 7 July 1994 but I accept that his capacity to work was very much reduced - so much so that he was not paid formal wages and was working only intermittently. He finally ceased work at S. Sali & Sons on 30 September 1994.

He was then not employed until February 1996. In or about that month he recommenced employment with Messrs. N.T. & N.A. Plunkett, the orchardists at Ardmona with whom he had worked for many years before becoming a truck driver. He was employed only on a part-time basis and pursuant to the
WorkCover Incentive Scheme for Employers described in Exhibit A, pursuant to which his wages are subsidised by the Victorian WorkCover Authority and his employers are protected against liability for any recurrence or exacerbation of his injury. His earnings in that employment are of course to be taken into account as an offset against the wage loss which he sustained by reason of his inability to pursue his former employment; they do not, however in my view, in any way represent a true measure of his present capacity to earn.

I am satisfied that up to the date of trial, the plaintiff's loss of earnings is to be measured as the difference between his actual earnings (including his earnings under the Wise Scheme) and on the other hand, the earnings of comparable employees of S. Sali & Sons. As a matter of mathematics there is no issue as to the quantification of that part of his claim. To 18 June it amounts to $150,685.00. That loss has been offset to some extent by payments of workers' compensation amounting to $27,767.00. The plaintiff is entitled to interest on the balance, $122,918.00 and I accept the plaintiff's counsel's submission that it is appropriate to allow interest at approximately .5% per annum for approximately seven years. I allow for interest on the past loss of earnings the sum of $64,500.00.

The plaintiff's present employment with Plunkett involves his working an average of about 30 hours per week and generally not more than eight hours in any one day, driving a forklift in the employer's fruit packing shed. He is able to work, for the most part, at his own pace, which I would understand enables him to leave his machine and rest or flex his back as required before carrying on. I am satisfied that that job represents the limit of his present capacity for work. His earnings in that employment are not a true measure of his residual capacity to earn, because it is only by virtue of the special arrangements that are made for him that he has been able, firstly, to obtain such employment and, secondly, to continue in it. On the open labour market, his capacity is very much reduced and depends on his being able to find a sympathetic employer who has available and is willing to employ him in work within his very limited capacity. The plaintiff is, by all accounts and by my own assessment of him, a man who will not readily admit the extent of his disability; he is a man who will try to obtain work and will exercise his residual capacity whenever the opportunity presents. For that reason I think it is proper to regard him as not totally disabled but I would not assess his residual capacity week in week out as likely to yield on average any more than $100 per week net. Had he continued as a truck driver he would, at present, be earning approximately $640.00 per week net. I am satisfied that he is suffering a continuing loss in the order of $540.00 per week and that he will continue to suffer that loss for approximately 30 years into the future. Using a multiplier (three percent tables) of 1038, the present value of his loss over 30 years is $560,520.00.

The question then is to what extent that should be discounted for vicissitudes. It is clear on the whole of the medical evidence that before the accident the plaintiff suffered a condition of his spine capable of producing significant disability, even disability as great as that which he has in fact experienced, in the event that he was subjected to trauma. In a small degree, his past history of pain in the neck and thoracic spine demonstrates his vulnerability. His employment as a truck driver, had the injury in April 1987 not occurred, would have provided ample opportunity for the sort of trauma which could have rendered his spine symptomatic; but had that occurred he would have been entitled to compensation for the consequences and I therefore leave that out of account in determining the extent to which his assessed loss ought to be discounted. However, his energetic lifestyle, involving as it did participation in many vigorous sporting activities also provided ample opportunities for the occurrence of trauma of a sort capable of precipitating symptoms and disability. Taking all of these things into account it appears to me that it is appropriate to discount the present value of his future loss of earnings by 25%. I allow in respect of future loss of earnings $420,390.00.

The causation issue having been resolved, it was not seriously contended on behalf of the defendant that the plaintiff was not entitled to recover the whole of his out of pocket expenses incurred to the date of trial, and the amount involved is agreed at $64,019.44. He is also entitled to be compensated for the amounts deducted in respect of income tax from his weekly workers' compensation payment (Fox v. Wood) and that amount is agreed at $4,393.80.

The plaintiff advances a claim for future treatment costs and I am satisfied that he will require physiotherapy (he has had frequent and extensive physiotherapy from October 1991 to date) and/or remedial massage from Mr.
Goegan or some similar practitioner. The plaintiff's counsel invited me to quantify the likely future cost of physiotherapy and massage at a weekly amount and apply a multiplier of 1255 appropriate to the plaintiff's expectation of life which according to the Australian Life Tables is 42 years.
He made a similar claim in respect of ongoing medication and in respect of ongoing psychiatric treatment.

The plaintiff has given evidence, which I accept, that he has been significantly depressed by reason of the effects of his injuries upon him and upon his lifestyle and by reason of his continuing pain and disability, and he has been seen on a couple of occasions by a psychiatrist, Dr. Zelwer who has diagnosed chronic depressive disorder secondary to his chronic back pain. Dr.
Zelwer has expressed the opinion that he will require medication over a long period and that he would be assisted by other forms of treatment, not specified but presumably requiring attendance from time to time on a psychiatrist or psychotherapist. That evidence falls a long way short of justifying the claim advanced on behalf of the plaintiff, for a weekly attendance on a psychiatrist for the rest of his life. It also falls short, in my view, of justifying a claim for anti-depressant medication for as long as he should live.

Inevitably, allowances for future treatment in a case of this kind can only be arrived at on a somewhat arbitrary basis. I am satisfied that he will need physiotherapy and/or massage from time to time according to the level of the severity of his symptoms. The less active he is in pursuing work and other physical activities, no doubt the less will be the need for treatment. I am satisfied that he will require analgesia for his back pain. In respect of those items I make an arbitrary allowance of $50,000.00. I am satisfied that he will need treatment from time to time with anti-depressant medication and, to monitor that, attendance on medical practitioners including a psychiatrist on occasions. In relation to his back disability itself, he will no doubt need to consult a medical practitioner from time to time. In respect of those aspects of his ongoing and future treatment I allow $25,000.00. The total allowance, therefore, for future treatment and medication is $75,000.00.

It remains to consider the appropriate award for general damages. The plaintiff has been converted from an active and hardworking young man with what was to him an entirely satisfying lifestyle into someone who could reasonably be described as a physical and emotional wreck. Life has very little to offer him. He has lost all of those activities which were sources of pleasure and interest. He is able to work only to a very limited extent and only at the cost of ongoing pain and disability. He is frustrated and depressed. Time may heal some of his psychological wounds but not his physical symptoms. He has already had over nine years of pain gradually increasing to the point where he had to undergo surgery. He has had three periods of inpatient treatment in hospital, and two major operations. In my judgment, the appropriate amount to be awarded by way of general damages is the sum of $150,000.00. I attribute $60,000.00 to the past and allow on that sum interest at two percent per annum for nine years, that is $10,800.00 
In the result, the assessment of damages includes the following amounts:- 
General damages $150,000.00 
Interest thereon $10,800.00 
Past loss of earnings $150,685.00 
Interest thereon $64,500.00 
Future loss of earnings $420,390.00 
Out of pocket expenses $64,019.44 
Fox v. Wood $4,393.80 
Future medication and treatment $75,000.00 
There will be judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $939,788.24. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
