

Hayden and Anor versus Lacey Matter No 3201/90 [1998] NSWSC 525 (28 October )

Last Updated: 27 November 1998 `TERENCE HAROLD HAYDEN & ANOR versus GILLIAN NORMA LACEY` `3201/90` `28 October 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is the trial of a cross-claim for common law damages for breach of a contract for the sale of land in rather strange circumstances. Because this action is only one of about three or four pending in various courts involving this contract I will endeavour to be very circumspect in my findings because the findings that I make are limited to the evidence that is before me, which may not be the same evidence which has been adduced in any of the other proceedings. 
The contract for sale of land was in the 1988 edition of the form issued under the aegis of the Law Society and Real Estate Institute of New South Wales, with some special conditions.

The cross-claimant was the vendor and the cross-defendants the purchasers. The purchase price was $175,000, with the usual ten percent deposit. The first schedule to the contract, which is incorporated because of cl 2, provided for completion within six weeks from the date of the contract which would appear to be 1 November 1989. Special condition 4 provided that a fourteen day notice to complete could be given. Special condition 7 read as follows: "7. The vendor shall have the right to occupy the premises under licence until December 1989 provided that the vendor shall make such election to so occupy the premises prior to completion in writing to the purchasers' solicitors." 
The property was situated on Dangar Island. The cross-claimant was at the time of the contract occupying that property as her home and she had agreed to purchase some land at Bucketty and her intention was to erect a yurt on her land at Bucketty into which she could move with her animals. It would seem that she had at that stage fourteen cats and some other animals and she wished to move her whole establishment to Bucketty when the yurt was completed.

The story can be taken up on 27 October 1989 when the purchasers' solicitors wrote to the vendor's solicitors referring to all previous discussions and making it quite clear that the purchasers were not prepared to allow the vendor to remain in the Dangar Island premises after 8 December 1989.

They asked the vendor's solicitors to impress on the vendor: "The absolute necessity for the premises to be vacated by her by 8th December, and the legal consequences of her failure to do so." 
The letter then continued: "In the interim we would be obliged if you would advise us of a suitable date for settlement of this matter." 
The next letter in the bundle is a letter of 9 November 1989 from the vendor's solicitors to the purchasers' solicitors. Although this is headed "without prejudice" the real "without prejudice" material is on the last page and the balance sets out the "background to the problem which has arisen".

It would seem that the reason why the letter was written on 9 November was that the solicitor handling the sale was away from the office and his partner had been handling it until his return. The letter of 9 November made it clear that the vendor required two months occupation of the Dangar Island property after settlement and that the yurt could not be erected on the Bucketty land until the vendor became the owner of it, which in fact happened about 17
November.

No-one ever made an appointment to settle. There is a file note in the vendor's solicitors' file that the vendor had instructed that she could not possibly move out until the end of January, but the exact date of this file note is unclear.

The vendor's solicitors advised on a stratagem which would involve issuing a notice to complete prior to 24 November so that settlement would have to take place before 8 December. This scheme meant that the vendor could obtain the purchase money, remain in possession as a licensee and thereafter it would be a matter for the new purchasers to arrange for her eviction.

However, the material before me indicates that the vendor did not like this because she was worried that whilst she was at work most of the day, with her animals unattended on the property, she was only too open to an incident which involved the safety of her pets or the locks being changed. It was the vendor's concern that she could not comfortably rely on the purchasers only seeking possession through curial processes. No notice to complete was given.
The 1st of November passed, 1 December passed and on 4 December the vendor terminated the retainer of her then solicitors and retained other solicitors.
Those other solicitors advised her to wait until there had been a notice to complete or a specific performance suit from the other side.

In due course the purchasers did commence proceedings, indeed, the present proceedings were instituted by them for specific performance on 21 June 1990.
When those proceedings were instituted the cross-claimant by her solicitor indicated that she was willing to settle the matter. On 26 July 1990 the purchasers' solicitors wrote that they required a final inspection prior to settlement. At this stage negotiations broke down again, and on 27 August a defence was filed, which indicated that the cross-claimant relied on some other agreement, namely an agreement that she would have two months after settlement in occupation and she sought rectification.

What happened then, according to some evidence which found its way before me for some collateral reason, but, under the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) is evidence for all purposes, was that the Bank of New Zealand, the mortgagee, advertised the Dangar Island property for sale as a mortgagee sale, and the purchasers purchased it at the mortgagee sale for $140,000.

Although the deposit of $17,500 had been released to the vendor, the purchasers considered that the purchase had not left them as a whole out-of- pocket and in due course, possibly last week, the suit for specific performance was put to rest. The vendor, on the other hand, is extremely cross that the purchasers acquired the property for $35,000 less than was the agreed purchase price under her contract.

The claim for rectification was abandoned and the amended cross-claim was filed on 21 October 1998. The cross-claim, which has all the indicia of having been prepared by a person who has considerable knowledge of the law and procedure of this Court, pleads that there was an express term of the contract that the cross-defendants would complete on or about 1 November 1989. It further pleads that the cross-defendants would pay the balance of the purchase price of $157,500, yet they neglected or refused to complete whereby the cross-claimant suffered loss or damages. Alternatively, she claims that there had been a repudiation.

The defence admitted the contract. It denied that it was an express term that the cross-defendants would complete on or about 1 November 1989 and denied most other relevant parts of the cross-claim.

The pleadings on both sides were a little strange. The claim made by the cross-claimant appeared to be for damages for the loss of the contract, plus consequential damages because of a particular breach of warranty in the first instance, or repudiation in the second instance.

The defence really was one that should not just have denied the promise, but should have attacked the non-performance of conditions precedent, for reasons that I will mention in a moment. However, the way in which the case was presented on both sides made it plain what the issues were for my determination.

The key question is, was there a breach by the purchasers of the promise to complete on 1 November 1989? 
This is an action at law for damages. In such an action normally notices to complete have no part to play. Although the dichotomy between warranties and conditions has broken down to some extent in the more complex commercial life of this century, a breach of an essential term, usually called a condition, is necessary before a party can terminate a contract and sue for damages for loss of that contract. A mere breach of warranty in itself will give rise to damages. Moreover, there is authority to the effect that the action for damages in respect of a breach of warranty and breach of condition is on the same cause of action, it is just that when there is a breach of condition there are special damages in the loss of the contract. See The Millstream
Pty Ltd versus Schultz [[1980] 1 NSWLR 547], 553.

The mere fact that time is not essential in a contract for the sale of land, unless it is exactly or impliedly made so in the contract, or made so by notice to complete, is really irrelevant when one is suing on a breach of warranty.

At common law in an action in assumpsit for breach of warranty the plaintiff would plead, under the rules of Hilary Term 1834, that in consideration of certain things, the defendants promised that they would complete the contract on 1 November 1989 and all conditions were fulfilled and all things happened and all time elapsed necessary to require the plaintiff to performance of that promise, yet the defendants did not complete on 1 November. That is all the plaintiff has to say and indeed under [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p15) r 11 of the Supreme Court Rules these days those averments of conditions precedent are implied, but notwithstanding the fact they are implied the plaintiff has to establish them if challenged.

The defendants should then specifically deny that a particular condition precedent had happened or that performance had been excused. Thus, here the purchasers could say that they were not obliged to complete because the performance of their obligation to complete on 1 November was concurrent with the vendor's obligation to complete by herself complying with the contract.

The onus of proving the performance of the condition precedent is on a plaintiff, as is well illustrated in the case of Jefferson versus Paskell [[1916] 1 KB 57.] There a woman sued for breach of promise of marriage and the defence was that she was too sick to marry. It was held that this was a case where the plaintiff had to show that the condition precedent to the marriage, namely that she was in sufficient health, was established and the onus was on her.

Thus in an action for damages for failing to complete on the contractual day, it is for the person who is making the claim to establish, if challenged, that all conditions precedent to the settlement had taken place. Williams on
Vendor and Purchaser (4th ed Sweet and Maxwell London 1936) vol 1 p 603 merely says: "The performance of either party's duty in this respect cannot be exacted by the other unless he himself is ready to fulfil his own part of the contract; except only where the contract, either expressly or impliedly, otherwise provides." 
The cases cited in the footnote are not authority for that proposition. In fact they have been taken from counsel's arguments in the Privy Council case of Rutherford versus Acton-Adams [1915] AC 866, 868 - an argument which the
Privy Council did not pass on. However, the proposition is valid for the reasons that I have set out earlier.

Accordingly, to establish her claim Mrs Lacey had to establish that the non- settlement of the proceedings on 1 November happened without blame on her part. That may be putting it a bit too widely, but I am merely trying to centre on the basic concept.

The evidence does not go that far. The evidence shows that the whole background to what was happening in the last week of October was that it had been signalled to the purchasers loudly and clearly that there was a very real risk that they would not get vacant possession in accordance with the contract no later than 8 December. It could not be said that that was an ill-placed fear because the whole of the material before the Court shows that the stratagem that was adopted by the solicitor for the vendor, which she would not instruct him to implement, and all other feelings that the vendor evinced, was that she just could not leave the property in accordance with the contract.

Accordingly, the allegation of breach has not been made out.

I do not, for the reasons that I have said before, deal with many of the side issues that came up in this case. Mrs Lacey presented her own case and within the limits of her ability (for she said "I am a human not a lawyer") she presented it quite well. Mr Newlinds and Mr Newton of counsel appeared for the cross-defendants with their usual skill and courtesy.

There were also some suppositions made by the parties and some of the solicitors in this case that are not in accordance with principle. For example if there is a date fixed in the contract you are quite safe to wait until the other side has given a notice to complete. That is, as a general rule of practice, a gamble that most purchasers can take but when their bluff is called and it is their fault that there has not been settlement on the contractual date, they are liable in damages. However, the failure of the vendor's solicitor to give a notice to complete is only a matter which goes to the tactics at the time as to what was in the vendor's interest and has no effect on the present claim for damages.

It is also to be remembered that in this sort of case the Court can, to a degree, use its own knowledge of conveyancing practice. It is strange in this case that neither solicitor gave to the other a settlement sheet because normally one would expect the purchasers' solicitor to prepare such a sheet. I do not need to get into this area but I would have thought that the more likely inference is that the purchasers' solicitor did not give a settlement sheet because at the end of October there was no realistic possibility of the matter being settled in accordance with the contract.

For these reasons the cross-claim must fail and be dismissed with costs. The exhibits are to be retained for 28 days.

I think that the costs of 21 October 1998 should be paid by the cross- claimant, but I think in relation to the general costs of the suit each party should pay their own because the evidence tends to suggest all this was taken into account when the mortgagee sale took place. Furthermore the issues in the specific performance suit may have been different as the purchasers had the onus of showing they were ready, willing and able, but I think in dollars and cents it is all academic.

There is in the file Exhibit 1 before Master Macready, the original contract document. I order that Exhibit 1 before Master Macready can be returned to the
District Court.
 * * * 
