

Regina versus Alex Vella [1996] NSWSC 316 (1 August 1996) 
REGINA versus ALEX VELLA /95 
Thursday 1 August 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SULLY J, HULME J 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: On 28 August 1995 Mr. Alex Emanuel Vella, ["the appellant"], was presented for trial in the District Court at Campbelltown, and before her Honour Judge Backhouse QC, upon an indictment charging him with having supplied a prohibited drug, namely cannabis leaf, in that he had in his possession, on 2 May 1990, a quantity of cannabis leaf, being not less than the traffickable quantity.

To that indictment the appellant pleaded that he was not guilty. He was put upon his trial accordingly. The trial occupied 7 hearing days and the jury found the appellant guilty as charged. Thereafter he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention. No issue was taken at the hearing of the appeal with regard to the sentence, and nothing more need be said about it.

Twelve grounds of appeal were notified, of which three were abandoned and nine were argued. I shall deal in turn with each of those grounds of appeal; but, before doing so, it is necessary to canvass briefly the relevant facts. They fall within a small compass and can be summarised as follows.

At all material times the appellant lived at Lot 3, Koala Way, Horsley Park.
Living there with him were his wife and 2 small children. In those premises was a staircase, beneath which was a concealed cavity.

Early in the morning of 2 May 1990 a detachment of police officers, acting under the authority of a search warrant, entered and searched the subject premises. They came upon the concealed cavity. According to the relevant police officers, there were found in that cavity a blue and white bag and a child's school case with the surname "Vella" written on the inside of it. The blue and white bag was found to contain a large number of resealable plastic bags, each of which contained cannabis leaf. The school case was found to contain a set of electronic scales. There was, as well, a deal of other personal material stored in the concealed cavity, but none of it is of present relevance.

The officer in charge of the search operation was Detective-Sergeant Dein.
According to him, he confronted the appellant with the two bags and their contents. According to Detective-Sergeant Dein, he said to the appellant: "You can see what we have just found.". He indicated the cannabis and continued: "These plastic bags contain cannabis. I want you to understand that you are not obliged to say anything unless you wish but anything you say will be recorded and may later be used in evidence, do you understand that?".
The appellant allegedly replied: "Yes". Detective-Sergeant Dein allegedly continued as follows: "Do you have anything to say about this cannabis. It's packed in the same type of plastic bags we found in the boot of your
Commodore?". According to Detective-Sergeant Dein, the appellant responded: "Alright, it's not my wife's. Leave her out of it. I'll wear it. Don't let the kids see it.". Detective-Sergeant Dein allegedly then asked: "Have you used these scales?; and the appellant made no reply. Detective-Sergeant Dein then allegedly said: "Are there any other secret storage areas?"; and the appellant, once again, made no reply.

Evidence was led in the Crown case to establish that fingerprints of the appellant had been found on one of the plastic bags containing cannabis.

At trial, the appellant did not contest that the cannabis and the scales had been found in the manner previously described. Nor did he dispute that his fingerprints had been found on the one plastic bag containing cannabis leaf.
He contended, however, that he had no connection whatsoever with the cannabis leaf. In that regard, the appellant made an unsworn statement to the jury. It was in the following terms: "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury my name is Alex Vella. I live at Lot 3
Koala Way for the last fifteen years. I am married with two children.
 
On 2 May 1990 police came to the door. They showed me a warrant to search the premises. Some police took me to the back yard. Some time later a policeman came over, Sergeant Dein, and took me inside through the kitchen to the dining room down into the lounge room. Still down in the cavity he showed me a couple of bags one blue with white stripes on it. Inside of it there was some other bags. There was a bag belonged to my son Alex was shut at the time and I told them I was shocked I had never seen this blue and white bag before.
Then I told them that I wanted to see a solicitor and I didn't want nothing else to say.
 
Last time I seen that scales was in the kitchen and after that they took me to the police station in Liverpool. Some time later they let me make a phone call to my solicitor. He came over and got me out on bail. But I never made no speech at the police station or at the house and the verbal was said about my wife to leave her out of it and the kids. That was not true I never said nothing. I was taken to the Court that morning and I was let out on bail.
 
At the time of this arrest I owned a liquor store and supermarket. It was not unusual for me to have extra money in the house or extra stock in the cupboards and the kitchen or in the boot of my wife's car. Before the day of the arrest I went to visit some friends of mine in Windsor it was about Sunday afternoon and I left a friend of mine to look after the place, his name was
Brian Ralphs. I left home about two o'clock and I arrived back home about 11 o'clock. When I came home he was asleep on the lounge. I wake him up, I gave him fifty dollars and I said "Thank you would you look after the place again in a few days time because I am going away?".
 
But at no time no police took any notes of me in my presence and I never made no statement to anyone else. There is a map here drawn by my son Alex about the house how it is all situated. If you would like to look at it you are welcome.
 : Perhaps your Honour could hold onto the map of his household? 
DISCUSSION ABOUT TENDER OF MAP.
 : Perhaps if I could hold that for Mr. Vella as he indicates locations.
 : This is where the lounge room is and that is where the steps are and the steps they are only 18 inches deep with 2 feet either way. There are only three little steps here they are only about 8 inches high to reach.
This is where the back door is to go to the back here. That is where Sergeant
Dein came from the back and took me inside through the kitchen to the dining room and looking in through the cavity over here.
 
At no stage McDonald or other police took any statements from me and I will trust in your judgement to find me not guilty. Thank you.
 : Might I assist Mr. Vella. Mr. Vella, do you wish to say anything about the subject matter of the state of opening or closing of the school bag? : The school bag, when I looked in the cavity was shut and last I seen the school bag it was in the kitchen as well, It was the kids like when I used to make lunch for them.
 
At the time of this incident happened I was off work I was six months in plaster. While my wife used to be at work I used to make lunches for the kids.
 : Do you wish to say anything about the subject matter of the sandwich bags in the kitchen? : There's always been sandwich bags in the kitchen.
 : Do you wish to say anything about the subject matter of when you next had any contact with Mr. Ralphs after your arrest? : Was about three days after I been arrested that he contacted me and I gave him Michael Croke's phone number to get in touch with him. Thank you." 
The appellant called in his case at trial a Mr. Brian Ralphs. The evidence of
Mr. Ralphs was fundamental to the case made at trial by the appellant. For, according to Mr. Ralphs, it was he who had placed the cannabis in the plastic bags, and had stored those bags in the blue and white bag, which he had put into the concealed cavity. The version given by Mr. Ralphs was, in summary, that he had been asked to mind Mr. Vella's house while Mr. Vella and his family went out for the night; that he had brought to the house, after the departure of Mr. Vella and his family, the cannabis leaf in question; that he was in the course of cutting, weighing and packaging it when he was disturbed by a caller to the premises; that in panic he had collected the material and hidden it in the concealed cavity, intending to return and reclaim it on a subsequent occasion; but that the cannabis was discovered and seized by the police before he had that opportunity. It was sought to corroborate this version, in part at least, by calling a Mr. Dominique Gauchi. Mr. Gauchi identified himself as the person who had, indeed, called unexpectedly at the premises when Mr. Ralphs had been there. He said that he had had a very brief conversation with Mr. Ralphs; and, having ascertained that Mr. Vella was not at home, had gone on his way.

The appellant's case at trial sought, also, to discredit the police evidence concerning the statements allegedly made by the appellant to Detective-
Sergeant Dein. It was contended, put shortly, that the entirety of the police evidence concerning these alleged exchanges between Detective-Sergeant Dein and the appellant, was a police fabrication. To that end, evidence was called from Mr. Michael Croke, who had been at the relevant time the appellant's solicitor. According to Mr. Croke, he had a conversation, on the day of the appellant's initial arrest, with a Detective-Sergeant Cooper, another police officer prominent in the search of the appellant's premises, who had given evidence, in the Crown case, corroborating the evidence of Detective-Sergeant
Dein. According to Mr. Croke, Detective-Sergeant Cooper told him that the appellant had made no admissions. This evidence, so it was contended at trial for the appellant, gave the lie to the police evidence alleging that the appellant had made the various statements earlier herein narrated.

It is against a factual background as thus generally described that the particular grounds of appeal fall to be considered.

Ground 1 
This ground was abandoned.

Ground 2 
The ground was propounded in the following terms: "Her Honour erred in failing to grant the application by defence counsel for the discharge of the jury following the wrongful and unwarranted attack upon defence witness, solicitor, Michael Croke, by the Crown in cross examination." 
There can be no gainsaying, in my opinion, that the Crown Prosecutor at trial did indeed subject Mr. Croke to a lengthy and combative cross- examination.

The first point of attack of the cross-examiner centred upon the detail of the actual exchange between Mr. Croke and Detective-Sergeant Cooper as to the making, or not, of admissions by the appellant to the police. The following extract from the cross-examination indicates sufficiently for present purposes the nature of the attack, and of the way in which Mr. Croke sought to deal with it.
 
Q. ..................You say you can't remember the text but you can remember the thrust, that's right isn't it? 
A. Yes.

Q. And doing the best you can you say you asked Mr. Cooper if Mr. Vella was at Liverpool Police Station I think, or if he was there? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you then went on to ask whether or not he had been arrested, or words to that effect? 
A. Yes, I think -- 
Q. I am just reading what your evidence was just before morning tea, you understand? 
A. Yes of course, I understand that.

Q. Do you just agree that that is what you said just before morning tea? 
A. Yes I think that's probably right, yes.

Q. And you then asked you think, the nature of the charges. That is the evidence you gave before morning tea? 
A. Yes, that's probably right, yes.

Q. And you then asked whether or not any admissions had been made by Mr.
Vella, that was your evidence before morning tea? 
A. Yes.

Q. And Mr. Nicholson asked this question, "When you asked him" that is whether any admissions had been made, when you asked him, "Do you recall what
Mr. Cooper said" and your reply was, "He said that he had not made any admissions", that was your evidence this morning? 
A. Yes.

Q. And the "he's" there when he said, that is Mr. Cooper said that Mr. Vella had not made any admissions? 
A. Mmm, yes.

Q. And that as you recall although not the exact words that were used on the day? 
A. No.

Q. You say that was the thrust of the conversation? 
A. That was the thrust of the conversation, yes.

Q. And it was I think you agreed, a fairly brief conversation? 
A. Yes.

Q. It may well have been you think on the mobile phone while you were travelling somewhere? 
A. It could have been, yes.

Q. It is the situation isn't it Mr. Croke that you are given to using a certain expression when inquiring whether a client has made admissions, you have certain expressions you use don't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. And one of the expressions you commonly use Mr. Croke is this expression, when you are asking about a client or a suspect you use this expression, "Has he signed up?".

A. Correct.

Q. Now can you tell the Court Mr. Croke what do you mean, what is in your mind by this expression, "He signed up?".

A. Has he made an admission.

Q. So that covers does it a written admission or an oral admission? 
A. Yes.

Q. An alleged verbal? 
A. Yes.

Q. In your mind? 
A. In my mind.

Q. You would concede this wouldn't you Mr. Croke that the words "signed up" taken literally mean that the accused has put pen to paper and has signed something, taken literally? 
A. Yes, I wouldn't dispute that at all.

Q. And you would accept wouldn't you that your use of the expression "has he signed up" may give rise to an entirely different meaning in someone else's mind who interprets it literally. You would expect that? 
A. Not to an experienced police officer whom I knew, no.

Q. You say that if you use the expression "has he signed up" to Det. Cooper that you would understand it to mean has he made any admissions? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you say that Det. Cooper would also have understood it to mean "has he made any admissions"? 
A. Yes.

Q. How can you say what is in somebody else's mind Mr. Croke? 
A. I can only say from my experience with policemen that they would have been aware of the ambit of my inquiry.

Q. So you are surmising based on your experience you say, that if you used this expression "has he signed up" that the policeman must have known that you were talking about an admission? 
A. My experience would suggest to me that if he had not signed a document but had made a verbal admission Det. Cooper would have in fact told me." 
There was a deal more to the same effect. The cross-examiner pressed Mr. Croke insistently about his, Mr. Croke's, not having made any contemporaneous notes from which he could now refresh his recollection. Mr. Croke conceded that, indeed, he had not made any such notes of what had been a very brief conversation held, so far as he was concerned, on a mobile telephone at a time when he was driving his motor vehicle.

Additionally, the Crown Prosecutor cross-examined Mr. Croke in terms suggesting to him that he was, arguably, at risk of having contravened section of the Crimes Act, and of having committed, as well, the offence of misprision of felony. These were, undoubtedly, very serious suggestions to make about any witness, let alone a witness who was a practising solicitor.

Not surprisingly, these suggestions made in cross-examination drew a very spirited protest from learned senior Counsel appearing at trial for the appellant. This triggered exchanges which culminated in the complete withdrawal by the Crown Prosecutor of the suggestions that he had been making to Mr. Croke. The Crown Prosecutor acknowledged, in effect, that the suggestions had been wholly misconceived: the misprision suggestion, for the reason that there was not in issue a felony allegedly committed by the appellant and capable of being the subject of such a misprision; and the section 316 suggestion, for the reason that, at the material times, that section had not been in operation.

So far as concerns the Crown Prosecutor at trial, this whole sorry episode was finalised, and as recorded in the trial transcript, as follows: "CROWN PROSECUTOR: Q. Mr. Croke before we adjourned you may recall I had asked you whether you were aware of something called the "misprision of felony"" 
A. Yes.

Q. And I also read to you a section from the Crimes Act and asked you certain questions about it? 
A. Yes.

Q. Now Mr. Croke I withdraw any suggestion in this Court that you have been guilty of a breach of either of those legal requirements, those legal Acts.
Either the misprision of felony or the Section 316. Do you understand? 
A. Yes.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: That I unreservedly apologise your Honour for any suggestion that he has been.

HER HONOUR; Thank you. Thank you Mr. Crown." 
The next attack made by the cross-examiner on Mr. Croke centred upon the statement taken initially by Mr. Croke from Mr. Ralphs. The thrust of the cross-examination was directed to the proposition that Mr. Croke ought to have reported promptly to the police the disclosures made to him by Mr. Ralphs. Mr.
Croke maintained, and, so far as I can ascertain from the trial transcript, clearly and consistently, that he had felt no compunction about the matter, and had perceived no conflict of interest arising by reason of any such consideration. Mr. Croke's position was put with unmistakable force and clarity, and as follows, in re-examination: "(COUNSEL): Q. Well perhaps if I ask this question. Mr. Croke just pause before you answer it please. You've been asked by Mr. Crown a lot of questions about why you delayed notifying any police or authorities about the contents of Mr. Ralphs' statement until he gave his evidence at the first trial last year. Do you understand that? 
A. Yes I do.

Q. Now did you have a reason in your mind for taking that decision? 
A. Yes.

Q. What was that reason? 
A. Subsequent to my receiving the brief of evidence in the matter and it being revealed in the brief of evidence that there was an alleged admission by -- 
OBJECTION. LEGAL ARGUMENT.
 : Q. What was the reason Mr. Croke? 
A. Because I had absolutely no confidence in the capacity of the New South
Wales Police Department to deal with this matter in a fair manner.

Q. And that is against the background of the alleged oral admission in the brief? 
A Yes." 
The foregoing summary sets the background for a consideration of the present ground of appeal.

In my opinion, it is a fair criticism of the cross-examination of Mr. Croke that it was, in part at least, unnecessarily confrontational and abrasive. The misconceived attacks based upon an alleged breach of section 316 of the Crimes
Act, and an alleged misprision of felony, were, to say the least, unfortunate and unhelpful. Nonetheless, I have not been persuaded that the learned trial
Judge erred in refusing to discharge the jury by reason of the events earlier herein summarised. So far as concerned any suggestion of criminal misconduct by Mr. Croke, the Crown Prosecutor at trial was required, and in my opinion quite properly required, to back down completely and in the presence of the jury; and he did so. The answers given by Mr. Croke in re-examination were, in my opinion, a very powerful riposte to the suggestions made in cross- examination concerning possible conflict of interest, and an unacceptable failure to report to the proper police authorities evidence of the commission of a crime.

A trial Judge who is asked to discharge a jury at any point throughout the course of a long and difficult trial; but, particularly, when the trial is already well advanced, has to exercise a judicial discretion. He must take account of the seriousness of aborting the trial but, of course, he must evaluate the risk, if any, of a miscarriage of justice by a continuation of the trial. He will do that in the light of his appreciation of the atmosphere of the trial. In the present case his Honour's exercise of discretion has not been shown to be in error.

I think, therefore, that Ground 2 has not been established.

Ground 3 
This ground was not pressed.

Ground 4 
The ground was propounded as follows: "Her Honour erred in refusing to admit into evidence the copy of the statement of Brian Alan Ralphs." 
During his cross-examination of Mr. Croke, the Crown Prosecutor at trial asked for Mr. Croke to be given his office file to the end of his, Mr. Croke's, locating and producing a copy of the statement originally taken by him from
Mr. Ralphs. Mr. Croke did in fact locate and produce what appeared to be a machine-produced copy of that statement. This was made available to the Crown
Prosecutor. The following cross-examination then ensued: "Q. And when you had that document from Mr. Ralphs, it was obviously when you read it, of great assistance to your client Mr. Vella. You'd agree with that? 
A. Yes, if accepted, yes.

Q Yes if accepted it had great potential to assist Mr. Vella? 
A. It was totally exculpatory of Mr. Vella yes.

Q. So I suggest then that there were only two possibilities I suggest. One, that if it was accepted it was totally exculpatory. You'd agree with that? 
A. Yes.

Q. You'd agree that there was also the possibility in the eyes of a cynical prosecutor perhaps, that it might not be accepted? 
A. I couldn't disagree with that.

Q. Yes. And that would have crossed your mind at the time you were taking the statement from Mr. Ralphs that this might not be accepted? 
A. I can't recall specifically addressing that in my mind at the time, but I don't doubt that it did.

Q. But as an experienced practitioner in criminal law you'd be keen to test the ascertains being made by Mr. Ralphs to make sure -- 
A. I was -- 
Q. To make sure - that they didn't obviously conflict with your instructions? 
A. I was completely satisfied of the sincerity of what Ralphs told me.

Q. No I'm not asking about the sincerity. I'm asking you about the facts that were in there. Did you test any of the facts asserted by Mr. Ralphs by asking him questions for example? 
A. You mean did I cross-examine him? 
Q. No, just ask him any questions about it? 
A. I have no specific recollection but I obviously would - I think I would have, yes.

Q. Yes well does the document tell you anything about where he says he got the marijuana from? 
A. (No verbal reply) : Yes I might indicate I seek to tender that document, there's cross-examination on it, I tender it.
 (CROWN PROSECUTOR): It's used as a memory refreshing document by the witness your Honour.
 : He's being cross-examined on the contents of a document having it put in his hands by Mr. Crown. Let's have no mysteries. I tender it.
 : Yes it does reveal where he got it from.
 (HER HONOUR): I'll just defer dealing with the tender Mr. Nicholson.
 : Certainly.
 (HER HONOUR): Q. Go on Mr. Croke. Sorry I missed your answer? 
A. The document does disclose from where Mr. Ralphs obtained the drugs." 
It was common ground at the hearing of the appeal that the provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) did not apply to the trial here in question. The questions of law arising in connection with the present ground of appeal fall, therefore, to be considered by reference to the law as settled prior to the enactment of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). That law is usefully summarised in an article by Mr. M. H. McHugh QC, (as McHugh J of the High Court of Australia then was), in: [1 Australian Bar Review ] at 65 and following. Two propositions are there advanced which are, in my opinion, relevant for present purposes. They are as follows: "13. If the cross-examiner shows the document to the tribunal of fact or directly or indirectly gets any of its contents before the tribunal of fact, he can be required to tender the document. Oakes versus Gaudron [(23/5/63)
Walsh J].
If a witness is cross-examined as to part of a document, his opponent may prove that part of the document in re-examination together with such other parts of the document as are necessary to explain or modify it. Meredith v
Innes <case>; [(1931) 31 SR 104] at 112" 
In the present connection, the application of those principles seems to me to entail that the document in question was admissible. The first attempt to have the document admitted was that made by learned senior counsel appearing at trial for the appellant, and as noted above. Shortly thereafter, learned senior counsel, being then in re-examination, made a second attempt to tender the document. The trial transcript notes that there was further legal argument about that tender, but there is no recorded detail of the course of the argument. Similarly, the trial transcript records a statement by the learned presiding Judge to the effect that her Honour ruled against the tender; but there is no exposition of the process of reasoning which led her Honour to that conclusion.

Thereupon, it becomes necessary for this Court to consider whether the non- admission of the document caused the trial to miscarry. It is for the appellant to demonstrate that it did. I have not been persuaded that the point has been established. This Court has no idea of the contents of the statement; and is, in my opinion, therefore unable to reason to a conclusion that the whole of the contents of the document, had they been admitted into evidence, must reasonably be supposed to have been likely to strengthen, in the eyes of the jury, the appellant's case at trial. The matter has been left, before this
Court, in such a condition that it is not possible, in my opinion, to reason to a conclusion that the failure to admit the document entailed that the appellant lost thereby a fair chance of an acquittal. In my opinion, Ground 4 has not been established.

Ground 5 
This ground was propounded as follows: "Her Honour erred in giving directions as to the meaning of "supply" which were erroneous, confusing and inadequate." 
I do not think it is necessary for present purposes to canvass in detail the entire course of the directions given by the learned trial Judge on the question of the meaning of the word "supply" as relevant to the case sought to be established at trial against the appellant. I think that it is fair to say that such directions, especially as given during the early parts of the summing up, might well have been thought, had they stood uncorrected, to have been apt to confuse the jury.

As it happens, however, learned senior counsel for the appellant took this matter up with the learned trial Judge at the very end of the summing up.
Counsel asked for a direction as follows: "(COUNSEL): ........ On that question of knowledge your Honour, I think that my friend and I would ask you jointly to remind the jury that it is essential when considering whether or not Mr. Vella had possession of the cannabis which was at the house, that he must first have known of the existence and location of the cannabis, prior to considering whether exercise (sic) control over it." 
Her Honour responded as follows: "Finally just coming back to what you need to be satisfied about in this matter, on the question of whether Mr. Vella was in possession of the drug in question in this case, what I direct you is that you would have to be satisfied that Mr. Vella knew of its existence. You would have to be satisfied that he knew of its existence before he could be said to have custody or control of the cannabis." 
In my opinion, that final direction to the jury put clearly and completely the essence of the question which the jury had to resolve beyond reasonable doubt in favour of the Crown before being entitled to convict the appellant.

In my opinion Ground 5 has not been established.

Ground 6 
The ground was propounded as follows: "Her Honour erred in giving directions as to the meaning of "possession" which were erroneous, confusing and inadequate." 
The learned trial Judge came on a number of occasions to the question of "possession". The various directions thus given at various points throughout her summing up by her Honour to the jury were as follows: "Now returning to this question of possession. This is the next matter which
I propose to give you a direction about. What is the meaning of possession in law? In order to possess something, a person does not have to own it. What is necessary is that he must knowingly have the thing in his physical custody or at some place under his control. He must have the intention and the ability to exercise control and dominion over it to the exclusion of all persons other than those acting in concert with him." "By knowingly in this context is meant that the accused knew either of the existence or the likely existence of the item in question and was also aware that it was likely to be a narcotic drug." "As I have already said to you there is no real dispute that the particular substances, the cannabis leaf was in fact present in the house of Mr. Vella on that particular morning. The question then to be determined you have before, namely whether it was in the possession of Mr. Vella. You have a piece of evidence that it was found in his house, but what you have got to determine, the fact of it being found in his house is some evidence, but it certainly does not prove that he had custody or control of that substance." "What you have got to be satisfied is you might say to yourself in this case, well it is in his physical custody. Well it certainly is in his house and you might say to yourself, well is it under his control? The fact alone of it being in his house is not sufficient in the context of this particular charge, which has been brought by the Crown against Mr. Vella. You would need to be satisfied by the evidence that he had it. If he didn't have it in his physical custody, in the sense that certainly he did not have it on his body, but what you have got to be satisfied is that he, the accused knew either of the existence or the likely existence of the item in question." "In other words you would need to be satisfied that he knew that the substance, that is the cannabis, that he knew of its existence and that he knew that - or its likely existence and he was also aware that it was likely to be a narcotic drug." "What I am saying is, this is twofold. You have got, not only to be satisfied that he knew of the likely existence of it under the cavity, but that he also knew that that particular substance was in fact cannabis, which in turn is a prohibited drug." 
And, finally, her Honour gave, at the very conclusion of the summing up and in response to a specific invitation from the appellant's counsel, the direction which has been quoted above in connection with Ground 5.

In evaluating the sufficiency of these directions, it is in my opinion necessary to bear carefully in mind the way in which the trial was fought. The
Crown case was perfectly simple. It posited that the cannabis had been found in the appellant's home; in a secret location of which he must have been aware, and of which he never denied knowledge; packed in bags, one of which bore the fingerprints of the appellant, a fact not denied by him; and there being no indication anywhere of anybody other than the appellant, Mr. Ralphs alone excepted, who might be found, reasonably and sensibly, to have actual possession of the cannabis. The defence case was equally simple. It was a simple, total denial by the appellant of any connection whatsoever with, and of any knowledge whatsoever of, the presence of the cannabis in the concealed cavity. The way in which the issue of possession was fought at trial necessarily entailed, in my view, that, once the jury rejected the evidence of
Mr. Ralphs, as the jury plainly did, then the whole underpinning of the appellant's case at trial disappeared, with the necessary result that the only remaining inference was, overwhelmingly, that the appellant had both knowledge and possession of the hidden cannabis.

In connection with the present ground of appeal, it was submitted that the learned presiding Judge ought to have given some assistance to the jury concerning the hypothesis, which it was submitted to this Court was reasonably open to be accepted by the jury, that the appellant had been holding the cannabis, in effect as bailee for Mr. Ralphs as bailor, and that the appellant, on that hypothesis, could not be found to have had the requisite "possession".

In my opinion, the short answer to that submission is that no such hypothesis was advanced as part of the defence case at trial; and there was not, so far as I can see, so much as a scintilla of evidence capable of giving substance to the suggested hypothesis.

In my opinion, Ground 6 has not been established.

Ground 7 
This ground was not pressed.

Ground 8 
This ground was propounded as follows.
 "Her Honour erred in not properly or adequately directing the jury as to the dangers involved in relying on the uncorroborated Police evidence as to the oral admissions allegedly made by the Appellant." 
At a comparatively early stage in the course of the summing up, the learned presiding Judge gave the jury a direction that was intended to comply with the requirements established by the decision of the High Court of Australia in
McKinney versus The Queen  <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 468.] Her Honour gave, in that connection, some particular directions which need not now be canvassed in detail; and her Honour then added: "In these circumstances if you find that there is no reliable confirmation that the admission was in fact made the law requires me to warn you that before convicting on the basis of the alleged admission you must consider the dangers involved in doing so.
 
The Crown points to the evidence of the various police officers. I will take you to that evidence in more detail later but in essence the evidence that you have before you is the evidence from a number of police officers who say that they were there at the time and also the Crown relies upon the notes that were made by Detective McDonald. There is of course dispute about that note taking which again I will take you to in more detail but so far as the Crown is concerned it relies upon for its case it relies upon the evidence of those police officers and more specifically by way of confirmation or supportive, it relies upon the notes of Detective McDonald." 
Learned senior counsel appearing at trial for the appellant put to her
Honour that these particular directions were erroneous: first, because
Detective McDonald's notes were not in fact in evidence at all; and, secondly, because the challenge to police evidence could not be corroborated save by evidence independent of the challenge to police officers.

Her Honour responded by bringing the jury back into Court and by re-directing them in the following terms: "I am going to send you home shortly but before I do that I want to go back to this last direction that I was giving to you about the Crown case and the direction with respect to confessions or admissions and uncorroborated police evidence. You will recall that I did refer to the notes in the context of I said, that the Crown pointed to the evidence of the notes that were taken by
Detective McDonald. I have been reminded by counsel that firstly the notes are not in evidence, although you have heard a lot of talk about notes whether they were taken or not taken or when they were taken but the fact is they are not in evidence and therefore cannot be regarded as evidence and therefore if
I left you with the impression that they could perhaps be confirmatory or supportive of the evidence which the police officers have given about the admission well then that is not correct. There is no independent evidence, that is, independent of the police themselves, as to the actual admissions which the police say the accused made that morning at the house on 2 May ." 
After some further directions, not irrelevant, her Honour continued further as follows: "Finally on that topic I have taken this a little bit out of order now but if you will just hark back, I have already given you this direction before and perhaps on this question of the evidence of the police officers about the admissions, having said to you that the notes are not confirmatory and that in fact there is no independent evidence that is independent of the police officers themselves, I will just repeat for you what I have already said to you this afternoon, if you in the circumstances that I have told you about, that police officers are trained to give evidence in court and you may think that it would be easier for a practiced witness to tell lies without being detected than for somebody without that experience and when considering whether the accused would have been likely to make a false admission you must also make allowance for the fact that he was alone without legal advice. So they are the circumstances I am talking about.
 
So in these circumstances, and I give you this direction now, if you find that there is no reliable confirmation that the admission was in fact made the law requires me to warn you that before convicting on the basis of the alleged admission you must consider the dangers involved in doing so and that is when
I went on to tell you incorrectly about the notes. So I have corrected that and also I went on to direct you that in fairness to the police that would be quite wrong to suggest that just because they are members of the police force their evidence is likely to be false. That is not so and that is not the reason for the warning I have just given you. That warning is required to be given because the accused was at a disadvantage in being held alone and without the opportunity of obtaining corroboration for his account.
 
So I think I have now corrected my error in referring you to those notes and that I have also clarified for you that there is other evidence in the Crown case beyond the admissions which have been referred to. So having said that I propose now to send you home." 
In my opinion these re-directions were adequate to the circumstances of the instant case.

In my opinion Ground 8 has not been established.

Ground 9 
The ground was propounded as follows: "Her Honour erred in directing the jury, at the request of the Crown, that what was said by the Appellant in his statement concerning the suitcase was not put to Police witnesses." 
The first point to be made in connection with this ground is, in my opinion, that the passage of the summing up to which objection is now taken occurs at a part of the summing up in which the learned presiding Judge is giving a fairly detailed summary of the arguments that had been put, respectively, by the Crown Prosecutor and by learned senior counsel appearing at trial for the appellant. I do not think that a fair reading of the whole of that part of the summing up justifies a conclusion that the jury would have understood her Honour as giving some kind of official judicial imprimatur to any of the submissions that she was thus summarising for the assistance of the jury.

I do not think that any cause has been shown to warrant this Court's now concluding that this comparatively small detail in a very lengthy summing up must be supposed, reasonably, to have caused a miscarriage of the trial. I am strengthened in that view by the fact that learned senior counsel for the appellant did not seek any particular correction by her Honour of the passage now criticised.

In my opinion Ground 9 has not been established.

Ground 10 
This ground was propounded as follows: "Her Honour erred in lending judicial weight to statements by the Crown concerning the evidence of the defence witness Ralphs that there was a lack of scientific evidence that cannabis impairs memory." 
Here, again, criticism is being made of a portion of the summing up in which the learned presiding Judge was summarising for the assistance of the jury submissions that had been put in final address by the Crown Prosecutor. What her Honour actually said, so far as is at present relevant, is as follows: "Then turning to the evidence of Ralphs he dealt firstly with the fact that you would have observed the police officers reading their statements and there was nothing wrong with that. That is here in this Court when they gave their evidence when they firstly went into the witness box they were invited to read their statements and that is what they did. The Crown has put to you that Mr.
Ralphs never looked at his statement and then it was sought in re-examination of Mr. Ralphs to get from him that he had a very flawed memory, that he had been a cannabis user for some years and the Crown submitted to you that there was no scientific evidence before you that smoking impairs the memory." 
In connection with this ground of appeal, I would repeat mutatis mutandis what I have earlier said in connection with Ground 9. I observe in addition that, in my opinion, there was placed simply and clearly before the jury at trial evidence from Mr. Ralphs himself which, had it been accepted by the jury, would have been capable of establishing the need to bear in mind, in assessing his evidence, that his own perception of his memory was that it was impaired by reason of his abuse of marijuana.

In my opinion, this ground has not been established.
 
Ground 11 
This ground was propounded as follows.
 "The trial miscarried by reason of the absence of expert evidence, being fresh evidence, as to the effect of drug taking upon the memory of the witness
Brian Alan Ralphs." 
In an interlocutory judgment delivered on Monday 22 July instant, this Court refused an application by the appellant to receive allegedly fresh evidence on the subject matter to which this ground of appeal is directed.

No attempt was made at trial to adduce any such evidence.

In those circumstances, the present ground cannot, in my opinion, succeed.

Ground 12 
The ground was propounded as follows: "The verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory." 
In so far as this ground depends upon the combined effect of the other grounds of appeal that were argued, it cannot succeed.

The ground is put, however, upon an alternative basis, namely, that the independent assessment of the evidence at trial, which the law requires this
Court now to make, would lead this Court to the conclusion that the jury at trial ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt as charged of the appellant.

The principles of law which are relevant in that regard are those established by the decision of the High Court of Australia in M versus The Queen [(1994) CLR 487.] Two passages in particular from the joint judgment of Mason
CJ, and Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ, are relevant. They are: "Where, notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain a verdict, a Court of Criminal Appeal is asked to conclude that the verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question which the Court must ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. But in answering that question the Court must not disregard or discount either the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses. On the contrary, the Court must pay full regard to those considerations" [181
CLR, 493:] (emphasis added) "It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by a Court of Criminal Appeal that the Court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred. That is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by the
Court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced. If the evidence, upon the record itself, contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to leave the Court of Criminal Appeal to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the Court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence." 181 CLR, 
In my opinion, an independent assessment of the whole of the evidence at trial raises two particular matters of importance. The first of them is the question whether the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt about the authenticity of the admission attributed to the appellant by the police witnesses. The second was the question whether the positive case put forward by the appellant, dependent as it was upon the evidence of Messrs. Ralphs and Gauchi, was such as to leave at large a reasonable doubt, undispelled by the Crown, as to the guilt, as charged, of the appellant.

As to the challenged admission allegedly made by the appellant to the police, it can be accepted at once that the evidence, in particular, of Detective-
Sergeant Dein, the person to whom the admission was allegedly directed, did display inadequacies and inconsistencies. There is no doubting that Detective-
Sergeant Dein had given sworn evidence at an earlier, and aborted, trial of the appellant; and that what he had then said did not reconcile with what he was saying at the trial now under consideration. Detective-Sergeant Dein himself explained those discrepancies on the basis that he had made a statement soon after the events in question; that such statement was consistent with what he was now saying; that he had not bothered to refresh his recollection from the statement prior to giving evidence on the earlier occasion; and that he had therefore given on that earlier occasion, but unintentionally, inaccurate evidence.

Detective-Sergeant Dein was cross-examined at length and in detail about these discrepancies. It seems to me that the jury, in deciding as it had to do, whether or not to accept these explanations, must have been advantaged by its opportunity to see and hear Detective-Sergeant Dein as he sought to meet the challenges thrown out by a long and vigorous cross-examination. It is true that the challenged admission was a verbal admission, and that it was wholly uncorroborated by any evidence independent of the challenged police officers.
Such uncorroborated, alleged verbal admissions are always treated by the
Courts with an understandable reserve. And it would be, in my opinion, both wrong in principle and foolish in practice for any Judge to close his or her eyes to the revelations concerning uncorroborated verbal admissions allegedly made to police officers, that have been emerging in an almost unbroken stream from the Royal Commission currently inquiring into the NSW Police Service. I think, however, that it would be equally wrong in principle and equally foolish in practice to take the stand that any conviction resting, either in whole or in significant part, upon such an uncorroborated verbal admission allegedly made, must be overturned, practically as a matter of course, as being unsafe and unsatisfactory.

I have no difficulty in appreciating how, in the present case, the jury might very well not have accepted the authenticity of the alleged verbal admission.
But I do not see that I am justified in saying, upon the basis of nothing more than a bare reading of this trial transcript, that the jury could not reasonable have accepted the authenticity of the admission.

As it happens, however, the present issue does not fall, in my opinion, to be determined only by reference to the rights and wrongs of the challenged admission. For, in my opinion, even if it be concluded that the alleged admission was so unreliable that it ought not to play any part in determining whether the appellant might reasonably be found, beyond reasonable doubt, guilty as charged, there remains, nevertheless, a substantial Crown case. In my opinion, the Crown case at trial gave rise to a very strong prima facie inference of the requisite knowledge and possession on the part of the appellant. The way in which issue was joined at the trial necessarily entails, in my opinion, that the jury cannot have accepted the Ralphs/Gauchi version of events. In that event, the prima facie inference deriving from the Crown case was necessarily strengthened to such a degree as to warrant, in my opinion, a finding of guilt as charged, and established beyond reasonable doubt.

I have no difficulty in understanding how the jury at trial could have rejected the Ralphs/Gauchi version of events. I cannot see why the jury, which had the advantage of seeing and hearing both of those witnesses, was not entitled to reject their version of events. I, looking only at the trial transcript, and without the advantage of seeing and hearing those witnesses, do not find their version of events so obviously compelling as to be convinced that their version of events ought to have left the jury with an overall reasonable doubt as to the guilt, as charged, of the appellant.

For the whole of the foregoing reasons, I have not been persuaded that this
Court should interfere with the appellant's conviction by reason of its being, in the requisite legal sense, unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Conclusions and Orders 
For the whole of the foregoing reasons, I am of the opinion that none of the challenges made to the appellant's conviction at trial has been made good. I am of the opinion that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the resons for judgment of Sully J. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons.
 
HULME J: I agree with the orders proposed by Mr. Justice Sully and with his Honour's reasons.
 * * * 
