

Richards versus Hunter Area Health Service t/as Stockton Hospital Ltd and Anor
Matter No 148/95 [1998] NSWSC 102 (7 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 April 1998 
JEREMY ALFRED RICHARDS versus HUNTER AREA HEALTH SERVICE t/as STOCKTON HOSPITAL LIMITED and ENHANCE SYSTEMS PTY LIMITED /95 April 1998 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 6 June 1994 the plaintiff was injured whilst employed by the first defendant as a hospital assistant grade 2 at Stockton Hospital. His duties were those of a cleaner and general hand. His specific task on that occasion was to change a fabric roll in a continuous towel dispenser which was attached to a wall above a hand basin in an ablutions area identified as Ward 22 or ATC 3. The dispenser was one of over one hundred such items installed at the hospital by the second defendant (Enhance). The provenance of the particular dispensers was slightly obscure. The available employee of Enhance (Mr Pratten) testified that the cabinets were American made, licensed for manufacture in New Zealand and had been brought to Newcastle from a Wollongong branch. They were delivered in boxes but they were not new. Mr Pratten described them as "refurbished". 
The plaintiff is a very short and slightly built man. To perform the exchange operation he needed to pull forward a bin into which a towel roll had been placed. This bin was at the base of the cabinet and moved forward and back on metal tracks. There were two inhibitors against the potential of the item running forward off the tracks: first a pimple-like protrusion indented a centimetre or so from the end of each track and second, a split pin inserted through a hole beyond those protrusions and near the extreme of each track.

Counsel for Enhance invited inspection of the implement - the one which was tendered was thought to be the actual one involved in the incident - in order to observe the aerofoil shape of the pimples so as to conclude that their purpose was to restrain the bin from travelling back (towards the wall) rather than forward (towards the split pins, or where they ought to have been). He argued that, as the evidence showed that the towel had been changed on many occasions prior to 6 June, the forward travel must have been on those occasions stopped by pin or pins and I should therefore conclude, if they were missing on 6 June, then they had been removed or come out at some time after the installation by Enhance and during the time that the first defendant was responsible for maintenance. He asserted that if the pin had not been originally inserted then it would be expected that the bin would have travelled free and fallen long before. Counsel put to numerous witnesses who worked at the hospital that the routine would have been to pull the bin forcefully forward until it hit the split pin stoppers. I do not accept this argument. Although I acknowledge that the shape of the pimples is as described, they were not without quality to signal a stopping point to any user. They could not in any event be final inhibitors of progress as the bin had to be able to move back across them when it was restored into operating position on those occasions when it had in fact passed as far as over the pimples and towards or against the pins. To load the towel, it was necessary for the bin to open by dropping its outer lip in a downward arc. To achieve this, it was necessary to move it as far forward as the pimples, but not necessarily past them or all the way to the split pins. I do not infer that in previous usage the bin must have been pulled to the extremities where such pins should have been located.

On the day in question the plaintiff put a replacement clean towel in the container bin which was of course opened in the way that I have described. The next step was to attach the end to a wooden roller which would then be placed onto brackets so that as towelling was soiled it would wind onto it with each exposure of a length of fresh towel. The plaintiff pulled out about a metre of towelling to enable this attachment but accidentally dropped the roller. He bent down low to pick it up. The impression I have gained is that he retained a grip on the towel end in one hand and was using the other for the purpose of picking up the roller. His action brought the bin containing the roller slightly further forward on the tracks and then it fell and struck him on the back near his left scapula area. This fall was facilitated by the absence of the split pins. That absence was abundantly proved in the testimonies of other employees of the defendant including the Mr Clare, Mr Eichinger, Mr Rowett and
Mr Stanbury. As I understood final submissions, no counsel suggested that I should find that the pins were in fact in place on 6 June but there was considerable debate about whose responsibility it was for that situation.

I interpolate that exhibit Z1 contains some answers to interrogatories verified by Mr Eichinger on behalf of the first defendant. In particular question 6 adverted to problems encountered between installation and 6 June. I am satisfied that those answers have been tainted by confusion and that the references to missing split pins probably refer to the subject incident and to observations made after it.

The somewhat mundane, but hygienically important, task being undertaken by the plaintiff was the subject of expert analysis by ergonomists (by which description I do not limit the other qualifications set out in their respective curriculum vitae) Dr Adams and Dr Olsen. Dr Olsen described the job of towel changing as elementary and I agree with that description. I disagree however with his observation that the plaintiff's allegations "point to a scenario that is extremely unlikely". Dr Olsen gave three reasons for his premise, first he thought that the combined weight of bin and towel and the distance of fall would be unlikely to cause a fracture in the shoulder region.
From the medical evidence I am affirmatively satisfied that that is what in fact happened. The second and third reasons involve hypotheses about the plaintiff's state of knowledge. Dr Olsen's assumptions do not coordinate with the facts. I am satisfied that the plaintiff was in fact unaware of the absence of the split pins. As he described the accident (and I accept his description) it is obvious that he must have brought the bin close to the threshold from which it fell but whether he had stopped the forward movement on the tracks at the pimples or just past them, if the dispenser was in proper order, the split pins would have restrained the fall. They were absent.

Dr Adams' written report must be qualified by his erroneous assumptions as to the weight of the items involved in the fall and that only one split pin was missing at the time. Both split pins were missing. As was patent on demonstration (note [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) [s )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s54.html) the removal of the bin by application of rotational pressure and bypassing split pins could only be done if the bin was in the closed position and its upper aspect on the same horizontal plane as the track. At the time of the plaintiff's accident it opened on the arc that I have mentioned.

The plaintiff was uninstructed about the structure or mechanism of the towel dispenser. As Dr Adams commented (omitting some now irrelevant references) it is self evident that if the plaintiff had been made aware of the way in which the bin was supported and the possibility that it could fall free if the pins were missing, he would have been able to avoid the dislodgment which caused his injury.

Mr Pratten testified that the items were properly installed but it is clear that no particular attention was paid in those operations to the precise matter of the placement of the split pins. I accept the evidence of Mr
Stanbury that if split pins were suitably in place then the use of pliers was required to remove them. A split pin could not be described as suitably in place unless the split had been adequately opened up. Although his observations were made after the plaintiff's accident Mr Eichinger located dispensers in which the split pins were unopened and I conclude that the probability is that they were so left either during "refurbishment" by Enhance or when its employees were performing the initial installation. I find the probability is that, given that the pins were absent on the day of the plaintiff's accident, one of the above was the case, namely, either insertion was overlooked altogether or the pins were not opened up thus permitting them to come adrift either at the time of refurbishment or installation. I reject the submission that I should give account to the possibility of intervention after installation to remove the pins. There is no evidence of any one so doing and accepting, as I do, that pliers would be necessary to remove a properly fitted pin I regard the removal by an intervener as entirely speculative.

I find that Enhance was in breach of its duty to potential users of its equipment which it supplied, including the plaintiff, by failing to ensure that the split pins were properly in place at all and in failing to notify anyone of the risk inherent in their absence. The foreseeability of injury as a result of such breach is plain.

The first defendant as employer had a non delegable duty to provide reasonably safe equipment for the plaintiff to use, to warn him of risks to which he was exposed and to instruct him adequately about the tasks required of him. In respect of this duty to its employee the first defendant could not simply rely upon Enhance and thus avoid responsibility. Counsel for the first defendant referred to Mason versus Williams & Williams Limited & Anor [1955 1 All
ER 808.]
The defect in the present case was not latent as in the case of the chisel which was the subject implement in the authority cited. Inspection ought to have revealed either the empty holes through which pins should have penetrated or looseness of pins which were unsecured because their splits had not been opened up.

I am satisfied that negligence on the part of each defendant contributed to the plaintiff's damage.

Contributory negligence was pleaded against the plaintiff. It was not established. Both defendants particularized failure by the plaintiff to keep a proper look out. It is true that the absence of the pins ought to have been observable but there were inhibiting factors affecting the plaintiff: the location of the dispenser at height and to the side of an installed washbasin, the absence of any instruction to the plaintiff about the structure and mechanics of the dispenser save the elementary routine of how to go about simply changing the towel roll and, not least, the plaintiff's own short stature. Other particulars were simply incantations assigning negligence. The final particular advanced by Enhance adverted to the application of force in the dislodgment of the bin. No doubt this happened as the plaintiff crouched down to pick up the roller whilst the towel end was held by one hand but he was performing a task in an authorized and I would find, appropriate fashion.
Whilst the dropping of the roller was an accident for which the plaintiff himself was responsible, I am unpersuaded that in any of his conduct he behaved in a way manifesting lack of reasonable care for his own safety.

The defendants instituted cross claims against each other. Counsel for each contended that his opponent's client should bear the greater portion of responsibility. Senior counsel for the plaintiff supported the contention of the first defendant but candidly noted the potential benefit to his client arising from some differences applicable to available damages against the respective defendants.

Assessing the comparative causative contributions of the respective defendants to the plaintiff's damage leads me to a conclusion that Enhance should bear a greater share of responsibility. I apportion liability as to 25% against the first defendant and 75% against Enhance.

I turn to issues of damages. Some items will need to be assessed at common law against Enhance and assessed within the strictures of the [Worker's
Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) against the first defendant. However there are some general matters with which it is convenient to deal first.

The plaintiff was born on 5 August 1970. He was raised by adopting parents.
This is significant as there are inevitable gaps in genealogical history which, if able to be filled may have helped elucidate a later manifest psychiatric condition. He left Morisset High School at Year 10 level and undertook a pre apprenticeship course, after which he worked briefly as a trades assistant. He enlisted in the army in June 1988. He did not complete recruit training. He was absent without leave from 16 August 1988 until 15
September 1988. He pleaded guilty to a charge of arising from that absence and was sentenced to eight days detention by a summary authority appointed under the Defence Force Discipline Act. His detention was served between 11 and 18
October. He was assessed as not suitable to be a soldier and on 24 November was discharged under Australian [Military
Regulation](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/repealedreg/mr211/) 176 . A psychological report following examination of the plaintiff in connection with his unauthorized absence stated: "Recruit Richards is a very immature soldier who was poorly motivated on enlistment. He has developed a strong emotional dependence on his fiancee, who suffers from various personal traumas and has been unable to function in training due to absence from her." 
The plaintiff told the summary authority (Major Tay) that his fiancee had been the victim of serious sexual assault in her early life, that her daughter was ill and that his absence on army service deprived him of the opportunity to be of assistance to her. At that time the fiancee was aged 21, her child about 11 months and the plaintiff was 18 years of age.

After discharge from the army the plaintiff worked for a time with a security company and as a labourer and came into the employment with the first defendant about mid 1990. He remained in that employment until after the accident on 6 June 1994.

The initial post accident symptoms noticed by the plaintiff related to his left shoulder. The original x-rays taken missed the fracture of the spine of the scapula which was later demonstrated by a bone scan. In the acute phase the plaintiff had marked swellings to the extent that consideration was given by medical attendants to undertaking surgical drainage of a diagnosed haematoma. The impression I gained was that the plaintiff felt that his complaints or the gravity of them were not treated with sufficient seriousness and there may have been some scepticism sensed by him about the belief of others as to their physical basis. This was unfortunate. First, because later studies including nerve conduction tests as well as the scan that I have mentioned, confirmed his bodily damage and second, because the plaintiff was vulnerable to suffering a psychosis and did in the event become psychotic.
There is some difference of opinion in the medical reports about the significance of the nerve conduction studies but, having regard to the raw figures of the results I prefer the opinion expressed in the medical material tendered on behalf of the plaintiff.

In November 1994 the plaintiff was referred into the care of Dr Vickery, a psychiatrist who continues to treat him. Dr Vickery gave evidence viva voce and I have as well his reports. I express a preference for his evidence which persuades me that the plaintiff's psychotic condition was and is causally related to the accident and its aftermath. I observe that Dr Dyball a psychiatrist who saw the plaintiff in February 1996 on behalf of the first defendant opened his report with a comment that the plaintiff showed clear evidence both in terms of his history and presentation of a chronic psychotic disorder. He later opined that the plaintiff suffered a major serious form of psychiatric disturbance which caused him to doubt the plaintiff's own statement that he was much better and to harbour further doubts about his working ability due to that condition. Dr Dyball reported also that the condition long pre-dated the accident and questioned any causal nexus with the tort. His report demonstrates that this opinion must have been derived from matters of history which I find are doubtfully based. This is no criticism of
Dr Dyball who, I am confident, would have been conscious of the reservation which would need to attach to history taken from a psychotic patient.
Fantasizing is one of the symptoms of the plaintiff's condition. Some history may also have been gleaned from reports sent to Dr Dyball by solicitors but the various histories set out in those may themselves have been taken by recorders who were not so sensitive to the plaintiff's condition and they could not in my view have been safely relied upon in assessing the situation of the plaintiff.

Pre-accident, so far as I can determine, the only manifestation of some flourishing of the plaintiff's condition was a period of hallucination in his teenage years. There is no evidence that the underlying condition flourished in the years that the plaintiff engaged in his employment with the first defendant. Nor did anything like that happen during his army service where the difficulties appear to have been in a quite different category. Another piece of particular misinformation given to Dr Dyball was that whilst in the army he had "a lot of violent outbursts" but this is not confirmed in any way by the army file.

It is true that the plaintiff at one point consented to a form of apprehended domestic violence order in favour of the woman who was previously his fiancee (at the time of army service) but I accept his evidence that he did so on legal advice (he avoided a possibly protracted hearing) and that he had not in fact been physically aggressive towards her. That relationship is now ended.
The plaintiff later married and a child has been born to the couple in the week prior to the hearing of the action in Newcastle. The absence of testimony from Mrs Richards is adequately explained by that circumstance.

The first defendant tendered reports from another psychiatrist Dr Allan.
Objection was raised to what was described as the non medical opinion contained in the documents. Regrettably there is much content which merits that description. Dr White considered that the plaintiff had no work related psychiatric disorder, or, as his first report read, any such disorder at all.
In his second report he referred to complications in the plaintiff's life by severe psychotic episodes suggesting chronic schizophrenia. He suggested that regular cannabis use was the possible trigger. The evidence does not satisfy me that the plaintiff is or was a regular cannabis user and certainly did not use cannabis at a time that was responsible for the post accident psychotic symptoms. Dr White's reports contain some unconventional material. For example at one point he stated of the plaintiff that despite numerous consultations and treatment interventions, he was unable to offer a meaningful diagnosis to explain his alleged disability. Whilst I would expect a patient to convey history and symptoms I tend to the view that diagnosis is for the person professing expertise. I reject Dr White's evidence. I point out in passing that the plaintiff's disturbance or apparently disturbed demeanour was commented upon by a number of medical examiners who were not seeing him for psychiatric assessment. However, it is fortifying that the medical practitioners specializing in other disciplines detected what they commented upon.

It is plain that in a direct sense the blow to the back did not cause psychosis and the process was, I find, that the consequences of it triggered an underlying infirmity. This is not of total comfort to the tortfeasors but it can be to the extent that I must evaluate a chance of some other event triggering off the condition even if the defendants' action had not done so.
In this case I do not regard that chance as so small as to be speculative and
I conclude that I should allow for the contingency that the plaintiff would have been similarly affected anyway.

A particular item of claim relates to lost opportunity as a miner. There is evidence of family tradition and there is testimony from Mr Land, an officer of the appropriate union which itself operates a corporation which provides employment in the industry. Mr Land is a director of that corporation. There is some obscurity about the circumstances of an alleged availability of employment at the mines post accident but I do not find it realistic to estimate that the plaintiff, given his vulnerability to psychosis, would ever have been able to pursue a career as a miner. I accept the opinion of Dr
Vickery that the current improvement in the plaintiff's condition is in a large part referrable to the absence of stress and I am persuaded that the plaintiff was probably suited to his employment as a hospital assistant in a large part because it was an unstressful occupation. I do not find that the accident caused or was likely to cause any financial loss to the plaintiff from lost opportunity in the mining industry.

At the hearing attention was paid to a resume produced by the plaintiff (Exhibit 2). I regard the content of the document as an example of the fantasizing which itself is a symptom of the plaintiff's psychosis. I am satisfied that he probably altered his army certificate of service to coincide with some of those fantasies. Recognizing these as consequences of illness causes me to reject the submissions on behalf of the defendants that I should find some sinister motive relating to these documents. One of the difficulties in assessment of this case has been the cheerful concession which the plaintiff made to questions by cross examining counsel about his actual and expected abilities. It is possible that the plaintiff will read this judgment as he is entitled to do and I would not wish to stifle any enthusiasm for rehabilitation, however, I should record and it will suffice to record that I find that the plaintiff has not achieved recovery to the extent that his evidence would appear to suggest he believes.

I have not overlooked that some evidence was given referring to criminal proceedings against the plaintiff for writing what was described at one point as abusive letters to the first defendant. Again I regard such conduct as a manifestation of the plaintiff's illness.

I turn to ingredients of damage. Where I make reference to agreed figures I note that the agreement was made on the usual basis that the defendants acknowledge the integrity of the calculations but not the inclusion of any particular amount or part of it in any award of damages.

I propose to include in the damages the total of out of pockets at $25,655. I also include $5,549 to avoid the detriment identified by the High Court in
Fox versus Wood.

Had the plaintiff remained in constant employment with the first defendant from the time of accident to date he would have earned $71,114. I recognize that there have been opinions expressed from time to time that the plaintiff may have been fit for light work. Indeed, he applied for the same with the first defendant. Such application, indeed any application for work was in my view coloured by the plaintiff's own inaccurate assessment of his ability and is probably one of the imaginings which were facets of his psychosis. I am satisfied that the plaintiff has been effectively unfit for gainful employment since the accident and I propose to include the amount of $71,114 in the damages.

The next three items of damage will require alternative assessment.

The plaintiff's future, and specifically his economic future, is extremely clouded. As Dr Vickery, whose testimony I found most candid and therefore helpful, commented "this litigation is not unnaturally of present significance in the plaintiff's life. If he perceives a successful outcome then his chances of improvement increase, whereas the opposite perception will obviously produce the opposite result." Whatever happens, I am persuaded that the plaintiff is at permanent risk of his symptoms reappearing. Knowing whether the tort played a part in that reappearance is something that could only be analysed in the context of whatever were to happen at such a time. I need to take into account that the plaintiff's situation may improve as Dr Vickery hopes and therefore he will from time to time enter into some gainful employment. As I have already indicated, I feel it is also necessary to give not insignificant weight to the prospect that the plaintiff may have come to suffer similarly from some other stress which he encountered although it was the distress tortiously imposed upon him by the defendants which had in fact been responsible for the symptoms to the present time and continue to contribute in the future.

It is agreed that the current nett earning of a comparable employee at the hospital are $371 per week. If the plaintiff were to be regarded as totally unemployable for the rest of the working life to the age of 65 then capitalization on the authorized rates would produce a capital sum payable by the first defendant of $333,158 or by Enhance of $439,264. Those figures, undiscounted for adverse vicissitudes which might have in a general sense affected the plaintiff in ensuing years, would represent what jargon has as a total and permanent employment disability. That is not the case proved by the plaintiff. I have to take into account the prospects of improvement consequent upon the treatment by Dr Vickery and the risk of similar disablement to which
I have made reference. I have done the calculation in order to provide myself with a guide. In all the circumstances I have come to the conclusion that as against each defendant there should be an award representing one half of total and permanent disability. The ingredient to be included in damages against the first defendant therefore will be $166,579 and against Enhance $219,632.

Claims are made for some future expenditure. The agreed cost of psychiatric consultation is $130 per visit. Dr Vickery gave evidence of the cycle that might be involved, perhaps every three weeks extending out to perhaps every two months and of course the possibility that it will need to be more frequent if things do not turn out in accordance with optimism. The plaintiff is responding well to the injections on Modecate which costs $3.60 per injection, other medications at $13,15 per week and a bottle of Cogentin every 4 weeks.
In order to create a basis for weekly calculation one could select $15 and also treat the two smaller amounts as weekly expenditures although I recognize that they are not. The total of these ingredients would be $41.45 per week.
Until the end of the plaintiff's working life (and it was not suggested by senior counsel for the plaintiff that I should consider his life expectancy) a weekly expenditure of that amount would capitalize against the first defendant at $37,222 and against Enhance at $49,076. I have done those calculations merely to give myself a sense for guidance. I repeat that I am conscious of the errors concerning the factors and I also take into account that the need will hopefully evaporate some time during the plaintiff's working life or, in any event, any need which can be referenced to this tort will expire during that period. Having regard to the sums produced by arithmetic, I conclude that it will do justice between the respective parties if I include in damages against the first defendant a sum of $18,000 for future expenditure of all types and against Enhance of $25,000.

That leaves the final item of non economic loss or general damages. In general terms I accept the complaints of the plaintiff noting as I have, that in some respects he has the benefit of seeing some things through rose coloured glasses. I also accept generally the medical evidence tendered on his behalf.
The foregoing indicates the basis of my conclusion. Although it tended to remain in the background when contrasted with the devastating results of the psychosis, the physical consequences of the plaintiff's injury should not be discounted. I reject those medical opinions which would seek to trivialise the consequences. The very earliest treatment shows that this undetected fracture was the source of much more seriousness and potential than appeared to have been appreciated even by some of the medical attendants. The plaintiff comfortably passes the threshold tests imposed by the [Workers Compensation
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). The applicable figure for a most extreme case for injuries suffered in June 1994 is $215,550. I would assess the plaintiff's proportion at 50% and against the first defendant there will be an element of non economic loss ingredient of $107,775. Uninhibited by statute, I would assess his general damages against
Enhance at $120,000.

For ease of reference I will tabulate the ingredients against the respective defendants.

Against the First Defendant: 
Out of pocket expenses  $25,655  
Past economic loss  $71,114  
Fox versus Wood  $5,549  
Future economic loss  $166,579  
Future expenditure  $18,000  
Non economic loss  $107,775  
Total:  $394,672  
Against Enhance:  
Out of pockets  $25,655  
Past economic loss  $71,114  
Fox versus Wood  $5,549  
Future economic loss  $219,632  
Future expenditure  $25,000  
General damages  $120,000  
Total:  $466,950  
Nothing was said about any claim for interest and as is apparent from the foregoing I have not included any amount referrable to that.

The provisions of [s151Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) become pertinent. I was invited by counsel to deliver my findings and reasons without directing entry of judgments in order to allow appropriate calculations to be made in respect of not only judgment in the original action but also on the cross claims. I am pleased to respond to that sensible suggestion.

I summarize my findings (omitting the detail in the above reasons) as follows:
Each of the defendants was negligent and contributed to the plaintiff's damage.
The plaintiff was not guilty of contributory negligence.
The responsibility is apportioned between the defendants as to 25% to the first defendant employer and 75% to the second defendant supplier of the towel dispenser.
Damages are assessed against the first defendant in the sum of $394,672.
Damages are assessed against the second defendant in the sum of $466,950.

Liberty to apply to all parties in respect of formal judgment, interest if applicable and costs.
 * * * 
