

Combined Auctions Pty Ltd versus Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd Matter No Ca /95 [1997] NSWSC 612 (5 December 1997) 
Combined Auctions Pty Limited versus Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Limited 
CA 40465/95 ED 3676/94 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Priestley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: EQUITY DIVISION - YOUNG J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40465/95 ED 3676/94 
DELIVERED: 5 DECEMBER 1997 
HEARING DATE: 22 OCTOBER 1997 
PARTIES: COMBINED AUCTIONS PTY LIMITED v GRAY EISDELL TIMMS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT OF: GLEESON CJ PRIESTLEY JA STEIN JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: M. WALTON 
Respondent: F.G. LEVER / J. GOOLEY 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: TRESS COCKS & MADDOX 
Respondent: SWAAB & ASSOCIATES 
CATCHWORDS 
EQUITY - REFUSAL TO REGISTER SHARES - CONSTRUCTION OF ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION - VALIDITY OF SPECIAL RESOLUTION 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED IN PART 
NO OF PAGES: 27 
COMBINED AUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus GRAY EISDELL TIMMS PTY LIMITED 
EQUITY - REFUSAL TO REGISTER SHARES - CONSTRUCTION OF ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION - VALIDITY OF SPECIAL RESOLUTION. A member of the appellant company (Ms Berns) executed a transfer of her shares in the appellant in favour of the respondent. The directors of the appellant refused to register the transfer. After the respondent commenced proceedings to obtain the registration of the transfer, an extraordinary general meeting of the appellant was held at which four resolutions were passed. The resolutions conferred upon the managing director of the appellant voting shares sufficient to give him control of the company, limited the number of shares which could otherwise be held by any one member, and, from 1 January onwards restricted membership of the appellant to pawnbrokers. The respondent amended its pleadings seeking additionally that the resolutions be declared void. Young J ordered the appellant to register the transfer and made a declaration that all four resolutions were void. 
On appeal 
The appellant submitted that: the appellant was justified in refusing to register the transfer as cll -15 of the appellant's articles of association, which conferred upon the appellant rights of pre-emption, had not been complied with; cl 12 of the appellant's articles of association, which conferred upon the directors a general right to refuse to register a transfer, was not subject to the operation of the cll 11-15; and,
Young J's declaration that the special resolution numbered (3) was void should be set aside.

Held:
There was no effective transfer notice to set in motion the machinery of cll 11-15, and thus Ms Berns was never at liberty to transfer her shares to the respondent.
It was unnecessary to decide whether cl 12 was subject to the operation of cll 11-15.
Although the respondent, never having been entitled to be registered as a member of the appellant had no locus standi to ask the court to declare the resolutions void, the question whether the resolutions could be dealt with separately, so that one or more might be valid and the others invalid, did not appear to have been raised before Young J and therefore should not be considered on appeal.

ORDERS . Appeal upheld in regard to Young J's order that the appellant register in the name of the respondent the transfer to the respondent of Ms
Berns' shares set aside; that order set aside.
Appeal in regard to the declaration that the resolutions purported to have been passed at a general meeting of the members of the appellant held on 4
October 1994 were void, dismissed.
Costs order below set aside.
Written submissions as to the costs orders this court should make in respect both of the trial and the appeal to be filed by the parties within seven days of the date of publication of the court's judgment.

COMBINED AUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus GRAY EISDELL 
TIMMS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The relevant facts are set out in the reasons for judgment of Priestley JA, which I have had the advantage of reading in draft form. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour, and with his reasons for those orders. I would make the following brief additional observations. 
The primary issue argued in the appeal concerns the correctness of Young J's conclusion that the letter of 8 April 1994, written by Ms Berns, was what was described in argument as a "trigger notice" under Article 11 of the Articles of Association of the appellant company. Young J did not expressly deal with the question in his reasons for judgment, but the matter was argued before him, and he must have decided it adversely to the appellant.

The case provides a good illustration of why it is that the law prefers what is sometimes described as an objective approach, rather than a subjective approach, to the interpretation of documents. The typewritten portion of the letter was obviously prepared, in anticipation of Ms Berns' signature, by the lawyer for the respondent. If she had signed the document as it was drafted, no difficulty would have arisen. The lawyer obviously understood the provisions of the Articles of Association of the appellant company, and prepared the document in the light of those provisions. However, it seems equally obvious that Ms Berns did not have any clear understanding of the
Articles. The words which she added to the letter, without the knowledge or approval of the original drafter, reflected her lack of understanding. Those words, and her subsequent conversations with the person to whom the letter was addressed, make it clear that she thought that she could keep her options open in the sense that, having written the letter, she could decide whether or not to go ahead with the transfer of her shares in the light of the amount of money that the transferee was prepared to pay for them.

Reading the letter as a whole, including the handwritten words added by Ms
Berns, I find it impossible to resist the conclusion that Ms Berns, at the same time as asking Mr O'Brien to "make arrangements" for the sale of her shares, was informing him that she was not intending to commit herself to the sale of the shares until she saw how much she was going to be paid for them.
She was making only a conditional expression of her desire to sell the shares, and the condition she was expressing was inconsistent with the scheme of the
Articles.

In his reasons for judgment, Young J addressed the question whether the subsequent oral communications between Ms Berns and Mr O'Brien amounted to a withdrawal of the notice. However, the tenor of those subsequent communications was merely confirmatory of the attitude expressed by Ms Berns in her letter. The question which arose for decision was whether the letter, when read as a whole, was a notice under Article 11. In my view it was not.

I agree with Priestley JA that, in the light of that conclusion, it is unnecessary, and inappropriate, for this court to deal with the wider question of the construction of Articles 9-16 inclusive.

I also agree that, since the question of severability was not raised at first instance, it is inappropriate for this court to deal with the challenge to the special resolution amending Article 114. In the light of this court's decision on the primary issue in the case, the respondent has no standing to challenge the resolution. On the other hand, if the shareholders of the company, after considering the matter on its merits, were minded to repeat that resolution alone, there would be nothing to prevent them doing so. The reason why this court is declining to interfere with the decision of Young J insofar as it related to this particular special resolution is not based on any view that there is some inherent vice in the resolution to amend Article 114, standing alone.
 
COMBINED AUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus GRAY EISDELL TIMMS PTY LIMITED 
PRIESTLEY JA: 
Introduction and the course of the proceedings leading to the orders at first instance.

The appellant is a company which was incorporated in 1971 and has since then carried on the business of conducting auctions of unredeemed pledges on behalf of pawnbrokers. Shortly after incorporation shares were allotted to 26 members, all directly concerned with the business of pawnbroking. Mr M.
O'Brien was appointed the general manager of the appellant when it began business. Some years later he was also appointed a director of the appellant.
Until the events of 1994, which gave rise to the litigation leading to this appeal, Mr O'Brien held no shares in the appellant. When this case was heard at first instance by Young J in 1995 he noted that one third of the shareholders were not currently involved in the pawnbroking business, though they were descendants or relatives of pawnbrokers or former pawnbrokers.

The respondent is a company which carried on business as an auctioneer and valuer. It was one of the appellant's most substantial competitors. Mr G. Gray was its chairman of directors.

Upon incorporation, the appellant adopted articles of association, some of which were directed to restricting membership of the appellant, so far as was possible, to a particular class. These articles are as follow: "8. The Directors may when considering any transfer of shares submitted for registration require that the transferee submit such information as the
Directors may in all the circumstances reasonably require in order to establish whether the company would if such transfer of shares were registered be an exempt proprietary company within the meaning of the Act.
The Directors may without assigning any reason decline to register any transfer of shares. But this clause shall not apply when the proposed transferee is a member or the wife widow husband widower or child of a member.
No share shall be transferred to any person who is not a member or the wife widow husband widower or child of a member except in terms of clause 12 hereof.
Any member who is desirous of transferring any shares or share held by him in the Company shall give notice in writing (hereinafter called the transfer notice) to the Company that he desires to transfer the same. Such notice shall entitle the Company to sell the shares or share to any member of the Company or to any person selected by the Directors at the fair value as hereinafter to be ascertained in accordance with these Articles. The transfer notice may include several shares but shall if not expressly otherwise provided for therein not operate as a separate notice in respect of each share. The transfer notice shall not be revocable except with the sanction of the Directors.
If the Company shall within the space of twenty-eight days after being served with such notice find a member or person selected as aforesaid (hereinafter called "the purchasing member") willing to purchase the share or shares and shall give notice thereof to the proposing transferor he shall be bound upon payment of the fair value to transfer the share or shares to the purchasing member.
The fair value of a share shall for the purposes of these Articles be fixed in such manner as the Auditor may determine and in determining the same he shall act as an expert and not as an Arbitrator and his certificate shall be binding and conclusive of the said fair value.
If in any case the proposing transferor after having become bound as aforesaid makes default in transferring the share the Company may receive the purchase money and shall thereupon cause the name of the purchasing member to be entered in the Register as the holder of the share and shall be a good discharge to the purchasing member and after his name has been entered in the register in purported exercise of the aforesaid power the validity of the proceedings shall not be questioned by any person.
If the Company shall not within the space of twenty-eight days after being served with the transfer notice find a member or person or persons willing to purchase the shares and give notice in manner aforesaid the proposing transferor shall be at liberty at any time within three calendar months afterwards to sell and transfer the shares (or those not placed) to any person and at any price.
The Company shall not be bound by or recognise any agreement to transfer or charge any share or any equitable contingent future or partial interest in any share or any other right in respect of any share except an absolute right thereto in the person from time to time registered as the holder thereof.
No person claiming in respect of any transmission by law of the interest of any shareholder (unless he or she is the husband wife widow widower or child of such shareholder) shall have any right as a shareholder in respect of such shares except a right to transfer the same subject to and in accordance with the provisions of the regulations as to transfers herein contained.
Any person becoming entitled to the shares of any shareholder in consequence of the bankruptcy or insolvency of such shareholder or any assignment of his estate for the benefit of creditors or insanity of any shareholder or any purchases upon a sale under any process of law or any transmission by law or any other cause or thing whatsoever (unless such person be the wife widow husband widower or child of such shareholder) shall forthwith transfer or sell such shares or cause the same to be transferred or offered for sale under or pursuant to the provisions of these Articles.
Subject as hereinbefore provided the Directors may call on the executors or administrators of a deceased member to transfer the shares of the deceased to some persons to be approved by the Directors and if the executors or administrators do not comply forthwith with such call they shall be deemed to have served the Company with a transfer notice and the subsequent provisions of these Articles shall take effect." 
In February 1994 a member of the appellant took the first steps towards selling her shares to the respondent, pursuant to cl 15, if the appellant could not find a purchaser pursuant to cl 12. The transfer of this member's shares did not proceed. Then, by letter dated 8 April 1994 Ms S. G. Berns, another member, and the holder of 350 shares in the appellant wrote to Mr
O'Brien as "managing director" of the appellant saying: "Dear Mr O'Brien, 
Please make arrangements for my sale of shares in the company in accordance with the usual procedures as soon as possible.

Yours faithfully, [the letter was typed to this point, there then followed a handwritten signature of Ms Berns above her typed name, and then, below that, in handwriting] 
Dear Mick, 
Please advise best offer at earliest convenience. Will consider and re- advise. With regards, 
Susan Berns" 
This letter, in its typed form had been prepared for Ms Berns by the respondent who had offered to buy Ms Berns' shares from her at a price of at least $15 per share. The handwritten part of the letter was of Ms Berns' own authorship.

The letter was later said by the respondent to have been a notice in writing in compliance with cl 11 of the appellant's articles. Part of the case before
Young J (the respondent was the plaintiff) was that the events following the giving of the notice by Ms Berns to the appellant had led to the coming into operation of cl 15 of the articles, that Ms Berns had then sold her shares to the respondent and that the respondent was entitled to be registered as a member of the appellant. These contentions were opposed by the appellant.

In an affidavit read before Young J, Mr O'Brien said, in par 10, that after getting Ms Berns' letter dated 8 April he had a telephone conversation with her which, to the best of his recollection, was to the following effect: "Myself: `Has Geoff Gray been around to your place?' 
Ms Berns: `Yes, I don't wish to keep my shares as I am out of the industry and I want to take the best offer. I could use the money.' 
Myself: `Susan, it doesn't work that way. The shares will be sold as per the
Articles of Association at the market rate. Your late father would be very unhappy if he knew you were doing business with Geoff Gray. Combined will not register a Share Transfer in favour of Geoff Gray who you know is a competitor of our company. He is one of the main reasons that Combined was formed in the first place." 
Ms Berns: `Will the shares be worth more next year, Mick?' 
Myself: `Probably. As soon as you want to sell, Susan, I will find a buyer for you and you won't be disadvantaged." 
Ms Berns: `Well, I may not sell after all.'" 
Mr O'Brien added that he had not spoken to Ms Berns since that conversation.

Mr O'Brien was not cross-examined on his affidavit.

In an affidavit by Ms Berns read before Young J, she referred in par 2 to having had a telephone conversation with Mr O'Brien on or about Wednesday 13
April 1994. It was common ground that this was the same conversation Mr
O'Brien had spoken of in his affidavit. All Ms Berns said about this conversation was: "I said: `Could you please tell me what my shares are worth.' 
O'Brien replied: `Why don't you ring Russell Parncutt. He is the auditor of Combined Auctions
Pty Limited.'" 
Her affidavit then gave an account of subsequent conversations with Mr
Parncutt (who also gave evidence by affidavit and was cross-examined).

Miss Berns was asked some questions in cross-examination about her conversation with Mr O'Brien. The transcript records: "Q. I wanted to ask you one or two questions about your conversation with Mr
O'Brien on that Wednesday. You would agree with me, wouldn't you, that during the course of your conversation with Mr O'Brien, Mr O'Brien told you that the shares had to be sold in accordance with certain requirements of the company's articles? 
A. I cannot confirm that. I don't recall that as being part of the conversation.

Q. Do you mean by that answer that that may have happened and you just don't remember? 
A. Yes, it is possible.

Q. You asked him in the course of the conversation whether the shares might be worth more next year? 
A. Yes.

Q. And he said `Probably. As soon as you want to sell, Susan, I will find a buyer for you and you don't be disadvantaged'. Do you recall him saying that? 
A. Oh, yes. He indicated to me that he could sell my shares at any time did I desire to pursue that course.

Q. I suggest that you then responded with words like `Well, I may not sell after all'? 
A. I don't recall that.

Q. But that may have been said? 
A. It is possible." 
In the appeal to this court, the following parts of the re-examination of Ms
Berns were said to be relevant: "LEVER: Q. You were asked some questions about your conversation with Mr
O'Brien and Mr Parncutt during April, and I think May 1994. Did you ever withdraw your letter of 8 April 1994? 
OBJECTION 
A. No.

Q. You have been referred to your letter of 8 April 1994 that you put your note on the bottom of. Did you ever write to the company or to the directors, to Mick O'Brien? 
A. No.

Q. Or Mr Parncutt saying that you no longer desired to sell your shares? 
A. No, no.

Q. Did you ever have a conversation with either of those men or any other director of the company in which you told them that you no longer desired to sell your shares in the company? 
A. No, I indicated to Mr Parncutt on the occasion of the first conversation with him that I would consider what he had said and I would get back to him, but I didn't say at any stage that I wasn't going to sell the shares.".

By letter dated 28 April 1994 to all shareholders of the appellant Mr O'Brien first enclosed the 1994 dividend and then continued: "We are aware that some shareholders have been approached by Mr Geoff K Gray with offers to purchase their shares. This is a matter of great concern to your directors, who advise you NOT TO SELL. In support of this advice, your directors point out that: 
Combined Auctions Pty Ltd was formed, as all shareholders will recall, specifically to provide pawnbroker/shareholders with a united forum in which to efficiently and economically dispose of unredeemed pledges by auction. It has consistently succeeded in fulfilling that aim, to the benefit of all shareholders.

We are not aware of Mr Gray's intentions in relation to your company. He has, over the years, and recently, expressed his desire to `take us over', but no formal offers or notices as required by law have been received.

Some of our shareholders no longer have an active interest in the company, and it is these whom Mr Gray appears to be targeting, on a one-by-one basis.
We respectfully remind all shareholders that, until an offeror (eg Gray) has acquired 20% of the total shareholding, he is not bound by the takeover provisions of the Corporations Law and can therefore offer different prices and conditions to different shareholders. 20% of the shareholding of this company represents over 3,500 shares, and no individual shareholder has anything like this quantity.

As your company is a proprietary company, all transfers of shares must be approved by your directors in order to be valid. Your directors do not intend to approve any share transfers to interests associated with Mr Gray. However, shareholders who are no longer actively associated with the company may wish, for their own personal reasons, to dispose of their shares. Your directors are happy at any time to assist in locating a suitable buyer, that is, an active pawnbroker whether or not currently a shareholder.

The reasons for forming Combined Auctions Pty Ltd, over twenty years ago, remain just as valid as they were then. Predatory approaches from persons outside the pawnbroking industry are in conflict with the aims of the company and with the interests of all shareholders. Mr Gray's overtures should therefore be firmly rejected." 
No steps were taken by the appellant pursuant to cl 12 of the articles to find a buyer for Ms Berns' shares within the twenty-eight days given by the clause.
On 25 May 1994 Ms Berns signed a transfer of her shares to the respondent for $6,300. This transfer was sent by the solicitors for the respondent to the appellant's directors with a request for its registration pursuant to cl 15, by letter dated 27 June 1994.

On 1 July 1994 Mr O'Brien and Mr Phegan (the other director of the appellant) held a directors' meeting at which they tabled the share transfer to the respondent and resolved to decline to register it pursuant to cl 9 of the articles. By letter bearing the same date the appellant notified the respondent's solicitors that its directors had declined to register the transfer. The letter gave no reason for the declining.

By letter dated 6 July 1994 Mr Parncutt wrote to Ms Berns saying that the board of the appellant had indicated that it would register a transfer of her shares to a named buyer at the same consideration as stated in the transfer to the respondent.

By letter dated 7 July 1994 the solicitors for the respondent replied to the appellant's letter of 1 July 1994 asserting the entitlement of the respondent to have the transfer to it registered and indicating that proceedings would be instituted to compel the directors to authorise the registration if their requirement was not met.

On 17 August 1994 the respondent paid $6,300 to Ms Berns for her 350 shares.

On 6 September 1994 the respondent began proceedings by summons directed to obtaining the registration of the transfer to the respondent of Ms Berns' shares.

On 7 September 1994 the directors of the appellant gave notice to members of an extraordinary general meeting of the appellant to be held on 4 October
The notice said that the business to be conducted at the meeting was to consider and if thought fit pass the following four resolutions: (A special resolution) "That the Directors issue to Michael O'Brien 12,000 shares (`Voting Shares') partly paid to $0.01, which carry the following rights, obligations and limitations: a par value of $1.00; a right to vote at any general meeting of the Company; no right to participate in dividends; the Voting Shares are not transferable except in accordance with paragraph (e); if the holder of the Voting Shares dies or ceases to be a Director of the
Company: the Directors may resolve that: 
A. the Voting Shares be transferred to any Director of the Company (`the
Transferee'); or 
B the Voting Shares be redeemed by the Company; in the case of a transfer, upon the Transferee paying to the holder the par value of the Voting Shares minus any amount not paid up on the Voting
Shares, the Directors must register the Transferee as holder of the Voting
Shares; in the case of a redemption, upon the Company paying to the holder the par value of the Voting Shares minus any amount not paid up on the Voting
Shares, the Directors must redeem the Voting Shares.
 participation on a winding up is limited to repayment of the par value of the Voting Shares minus any amount not paid up on the Voting Shares; and in all other respects, the Voting Shares carry the same rights and obligations as ordinary shares of the Company." (An ordinary resolution) "That the Company agrees to the issue and allotment to Michael O'Brien of ,000 Voting Shares." 
A special resolution) "That the Articles of Association of the Company be amended by inserting the following regulation 114: `(a) A member may not hold more than 10% of the issued share capital of the
Company carrying a right to participate in dividends.

If a member holds more than 10% of the issued share capital of the
Company carrying a right to participate in dividends, the member is regarded as having given a transfer notice to the Company under regulation 11 in relation to the shares in excess of the 10% limit.'" "(4) (A special resolution) "That the Articles of Association of the Company be amended by inserting the following regulation 115: 
Regulation 115 comes into effect on 1 January 2000.

If, from time to time, a member of the Company is not or ceases to be: actively engaged in a pawnbroking business; or the nominee of a person who is actively engaged in a pawnbroking business, the member is regarded as having given a transfer notice to the Company under regulation 11 in relation to the member's shares." 
These resolutions were passed unanimously at the extraordinary general meeting and on 17 October 1994 the 12,000 Voting Shares were allotted to Mr O'Brien.

Subsequently the respondent filed an amended summons seeking in addition to the relief originally sought, declarations that the four resolutions passed at the meeting of 4 October 1994 were void.

Young J granted the respondent the relief sought in regard both to the share transfer and the four resolutions.

As to the share transfer he held that the power of the directors to decline to register any transfer of shares without assigning any reason set out in cl 9 (see p 2 above) was subject to the special articles concerning transfers of shares in the appellant provided for in cll 11-15 (see pp 2 and 3 above). As the respondent had complied with cll 11-15, the directors had no right to refuse to register the transfer. Necessarily involved in this conclusion was a finding that Ms Berns' letter dated 8 April 1994 was an effective "notice in writing" within the meaning of cl 11. Because of his conclusion on the construction of the articles Young J refrained from deciding on the possible applicability of <case> of the Corporations Law to the case. The respondent had relied upon the applicability of this provision amongst its various arguments.

In dealing with the resolutions, Young J considered that the respondent had locus standi to challenge their validity because of his view that the respondent had been entitled at the time of the passing of the resolutions to be registered as a member of the appellant. Proceeding on that footing, some quite complicated points then required discussion by him. In the event he held that resolutions (1) and (2) were invalid. His substantial reason appears to have been that resolution (1) involved "complete surrender of the control" of the appellant to Mr O'Brien. Young J found it "extremely difficult to contemplate how any reasonable body of directors or reasonable body of shareholders when faced with the problem of a perceived attack on the company by Mr Gray and the plaintiff, would have thought that such a reaction is fair and in the interests of all the members." 
A little earlier he had said that the relevant resolution had not merely conferred "governing director-type powers on Mr O'Brien" nor merely left him in a position of control of the appellant but had also rewarded him "by allowing him a large slice of the equity capital of the [respondent] with minimum investment".

These remarks seem to show a misunderstanding of the rights attached to the shares described in resolution (1). The shares gave Mr O'Brien a right to vote at general meetings of the appellant. Once issued, his shares numbered 12,000 out of approximately 29,000 shares issued altogether by the appellant. He had no right to dividends nor any right to share in the assets of the appellant upon a winding up beyond the right to a return of any amount he had actually paid on his 12,000 shares.

Having held that resolutions (1) and (2) were invalid, Young J declared all the resolutions were void. From discussion of this aspect of the case in the course of the appeal it appeared that although the trial judge had been addressed about the resolutions individually, it had never been put to him that he might find one or more invalid and the others valid, so that he may well have been left with the impression that the parties were expecting that if he found one resolution bad, then they would all fall. (Counsel for the appellant, who had appeared at the trial, told this court that whether the resolutions were severable "was not the subject of discussion, as far as I can recall").

As entered, the court's formal order comprised an order that the appellant register Ms Berns' shares in the name of the respondent; a declaration that all four resolutions were void; and an order that the appellant pay the respondent's costs.

The appellant appealed.

The appeal.

In its appeal the appellant sought the setting aside of (a) the order to register shares in the respondent's name, and (b) the declaration that the special resolution numbered (3) was void. No argument was put concerning the declaration of voidness of the other three resolutions. The appellant expressly did not seek the setting aside of the declaration so far as it concerned them.

Necessarily, the first step in Young J's reasoning had to be that Ms Berns' letter dated 8 April 1994 had been a "triggering notice" for the purposes of cl 11 of the appellant's articles. An argument had been put to him by the appellant, (repeated in this court), that the terms of the letter of 8 April , read as a whole, did not constitute a cl 11 notice. Young J did not deal with the argument in so many words, but must have rejected it, because the whole of his reasoning was based on the view that the letter had been effective for the purpose of setting the procedure of cll 11-15 of the articles in motion.

The argument about the letter is logically the first argument in the case.
Before coming directly to consider the argument, it is necessary to mention that on a matter related to it, the trial judge observed: "There is some discrepancy in the evidence between the version of the phone conversations given by Miss Berns on the one hand and those given by Mr
O'Brien and Mr Parncutt on the other. My view is that I should accept Miss
Berns' evidence on these matters." 
I think Mr O'Brien's name must have been mentioned by the judge in this passage inadvertently. If his name be left out, then the passage is unexceptionable. On the evidence only one conversation ever took place between
Mr O'Brien and Ms Berns following her sending of the letter dated 8 April
Mr O'Brien was not cross-examined on his recollection of the conversation and the little evidence which Ms Berns gave about the arguably relevant parts of the conversation was to the effect that although she did not remember those parts it was possible that they could have happened. In these circumstances, if there is any discrepancy between the evidence of Mr O'Brien and Ms Berns, I do not see how it can have been open to the judge to accept that of Ms Berns in preference to that of Mr O'Brien.

The first argument required close reading of cl 11. The clause required a member wishing to use it to be "desirous" of transferring the member's shares when giving notice under the clause and that the notice should state that the member "desires" to transfer the shares. Upon the effective giving of such a notice two consequences immediately followed: the notice could not be revoked by the giver except with the sanction of the appellant's directors; and the appellant had twenty-eight days to find a purchaser. The latter consequence in turn raised two possibilities: if a purchaser were found and notice given to the proposing transferor then that member was bound by cl 12 to transfer the shares to the purchaser once the fair value of the shares had been ascertained pursuant to cl 13 and payment of that fair value made to the transferor; if no purchaser were found, the proposing transferor was at liberty to sell his, her or its shares to any person and at any price (cl 15).

It was submitted that the relevant clauses made it clear that the member seeking to set the machinery of cll 11-15 going by giving notice under cl 11 must be unconditionally "desirous" of transferring the shares; notice of a conditional desire to transfer them would not be within the clause.

It was then said that the terms of Ms Berns' handwritten addition to the typescript prepared for her by the respondent showed she was at best giving a conditional notice. It was submitted that her own words clearly conveyed a meaning to the effect "I am reserving the right not to transfer - I will not decide to transfer until I know the price and approve of it".

For the respondent it was said that the court should take the typed part of the letter as the operative part and the handwritten part as not affecting the intent of Ms Berns to bring herself within the provision of the articles which would bring about a sale either to a purchaser found by the appellant, or failing that, to whomsoever she chose. Some reliance was placed upon her oral evidence in support of this submission. I doubt whether her oral evidence should in any event be taken into account because the letter either was notice under cl 11 on the date when it was served upon the appellant or it was not.
It seems probable to me that the effect and meaning of the letter should be looked at as at the date of service. However, if it were permissible to take into account subsequent conversations, the only one that would be of any relevance, to my mind, would be that with Mr O'Brien, and his version of the conversation, which for the reasons already given I think should be accepted, to the extent that it furnishes any assistance at all, in my view tends to support the construction which the appellant seeks to put upon the letter.

Quite apart from that, however, my opinion is that when the letter is looked at as a whole, it carries a meaning to the effect of that contended for by the appellant. This conclusion means that the machinery of cll 11-15 was never set in motion and that Ms Berns never reached the stage of being at liberty pursuant to cl 15 to sell her shares to the respondent.

For the appellant it had been argued that the trial judge had been wrong in his construction of the articles and that cl 9 was not subject to cll 11-15.
This question seems to me to be quite difficult and since it is unnecessary for me to decide it, I will not attempt to do so.

In my view the appeal concerning the registration of the share transfer should be upheld and Young J's order that the appellant register the share transfer to the respondent, should be set aside.

As already mentioned, the appellant's appeal concerning Young J's declaration that all four resolutions of 4 October 1994 were void was limited to seeking to have that declaration set aside in respect of resolution (3) only. It was submitted that it was severable from the other three resolutions and that the court could declare that it, looked at alone, should not have been held to be void in that it was in no way oppressive and interfered with the rights of no shareholder. At the time it was passed no shareholder held ten percent of the class of shares dealt with by the resolution. For the respondent it was said that the resolution potentially interfered with the power of members to increase their shareholding beyond the limits permitted by the resolution. For the respondent it was also submitted that the resolution could not be separated from the other three passed at the same meeting.

This aspect of the case appears to have been conducted before the trial judge without any attention ever having been given to the question whether the resolution could be severed in this way. Because of this I do not think this court should embark upon such a course. I would therefore decline to accede to the appellant's submission that this court should set aside the declaration invalidating all four resolutions in respect of one resolution only. To do that would be to decide a question of severability not dealt with at first instance, which if raised may have altered the course of what happened at that stage. I think the court should reach this result notwithstanding that the consequence of my opinion that the respondent was not entitled to be registered as a member of the appellant at the time when the resolutions were passed is that the respondent had no locus standi to ask the court to declare the resolutions void.

On this aspect of the appeal therefore I would refuse to make the limited order that the appellant asks for.

Conclusion.

In my opinion the appeal should be upheld, and Young J's order that the appellant register in the name of the respondent the transfer to the respondent of Ms Berns' shares set aside; no order should be made concerning resolution (3); and the costs order below should be set aside.

Written submissions as to the costs orders this court should make in respect both of the trial and the appeal should be filed by the parties within seven days of the date of publication of the court's judgment.

COMBINED AUCTIONS PTY LIMITED v

GRAY EISDELL TIMMS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
