

Sportstravel Australia P/L versus Lye and Anor [1996] NSWSC 647 (20 December )

Sportstravel Australia Pty Limited versus Lye & Anor /96 December 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 18 April 1996. Since that time, various pleadings have been filed. The present pleadings consist of an Amended Statement of Claim, an Amended Defence and a Reply.

The plaintiff claims possession of the land and premises known as the "Big
River Motel" (the premises). The claim for possession is resisted on a number of grounds.

On 17 July 1996, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. The plaintiff seeks, inter alia, summary judgment pursuant to Part 13 rule 2 of the Supreme Court
Rules. For present purposes, the Court is concerned only with that application. On 1 November 1996, a special fixture for the hearing of the application was allocated. The hearing of the application took place on 4
December 1996.

A considerable body of affidavit material has been placed before the Court.
There has been some cross-examination of one of the defendants (Mr Ollis).
Some documentation has been tendered.

The plaintiff is the registered proprietor of the premises. The premises are used for the purposes of carrying on the business of a motel and restaurant.
The evidence establishes that the restaurant part of the business is ancillary to the conduct of the motel.

On 30 March 1995, an Agreement was made between the plaintiff and the defendants. A copy of that Agreement is an annexure to an affidavit sworn by
Mr Anthony on 16 July 1996. It was intended as a joint venture agreement. The expressed purpose of the joint venture was the registering of a plan of strata subdivision, the effecting of a sale of the strata titled units and to lease the premises in the interim period. The Lease or tenancy provisions are set forth in Clause 4 of the Agreement (4.7 provides for termination of the Lease by notice in writing upon, inter alia, default in payment of rent). Clause 13 provides for termination of the Agreement upon default. These provisions require the non-defaulting party to give, inter alia, a Notice of Default.

The plaintiff claims that there has been a history of default in payment of rent. The defendants dispute the allegations of default. The plaintiff's entitlement to possession is dependent upon it establishing that there has been default at the relevant times.

It seems that rent payments were not made in any regular fashion. It is claimed that rent has been paid by way of personal cheque, third party cheque and cash. The area of dispute relates to the receipt of payments allegedly made by way of personal cheque, third party cheque and cash. An endeavour to reduce the area of dispute led to the compilation of annexure `D' to the affidavit sworn by Mr Anthony on 30 September 1996. The quantum in dispute is relatively substantial.

It seems to be common ground that the Lease commenced on Friday, 31 March
It was for a term ending on 30 June 1996. The defendants allege that an agreement was reached to extend the term for a further period of six months.
This allegation is disputed. For the purposes of this application, it is conceded by the plaintiff that there is a triable issue on that question.

The Amended Statement of Claim purports to allege three alternative causes of action. The first of the three is said to arise from what is pleaded in, inter alia, paragraphs 1- 2A thereof.

The second cause of action is that of termination of the Lease by reason of default in payment of rent as at 7 March 1996. The third cause of action is that of termination by effluxion of time.

By reason of matters earlier mentioned (including the concession that there is a triable issue on the allegation of agreement to extend the term of the
Lease), the plaintiff cannot succeed on the first and third causes of action in this application.

Accordingly, for present purposes, the plaintiff to succeed must demonstrate default and termination by written notice.

The Amended Defence raises a number of matters. The allegations of default and termination have been put in issue. It is said that the plaintiff has failed to comply with the provisions of Clause 13 and of section 129 of the
Conveyancing Act, 1919. It is said that the plaintiff is precluded from bringing these proceedings by reason of the provisions of the Retail Leases
Act, 1994 (the Act).

During this hearing, it was accepted by the defendants that the defence pleading non-compliance with the provisions of section 129 has no application in the case of a default in payment of rent. Accordingly, this matter was not relied on by the defendants.

In my view, the argument based on the provisions of Clause 13 is without substance. I consider that the plaintiff is entitled to rely on the provisions of Clause 4. The plaintiff may terminate the Lease without, inter alia, giving a Notice of Default pursuant to Clause 13.

The Court has been referred to a number of the provisions of the Act (including sections 3, 5, 63, 68 and 79). When regard is had to the relevant provisions of the Act and the evidence, I consider that the arguments advanced on behalf of the defendants must fail. I am satisfied, inter alia, that the premises are not a "retail shop" and that the Lease is not a "retail shop lease". In any event, I am satisfied that the premises would be excluded from the operation of the Act.

I now turn to the question of default. One of the issues propounded by the plaintiff is whether or not the defendants were in default as at 7 March 1996.
It involves many questions of fact.

In many respects, the evidence was unsatisfactory. There is conflicting evidence from Mr Anthony and Mr Ollis. There is some questionable documentation.

The plaintiff has not identified due dates for the payment of rent. Payments were made on an irregular basis. Apart from disputes concerning the receipt of payment, there are disputes concerning alleged conversations (including discussion which is said to give rise to agreement to set off certain payments against rental).

Certain of the material deposed to by Mr Ollis (concerning payment) was inadmissible in form. It was objected to and rejected. This led to the tender of the documents which were admitted as Exhibit 1. These documents were not overly helpful.

Mr Ollis gave some unhelpful oral evidence concerning purported receipts (Exhibits B and C). There was material which threw up the question of whether or not there had been unauthorised alteration to documentation. There was copy documentation annexed to an affidavit sworn by Mr Ollis which differed from an original and carbon copy. It may be that Ms Lye could have thrown some light on these matters. She did not give any evidence.

The evidence could be described as unmanageable. It saw the parties adopting diametrically opposed stances.

The basic position of the plaintiff is that, on any view, as at 7 March 1996, there was a shortfall in rental payments. The basic position of the defendants is that, at that date, the defendants had paid rent in advance of that which had fallen due.

For the purposes of assisting their respective cases, Counsel have prepared certain schedules. Unfortunately, the assistance that can be gleaned from the schedules is dependent on the evidence that has been placed before the Court.
This evidence was not sufficiently helpful.

On the evidence before me, default has not been clearly demonstrated. The issue is one upon which the Court remains in doubt. I should add that it is an issue which I do not regard as being appropriate for summary disposition.

It seems to me that the question of default is best left for determination at the trial. At a trial, the Court has the advantage of evidence from all relevant witnesses and the material documentation is placed before it. In this case, the question of credibility of various witnesses will be a matter of significance. It would seem that findings of adverse credibility and dishonesty are likely.

There is abundant authority for the proposition that summary relief should only be granted in clear cases. It is a discretionary remedy. The applicant seeking relief bears the onus of satisfying the Court of entitlement to the relief claimed.

I consider that justice is best done between the parties by a refusal of the application for summary relief. I am not satisfied that this is one of those clear cases. In my view, the plaintiff has failed to discharge the onus on the vital question of default.

Perhaps, I should elaborate on one other matter. There was some argument concerning a question of whether or not the plaintiff had validly terminated the Lease in September 1996. The plaintiff sought to rely on such a purported termination as a further alternative cause of action. The matter of such termination was raised in the plaintiff's Reply by way of answer to a purported defence (that, by agreement, there had been an extension of the lease period). This plea did not provide a defence to the allegation of termination of the Lease in March 1996. It was raised to answer the third alternative claim for possession (which was based on effluxion of time).

The defendants contend that the only cause of action that can be relied on for the purposes of this application is the allegation of termination of the Lease in March 1996. In my view, this submission is correct. I do not consider that the present pleadings allege as a cause of action the purported termination in
September 1996.

I refuse the application for summary judgment. I reserve the question of the costs of the application for summary judgment. It seems to me that justice is best done between the parties if that question is left to be decided at a later time (such as after the trial of the proceedings).

The Notice of Motion contains prayers for other relief. I stand the balance of the Notice of Motion over generally with liberty to restore on 7 days' notice.
 * * * 
