

Scott Holdings Ltd versus the Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the
Archidiocese of Sydney and Ors [1996] NSWSC 182 (7 June 1996) 
SCOTTS HOLDINGS LTD versus THE TRUSTEES OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH FOR THE
ARCHDIOCESE OF SYDNEY & ORS /96 
FRIDAY 31 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The defendant is the proprietor of land in Gloucester Street,
Sydney. It would appear that that land is ripe for redevelopment and that there are three proposals whereby it would be redeveloped.

One proposal is by a South Australian corporation listed on the Australian
Stock Exchange, known as Alliance Holdings Ltd ("Alliance"), which is not a party to these proceedings. However, it is a company which is managing and controlling a joint venture between three Singapore bodies, one of which is the plaintiff and another of which is the second defendant.

That proposal involves the erection of a thirty-five storey building, twenty- five floors being used as serviced apartments, which would be managed by a subsidiary of the plaintiff for its great profit. A second proposal has been put up by the third defendant, Mr Lee, who is a controlling party of the second defendant and who is thus associated with the joint venture. A third proposal is put by an outside party and it is not necessary to detail that further. The third defendant's proposal involves the erection of a hotel on the land.

On 29 May 1996 the plaintiff approached the Chief Judge as the Duty Judge and obtained an ex parte injunction restraining the first defendant up to today from entering into any contract with the second or third defendants with respect to the subject land. At that stage the second, third and fourth defendants were not parties to the proceedings. They were only added when I gave leave to amend the summons approximately an hour ago. The only reason given why these parties were not added to the proceedings last Wednesday or why any notice was not given to them of today's application was because commercial delicacies within the joint venture may have inhibited that course.

The plaintiff says that there are three causes of action which it has against the third defendant. First, it says that Mr Lee is bound by the contractual requirements of the joint venture agreement, especially cll 12.13 and 12.14, which require the upmost good faith with respect to the co-venturers.
Secondly, it says that Mr Lee is plainly in a fiduciary position with respect to the other joint venturers and it would be unconscionable in the extreme to allow Mr Lee to make a profit out of a transaction which only came to his notice because of his association with the joint venture. Indeed, Mr Coles QC, who appears with Mr White for the plaintiff, says that it would be adding insult to injury in this case because the plaintiff actually was the one who discovered the possibility of making large profits out of this transaction and instead of exploiting it itself put the project in the hands of the joint venture.

The third way of putting the matter is that Mr Lee owes a fiduciary duty to
Alliance and that <case> of the Corporations Law gives the plaintiff a right to approach the court. This third submission runs contrary to the way in which s 1324 has been expounded by the courts and I need not say anything more about it.

The case in contract is, I think, a little weak until the agreement is stamped in New South Wales, but even if it were Mr Lee is not an actual party to the contract. The fiduciary obligation basis appears to be the strongest arrow in the plaintiff's quiver at this stage.

It is well known that to get an interlocutory injunction a plaintiff has to demonstrate (a) a prima facie or arguable case; (b) that damages are not an adequate remedy; and (c) that the balance of convenience or balance of justice favours the grant of an injunction over the refusal of an injunction.

For the moment I will assume that there is an arguable case of breach of fiduciary duty. However, so far as damages are concerned, the case has a slight twist because for breach of a fiduciary duty the liability of the defendant is not to pay damages but to pay equitable compensation. Therefore, it is not a case of looking to see whether the remedies at law are insufficient, because by definition they are, it is more a question of looking to see whether the equitable remedy of injunction chosen by the plaintiff is more appropriate to another equitable remedy which is available, namely equitable compensation. Accordingly, the matter really should be looked at under the heading of balance of convenience or balance of justice.

As to this matter, there are a number of factors to consider. The first is that what is being sought by the plaintiff is an injunction to stop the first defendant entering into a contract with the second and third defendants with respect to the land. The first defendant was not a party to the joint venture agreement, nor on the evidence before me to date had it any notice of rights under that agreement before the affidavits of the plaintiff were served on it.

Mr Coles QC puts that the church in all the circumstances, including now it has knowledge of the agreement, knows that if it deals with Mr Lee or the second defendant it will be involving itself in an unconscionable breach of an obvious fiduciary duty and, accordingly, the church should be restrained.

When it was put that on the evidence before me the church will lose about $4.4 million if it deals with the Alliance bid rather than Mr Lee's bid or $2.6 million if it deals with the Alliance bid as opposed to the third party's bid, and that there is no way in which the plaintiff is going to be responsible for that loss, the answer was that third parties every now and again do suffer incidental losses if they are caught up in a bout of unconscionable conduct and it is the prime duty of the court to stop the unconscionable conduct. I must say that I do not accept that proposition, at least in the wide way in which it was put.

Another consideration is that Alliance is not a party. Although there may well, in view of recent decisions on fiduciary duty in this Court, be fiduciary duties between members of a co-venture, Equity usually does not give relief unless all the relevant parties are added to the suit and it would seem to me that Alliance is a necessary party.

The next matter that needs to be considered is what would happen if no injunction were granted. It may very well be that the first defendant will enter into a contract with the second or third defendants, but that would not seem to me to be the end of the matter. The contract will involve sensitive land in the city Rocks redevelopment area. The evidence to date suggests that there is a development application granted in respect of serviced apartments, but there is no indication of any development approval for a hotel.

It would seem to me far more likely than not that the contract will take at least six to eight weeks to complete and until those six to eight weeks have expired and the contract is completed there is no irreparable harm. Everything can be reversed.

Mr Coles QC puts to that that the second and third defendants are well known as being resourceful people of business and may very well develop some strategy whereby they can assign the innocent third party or otherwise put the matter out of the court's reach. I think this is speculation and insofar as it is speculation it discounts the ability of this Court to follow misdeeds with respect to land in New South Wales .

Another factor is that Mr Lee has not been given any notice of today's application, yet he is a person who is likely to be affected by it, and there is no proper explanation as to why he was not.

Finally, equitable compensation would appear to be an appropriate remedy and, indeed, the more appropriate remedy, and Mr Lee would appear to be, especially if his hotel venture is successful, a person who would be able to afford to pay the equitable compensation.

Mr Coles QC says that this project was to be the plaintiff's flagship in
Australia and that commercially it will suffer a lot. I take that into account, but I do not think it outweighs the other factors.

Accordingly, I am not prepared to extend the injunction which the Chief Judge gave and I dismiss the present motion against the first defendant with costs.

There was an associated application made against Mr Lee. Mr Stevens QC, who appeared with Mr Pritchard for the first defendant did not appear for Mr Lee or his associates. That matter was heard ex parte.

The case against Mr Lee is stronger than the case involving the first defendant because he is the person who is actually alleged to be guilty of breach of fiduciary duty. However, it does seem to me that the factors which I enumerated under balance of convenience mean that there should be no grant of an injunction against the other defendants at this stage either.

I order that the proceedings continue by way of pleadings. The statement of claim duly verified is to be filed and served by 7 June 1996 and I note that the plaintiff will be moving for expedition before the Expedition Judge on 14
June 1996.
 * * * 
