

National Power Australia Llc versus Energy Australia Matter No 50036/98 [1998]
NSWSC 466 (24 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 November 1998 
NATIONAL POWER AUSTRALIA LLC versus ENERGY AUSTRALIA /98 July 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: NATIONAL POWER AUSTRALIA LLC versus ENERGY AUSTRALIA 
Proceedings: 50036/1998 
Dates of Hearing: 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 July 1998 
Further Written Submissions: 20, 21 July 1998 
Date of Judgment: 24 July 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr R J Ellicott QC/Mr A Leopold/Mr J D Smith 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Dunhill Madden Butler 
Counsel for Defendants: Mr A J Sullivan QC/Mr I E Davidson 
Solicitors for Defendants: Corrs Chambers Westgarth 
Construction of an agreement under which the defendant has a right to terminate if conditions are not fulfilled provided the defendant has provided reasonable assistance in the fulfilment of the conditions.

Held: that any failure to provide reasonable assistance must be causative of or materially contribute to the non-fulfilment the onus being on the party resisting termination: Plumor versus Handley [(1996) 41 NSWLR 30] and Hunyor & Anor versus Tilelli (McLelland CJinEq - 24 April 1997 - unreported) applied 
Held: on the facts reasonable assistance not furnished which did cause or materially contribute to the non-fulfilment 
Held: Plaintiff entitled to a declaration that the defendant not entitled to terminate 
Held: claim under the Trade Practices Act dismissed 
Interpretation of Agreement: Australian Broadcasting Commission versus Australian Performing Right Association Limited <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] applied 
I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The December 1997 Proceedings 12 
The Pleadings 12 
A Consideration Of The Relief Claimed 26 
The Defendant's Change Of Attitude 27 
The Proper Construction Of Clause 4.2 99 
The Issues 115 
The Defendant's Claim For A Letter Of Credit 117 
The Position Of Dresdner 142 
A Conclusion On Adequate Capacity 157 
A Consideration Of Sub-Clause 4.2(a)(i) 161 
The Conclusions I Have Reached 166 
Documentation Required On Financial Closing 169 
The Claim For Damages 171 
The Trade Practices Act Claim 171 
Some Other Matters 172 
Injunctive Relief 173 
Orders And Declaration 174 
NATIONAL POWER AUSTRALIA LLC versus ENERGY AUSTRALIA 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The plaintiff, National Power Australia LLC, for which Mr R.J. Ellicott of
Queen's Counsel, Mr A. Leopold of Counsel and Mr J.D. Smith of Counsel appeared, is, and has been since 1993, a company organised under the laws of
Delaware, United States of America and registered as an Australian registered body. It is a developer, owner and operator of steam and electric power plants in which it applies its patented technology, namely a fluidised bed combustor, to combust waste fuels in what it asserts to be an environmentally acceptable fashion. A purpose, and perhaps the main one, to which this technology can be applied is the use of coal tailings as a fuel to create electricity and certain bi-products.

From about 1993 the plaintiff's activities in Australia related, inter alia, to the Redbank Power Project, and the present proceedings are concerned with a
Power Purchase and Hedge Agreement, ("the PPHA"), in relation to that project into which National Power Partners entered on 28 March 1996 with the defendant, Energy Australia, for which Mr A.J. Sullivan of Queen's Counsel and
Mr I.E. Davidson of Counsel appeared. In the PPHA National Power Partners was referred to as "the Generator". On 29 July 1996 a Novation Agreement was entered into whereby the plaintiff was substituted for National Power
Partners. The project provided for the construction of a power station near the Warkworth Coal Mine, which is a short distance south west of Singleton in the Hunter Valley in the Shire of Singleton, which would utilise coal tailings produced by that mine, including those formerly produced and impounded in a large tailing dam, as fuel for the generation of electricity in what were considered to be more acceptable environmental and economic ways, and for the sale of that electricity, essentially, to the defendant. The facility was to have a capacity of approximately 128 megawatts and to be known as Redbank
Power Station. Compared to other electricity producing facilities in the
Hunter Valley area, this was a relatively small capacity. The cost of construction was in the order of $315m. The director of the plaintiff, who had the over-all control of the proposed development in Australia, was Mr Roy
David Alper.

The negotiations required considerations on a number of fronts. I do not necessarily put these in order of priority. The plaintiff had to be sure that if it obtained consent to build the facility it would have a purchaser for the electricity. It negotiated with MetNorth, by which name the defendant was formerly known, for it to purchase the electricity. It had to ensure the acquisition of the tailings from the Warkworth Mine. It had to obtain development and construction approvals from Singleton Shire Council, and overcome opposition from those with genuine concerns for the preservation of the environment to the effect that the activities would be detrimental to the environment. This led to a long fought case in the Land and Environment Court in which the plaintiff's view prevailed. That victory did not, however, prevent those with a contrary opinion from continuing to voice it.

It was necessary to have negotiations and discussions with State and Federal
Governments generally and to attempt to win concessions for carrying out the venture. No doubt cogent points in these discussions were the development of further employment opportunities in the area during the construction and operational phases, the overall development that would follow, and the "environmentally friendly" methods which would be used.

The plaintiff was unable to finance the development. It was never suggested it could. Hence, it had to arrange for substantial loans and investments. Prior to the Federal budget of May 1997 the Federal Government had provided assistance for developers through infra-structure bonds. In attempting to organise the financial side the plaintiff relied heavily on these. The May budget removed them. The plaintiff lobbied Federal parliamentarians for a "grandfather" provision, i.e. one which would ensure that the infra-structure bonds were kept in place for projects which were well "on line" when the change was made. Ultimately this was not successful, although, after further lobbying, the Federal Government provided another form of benefit. Much was sought to be made, in cross-examination, of the stance adopted by the plaintiff in lobbying the Federal Government on the basis that if the infra- structure bonds were not maintained it was doubtful whether the project could go ahead, thereby jeopardising development and employment opportunities on the one hand; and continuing to assert to the defendant that, irrespective of the
Federal Government's decision, the project would proceed, on the other. Mr
Alper explained the apparent inconsistency satisfactorily in my view. He said that by mid 1997 the plaintiff was concerned that the defendant wished to avoid the PPHA, if it could, and he did not wish to provide it with an opportunity to do so by disclosing the financial difficulties.

The plaintiff also had to arrange for lenders and investors to provide project funding, i.e. funding which would enable the facility to be built and become operational, at which stage it would derive income from the sale of electricity either to the defendant or, if it produced more than the defendant required or was obliged to take, to a pool, which purchased and distributed excess electricity. They would demand access to all relevant information to enable them to carry out due diligence tests. Much evidence was led about the extent of the information provided by the plaintiff to the defendant and the obligation to furnish more. However, from the potential lenders' and investors' point of view a matter of obvious concern was to ensure that the defendant would proceed with the PPHA and continue to purchase the electricity. Generally speaking money earned would be used firstly in paying operating costs; secondly, in paying difference payments pursuant to the hedging arrangements in the PPHA; thirdly and fourthly, in discharge of interest and principal payments respectively to the lenders, although there was an issue as to whether this only applied to "senior debt" or also to "subordinated debt" and equity investment; and finally by way of interest and dividends to investors.

What I have described is but a brief outline of the many negotiations and discussions, which had to take place in seeking to organise such a project.
But it is sufficient to show the magnitude of the task, with the associated cost, the plaintiff had undertaken.

In February 1996 Energy Australia prepared a detailed Business Evaluation of the proposal to be placed before its shareholder, the Government of New South
Wales, the purpose being to enable the Government to decide whether it would enter into the PPHA. It did so in circumstances where it was a retailer, i.e.
a purchaser of electricity for distribution to consumers, and whereby it agreed, in essence, to acquire such electricity pursuant to a pricing arrangement which provided for hedging of the amount payable in various ways.
The hedging operated to establish maximum and minimum prices and, depending on the circumstances in relation to the hedges, money was payable by the plaintiff to the defendant or vice versa. The PPHA provided for adjustments by way of set-off. At the moment it is not necessary for me to explore the intricacies of this arrangement, but rather to note it to explain why the PPHA was referred to, in part, as a hedging agreement.

The present proceedings, which require an even more urgent resolution than most commenced in this Division, at least on the issue of liability, were commenced by a Summons issued on 27 March 1998, which was amended on 17 April and, subsequently, on 19 June 1998. Since their inception they have been subjected to intensive case management and, on 8 May 1998, the issues propounded in paragraphs B2 to B8 of the Further Amended Summons were specially fixed for hearing to commence on 6 July 1998.

The parties placed before me some fifteen lever arch files of documents. Time did not permit a consideration of each one and of objections, although the parties were not precluded from objecting to any document to which reference was made. I indicated to the parties that I would only have regard to such of the documents as were referred to in the evidence or in submissions and to which no objection was taken. There was no disagreement with this course because of the severe time constraints imposed in not only having the matter heard, but a judgment given.

The parties agreed, in the circumstances, that final oral submissions should be concluded by Friday, 17 July 1998 and Counsel spoke to quite extensive written submissions. On 20, 21 and 22 July 1998 I received further written submissions some of which referred to and appended additional documents. I have not been advised of any objections to these written submissions or to the documents and I propose to have regard to them, in the absence of objection, on the basis to which I referred in the last paragraph.

The urgency of the matter arises from the fact that if the defendant is entitled to terminate the PPHA it must do so having regard to the terms of the
PPHA by Sunday, 26 July 1998. The parties have agreed on a regime for the giving of notice before an attempt is made to exercise that right. I shall refer to the relevant correspondence. I was advised that to enable this judgment to be written the parties had agreed or were agreeing that the time for such termination should be extended by twenty one days. I have not been told that this agreement is not in place. However, to avoid any further field for argument I think it desirable, if possible, to give my judgment before 26
July 1998.

This may mean that I will not be able to deal with all submissions the parties have made. However, I am satisfied that I have considered those relevant to the reasons for the conclusions I have reached, and that I have done so conformably with the way in which the parties were prepared to have this litigation determined.

By a letter dated 25 March 1998 Mr Graeme Dennis, the partner of Messrs Corrs
Chambers Westgarth, the solicitors for the defendant, with the principal carriage of the matter, wrote to the solicitors for the plaintiff, Messrs
Dunhill, Madden, Butler:- "We refer to your facsimile letter of 24 March 1998.

Without prejudice to any right our client now has, or may hereafter have, we advise that our client has no immediate intention of issuing a notice of termination under clause 4.2(c) of the PPHA.

If our client should form an intention to issue such a notice, we will give you five (5) business days notice in writing prior to issuing such notice of determination." 
On 26 March 1998 Messrs Dunhill, Madden, Butler replied:- "Our client accepts your client's undertaking to give five business days notice in writing prior to issuing any Notice of Termination under clause 4.2(c) of the PPHA." 
The Chairman of the defendant, Mr J.F. Conde, said that as at 15 July 1998 the defendant had not decided whether it would give the notice referred to in the letter of 25 March 1998, and, as at the conclusion of the hearing no such notice had been given.

The issues require, essentially, the construction of the PPHA and, particularly clause 4.2, and a determination of the factual position having regard to that construction. Clause 4.2 provided:- "(a) This Agreement is conditional upon: 
Generator having received the approval as a wholesale trader on terms reasonably acceptable to it, by the Electricity Transmission Authority under the Electricity Supply Bill of 1995 (if such approval is legally required).

Generator's execution of the Credit Agreement (as defined in Annexure C-2) and satisfaction of all conditions precedent for first drawing under the Credit Agreement.

Generator shall, on or prior to the earlier to occur of closing of financing for the Facility or 1 February, 1997 assign this Agreement to a project development company, joint venture or similar entity whose sole purpose is to own, construct and operate the Facility and whose shareholders or joint venturers shall: 
A. include Generator or its Related Body Corporate or AIDC Ltd. or its Related Body Corporate and may also include persons reasonably creditworthy to meet their obligations under this Agreement and experienced in ownership, investment in or operations of energy generating facilities or experienced in investing in infrastructure and industrial facilities, or, 
B. include Generator and its Related Body Corporate and other persons whose creditworthiness to meet their obligations under this Agreement is reasonably satisfactory to Energy Australia and who are experienced in the ownership, operation or investment in electric generating facilities or other infrastructure and industrial facilities, and the requirements of clauses 11.4(a)(ii) and (iii) shall be met. 
By closing of financing for the Facility: the Generator shall be an entity with an adequate capacity to meet its financial obligations under Section 2 of this Agreement and to pay interest and repay principal in a timely manner, as determined in Energy Australia's reasonable opinion or the financial obligations of Generator under section 2 of this Agreement be guaranteed by an entity that is creditworthy in Energy Australia's reasonable opinion; or 
Generator shall provide to Retailer a first ranking security interest, a guarantee, letter of credit or other credit support from a reputable and creditworthy bank in a form and an amount Energy Australia may reasonably require to satisfy itself of Generator's ability to meet its obligations under section 2 of this Agreement or, such other equivalent commercial terms, conditions or security that Energy Australia may reasonably require to satisfy itself of Generator's ability to meet its obligations under section 2 of this Agreement.

By closing of financing for the Facility, Generator shall provide to Retailer a security interest in a form and substance identical to the Securities described in the Credit Agreement. Such security interest shall rank below and be subordinate to in all respects the Securities described in the Credit Agreement.

Generator shall use all reasonable endeavours to obtain fulfilment of the conditions in clauses 4.2(a)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv). Each Party shall provide reasonable assistance to the others in its endeavours to obtain fulfilment of the conditions. 
If the conditions in clause 4.2(a) are not fulfilled by the second anniversary of the date of this Agreement or a later date agreed on by Generator and Energy Australia, either Party may, if it has complied with its obligations under clause 4.2(b), terminate this Agreement by notice to the other Party given within 120 days following the applicable deadline date.

If this Agreement is terminated under clause 4.2(c), then in addition to any other rights, powers or remedies provided by the law: 
Each Party is released from its obligations to further perform this Agreement except those in respect of maintaining confidentiality; 
Each Party retains the rights it has against the other in respect of past breach." 
It is not in issue that the conditions in clause 4.2(a)(ii) to (iv) were not fulfilled by 28 March 1998 and that the parties did not agree on any later date for that to happen. There is an issue whether clause 4.2(a)(i) was required to be fulfilled by that date, it not being in issue that such an approval had not been granted by then. The defendant has asserted that it has complied with its obligation to provide reasonable assistance pursuant to clause 4.2(b). That gives rise to an issue of construction, viz whether, as the plaintiff has not fulfilled certain of the conditions, the defendant is entitled to terminate the PPHA by notice to it given within 120 days of 28
March 1998, i.e. on or before Sunday, 26 July 1998.

The plaintiff's contention is that the defendant cannot give that notice because it has not complied with its requirements under clause 4.2(b) in that it has not provided "reasonable assistance" to the plaintiff "in its endeavours to obtain fulfilment of the conditions". The basic difference of construction between the parties is whether, as the plaintiff asserted, the failure to provide reasonable assistance, without more, precluded the giving of a Notice of Termination because that is the necessary trigger to activate that right; or whether, as the defendant contended, the plaintiff must prove that any established failure to provide reasonable assistance was the cause of or materially contributed to the non-fulfilment of any conditions or, put another way, that the non-fulfilment of any condition would have occurred regardless of the failure to provide reasonable assistance, as to each of which matters the defendant submitted that the plaintiff carried the onus. The plaintiff further submitted that even if the defendant's submission was correct, the evidence established that the defendant's conduct was causative of or materially contributed to the non-fulfilment, so that the defendant could not give a Notice of Termination.

The December 1997 Proceedings 
In December 1997 proceedings were heard by Giles CJCommD to decide whether the defendant was entitled to terminate the PPHA by reason of the failure to make the assignment referred to in clause 4.2(a)(iii) by 1 February 1997. His
Honour held it was not as that date was indicative only, the time required for the fulfilment of conditions being set forth in clause 4.2(c).

The Pleadings 
By its Further Amended Summons the plaintiff sought the following relief:- "2. A declaration that the Defendant is in breach of Clause 4.2(b) of the Power Purchase and Hedge Agreement dated 28 March 1996 (`PPHA') by failing to provide reasonable assistance to the Plaintiff and the Plaintiff's endeavours to obtain fulfilment of the conditions contained in Clause 4.2(a) of the PPHA.
 . A declaration that, on the proper construction of the PPHA, the defendant is not entitled to terminate the PPHA upon the ground or grounds that the conditions contained in Clause 4.2(a) of the PPHA were not fulfilled by 28 March 1998.
 . A declaration that the Defendant has contravened s.52 of the Trade Practices Act 1974(Cth) (`the Act').
 . Damages for breach of contract.
 . Damages under s.82 of the Act.

In any event . Such further or other orders as the court deems fit, including injunctive relief.
 . Costs." 
The seeking of the declaration in paragraph 2 and, perhaps, more particularly in paragraph 3, potentially raised very real and difficult questions as to whether the Court should, in the exercise of its discretion, make them, or whether it should treat them as hypothetical and/or as seeking an advisory opinion from the Court. That potentiality did not eventuate in this case because as to the first declaration sought the plaintiff is content that I should make findings that the defendant is in breach of contract. As to the second declaration sought Mr Sullivan stated in his final submissions that if
I found that there was conduct that led to a failure to provide reasonable assistance and that the defendant was not, in consequence of that conduct, entitled to give a Notice of Termination, the defendant did not submit that the declaration sought in paragraph 3 should not be made. This view was no doubt taken because the defendant wishes to know what its position is, and in recognition of the power of the Court to make declarations in relation to present contractual rights as explained in cases such as Dormer versus Solo
Investments Pty Limited [[1974] 1 NSWLR 429] at pp.434-5 and Galaxy Communications Pty Limited & Ors versus Paramount Films of Australia Inc & Ors (Court of Appeal - 27 March 1998 - as yet unreported).

I should add that Mr Sullivan submitted that as the Government was the shareholder of the defendant I should not, for that reason alone, make such a declaration in the exercise of any discretion if I was otherwise satisfied it should be made, on the basis that the Government would not act in contravention of any findings of breach, which would justify the making of the declaration. If I conclude that the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration the amounts and commercial considerations involved and the need for certainty are such, that that reason would not cause me to not make it.

By paragraph C5 of its Further Amended Summons the plaintiff pleaded that it is an express term of the PPHA that the "closing of finance" is conditional upon certain conditions being fulfilled, as set out in clause 4.2(a). The defendant admitted that paragraph, and said that it would refer to that clause and the entire PPHA at the hearing for their full effect and meaning.

In paragraph C6 the plaintiff pleaded that the terms of those conditions, being the "certain conditions" referred to in paragraph C5, are set out in clauses 4.2(a)(i) to (v) inclusive, and would be relied upon and referred to by the plaintiff in full at the hearing. The defendant admitted that paragraph and repeated that it would refer to those clauses and the entire PPHA at the hearing for their full effect and meaning.

Paragraph C7 of the Further Amended Summons pleaded:- "It is a further express term of the PPHA (clause 4.2(c)) that if any condition in clause 4.2(a) is not fulfilled by 28 March 1998 (or such later date as may be agreed on by the Plaintiff and the Defendant) then either party may (but only if it has complied with its obligations under clause 4.2(b) of the PPHA) terminate the PPHA by notice to the other party given within 120 days following 28 March 1998 (or following any later agreed date)." 
In paragraph 7 of its Defence the defendant denied that paragraph; said that it would refer to clauses 4.2(a), (b) and (c) and the entire PPHA at the hearing for their full meaning and effect; and:- "(c) Further says that the Defendant is entitled to issue a notice to terminate the PPHA if there has been a failure to comply with any of the conditions in clause 4.2(a)(i), (ii), (iii) or (iv) of the PPHA except where that failure has been caused by the Defendant's lack of provision of reasonable assistance in respect of the fulfilment of the particular condition in question not fulfilled." 
To some extent this pleading pointed up the essential difference on the construction issue. The plaintiff's case was that the right to give a Notice of Termination is subject to the defendant's having complied with the obligation to provide reasonable assistance in the "endeavours" to obtain fulfilment of the conditions, so that if reasonable assistance to that end in respect of each of the conditions was not provided, a Notice of Termination cannot be given. This is so, so it was submitted, even if there is a failure to provide reasonable assistance which does not cause non-fulfilment.

The defendant's submission was that there must be a causal relationship between the failure to provide reasonable assistance and the non-fulfilment of the condition or conditions in respect of which reasonable assistance was not provided. It was submitted that it would lack commercial sense for the plaintiff to be able to rely on a failure by the defendant to provide reasonable assistance as disentitling the defendant to give a Notice of
Termination, if, notwithstanding that failure in respect of a condition, the condition was fulfilled in any event; or even if reasonable assistance had not been given the plaintiff would not, in any event, have been able to comply with the condition for other reasons. This construction may have to be considered in the light of the plaintiff's obligation to use reasonable endeavours to obtain fulfilment of the conditions, rather than to obtain fulfilment of them, and that the giving of reasonable assistance is directed to "its endeavours to obtain fulfilment ..". "Reasonable assistance" in "endeavours" may be a different thing from "reasonable assistance" in obtaining fulfilment of the conditions. None-the-less, the right to give a
Notice of Termination is dependent on the non-fulfilment of the conditions.

In paragraph C8 of the Further Amended Summons the plaintiff pleaded that it was a further express term, being clause 4.2(b), that each party would provide reasonable assistance to the others in their endeavours to obtain fulfilment of the conditions. The defendant admitted that this was so in relation to the fulfilment of the conditions in clauses 4.2(a)(i) to (iv); denied the balance of the paragraph; further said that it would refer to clause 4.2(b) and the entire PPHA at the hearing for their full effect and meaning; and repeated sub-paragraph 7(c).

In paragraph C9 the plaintiff pleaded that as a result of the breaches of the express term pleaded in paragraph C8, which breaches were particularised in paragraph C11, the defendant was not entitled to terminate the PPHA pursuant to clause 4.2(c). The defendant denied this paragraph.

In paragraph C10 of the Further Amended Summons the plaintiff pleaded the following implied terms:- "(a) That the defendant would act fairly and in good faith in the performance of its obligations under the PPHA; and 
That the defendant had a duty to co-operate with the plaintiff to perform all acts necessary for the operation of the PPHA." 
The defendant's Defence did not admit these allegations.

In paragraph C11 of the Further Amended Summons the plaintiff pleaded the breaches of the PPHA, which the defendant denied. The plaintiff's particulars of breach relied on the matters referred to in the affidavit of Mr Alper, sworn on 27 March 1998, and, in particular, on paragraphs 56 to 68 thereof. It was pleaded that the defendant had, through its directors and employees, made oral representations to proposed investors and/or equity participants in and/or contractors for the project that the defendant and the political forces that governed it did not really want the project to proceed; that the PPHA was not "now" politically acceptable; that there could be an adverse impact on the future relationship between any such parties, on the one hand, and the defendant, on the other, if such parties continued to support the project; that if such parties were not prepared to proceed with their involvement in the project, the defendant could be in a position to consider some form of compensation for them; that the defendant would not honour its obligations under the PPHA; that the defendant would not sign the necessary documents relating to the financial closing; that the defendant did not consider the
PPHA to be in its best interests; and "that the Defendant does not now view the Project today in the same light as it once did in that it may not continue with the Project".

The particulars nextly pleaded that shortly before 2 March 1998 the defendant orally represented to a journalist certain material, which was published in "The Telegraph", and, in particular, represented that the Board of the defendant was meeting to consider whether to cancel the PPHA:- ".. which representations were made with the intention that they would be re-published in The Daily Telegraph or with the knowledge that such re-publication was the natural and probable consequence of the making of such representations." 
It was further pleaded that by a letter dated 24 March 1998 the defendant represented to the plaintiff that the conditions contained in clause .2(a)(iv) of the PPHA would not be satisfied unless the plaintiff procured a letter of credit in the amount of $275m; that Redbank Operating Services, a partnership of NPO Pty Limited and LG & E Australia Pty Limited was not an operator within the meaning of clause 5.1(c) of the PPHA that was technically capable of operating and maintaining the Redbank Power Facility; and that neither the plaintiff nor LG & E had a reputation within Australia as required by that clause.

It was nextly pleaded that by letter dated 20 January 1998 from the defendant to the Minister for Energy, Mr R.J. Debus, the defendant represented that the continued commercial viability of the project and the defendant's involvement in it was highly unattractive, that a decision to attempt to withdraw from the
PPHA had been made, and that the defendant had sought to withdraw from it.

It was particularised that by letter dated 22 January 1998 from the defendant to the Treasurer, Mr M.R. Egan, the defendant represented that the continued commercial viability of the project and its involvement in it was highly unattractive.

The particulars turned to representations allegedly made to ABB, which was one of the proposed equity participants and the contractor for the construction of the facility. It was pleaded that on 5 February 1998 there had been changes from what had been proposed when the PPHA was entered into resulting in environmental concerns for the project because a second tailings dam had been constructed at the Warkworth Mine, and that on 20 February 1998 there had been changes from what had been proposed at the time the PPHA was entered into resulting in environmental concerns for the project in that the fuel proposed to be used for it, when the PPHA was entered into, was to be tailings "in the majority but would now be a mixture of tailings and other products which could be commercially sold to other operators". It was pleaded that the representations made to ABB were false.

Paragraph C12 dealt with damages, and paragraph C13 pleaded the claim under s.52 of the Trade Practices Act. It alleged that the defendant represented to the plaintiff in trade or commerce, at a meeting on 6 March 1998, that provided all the conditions were met and satisfied the defendant was prepared to go ahead with the PPHA and to help the plaintiff in satisfying the conditions; that in a letter dated 23 December 1997 the defendant stated it was prepared to execute the Novation Agreement and Tripartite Consent Deed upon financial closing; that in a letter dated 5 February 1998 the defendant stated it had no desire to delay the project or the PPHA; that in a letter dated 24 March 1998 the defendant stated it was prepared to participate in the financial closing and sign the requested documents; and that the defendant had a bona fide intent to honour its obligations under the PPHA provided the conditions were met.

In relation to the first allegation the defendant admitted that on 6 March Mr Arthur Gillen, its General Manager-Finance, said words to the following effect to representatives of the plaintiff:- "I can tell you, provided all the conditions of the PPHA are met and we are satisfied with the creditworthiness and all other conditions are met, then Energy Australia is prepared to go ahead with the deal." 
Otherwise that allegation was not admitted.

In relation to the second allegation the defendant admitted that by letter dated 23 December 1997 it informed the plaintiff that its understanding was that the plaintiff only requested the defendant's assistance in two respects, namely the execution of a Novation Agreement between the plaintiff and various other parties, and the execution of a Tripartite Consent Deed. It was further admitted that the letter continued:- "If there is any other matter upon which you are relying for Energy Australia's assistance in order to meet the conditions precedent, please let me know immediately.

Energy Australia is prepared to execute the Novation Agreement and Tripartite Consent Deed upon financial close, subject to National Power Australia LLC and Redbank Project Pty Limited meeting the other obligations and conditions to be achieved on or prior to closing of financing (and particularly the matters in each of the paragraphs of clause 4.2(a) of the PPHA)." 
In relation to the same allegation it was pleaded that by a letter dated 13
January 1998 the defendant informed the plaintiff that the Novation Agreement in the form submitted by it did not comply with the requirements of condition .2(a)(iii) "which requires an assignment and assumption rather than a novation", and the defendant said that it was not prepared to waive that requirement. In further answer to the allegation it said that by letter dated February 1998 the defendant informed the plaintiff that it was prepared to sign the Novation Agreement "on financial close (provided of course everything is in order and the closing occurs) ..". The letter continued that the defendant could not see how that would serve a useful purpose because such a document would not be effective as an assignment for the purposes of condition .2(a)(iii), and:- "The fact that there was a previous Novation Agreement is irrelevant - the previous Novation Agreement was intended for the purpose of allowing you to take out your unwilling equity participant rather than for the purpose of completing condition precedent 4.2(a)(iii)." 
Otherwise there was no admission as to the second allegation.

In response to the third allegation the defendant admitted that by letter dated 5 February 1998 it informed the plaintiff that notwithstanding a complaint about a refusal to meet with the plaintiff and the equity participants, the defendant wanted to meet for some time. The letter continued:- "We have no desire to delay the project, on the contrary it was you who took a month to respond to our letter of 23 December 1997 and it was you who cancelled a meeting with the equity participants that was scheduled for 17 November 1997. We have waited patiently since then for you to arrange a replacement meeting and we are still waiting. The first step is for you to send us a proper and complete agenda, something we have always requested prior to a meeting." 
Otherwise the defendant made no admissions in relation to that allegation.

In relation to the fourth allegation the defendant admitted that by letter dated 24 March 1998 it informed the plaintiff that it was prepared "to participate in the financial close and sign the requested documents, provided that the other conditions precedent are satisfied and that there is no subsisting breach of the PPHA by National Power".

The letter continued that the Tripartite Consent Agreement, the Deed of
Assumption, the second ranking charges over Redbank Project Pty Limited and
Redbank Constructions Pty Limited, a Site Mortgage from Redbank Project Pty
Limited and a Priority Deed with the holder of the first securities were, in draft, acceptable "provided that the other conditions precedent are satisfied and there is no subsisting breach of the PPHA by National Power", and:- "The only other reasonable assistance that we understand you were requiring of Energy Australia was to meet with your potential investors and advise them whether Energy Australia was prepared to participate in the financial close. In our meeting with them on March 6, we confirmed that Energy Australia is prepared to participate in the financial close and sign the requested documents, provided that the other conditions precedent are satisfied and there is no subsisting breach of the PPHA by National Power." 
Otherwise there was no admission as to that allegation. The final representation was in the following terms:- "(e) That the Defendant had a bona fide intent to honour its obligations under the PPHA provided the conditions were met." 
The response to that was that the defendant "does not admit the representation".

Paragraph C14 of the Further Amended Summons asserted that to the extent that the representations pleaded in paragraph C13 did not relate to future matters, each was made by the defendant to the plaintiff in contravention of s.52 in that each was contrary to the facts. That was particularised by saying the facts were as represented in the representations referred to in paragraph
C11(ii) and (iii). It was further pleaded:- ".. in fact, since at least late February 1998, the defendant has not had a bona fide intention to perform its obligation under the PPHA." 
These various allegations were denied.

In Paragraph C15 it was pleaded that to the extent that the representations related to future matters they contravened s.52 by virtue of s.51A and, in paragraph C16, the plaintiff asserted that it was induced by the representations to proceed towards financial closing and that in so doing it expended significant resources in the time of senior management and incurred significant expense.

In relation to paragraphs C15 and C16 the defendant pleaded the matters referred to in paragraph 13, otherwise denied paragraph 15, and did not admit paragraph 16.

In paragraph C17 the following further representations were pleaded:- "(i) The condition contained in clause 4.2(a)(iv) of the PPHA would not be satisfied unless the plaintiff procured a letter of credit in the amount of $275m; and 
That Redbank Operating Services, a partnership of NP Operations Pty Limited and LG & E Australia Pty Limited: was not an Operator within the meaning of clause 5.1(c) of the PPHA, that was technically capable of operating and obtaining the Redbank Power Facility, and that neither the plaintiff nor LG & E had a reputation within Australia as required by clause 5.1(c) and made such representations in circumstances in which it was a natural and probable consequence that they would be re-published to proposed investors and/or equity participants in the PPHA .." 
It was further pleaded that the plaintiff did re-publish such representations to the proposed investors and/or equity participants.

In paragraph 17 the defendant admitted that by letter dated 24 March 1998 it informed the plaintiff that on 13 January 1998 it gave it advance warning that its preliminary view was that Redbank Project Pty Limited was unlikely to meet the conditions precedent unless additional security or credit support was provided. It was also admitted that in that letter a letter of credit for "about $275m" was required, and that it informed the plaintiff, in essence, of its dissatisfaction with the equity partners.

A Consideration Of The Relief Claimed 
In view of the preparedness of Mr Ellicott to accept, if his client were successful, findings that the defendant had breached the PPHA, rather than press for a declaration, and Mr Sullivan's concession in relation to a declaration concerning the inability to terminate, it is not necessary for me to analyse the authorities relating to the grant of declaratory relief and the circumstances in which the discretion should or should not be exercised. I have dealt with the additional submission Mr Sullivan made as to the exercise of discretion.

In the present case there is no evidence that the plaintiff has terminated the contract by virtue of the breach alleged, namely the failure to provide reasonable assistance pursuant to clause 4.2(b). Rather Mr Alper said,
Tpp.9-10:- "Q. You heard Mr Ellicott say words to this effect: that we, being the plaintiff, fundamentally want to retain this contract, that we wish the contract to remain on foot, and that we wish that Energy Australia would come to their senses and get on with it? 
A. I heard that.

Q. That, of course, were your instructions to Mr Ellicott? 
A. That would be our desire.

Q. That remains your desire now? 
A. It is our desire. Whether we can accomplish that, I don't know.

Q. That is your desire, isn't it, despite your allegations that to date the defendant, Energy Australia, has been in breach of fundamental terms of the agreement? 
A. Yes." 
Accordingly, not only has the plaintiff not sought to terminate the PPHA, but it has indicated by that evidence that it wishes, at the moment, to retain it on foot, a position which is made clear by the second declaration sought. Mr
Ellicott submitted, however, that the present proceedings do not raise any question of the rights of the plaintiff to terminate the contract or to seek damages.

The Defendant's Change Of Attitude 
The entry into the PPHA followed a Business Evaluation, which the defendant prepared in February 1996, which noted:- "Negotiation with MetNorth Energy re-commenced on 1 November 1995, with a focus on achieving a price and risk position acceptable to both parties. NPP's financial advisers, AIDC, have been involved in the negotiations and are confident that the agreement will be acceptable to financiers. AIDC are also contemplating equity participation in the project. The PPHA has now been finalised to the satisfaction of MetNorth and it is believed that the risk issues have been adequately addressed.

In summary, two Agreements have been negotiated. The first is a capped two-way firm hedge for approximately 110MW (dependent on actual plant performance) and a non-firm one-way hedge above the cap price. The second Agreement gives NPP the right to Put and MetNorth the right to Call an option on a second Power Purchase and Hedge Agreement, largely under the same terms and conditions as that of the first plant. This plant is to be approximately the same size, majority fuelled by tailing and located in the Hunter Valley.

The first plant is due to come on line in early 1999 at a price (in July 1995 dollars) of $40.50 per MWh declining to $38.15 in real terms over the 30 year life. This represents approximately $39.3m per annum. The Agreement includes an adjustment to market prices at 20 years. The Agreement associated with the Put and Call is also subject to adjustment to market prices at commencement and at 20 years.

In terms of risk allocation, broadly speaking, NPP are exposed to the risk of plant performance and MetNorth Energy is exposed to market risk. MetNorth is also exposed to the performance of its Network at an acceptable level. Both parties share a number of risks that exist due to the uncertainty of market arrangements over the life of the Agreement.

The project is considered by MetNorth to have a strategic fit, both for government and MetNorth. This fit is across areas such as regional development, micro economic reform policy, environment and purchase strategies. Notwithstanding, a fundamental requirement is that the plant be commercial, and provide energy prices comparable to other generators.

Whilst the project is fundamentally focused on the disposal of tailing, the project is the first major Independent Power Project (IPP) to be considered in New South Wales in the context of a competitive market for electricity. As such, this report is submitted for consideration by Treasury [subject to the impending determination of the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal] to confirm MetNorth's approach to evaluating this project and gain confirmation that the project is consistent with MetNorth's shareholder's strategic objectives." 
The shareholder, to which is reference was made, is the Government of New
South Wales.

The Business Evaluation set out the various benefits and, in effect, argued the case for the entry into the PPHA, which was described thus:- "The Power Purchase and Hedge Agreement (`Agreement') that has been negotiated with NPP is a hybrid of a traditional power purchase agreement and a hedging agreement. The hybrid form addresses the situations where: * There is a pooling arrangement for the wholesale trading of electricity and contracts outside the pool are hedges against the pool price; and * A pooling arrangement ceases to exist and traditional wholesale power purchase arrangements are applicable. 
The plant is due to come on line in early 1999 for the price (in July 1995 dollars) of $40.50 per MWh declining to $38.15 in real terms over the 30 year life. This represents approximately $39.3m per annum. The hedge aspects of the agreement are a firm capped two-way hedge against pool price and a non-firm one-way hedge above the price cap. Should the plant be off line at times when real pool price exceeds $300 per MWh, National Power's liability will be limited to $300 per MWh. Offsetting this, the plant has some capacity in excess of the contract quantity of 110.96 Megawatts. If the plant is on line when pool price exceeds $300 per MWh, MetNorth Energy will capture the benefit of pool prices in excess of $300 per MWh." 
The Business Evaluation dealt, under the heading "Risk Allocation", with the various risks being undertaken by the parties including:- "MetNorth is exposed to market risk in terms of both price and quantity. Taking on this risk is core business of MetNorth Retail. MetNorth must be confident that the contract price is competitive throughout the term of the Agreement. If the contract price is not competitive, loss of sales will eventuate as MetNorth is exposed to Retail competition in electricity and competition from other energy forms. In terms of quantity, competition means that MetNorth can no longer predict its sales volume with the same certainty that it could as a monopoly supplier. To this end, MetNorth must also be confident that there is a place for the contract in its purchase portfolio throughout the term of the Agreement. These issues are discussed more fully elsewhere in this document.
 ...

In terms of transmission avoidance, MetNorth has taken the risk (and benefits) associated with the benefits of transmission avoidance and the ability to capture these benefits in Retail subject to the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal issuing an initial determination in this regard. The magnitude of these benefits are not insignificant, currently estimated to be some $2.046/MWh. The key risk is in effect regulatory, with the ability to capture these benefits dependent on regulatory determinations throughout the terms of the agreement.

MetNorth may also be exposed to risks associated with future boundary review which results in Redbank being no-longer in MetNorth's distribution area. The intent is to establish separate Network and Retail Agreements with Generator and a further Agreement between Retail and Network allocating costs and risks as appropriate. This process will enable the Network Agreement to be novated in the event of a boundary change." 
This showed that the authors of the Business Evaluation understood that the defendant was undertaking quite considerable risks. It continued with "The
Financial Case". A competitive quote was sought and the conclusion was expressed:- "Under the low case scenario, prices remain below $25 per MWh over the next two decades, whilst under the high case real prices reach $42.50 per MWh in 2,000 and rise to $43.70 in real terms beyond 2005. ACIL suggest a value between $34.90 and $42.90 per MWh." 
On the discovered Business Evaluation someone, presumably being an officer of the defendant, wrote:- "So we signed at the upper end!!" 
The Business Evaluation concluded:- "On the balance of probability, Redbank will provide electricity which is market competitive. However, it is by no means without risk. Whilst benchmark real prices some 23% below current BST levels have been used in the analysis, there is no absolute guarantee that prices will not drop further in the short term. However, it is expected that prices will stabilise at or near new entrant prices at around the time that Redbank comes on line. These prices are expected to be slightly above the price negotiated with Redbank. On this basis, Redbank should provide competitive advantage." 
Under the heading "Risk Analysis" it was stated that a due diligence process had been carried out in relation to National Power Partners and:- "In summary, the due diligence revealed a company with a sound technology and an ability to exploit opportunities with low quality fuels. It also revealed a company in a weak financial position that entered into partnership arrangements to develop projects. Further, they are not seen as litigious and have established good relationships with customers." 
Under the heading:- "Does National Power Have the Financial Capacity to Deliver the Project?", it was stated:- "It has been acknowledged from the earliest discussions with the Board, that National Power Partners "fly close to the wind". Financial statements reveal a company in a weak financial position, having invested heavily in this project over a number of years. They continue, however, to be able to maintain cash for the project through other parties. Support was obtained in October 1995 from Heller Finance who now hold equity in National Power Partners. Further, National Power's financial advisers (AIDC), continue to hold the view the project is bankable and are considering equity participation. AIDC have indicated an intent to provide development funds to the project to bring it to financial close once the Power Purchase and Hedge Agreement is finalised.

Notwithstanding this, it is usual practice world-wide, for Independent Power Projects to be non-recourse financed projects. The project development company therefore, will general have extremely limited asset backing prior to financial close. As the project development company is the eventual counter party to the Power Purchase and Hedge Agreement, credit issues must be managed through contractual or other arrangements. To this end, the Agreement includes both performance guarantees and conditions precedent for the provision of security interests to MetNorth. MetNorth must be satisfied with the securities offered before the Agreement becomes operative." 
The Business Evaluation made certain conclusions about risk, which were that "the deal will provide MetNorth with competitive advantage". It repeated that market risk was the key risk, and concluded that "all things considered" it was recommended that the defendant proceed with the project following finalisation of contractual arrangements, confirmation on methodology for transmission avoidance, and confirmation from Treasury that the project is consistent with shareholder's objectives. This recommendation was accepted.

The entry into the PPHA by Mr Alf Smith, the Acting General Manager of the defendant, did not accord with the view of all the defendant's executives. It was opposed by Mr Michael Slater, who was a Hunter Area based Divisional
Manager and who wrote a memorandum to the Managing Director on 5 February
He said that in accordance with the Managing Director's direction at the
Senior Executive Management Meeting of 28 January 1997 he had reviewed "the current status and enforceability" of the PPHA, which he described. He said it represented "a completely different type and form of contract to the base load capacity contract under consideration by" another company as at 1 October .

In his review he suggested it did not provide sufficient protection to the defendant "for a contracted relationship with obligations over a long term (30 years)". He reported that he had discussed the matter with Mr Gillen and that they agreed that "the only effective role for Energy Australia in monitoring this contract is through the financial due diligence process for which he has responsibility".

His memorandum referred to the "apparent commitment" of the New South Wales
Government to the project and, on the assumption of that commitment, stated:- "It would place these roles, the creditability (sic) of Energy Australia and Business Services, along with my own personal credibility as a Hunter based divisional manager at risk if I were perceived to have a brief to terminate or invalidate the Redbank contract." 
The Government's commitment to the project, at that time, was exemplified by a press release by Mr Face, the Minister for Gaming and Racing and the Minister
Assisting the Premier on Hunter Development, of 31 January 1997. Mr Face described the project, set forth what Mr Alper had said about it, and stated:- "Mr Face said the construction project would mean more than 200 jobs for a two year period.

Another 50 jobs would be created when the plant commenced operation in 1999.

Mr Face said the new project was a great example of how the Carr Government's commitment to the Hunter was transmitted into jobs.
 `This plant is further proof, if any is needed, of the Carr Government's faith in the future of the region' he said." 
In early 1997 Mr Gillen, who joined the defendant in October 1996 as the
General Manager - Finance, and who retained that position until early July , took over the supervision of the PPHA. He first became aware of it in
December 1996 when, as chairman of the Energy Risk Management Panel, he was reviewing all forward purchases in the energy trading portfolio. In cross- examination he was referred to Mr Slater's memorandum of 5 February 1997, which he said he had not seen before being in the witness box: Tp.173. He said he had no discussion with Mr Slater about the contents of the passage I have quoted from that memorandum, but, Tp.176, he said:- "I remember Mike Slater commenting that he had tried for four years to stop the project going ahead ... and he was very disappointed that the PPHA had been signed ...." 
Mr Slater told Mr Gillen that he was "glad to get it off his plate", and that he was disappointed that the defendant was in a position where it had to go ahead with its obligations under the PPHA. Mr Gillen discussed with Mr Slater the possibility of getting out of it, and was told that it was legally binding and that there were no reasons for the defendant not to proceed. He added, p.177, that Mr Slater told him the PPHA had been reviewed from a legal point of view and that the conclusion was that it was legally binding.

Mr Gillen said that when he took over its supervision Mr Woodley, the Managing
Director of the defendant, told him the reasons for his being given this task; that the PPHA was unusual because it had certain requirements, which made it an equity investment, rather than a straight power purchase hedge agreement; and that it had a requirement for a greater level of financial input. Mr
Woodley told him that the agreement "is particularly unusual and the strike price is above the current market price": Tp.179, and was "significantly higher than the market price", but that Mr Woodley said nothing to the effect that the defendant "would like to get out of the contract", although he added, somewhat contradictorally, that Mr Woodley said that "it would be great if we could get out of the contract, but Mike Slater has a legal opinion and it is legally binding". Mr Gillen continued, Tp.180, that he took it as part of his brief that Mr Woodley was saying to him, in effect, that it would be a good thing if the defendant could get out of the PPHA.

Mr Gillen denied that by at the latest January 1997, it was the economic aspects of the PPHA that were the basis for the defendant's wishing to "get out of it". If that was not the position at that time, which I very much doubt, it certainly was the position shortly thereafter. There can be no doubt that the defendant regarded the PPHA as a bad financial deal from which it should extricate itself. However, I am not satisfied that was a course it has ever proposed to take unless it has a legal right to do so. None-the-less, Mr
Ellicott submitted that the attitude being taken by the defendant's senior management affected the attitude they took to the PPHA and, in particular, to the obligations to provide reasonable assistance.

At Tp.185, Mr Gillen denied that as a result of his conversation with Mr
Woodley he saw it as part of his instruction to do what he could, if it was possible, to terminate the contract; he said that he did not have any knowledge that the defendant wanted to get out of the contract; and that Mr
Woodley made no comment other than that it would have been "nice" if the defendant had not entered into it. He said, Tp.185, that he had no knowledge "of any member of the organisation not wishing to proceed with the contract".
This evidence was inconsistent with his other evidence and, in the light of all the evidence, is totally improbable and lacks credibility.

At Tp.186 Mr Gillen was referred to paragraph 8 of his witness statement in which he recounted a statement to Mr Alper that security should be required "along the lines of a conventional commodity trading agreement" to cover financial exposure caused by fluctuations in the pool price. He accepted that
Mr Alper did not agree it was a conventional commodity contract, and, in a long answer, he tried unsuccessfully, in my opinion, to justify his position as to the nature of the PPHA. At Tp.188 he conceded that he had never seen such a contract before.

Mr Gillen agreed that from February 1997 until 28 March 1998 he had maintained that the defendant was entitled to a letter of credit or guarantee in a very substantial amount, the only change in his view being a reduction from $375m originally sought in about July 1997 to $275m on 24 March 1998. There is no doubt that Mr Gillen was seeking an amount in excess of that to which the defendant was entitled under the PPHA on several bases to which I shall refer.
When asked about the reduction from $275m to about $101m in July 1998 Mr
Gillen volunteered that one of the reasons for this was "the Board's attempts to be reasonable": Tp.189. He maintained, notwithstanding overwhelming evidence to the contrary, that $375m remained a reasonable figure: Tp.190.

Mr Gillen said that when he was considering the amount of the letter of credit he was not looking at the agreement in isolation. In this context, Tp.191, he said that he did not know that the defendant had sought legal advice on whether it could terminate the PPHA, although he knew it had sought legal advice but he said that he had not looked at it. In the light of what was contained in his paper to the Board of 17 February 1997, which referred expressly to the legal evaluation of 24 January 1997 and contained a summary of it, according to what has been disclosed, and an attachment headed "Termination of" the PPHA, for all of which client professional privilege was claimed, this evidence is not credible.

Commencing at Tp.193, Mr Gillen was cross-examined about clause 4.2(a)(iv), which he said he analysed. He agreed an important question was that of adequate financial capacity in accordance with it. The real difficulty in his evidence, as became apparent, was that he was seeking to construe the clause, or alternatively to ignore its terms, because he thought the first task was to identify all the defendant's risk exposure under the PPHA and seek to protect it from them, rather than to apply the words to the risk identified by it as subject to cover by security.

Mr Gillen expressed the view, which on the basis of all the evidence could not be sustained, that he did not know whether the parties, which would be the operators, would be creditworthy. He also considered that the major proportion of the risk was being taken by the defendant and he was taken to the Business
Evaluation: Tp.200, for the purpose of examining how risk was considered by it.

The cross-examination then moved to the extent to which, if at all, the cap provided for in the PPHA had been taken into account in arriving at $375m. Mr
Gillen said he did not understand its significance originally but agreed it was of fundamental importance in working out the defendant's exposure in relation to amounts of differences payable by the Generator to the defendant in times of outages. This evidence, in the light of all the evidence, was extraordinary. Mr Conde, the Chairman of Directors, considered that management should have picked up this point and advised the expert retained by the defendant to assess the financial impact of it. When account was taken of the cap it substantially reduced the amount sought by way of letter of credit. Mr
Gillen gave no satisfactory explanation for having overlooked the cap. He could not recall how the $375m, which was the figure he fixed for the letter of credit, was calculated: Tp.204, although he said the figure was put to the
Board before being submitted to the plaintiff but without any calculations which would support it. He did not accept the invitation to show how it was calculated and seemed to wish to maintain it was correct notwithstanding that it was shown to be fundamentally flawed.

On 17 February 1997 a report to the Board, one version of which incorrectly bears date 17 February 1996, was prepared by Mr Gillen in which, inter alia, he noted that a legal evaluation of the PPHA was provided by Messrs Corrs
Chambers Westgarth on 24 January 1997. Mr Gillen dealt with the broad commercial terms of the PPHA and noted a concern that the defendant may be required to purchase 8.2 per cent of its energy "at the premium prices described below". He referred to the ability of the Generator to increase output and prices and compared the price in clause 2.3(a) of $40.50 per MWh with the price of approximately $30 to $31, which was obtained by the defendant by way of long term "recently".

Mr Gillen reported that without direct customers the defendant was exposed to full electricity market price risk on all electricity purchased, and bore all of the risk of pool participation fees above an escalated $37,500 per quarter.

He referred to the "time frame exit clauses" in clause 4.

He said:- "The commercial terms of the contract appear to have been passively negotiated by Energy Australia. Almost all financial exposure rests with Energy Australia, whilst the strike price is at least 25% higher than similar long term contracts. 
There appears to be no network benefit from the facility given its remote location. In addition there appears to be virtually little environmental benefit from being involved in the project. In fact, Greenpeace has been outspoken in demanding the project be scrapped (Australian Financial Review, 5 and 7 February 1997). Greenhouse gas emissions are high compared to most NSW power stations. As described above, Energy Australia has significant exposure to greenhouse/carbon taxes in terms of its being passed on to customers." 
The next attachment to that report is headed "Termination of the Power
Purchase and Hedge Agreement" for which privilege was claimed.

Mr Gillen agreed, Tpp.220-221, that prior to writing the Board paper of 17
February 1997 he considered the legal advice and that, in so far as any answers he gave previously were inconsistent with that, his recollection was faulty. I have referred to that evidence, which shows that his recall was faulty. He agreed, Tp.221, that the price of approximately $40 per megawatt hour was much higher than the current market levels in February 1997, and he said that the defendant "had entered into such a long term contract which was out of the money, i.e. it was at prices that were higher than the strike price": Tp.222.

Ultimately, although not in my opinion from my observation of Mr Gillen without some attempt to avoid the clear question being put to him, he agreed that in paragraph 2.3 of his memorandum to the Board he was stating his understanding of the payment which would have to be made by the defendant if the system marginal price was less than the contract strike price, and that was the risk to which he was referring in the sentence:- "Without direct customers, Energy Australia is exposed to full electricity market price risk on all electricity purchased." 
Mr Gillen was referred, Tp.226, to his statement in Attachment 1 to the Board paper:- "The commercial terms of the contract appear to have been passively negotiated by Energy Australia. Almost all financial exposure rests with Energy Australia, whilst the strike price is at least 25% higher than similar long term contracts." 
He said that after reviewing the various papers and files he noted there were certain recommendations that had been made about commercial terms, which were not in the PPHA, and that they should have been negotiated and included in it.
He agreed there had been quite extensive consideration of the PPHA to his knowledge before his report to the Board, and, Tp.228:- "My conclusion that the contract was passively negotiated had been formed by my review of the contract itself and by my review of some of the information in the files, which clearly showed that recommendations made about including and excluding certain terms in the PPHA weren't recognised when the final document was executed." 
The PPHA was prepared by officers of the defendant and solicitors instructed by it, although not the solicitors who advised it from at least early 1997 and appeared for it in this litigation.

Mr Gillen did not recall whether he made any recommendation to the Board and, in answer to the question whether he recommended that the defendant take whatever steps it could to terminate the agreement, he replied:- "At that stage, no." 
Mr Gillen was asked nextly about a letter from the plaintiff to him, which was signed by Mr Alper and dated 20 February 1997. It sought urgent information about the amount of security the defendant may require under clause .2(a)(iv)(B), and continued:- "This is of great interest to our prospective investors and lenders and we need to advise them as quickly as we can to avoid last minute complications that can affect the closing. It would be much appreciated if you can give me your thoughts on this when we meet." 
There was a Board meeting on 24 February 1997 at which Mr Gillen spoke to his report:- ".. and indicated a number of concerns with the" 
PPHA. He was requested to undertake a financial and environmental due diligence and to determine the source of the initial advice to the Board indicating that the project had a positive environmental impact.

Mr Gillen said that at that meeting no Board member said anything to the effect that the defendant should avoid the PPHA if it could, and he said the concerns he expressed to the Board were:- "The concerns that I pointed out were essentially those summarised in my note which covered the financial exposure of Energy Australia, which also covered the concern that the agreement had been entered into without due recognition of some of the recommendations that were made prior to its execution and had been passively negotiated and the fact that the contract was unusual in that it did not have an opportunity to have a market price adjustment for the first 20 years": Tp.231. 
He said that at the meeting the Chairman said that the previous Board had decided to go ahead with the PPHA because there were benefits associated with regional development and the environment, which was a major consideration at the time it was entered into, and that another director spoke in favour of it.
He saw no minute where those comments were recorded: Tp.233.

On 27 February 1997 Mr Gillen, Mr Storrie, Mr Alper, Mr Chu and Mr Murphy met.
A file note of that meeting was created. Environmental issues and security were discussed and Mr Gillen agreed that from the very early days of his consideration of the PPHA there was a basic difference between him and Mr
Alper in relation to how the PPHA was to operate on margins.

Mr Colin Randall was appointed to carry out an environmental due diligence and, on 15 April 1997, Mr Gillen wrote to Mr Alper stating that it was the defendant's view that its requirements exceeded those of the Land and
Environment Court in accordance with its greenhouse gas obligations under the
Energy Supply Act and, accordingly, it needed sufficient information to ensure, firstly, that the project was consistent with the environmental attributes, as understood when the PPHA was signed, and, secondly, that the defendant fulfilled its legal obligations. Although Mr Gillen took up much time in considering environmental issues, because, I am satisfied, he saw that as a potential way of stalling the PPHA, in the end the project was not shown to be in conflict with environmental conditions.

Under the heading "Financial Security" the letter stated:- "For Energy Australia there are two principal payment exposures to the Generator, one for the adjustment payments under the hedge, and the other for the termination value of the contract should it be terminated early. 
The amount of the adjustment exposure is the difference between the Strike Price under the contract and the actual Pool Price in the half hours as they occur, if the Pool Price is higher than the Strike Price. The adjustment payments are to be made monthly. The amount of the termination value exposure is effectively the net present value (at the time that the contract is terminated) of the adjusted payment stream which would otherwise be payable by the Generator under the contract for the balance of the term of the contract if it had not been terminated early.

Set out in the attachment are the proposed formulas which derive a security amount intended to cover these exposures, which would be sufficient for Energy Australia's purposes." 
One matter in this letter, which gave rise to controversy in the evidence, was the entitlement of the defendant to a letter of credit, at that stage, to cover any amount payable on termination. At Tp.239 it was put to Mr Gillen that there was no contractual right to receive any security for the termination value of the contract at that stage, to which he replied that he was not sure and would have to check and, as to the adjustment payments, he said that was a reference to such payments under the hedge. He was cross- examined at some length about that, commencing at Tp.240.

On 21 April 1997 Mr Gillen prepared a report to the Board in which he set out some of the history of the matter and, in relation to the PPHA, he said:- "Under the agreement executed in March 1996 Energy Australia is committed to purchase the electricity produced at Redbank over a period of thirty years. The prices under the agreement are well above market price for energy sourced from traditional coal-fired generation but does not provide these environmental benefits." 
He noted that the plaintiff had been given most of the approvals it required to proceed with the construction of the plant and hoped to achieve financial close in May 1997. He said if the defendant had any "unresolved concerns, these should be raised prior to financial close".

He dealt with the environmental issues and said that arising from Mr Randall's investigations it now appeared that major modifications to the overall plant configuration had been made "with the result that the environmental benefits previously claimed by National Power will not now be realised". This was never established and, as I have said, it was not contended that the plaintiff breached any relevant environmental considerations.

His recommendation was:- "The issues relating to Redbank are of such importance that the Board's approval is sought to inform the stakeholders in the project, including Energy Australia's shareholder and the Department of Energy, of our understanding of the revised environmental consequences of the project, bearing in mind the confidentiality restrictions in the Redbank agreement (clause 16.2)." 
Mr Gillen was cross-examined about this and the adoption by the Board, on 27
April 1997, of his recommendation about informing the stakeholders.

He said that subsequently he had informal discussions with "the senior people in Treasury" and:- "Q. Are you saying that you did not inform or suggest that it might be in the government's interest to stop the project on environmental grounds? 
A. I may have made the discussion to one of the senior Treasury people at a formal meeting that it wasn't in Energy Australia's interest for the contract to go ahead and that there may be some grounds to terminate the contract": Tp.246. 
He denied discussing with such people whether the Government might be able to act through regulatory processes. He was referred to a file note, which apparently was submitted to the Treasurer, Mr M.R. Egan, on 16 June 1997, but had been submitted to his Executive Director on 15 May 1997. That reviewed both environmental and economic concerns and concluded that the defendant's management "has informally suggested that it may be in the Government's interest to stop the project on environmental grounds ... they believe the
Government may be able to act through the regulatory process".

The recommendation was that the Treasurer sign the attached letter to the
Chairman of the defendant. That letter, which was addressed to the Chairman,
Mr Hughes, and dated 20 June 1997, stated:- "It has come to my knowledge that the mooted environmental benefits of the Redbank Power Station may not be realised due to major modifications to the design. I have also been informed that in the light of the significant reduction in the wholesale price of electricity the economics of the project are no longer attractive.

I would appreciate you providing me with an analysis of the impact of the design changes on the environmental performance of the project. Could you advise me of the following: * What regulatory approvals have been granted and whether grounds exist for these to be withdrawn or modified in light of the design changes? * Who are the consenting authorities? * What approvals remain outstanding? 
I also require a detailed analysis of the revised economic benefits of the project. This analysis should provide a clear indication of the value or cost to Energy Australia of the Redbank contract." 
This letter pointed out, as clearly as could be, that the Treasurer, at least, was having second thoughts about whether the project should proceed and was looking at reasons, particularly in the environmental area, for terminating it. In this respect he was in agreement with the defendant's Board and senior management.

Mr Gillen agreed, Tp.248, that he was one of the sources of the suggestion that it may be in the Government's interests to stop the project on environmental grounds, although he maintained his denial that he suggested that should be done through regulatory processes.

At Tpp.249-250 Mr Gillen said the reasons why it was in the interests of the defendant not to go ahead with the PPHA, in his view, were that it was too restrictive as it was for thirty years, and he believed the Board had made a decision, which was not based on commercial grounds but on political reasons, and, from a separate commercial point of view, the project was not in the interests of the defendant in terms of the value of the organisation on privatisation and of the profits to the shareholders over the long term. He agreed Mr Weekes was looking into ways to terminate for those reasons on his instructions from March 1997, although he added that it was then that the defendant became aware of misrepresentations made by the plaintiff. Whilst there were various allegations about such alleged misrepresentations, none were attempted to be proved. He continued, Tp.250:- "Q. So, do I understand that from March 1997 a matter in the forefront of your mind was how this contract could be terminated? 
A. Well, your Honour, I believe the question was rather whether or not the contract could be terminated.

Q. Well, I suppose that is always a question, whether a contract could be terminated, but I was suggesting that the matter in the forefront of your mind, in the consideration of this contract, was whether it could be terminated? 
A. Yes." (My emphasis.) 
There cannot be a shadow of doubt that Mr Gillen and Mr Weekes, in accordance with his instructions, were looking for ways to prevent the PPHA proceeding. I have no doubt that this attitude pervaded Mr Gillen's approach to a consideration of the PPHA and led him into serious error in construing its terms. He was hardly in the frame of mind to provide "reasonable assistance" to the plaintiff in its endeavours to fulfil the conditions. However, the question will arise in due course whether there was a failure to provide reasonable assistance and, if there was, whether that impacted in a causal way on the attempts to meet the conditions.

Mr Gillen was referred to Mr Randall's report of 1 July 1997, which dealt with environmental benefits, the status of approvals and the due diligence process.
Mr Gillen said:- "I got Mr Randall, as part of his due diligence on the whole project, to look at possible ways for withdrawal or modifications to the current approvals." 
He said that was not done as the result of the letter written by Mr Egan to Mr
Hughes on 20 June 1997, notwithstanding Mr Egan's request for information about those subjects. Mr Gillen suggested that Mr Weekes may have asked Mr
Randall for the information and, Tp.253:- "Q. What Mr Ellicott is asking you, I think, is that when you look at that page, the two paragraphs of the environmental benefits and status of approvals and the second the due diligence process, do you agree that the first one is dealing with the inquiries made by the Treasurer on 20 June - I think that is what Mr Ellicott wants to know? 
A. Well, it would certainly appear that way from the tenor of the response." 
That would seem an extraordinary coincidence if the information was not sought in response to Mr Egan's request.

On 6 May 1997 Mr Gillen wrote to Mr Alper in relation to "Environmental
Assessment" and "Ability to Meet Payment Commitments". Under the latter heading it was stated:- "The volatility of the electricity market and the uncertainty associated with the future market price directions requires that the counter party have considerable capital to sustain itself and its ability to meet cash difference payments across the 30 year term. For example, a market price just 20% above the contract price can require that the Generator make difference payments totalling over $200m over the term. In that environment, working capital of the suggested $4.5m will not go far." 
Mr Gillen agreed that far from the Business Evaluation suggesting that, it said exactly the opposite: Tp.254. Of more significance is the failure of the defendant to rely on this point in its ultimate, and inaccurate, assessment of the amount of the letter of credit.

The letter also dealt with the requirement for a letter of credit covering the termination payment obligations under clause 20.3. Mr Gillen said it was not his understanding that the defendant did not have a right to demand security and, after some debate about what the letter of credit required in clause 4.2 covered, he gave the following evidence:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. It is just not clear to me. Do you want to suggest there is something in section 2 that deals with termination payments implicitly or expressly? 
A. Your Honour, I am suggesting that the risk of termination is similar to the risk of default by the other party and therefore in terms of the letter of credit that we would be seeking, there is a correlation between the two.

Q. Before we pass on, I just want to be clear about something. Do you want to suggest that, as you understand it, there is something in section 2 of the agreement which deals with termination payment obligations? 
A. No, I don't want to suggest that.

Q. Either expressly or impliedly, you don't want to suggest it is there, either expressly or impliedly? 
A. In terms of termination payments I don't want to, assuming there is anything implied in terms of risk for Energy Australia, either by default or either by termination by non performance, the risk is the same.

Q. Where is that referred to in section 2? Where is that element of risk referred to in section 2? 
A. I believe that is covered under part 4.

Q. What page? 
A. On page 18.

Q. I am talking about section 2? 
A. Oh. Sorry. Yes, sorry, under section 2 it is not relevant." 
Mr Gillen then suggested that clause 2 should read "clause 4.2(iv)" and that there was a typographical error.

At Tpp.258-259 Mr Gillen gave the following evidence:- "HIS HONOUR: Mr Ellicott, we have been through this. He has agreed with that. It seems to me that what Mr Gillen is saying is that it would have been better if the agreement had covered this risk.

Q. Is that what you are saying, Mr Gillen? 
A. I am suggesting that the risk of termination is under the same category of risk as default by the other party and, therefore, the letter of credit, a letter of credit requirement to cover both is in the same sort of vein.

Q. But that requires a rewriting of the contract, doesn't it? 
A. Or agreement between the parties to work along those lines.

Q. We will deal with it step by step. When you say `or' do you agree with my proposition that it requires a rewriting of the contract? 
A. Yes.

Q. Or, alternatively, another agreement by the parties to deal with it in the way you would have liked it to have been dealt with? 
A. Yes." 
This evidence indicated to me clearly that in considering the amount of the letter of credit Mr Gillen was not merely considering the words of the PPHA, in so far as they provided for the giving of security, but also the provision of further security to which, under the PPHA, he acknowledged the defendant was not entitled unless it was re-written or a fresh arrangement was made.
Therefore, far from seeking to administer the PPHA in accordance with its terms, Mr Gillen was seeking to shore up the position of the defendant in a manner the PPHA did not permit and, in doing so, was demanding a letter of credit for an amount almost four times that which was sought by a letter from the defendant of 5 July 1998, viz $101,500,000. That amount was calculated on the worst case scenario of the plaintiff's expert, and ignored the amended view of the defendant's expert that the amount for which the letter of credit should provide was between $60m and $90m.

On 15 May 1997 Mr Gillen wrote to Mr Alper in relation to due diligence, stating that he expected that "commercial in confidence matters" would be disclosed to the defendant to enable it to participate in the due diligence process as required by the PPHA and to perform its own due diligence. He continued:- "I should mention that the willingness of the banks to finance the project is not necessarily persuasive to us. They will have a different security position and perhaps they are taking some comfort from our own involvement in the project rather than the creditworthiness of the plant owner. If the banks consider it sufficiently risk-free, then presumably they will be prepared to back some of the payment covenants from the plant owner on the hedge contract.

Regarding the guarantee, perhaps there has been some misunderstanding of the role your investment partner will play. The fact that you had stressed to us that it will be such a significant player in the US markets suggested to us that we would have recourse to it. If we are not to get a guarantee from your investment partner, then of course our credit assessment changes dramatically." 
The first and second sentences I have quoted are inexplicable by reference to the PPHA, which provided for the final due diligence reports of the banks to be furnished to the defendant.

It was suggested to Mr Gillen, Tp.262, that in seeking a significant letter of credit the defendant gave no attention to the potential of the project's earning revenue, which he denied.

On 18 July 1997 Mr Gillen wrote to Mr Alper confirming that the conditions in paragraphs 4.2(a)(iv)(A) and (B) were in the alternative, and that a letter of credit under the latter paragraph would be required to secure the obligations owed by the Generator to the defendant under clause 2 of the PPHA "including the difference payments". Mr Gillen dealt in that letter with the potential payments which may have to be made, which suggested that the amount of those payments to be secured would be about $750m. In these circumstances he sought, stating that he believed the defendant was not being "unreasonable", an initial security or demonstrated capacity to pay of $375m, which he recognised as a large initial security amount. In the light of what transpired the amount was totally unjustified. It exceeded the amount claimed on 24 March 1998 by $100m and the amount claimed on 5 July 1998 by some $274m. On one view of the evidence of the defendant's expert, the amount to be covered by the letter of credit, if there was a contractual entitlement to a letter of credit, was as low as $60m.

Mr Gillen was then taken to a letter from Mr Hughes, the Chairman of the defendant, to the Treasurer, dated 31 July 1997. This responded to the
Treasurer's letter of 20 June 1997 and stated, in the opening paragraph, that the criteria under which the defendant approved the purchase of power from the project "appear to have changed". It continued:- "The environmental and regional development benefits which were expected to be realised at the time the Power Purchase and Hedge Agreement (PPHA) was signed, no longer appear achievable." 
The letter dealt with a number of matters and, under the heading "Economic
Issues", concluded:- "Further, if the Redbank project proceeds then the quantity of electricity purchased by Energy Australia from the existing NSW generators will fall. In terms of current vesting contract prices this will divert around $40m per annum of revenues away from Delta, Macquarie Generation and Pacific Power. If the Put Option for the second stage of the project is exercised then the loss of revenue will be $80m annually." 
Under the heading "Contract Status", Mr Hughes wrote:- "The PPH contract was signed in March 1996 at an effectively fixed price, and without the specific representations made by the counter party referred to earlier in this letter being included explicitly within the contract documentation. As a result of this Energy Australia, if it were to withdraw from the contract, could incur very large penalties." 
Mr Gillen agreed he drafted the letter for Mr Hughes, which expressed eloquently Mr Gillen's dissatisfaction with the PPHA, and which could only lead the reader to the view that it was in both the defendant's and its shareholder's interests that the project did not proceed.

At Tp.269 Mr Gillen said there was no agreement on the part of the Board of the defendant to get out of the PPHA, but rather there was an initiative that was being handled by Mr Weekes and him, which was "to look at ways of getting out of the contract". He said the Board was aware that Mr Weekes and he were investigating that, but not aware of a "blow by blow description of what was happening", and it had not "given us any directions in terms of deliberately derailing the project": Tp.270. He continued:- "Q. Now when you said a moment ago the Board was aware what we were investigating what were you referring to? 
A. The Board was aware that we were investigating means of terminating the contract.

Q. And had anyone at Board level told you not to pursue those investigations? 
A. No.

Q. Had anyone at Board level told you to pursue? 
A. Yes.

Q. Who? 
A. The previous Managing Director.

Q. That's Mr- ? 
A. Mr Woodley. Well - and, well, basically all of the Directors endorsed pursuing the task." 
This evidence is at variance with the evidence that the Board was either not aware of or not concerned about the termination of the PPHA. It is quite clear to me from the whole of the evidence that from early 1997 the defendant, at management and Board level, recognised that the PPHA was a bad agreement from the defendant's point of view, and that it was content for Mr Gillen and those working under him to pursue all strategies to determine ways to terminate it.

On 3 September 1997 Mr Gillen wrote to Mr Alper replying to his letter of 15
August 1997. The letter sought various financial and other information to allow the defendant to complete its due diligence. The letter also repeated the continued requirement that the defendant be provided with security:- ".. to satisfy the potential value of the difference payments to be paid by the Generator to Energy Australia over the full length of the term, including any balance of the term after a default by the Generator where Energy Australia elects not to terminate the PPHA." 
On 19 September 1997 Mr Weekes sent a memorandum to Mr Gillen referring to the losses to the shareholder if the project went ahead, and noting that the PPHA contained provisions relating to termination for reasons other than failure in respect of the conditions precedent, but that those provisions required compensation equivalent to payment of the discounted value of the future net cash flows. It concluded:- "On this basis the present value of the contract from EA's viewpoint is negative $80m. To indicate the price sensitivity, if it were possible to buy 20-year base load electricity at $25 per Mwhr then the contract value is negative $160m.

Conversely, if Energy Australia were to go to the market to-day and the lowest price at which it could buy 20-year base load was, say, $38 per Mwhr then the contract value would be negative only $40m." 
At Tp.272 Mr Gillen was referred to paragraph 5 of his letter of 3 September in which he suggested that the force majeure provisions did not operate to relieve the Generator of its financial obligations to pay difference payments under clause 2 of the PPHA where the pool was in existence. This seems to be at odds with the PPHA and, when Mr Gillen was asked for an explanation the question was rejected on the basis of Mr Sullivan's objection.
I am satisfied that on a proper construction of the PPHA the force majeure provisions had this operation and that the defendant should have been aware of this in determining the amount of security.

At Tp.281 Mr Gillen was referred to a letter from Mr Alper of 14 November , which provided certain financial information. Mr Gillen said he was not satisfied with that information and, on 17 November 1997, he wrote to Mr
Alper. He agreed that letter sought no further financial information and that the first correspondence that asked for amplification was a letter of 23
December 1997, in which a summary of the project was prepared on behalf of the defendant, which noted that in February 1997 doubts were raised about it from "an overall economic perspective" and that the defendant's role was transferred to Mr Gillen. This document showed the doubt being cast upon the project by the defendant.

Mr Gillen agreed that on 5 December 1997 at the meeting with representatives of Axiom and Hastings reference was made to that dispute, which was to come before the Court later in that month, and that if that was resolved that the defendant "is still likely to insist upon strong financial security". He agreed that would give some cause for concern to investors.

Annexure "H" to the witness statement of Mr W.D. Murphy of 4 July 1998 was a file note of the meeting of 5 December 1997. It was admitted without objection although a representative of the defendant was present. The note recorded that a representative of Axiom stated that she was not certain of the plaintiff's legal position under the PPHA, particularly as at 28 March 1998, and that a solicitor for Axiom had said that the defendant would be terminating. There was discussion about why the defendant wished to "walk away" from the agreement. It was quite obvious that by then the defendant had made plain to
Axiom that it wished to terminate the PPHA. Thus, Mr Murphy's note was consistent with the evidence of Mr Gillen.

Mr Gillen said that he did not write down, and he did not know whether Mr
Weekes did, what it was that the defendant had to have to be satisfied that this project was either creditworthy or financially viable.

It then emerged that Mr Dennis, the solicitor for the plaintiff, said at the meeting with Axiom and Hastings:- "Energy Australia believes that the best view of the agreement is that the condition precedent has not been met and either the agreement stopped back in February or they have the right to serve a notice next March. If they are bound they will perform their obligations." 
In relation to lenders and investors Mr Gillen said that as the defendant was committed to the project he did not believe it had a role to encourage such people, but a role not to discourage them. He continued:- "Q. .. Did you think that it was appropriate that Energy Australia should express negative attitudes about the agreement to such people? 
A. I thought it was appropriate that Energy Australia should express the facts": Tp.297. 
On 10 December 1997 Mr Gillen gave a presentation to the newly constituted
Board of Energy Australia.

On 20 January 1998 Mr Paul A. Broad, the Managing Director of the defendant, wrote to Mr R.J. Debus, the Minister for Energy, in response to his request for information regarding the current status of the project "to enable you to respond to the questions posed by the Hunter Valley Labor Members of
Parliament". Mr Broad described the financial basis and, at the commencement of the second page, continued:- "On 10 May 1996, and in line with the deregulation of the NSW electricity industry, deregulation of wholesale electricity trading occurred. The resulting pool market for electricity saw reductions in the price of electricity to prices well below those originally anticipated in some cases as low as $14.50. While the long term sustainability of these lower pool prices is uncertain, forecasts suggest a levelling out of prices in the low to mid 30's. An outcome of this nature would make the purchase of electricity under the third obligation above (i.e. $42) quite disadvantageous to Energy Australia's commercial competitiveness. Accordingly, Energy Australia sought to withdraw from the PPH agreement." 
The last sentence seems to be a reference to the proceedings before Giles
CJCommD in December 1997.

Mr Broad made reference to a number of "key due dates for conditions", including 1 February 1997 by when the plaintiff was to assign the PPHA to a new Generator entity. He also referred to 28 March 1998, 1 January 1999 and 1
January 2001. He advised the Minister that on 17 December 1997 Giles CJCommD had ruled that the date of 1 February 1997 to complete an assignment was only a target or indicative date "and that 28 March 1998 was the essential date for meeting this condition". In those circumstances he looked at a number of matters to which the plaintiff had to attend, and noted that since 17 December two financiers, Axiom and Hastings, were reported to have withdrawn all support from the project, as a result of which it was understood that the plaintiff was "currently seeking investors to replace them".

The letter continued:- "In order to protect its position and its contractual rights under the PPHA, Energy Australia conducted a due diligence. The due diligence identified that the original criteria under which the Board of Energy Australia approved the purchase of power from this project have changed. In particular, the environmental and regional development benefits which were expected to be realised at the time of signing the PPHA no longer appear achievable.

CONCLUSION 
As a result of the emergence of the competitive electricity industry and the subsequent (albeit short term) declines experienced in spot market prices, the continued commercial viability of this project and Energy Australia's involvement in it, is highly unattractive. The decision to attempt to withdraw from the PPHA was made following consultation with officials from Treasury and was based upon the potential, and negative, effects on current and future dividend payments to State Government as well as the effect on market price for the company as a whole. Despite the recent action in the Supreme Court by National Power, it is Energy Australia's intention to continue to try and resolve this matter directly with them. The nature of any future communications will be very much dependent on legal guidance and commonsense compromises." 
This letter made a number of things plain. Firstly, the changes to which Mr
Broad referred were not, nor were they suggested to be, the fault of the plaintiff. Secondly, the perceived lack of the continuance of commercial viability was not suggested to be the fault of the plaintiff. Thirdly, the decision "to withdraw" was made in consultation with officials from Treasury and was based on matters totally irrelevant to the contractual obligations the parties had assumed as between themselves. Fourthly, the letter proffered no criticism of the plaintiff.

Mr Gillen was then referred to the letter to Mr Debus: Tp.286, and he was asked whether it would be possible to know, as the conclusion stated, whether the transaction would be attractive, unattractive or highly unattractive without having the further information requested in the letter of 23 December
He replied:- "I believe we formed that view on the basis that the information that would have been provided would have been optimistic and on that basis the information didn't provide us a lot of comfort but it was attractive. I don't know whether we could prove that it was highly unattractive but it was certainly unattractive.

Q. Do I understand you to mean by that answer that you understood that sentence to proceed on the basis that any financial information provided to the defendant by the plaintiff would have been optimistic? 
A. Yes, your Honour.

Q. So without seeing it, you were sceptical of it? 
A. Yes." 
Mr Gillen agreed, Tp.287, that after the decision of Giles CJCommD he believed there was a probability that the defendant would be able to terminate the contract on 28 March 1998 because the assignment had not been made by 1
February 1997, and that that had a major effect "on our thinking".

At Tp.304 Mr Gillen was cross-examined about the letter to Mr Debus of 20
January 1998, which he said he assisted in drafting and, at Tp.308, he said, after being referred to a lengthy passage from the letter:- "Q. That is quite clear that you were keeping a very close eye, were you not, on opportunities, I suggest, that might enable Energy Australia to withdraw from the agreement? 
A. We were keeping a close eye on opportunities, yes.

Q. Opportunities to withdraw from the agreement; that's right, isn't it? 
A. To withdraw or modify the agreement.

Q. Well, if you couldn't modify the agreement you would be looking for opportunities to withdraw from it, is that right? 
A. Yes." 
By the end of January or early February 1998 Mr Gillen became aware that ABB was being mooted as a potential investor. He knew ABB to be a very large international company with a reasonably long association with the defendant and with a good reputation in certain areas. The defendant wanted to continue to have an association with ABB and, shortly after learning of ABB's possible involvement, a meeting was arranged on 5 February 1998 at the request of the defendant and without informing the plaintiff: Tpp.308-310.

There was a meeting between Mr Gillen, Mr D.M. Clemson, the Chairman of ABB
Financial Services Australia Limited, and Mr M.B. Dureau, the Managing
Director of ABB Power Generation Limited. This occurred on 5 February 1998 at the request of an officer of the defendant, although Mr Dureau, in his contemporaneous diary note, stated it was obvious that the meeting had been requested by Mr Broad. That diary note set forth that Mr Gillen raised several concerns held by the defendant about the project and his shock at the withdrawal of Axiom and Hastings. The concerns were:- "1. The financial viability of the project, given the weak financial position of National Power; . The change in environmental outcomes; . The security of payment should the pool price rise above the contract price; and . The perception that this Power Station was stealing capacity from the existing power stations." 
The note stated that on the financial viability issue ABB was seriously considering equity participation, which had been requested by Dresdner Bank, and that the representatives of ABB pointed out that once the equity partners were in place the plaintiff would have a small role and that its financial position, whatever it might be, would not jeopardise the project.

The note continued that on the environmental issue ABB had carried out design checks and was satisfied that the plant would meet or do better than all environmental constraints and that a boiler was capable of meeting the project specifications. It continued that Mr Gillen explained that his reference was more to the Warkworth site and the building of the second tailings dam.

Mr Clemson addressed the issue of security of payment and advised that ABB was aware of it and was taking steps to ensure that it was not a problem, and further that ABB was seeking to include Louisville Gas and Electrics in the project.

Mr Gillen, apparently, stated that the defendant was concerned that any inclusion of power generation capacity in the States would detract from sales ability of generating assets, which were currently under-utilised, to which Mr
Dureau replied that the total output of Redbank was 130 MW compared to one single unit at Bayswater of 660 MW "and that this perception could easily be reversed by a whole hearted support of the project from the Government and from the Management of eA. The project could be sold on the basis that it was generating employment in the Hunter Valley both during construction and afterwards during operations and that all efforts were being to direct supply activities to the Hunter Valley factories including ABB's fabrication works at
Tomago".

Mr Dureau explained that ABB was very much behind the project, which was important to it for various reasons referred to in his note, and the disappointment that all senior management of ABB had at the change in the
Government's position "which caused the cancellation of IPP contract negotiated by ABB for Collie Power Station in Western Australia and the negative effect that it had overseas".

Whilst ABB was keen to develop a strong alliance with the defendant, Mr Gillen stated that the perception was that this was a bad project for any alliance to be built on and that the Government was not in favour of the project. Mr
Dureau pointed out certain concessions Mr Egan had provided for the project, which Mr Gillen acknowledged "but still said that the Government was uncomfortable with the project and asked if there were any other ways that the project can be re-shaped implying that any new structure would exclude
National Power".

The note concluded by stating that there was a request for a meeting between
Mr Broad and Mr Tommie Bergman, the Managing Director of ABB, once the equity issue had been clarified.

Mr Clemson and Mr Dureau each swore affidavits on 14 May 1998 deposing to what had occurred at this meeting. Mr Clemson referred to the detailed conversation which, essentially, followed the note to which I have referred. He attributed to Mr Gillen the following statement, which matched up with the note that the defendant was concerned that any inclusion of power generation capacity would detract from sales ability of generating assets. He said Mr Gillen said:- "The Government doesn't think it needs this power plant. Don't you think it would look bad if another power plant was to be built when it was about to sell its existing stations with surplus capacity?" 
He also attributed to Mr Gillen the following statement:- "One of the principal concerns was that if the generators are sold, it would establish a bad precedent if the Government supported a long term power purchase agreement with a private power station." 
Mr Dureau also gave a version of the conversation which followed, substantially, the note. He attributed to Mr Gillen the following statement:- "EA is concerned that any addition to the generating capacity to New South Wales will detract from the ability to sell the existing assets which, at the moment, are under-utilised." 
In his witness statement, Exhibit 2, Mr Gillen gave his version of that conversation in which he included a statement by Mr Dureau that ABB was very concerned that the defendant was not honouring its obligations under the contract and could not understand why it forced the plaintiff to go to Court "in December". Mr Gillen said he replied that the defendant had a number of concerns about the matter, to which Mr Dureau said he thought the project was excellent and, after some discussion as to why Axiom and Hastings pulled out,
Mr Dureau said that ABB was fully committed to the project and:- "We have in place financial arrangements in the US with National Power to secure rights to obtain certain technology to enable ABB to build other power generation plants elsewhere in Australia and other parts of the world. The technology is very sound, has a good future potential internationally, is in line with ABB strategy for its international expansion and is fully supported by head office in Zurich. We've put $15m into this project so far." 
Mr Gillen said that he replied that there was concern that when the pool price rose to high levels, and either the generation plant was down or the project participants had other priorities on their cash requirements, that would prevent difference payments being made to the defendant to reimburse the pool exposure, particularly given that the PPHA was over such a long period. He said that Mr Dureau considered that the contract was good for both and that he could not understand why the defendant was anything but supportive of Redbank.
Mr Dureau also said that ABB's contacts at Government levels wanted the project to go ahead, and asked why, if the Government was totally backing the project, the defendant was not fully supportive of the plaintiff.

Mr Gillen said this led him to ask why ABB thought the Government was totally behind the project, and whether consideration had been given to it not being in the interests of the people of New South Wales for a new power plant to be built when the existing power stations had excess capacity and were about to be privatised. He agreed Mr Dureau spoke about the generation of jobs in the
Hunter Valley, and there was discussion whether the construction of the power generation plant would add value to the defendant on privatisation. Mr Gillen expressed the view that a long term power purchase contract with any Generator would erode the value of privatisation during a period of uncertain pool prices. Mr Dureau disagreed.

Mr Dureau, according to Mr Gillen, said that ABB wanted to build the power plant, that they were locked in, and that the project was firmly on track for financial close. Mr Gillen asked if there was a possibility that the project could be "deferred or re-configured to overcome our concerns" as the defendant was "obviously keen to maintain a good long term relationship with ABB".

Mr Gillen said the purpose of the meeting was to establish ABB's commitment as a long-term equity participant in the project and to determine its preparedness to financially support the project. He denied that he said that the defendant had been shocked by the sudden withdrawal of Axiom and Hastings and that the defendant had concerns about the financial viability of the project. He agreed he mentioned the weak financial position of the plaintiff by reference to the due diligence, and he expressed concern about the security of payment. He denied he mentioned that there was a perception that the
Redbank Power Station would steal capacity from the existing power stations and that the defendant was concerned that any inclusion of power generation capacity would detract from sales ability of the generating assets, which were currently under utilised. He denied that he said that the Government was uncomfortable with the project, although he said that when Mr Dureau commented that the project had Government support he asked whether ABB had considered that that may not be the case. He agreed that he asked if there was any basis for changing the plant configuration, but he said that nothing was said at that meeting about the exclusion of the plaintiff. He requested a meeting between Mr Broad and Mr Bergman, and he agreed that the ABB representatives indicated that they were looking favourably at the project. He denied, in effect, that he referred to the plaintiff's lacking financial strength such that it was a company with which other companies should not associate and he denied expressly that he said that he would rather the plaintiff was not in the project.

Mr Gillen denied that he said, inter alia, that the defendant was concerned that any addition to the generating capacity of New South Wales would detract from the ability to sell the existing assets which, at the moment, were under- utilised. The statement, which he denied, seems reasonably consistent, however, with that he agreed he made:- "In my view a long term power purchase contract with any generator, such as the PPHA with National Power, would erode the value on privatisation for Energy Australia rather than enhance it during a period of uncertain pool prices." 
Mr Gillen asserted that the topic of privatisation was raised by Mr Dureau, and he denied that he said that the project was perceived as being a bad one and he could not see any alliance being built upon it as the first major relationship with the defendant. He also denied that he said that the New
South Wales Government was not in favour of this project. He further denied that he said that the Government was still uncomfortable with the project and would prefer that it did not proceed, and that he asked whether there was some way that it could be re-shaped so that there would be a structure different to the current structure but involving ABB.

I do not see that there is any inconsistency between the statement of Mr
Dureau in relation to the Government attitude as expressed by Mr Gillen and the question by Mr Gillen as to whether there was a possibility that the project could be deferred or re-configured "to overcome our concerns".

In relation to Mr Clemson's affidavit concerning this meeting Mr Gillen denied a number of matters, which followed essentially the matters he denied in relation to the version of the conversation given by Mr Dureau.

Mr Clemson and Mr Dureau were each cross-examined and I am quite satisfied that their evidence, in so far as it conflicts with the evidence of Mr Gillen, should be accepted. They had the advantage of a contemporaneous diary note prepared by Mr Dureau, whereas Mr Gillen did not have one available, to him for the reasons he gave in his statement. Further their versions are, in my opinion, wholly consistent with the probabilities and, in particular, the defendant's efforts, which were apparently supported by Treasury, to see that the PPHA did not go ahead. Both Mr Clemson and Mr Dureau impressed me as witnesses of truth. Once their evidence is accepted it becomes very clear that at this meeting Mr Gillen was putting the most unfavourable light possible on the plaintiff, the project and the Government's interest in it. This, in my view, was adopting an attitude which was directly contrary to the defendant's obligation to provide "all reasonable assistance". Every attempt Mr Dureau and
Mr Clemson made to support the project was queried or denied by Mr Gillen.

On 17 February 1998 Mr Bergman, the Chairman of ABB, and Mr Broad met. Mr
Broad's diary note stated the issues as being that Mr Bergman confirmed that
ABB was an equity partner in the project and advised that a letter from the plaintiff was on its way to the defendant confirming that the plaintiff had financial backing for the project. He recorded that legal advice ABB had was that its position was very strong, that the consortium would apply legal pressure to have the defendant fulfil its commitments and believed that public pressure in the context of a float would force the defendant to continue the
PPHA.

Mr Broad noted that the defendant was focusing on 28 March and the financial closing, and he indicated concern about the financial viability to the defendant. He wrote:- "3. I indicated to them that the purchase price for power from Redbank was significantly higher than what we believed we could obtain power for either from the pool, existing generators or possibly a new entrant, which suggests that the commercial position of the contract had changed significantly for Energy Australia.
 . Energy Australia takes all the risk in underwriting this deal.
 . We understand other existing generators in NSW could supply significantly more power than Redbank at lower prices and that the bringing of Redbank on line reduces the value of the NSW generators as well as Energy Australia.
 . There were no green credits for our licence conditions in the Redbank proposal despite the original purported claims that there would be significant green credits.
 . That the burning of tailings can be undertaken by existing generators at the same rate, if not more so, than Redbank." 
Mr Broad's diary note said that the discussion then focused on where a resolution of the issues might come from and agreement that there would have to be negotiations between the relevant parties and the defendant to seek to find a solution.

Mr Bergman's diary note recorded that Mr Broad had said that it was a "commercially very bad project for Energy Australia involving one hundred millions of loss"; that the relationship between the plaintiff, on the one hand, and the New South Wales Government and the defendant, on the other, was extremely bad; that the defendant's strategy was to do everything possible to get out of the contract "legally/commercially"; and that he advised that the defendant would soon receive a letter with details of equity participation, but that Mr Broad responded that what was sought was a negotiated settlement and that would enhance the value of the defendant's other assets when privatisation or a public float took place. Mr Bergman recorded that Mr Broad stated he was able to withstand likely negative reactions and that he could "live with it and presently his main concern is to protect the best interests of Energy Australia".

Mr Bergman also recorded that Mr Broad said that his responsibility was to look after the best interests of the defendant "and that clearly was for the project not to proceed" and "the entire Board of Energy Australia was recently replaced and the Redbank project was part of the reason".

Mr Bergman's note stated that ABB's best strategy was to pursue the project with full vigour until the end at which time either ABB would receive substantial compensation or "have a project". On Friday, 20 February 1998 Mr
Pitt, the Managing Director of ABB Transmission and Distribution Pty Limited, met with Mr Mervyn Davies, the General Manager-Network of the defendant, the purpose of the meeting being to seek to re-open talks between Mr Broad and Mr
Bergman.

Neither Mr Broad nor Mr Bergman were called. Their diary notes were tendered without objection. Both diary notes made it clear that the defendant, at the level of the Managing Director, was determined to terminate the PPHA and, if
Mr Bergman's note be accepted, Mr Broad was not interested in further information which may be furnished in aid of the PPHA's proceeding. This stance is consistent with what I believe to be the attitude of the Board and management of the defendant. Mr Broad's approach was totally inconsistent with providing all reasonable assistance.

Mr Gillen agreed he telephoned Mr Dureau and said to him:- "Following the meeting between Paul Broad and Tommie Bergman, I would like to have a meeting with you so we can discuss possible compensation arrangements with the parties involved." 
Mr Dureau swore, in paragraph 6 of his affidavit of 14 May 1998, that Mr
Gillen telephoned him and said:- "Following Tommie's meeting with Paul Broad, we need to discuss compensation for ABB." 
In my view it is inherently probable that the conversation took place in those terms, firstly, because I accept the evidence of Mr Dureau, and secondly because he had a contemporaneous diary note, which is Annexure "D" to his affidavit, which quoted those exact words.

Mr Gillen suggested that the compensation was in relation to the plaintiff and denied that he was discussing compensation for ABB with Mr Dureau.

In a note of the meeting with Mr Pitt, Mr Davies set out various general matters discussed and noted that he advised Mr Pitt that the defendant had concerns about the Redbank project:- ".. and expressed regret that the meeting, earlier that week between Tom Bergman and Paul Broad had failed to advance our companies' mutual understanding of each other's position and of the issues surrounding the Redbank project." 
There was consideration given to arranging a further meeting between Mr
Bergman and Mr Broad, which did not eventuate.

Mr Pitt, in his affidavit of 14 May 1998, stated he met Mr Davies, who told him that he had been requested by Mr Broad to visit him personally to outline the defendant's position in case Mr Broad's actions were misinterpreted in the meeting by Mr Bergman. Mr Davies, according to Mr Pitt, said that he had been asked to meet with Mr Pitt in the hope that he, Mr Pitt, could assist to persuade Mr Bergman to further discuss ABB's continued involvement in the
Redbank project. Mr Pitt said Mr Davies said:- "Energy Australia should not have investments in power stations, they should obtain the power from the pool. Energy Australia, and the political influences that govern it, do not really want the Redbank project to proceed." 
He added:- "The Energy Australia staff who were involved in forming the original deal had a very different agenda and the influences upon them are not politically acceptable now." 
Mr Pitt said that Mr Davies was critical of the plaintiff, expressed surprise that ABB would deal with it and said that ABB "should seriously consider the type of partner we have in National Power". There was some discussion about the environmental position and Mr Davies suggested that ABB "should seriously look at why the other financiers have pulled out of the project". He said:- "If ABB understood that, you would rightly consider following similar actions. So far, we have had a very good business relationship with ABB. If ABB continues supporting the project, the situation could impact on the future relationship with Energy Australia and could impact on business outcomes." 
Mr Pitt said the situation was out of his control and that Mr Davies said that if ABB was not to proceed then the defendant "could be in a position to consider some form of compensation but it would not be in the tens of millions".

Mr Pitt had a telephone conversation with Mr Davies on 27 February 1998 in which he told him that he had communicated his sentiments to Mr Bergman and that ABB was intent on continuing "to close the project". Mr Pitt told Mr
Davies that the question of compensation was basically disregarded due to the investments of the plaintiff and ABB "combined" and as ABB was focused on the financial completion. Mr Davies responded that he was disappointed and that if the project went ahead "it could affect our traditional relationship, which has been a good one". Mr Pitt said that that was a result with which he would have to live. Mr Pitt was not required for cross-examination and Mr Davies was not called to give evidence. Mr Pitt's uncontradicted version of the conversation is further evidence of the active attempts to remove ABB from the scene, and of Mr Davies' unacceptable commercial conduct to either threaten or cajole ABB to abandon the project by reference to further business relations.

Mr Davies was not called. However, he was available and it emerged in final addresses that the defendant must have taken a deliberate decision not to call him. I say that because Mr Sullivan conceded that Mr Davies' statements were the very antithesis of providing reasonable assistance and that they were to be regretted. (I might add that the same concessions could appropriately have been made about the conversation of Mr Gillen on 5 February 1998, and the statements of Mr Broad to Mr Bergman.) He submitted, however, that the comments did not lead to any breach of contract because far from them leading to the consequence that ABB was deflected from its intention to continue with the project, ABB robustly confirmed that it intended to do so notwithstanding
Mr Davies' statements. This is but one example of the importance of construing the contract. On Mr Ellicott's submissions this failure to provide assistance was sufficient to preclude the defendant giving a Notice of Termination. On Mr
Sullivan's submissions it was not.

At Tp.315 Mr Gillen was referred to the arranging of a meeting on 23 February between the defendant and investors and to the receipt of commitment letters from AIDC, ABB and LG & E. That meeting was cancelled on the basis that the principal reason for it was to meet the participants face to face to ascertain the level of commitment, which had been answered. The next meeting was between Mr Gillen, Mr Dureau and Mr Clemson on 5 March 1998. According to
Mr Dureau's note Mr Gillen put a proposal to pay the plaintiff "a fair and agreed sum to conclude their involvement as the developer and equity participation in the project" and then to enter into a new contract with ABB.
This was consistent with Mr Dureau's version of the conversation on 27
February 1998. The consequences of not following this course were stated, namely that "a Strategic Alliance was dead".

Mr Dureau stressed that the various parties were moving to close the project before 28 March 1998 and that ABB could not enter into any agreement with the defendant, which would have to approach the plaintiff.

There was discussion about the environmental issues and it was recorded:- "D. Clemson asked if eA would honour their obligations under the PPHA and sign. A. Gillen stated that they would not.

D. Clemson asked a second time (not immediately) and A. Gillen again said that EA did not consider the contract to be in their best interests so would not sign and would fight the issue in the courts.

A. Gillen said that eA had opinions form (sic) J.P. Morgan and others that the decision not to sign would not hurt eA's reputation and might be positive in the lead up to privatisation.

A. Gillen indicated that they were looking for a way to save the Government and the Board from an embarrassing situation.

M. Dureau indicated that a legal battle would have no winners except the lawyers and the Liberal Party which was happy to make this an election issue.

Some discussions followed regarding the timing and ABB stressed that it would not be a party to anything which jeopardised the validity of the PPHA - which would fail if it were not consummated by the 28th March 98." 
Mr Gillen's contemporaneous diary note recorded that there was an impasse in the development of the Redbank project "and that as it was also clear that we were on the verge on the litigation, I had been authorised by the Managing
Director to discuss possible outcomes that could achieve a mutually desirable outcome". This meant, obviously enough, one which would not lead to the PPHA going ahead, once again negating the obligation to provide reasonable assistance.

His diary note recorded that as soon as litigation was commenced the relationship between the defendant and ABB would be "irretrievably destroyed", and he then proceeded to outline a proposal that would represent a better outcome for all concerned, which involved paying a fee to the plaintiff, reaching an agreement with ABB to take a significant equity level, and forming a long-term strategic alliance with ABB to build and operate similar plants in
Queensland and other locations in the Asia Pacific area, and ABB would re- configure the current design at the Redbank Power Station to achieve better environmental benefits and "greener" energy than that planned to be delivered under the current design. Thus Mr Gillen was seeking to bring commercial pressure to bear on ABB in what I regard as a totally improper way having regard to the contractual obligations the defendant had undertaken.

His note confirmed that the initial reaction of Mr Clemson and Mr Dureau was that it would be difficult to achieve better environmental benefits, and that matter was discussed at length. It also confirmed that Mr Dureau said that ABB was committed to the plant going ahead, and was very interested in forming an alliance with the defendant to build a similar plant in Queensland and the
Asia Pacific area.

There were discussions about the position of the plaintiff and Mr Gillen said that:- ".. I could confirm that EA would resort to the courts to prevent the project from proceeding in its current form, and that this would destroy any prospects of a long-term alliance between ABB and EA." 
His note continued:- "Both Mike and Doug were visibly shocked by this comment. It was clear to me that they did not expect EA to take such an aggressive stance." 
There was further discussion about how the matter could be resolved and it was decided to have a further meeting.

Mr Clemson deposed that when he asked Mr Gillen whether the defendant proposed to honour its obligations under the PPHA "and sign", Mr Gillen replied:- "No. We will not sign." 
Mr Clemson said Mr Dureau spoke on other issues and he then asked a question based on Mr Gillen's statement that the defendant would not honour the PPHA:- "Can I ask you the question again: do you intend to honour your obligations under the PPHA?" to which Mr Gillen replied "No". Mr Clemson's evidence was essentially consistent with Mr Dureau's contemporaneous diary note.

Mr Clemson said that he said that was a very important decision, which "will not reflect well on the New South Wales Government in terms of political risk".

There was discussion about the litigation and Mr Clemson said ABB would continue to proceed to financial close and that he could not do anything which would jeopardise the defendant's position. The commercially ethical approach of ABB stood in stark contrast to the tactics being adopted by the defendant.
Mr Gillen said:- "What I want to achieve is a heads of agreement with ABB prior to 28 March 1998." 
Mr Dureau's version of this conversation was basically in the same terms. He said that Mr Gillen said, initially, that the defendant would not sign in answer to Mr Clemson's question and, in answer to the follow up question, that it was not in the defendant's best interests to sign "and we are prepared to fight the issue in the courts".

In paragraph 34 of his statement, Exhibit 2, Mr Gillen basically confirmed what had been said, although in relation to Mr Dureau's affidavit he denied various portions including any statement that the hope of a strategic alliance was dead. He also denied that he said the words "No, we are not going to sign".

In relation to Mr Clemson's affidavit he denied that he said "No, we will not sign" and "No" in answer to the second question. He conceded that Mr Clemson asked whether, if an alternative arrangement could not be put in place to the defendant's satisfaction, the defendant would proceed with the PPHA, and he said he replied:- "Energy Australia will honour its obligations under the contract. But we are not prepared to accept on face value what we've been told, but still remains unsubstantiated, by National Power and will resort to the courts to protect our position if we have to so that the project in its current form will not proceed. We are just not prepared to dilute our rights under the PPHA." 
Mr Sullivan structured a submission in relation to the meeting of 5 March , which was that Mr Clemson and Mr Dureau were at odds in a significant respect. He referred to the answer Mr Dureau said that Mr Gillen gave to Mr
Clemson's second question, as appeared in the second quotation at paragraph 8 of Mr Dureau's affidavit, viz "No, it is not in our best interests to sign and we are prepared to fight the issue in the Courts ....." 
At Tp.141 Mr Sullivan put the whole of this answer to Mr Clemson and asked whether he agreed that Mr Gillen gave it. Mr Clemson denied in the most emphatic terms that Mr Gillen gave that answer, thus putting him at odds with
Mr Dureau.

At Tp.150 Mr Dureau denied that Mr Gillen said to him:- "Energy Australia will honour its obligations under the contract. But we are not prepared to accept on face value what we have been told, that still remains unsubstantiated by National Power and will resort to the Courts to protect our position if we have to so the project in its current form will not proceed." 
Mr Sullivan's submission was that Mr Gillen was merely putting, as Mr Dureau had deposed, that it was not in the defendant's best interests "to sign", not that the defendant would not honour its obligations under the PPHA. However, the submission does not fit easily with certain evidence Mr Gillen gave.

At Tp.320 Mr Gillen was referred to the meeting on 5 March 1998. He agreed Mr
Clemson asked if the plaintiff would honour its obligations under the PPHA and sign the consent. He denied that he said the defendant would not, and asserted that he said that the defendant would honour its obligations under the agreement, but would reserve the right to protect its interests and entitlements under it. He then said:- "Q. Would you deny saying that, you saying that EA wouldn't sign or words to that effect? 
A. Words taken in that bald sense, I would deny": Tp.320. 
He said that he did not recall that he was asked that a second time, but he said he could recall that he made a statement categorically that if all the conditions precedent under the PPHA were met, the defendant would honour its obligations. He denied saying that the defendant did not consider the contract to be in its best interests "so would not sign and would fight the issue in the courts". He agreed he said that if the defendant had to resort to the courts to protect its interests under the PPHA, it would do so. He denied saying anything "about not signing". He also denied saying:- "No, it is not in our best interests to sign and we are prepared to fight the issue in the court. We have had options from various parties, including J.P. Morgan that the decision not to sign will not hurt EA representation and may even be a positive leading up to the privatisation of the electricity industry in New South Wales. What we are looking for here is a way to save the Government and the EA Board from an embarrassing situation": Tp.321. 
His answer was:- "No, I did not use those words, although portions of them are taken out of context." 
Mr Gillen agreed that he said that the defendant would resort to the Court to prevent the project from proceeding in its current form, but he denied that in that context he said that that resort would destroy any prospects of a long- term alliance between ABB and it. It was then put to Mr Gillen that in his note of the meeting he said:- "I said that on a without prejudice basis I could confirm EA would resort to the courts to prevent proceedings in its current form and that this would destroy any prospect of a long term alliance between ABB and EA".

Having been shown the note he said that he had said those words which he meant "in the context of going to Court", an explanation I found difficult to accept.

He further conceded that he said in his note:- "I also said that as soon as litigation action was commenced, the relationship between EA and ABB were irretrievably destroyed." 
He agreed he said that and that he was "trying to make the point that it was in everybody's interest to reach a mutually agreed outcome rather than resorting to the Courts".

He agreed that on 5 March 1998 he sent quite a lengthy letter to the plaintiff, which was prepared in conjunction with the defendant's lawyers, and in which letter it was stated that the plaintiff would receive a further letter that would lay the ground work for legal action by the defendant.

Mr Clemson's cross-examination about the discussion on 5 March 1998 is set forth at Tpp.144 to 147. In my view Mr Clemson was a completely honest witness and, notwithstanding the difference between Mr Dureau and him on the point to which I have referred and in so far as he may have made any concessions in cross-examination, these matters did not impact upon the substance and truthfulness of the evidence he gave. I have not the slightest doubt that Mr
Gillen said to Mr Clemson that the defendant would not honour its obligations under the PPHA, upon which evidence the difference between Mr Clemson and Mr
Dureau does not reflect, and, in so far as there is a variation between the version of that conversation put forward by Mr Gillen and the version put forward by Mr Clemson I accept the latter's recall, which is totally consistent with the contemporaneous diary note.

It is to be noted that in the cross-examination of Mr Clemson it was put to him that he said:- "Are you sure that Energy Australia will not sign the consent document?": Tp.142, which Mr Clemson denied. No such version appears in Mr Gillen's statement, but it is consistent with Mr Clemson's, and for that matter Mr Dureau's, evidence.

Mr Clemson also denied, in a very positive and believable fashion, that Mr
Gillen never said:- "No, we don't intend to honour our obligations under the PPHA": Tp.144. 
He was then asked:- "Q. I suggest to you he said, `we will not sign the agreement', but I put to you that he never said to you words to the effect that they would not honour their obligations under the PPHA? 
A. But the answer to the substance of the question was, in fact, the first time it was asked and Mr Gillen's answer was, `no'." 
Mr Clemson was then cross-examined as to whether it was "No" or "No. We will not sign" and he said he believed the substance was the same. The obvious point Mr Clemson was making was that Mr Gillen's statements led to the conclusion that he was saying that the defendant would not honour its obligations.

Mr Dureau's cross-examination commenced at Tp.147 and it was put to him,
Tp.150, that Mr Gillen said:- "Energy Australia will honour its obligations under the contract. But we are not prepared to accept on face value what we have been told, that still remains unsubstantiated by National Power and we will resort to the courts to protect our position if we have to so the project in its current form will not proceed." 
His answer was:- "Definitely not. His answer was simple and that was a no." 
I have considered the evidence given by Mr Clemson and Mr Dureau at length.
Each satisfied me that his evidence, which was supported by the contemporaneous diary note, should be accepted. In the result I am satisfied that Mr Gillen made as clear as could be that the defendant would not proceed to a closing, that it wanted to treat separately with ABB, and that if ABB was not prepared to do that the possibility of future business opportunities would not be available.

The view of Mr Conde in relation to conduct of this type is summarised in his evidence at Tpp.446-447:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. Mr Conde, what did you understand ABB's position was in early March 1998 in relation to this project? 
A. I think I understood that ABB was going to become involved as supporting the project as well as being the organisation supplying some of the equipment.

Q. And supporting the project in what way, as you understood it? 
A. Being one of the partners with National Power, providing funding.

Q. Would you have been concerned if you had known that an approach had been made to ABB without the knowledge of National Power to, in some way, change the arrangements at that time, namely in early 1998? 
A. Along the lines of Mr Ellicott's questions? 
Q. Yes? 
A. Yes, sir.

Q. And why would you have been concerned? 
A. Well, even on a without prejudice basis, it does not seem entirely proper.

Q. And does it seem consistent with the furnishing by Energy Australia of reasonable assistance in endeavours to bring about the fulfilment of the conditions to you? 
A. Well, your Honour, my understanding of any discussions with ABB, as it turned out that that didn't involve National Power, had all been without prejudice and sort of off the record, as it were and that the dealings with National Power on the matter of the agreement was being conducted on the record and that we had a lot of questions about the assistance we were receiving from National Power to come to a view on some matters that we needed to form a view on prior to financial close.

Q. If I can just return to my question, and given the without prejudice, off the record nature of the conversations, did such conversations or do such conversations seem to have been consistent with the furnishing by Energy Australia of reasonable assistance in endeavours to fulfil the conditions? 
A. It is not a conversation I would have had, your Honour.

Q. Why not? 
A. It does not seem entirely proper.

Q. In what way? 
A. Well, it just does not to me.

Q. Well, I was asking you in the context of reasonable assistance and endeavours to fulfil conditions. Were you answering in that context? 
A. I suppose, to the extent that it may have influenced ABB's attitude but I don't believe that those conversations were interfering with what I understood to be our genuine efforts to give assistance and deal with National Power's questions to us on the main matter of the agreement and its resolution.

Q. I don't quite follow that? 
A. Well, I am not seeing immediately the connection between what may or may not have been said to ABB and whether my personal view of what is alleged to have been said, how that impacts, giving or endeavouring to give assistance to National Power with whom we were having the day-to-day dealings, as I understand it, on the conditions precedent and supporting financial closure.

Q. Well it may be suggested at some stage before this case ends that the impact was to divide ABB and National Power. Is that an impact you can see arising from the hypothesis you have been asked to assume? 
A. As a matter of fact, it was never suggested that there had been such problems arising in the mind of ABB, as far as I am - as far as I can recall. I am not sure that I am answering your question.

HIS HONOUR: I am not sure you are. You may be having difficulty with it, but thank you very much.

ELLICOTT: Q. You would understand in those circumstances if a discussion along those lines were held with ABB, it might well affect their commitment to the project themselves, you would understand that? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And if National Power was seeking to get them involved in the project as a substantial investor, then that would hardly be lending reasonable assistance would it? 
A. I can understand what you are putting.

Q. You agree with it? 
A. Yes. I always have a little difficulty understanding the significance or lack thereof of these so-called without prejudice, off the record discussions.

Q. You would understand sometimes, unless the party that is going to be affected in this case National Power, agrees that something is to be without prejudice, that without prejudice discussions with somebody else that does have an impact on them can affect National Power; you can understand that? 
A. Yes.

Q. And although it is without prejudice with, say ABB, it may nevertheless have an impact on National Power, you understand that? 
A. Yes." (My emphasis.) 
On 6 March 1998 there was a further meeting between Mr Gillen, Mr Dureau and
Mr Clemson. Mr Dureau prepared a written memorandum of the meeting at which Mr
Clemson said that he had spoken to Mr Peter Giller of ABB Energy Ventures "and we are interested in the proposal that you have put forward and would like to know how you now intend to proceed".

Mr Dureau said Mr Gillen replied that the defendant would send ABB a letter outlining the proposal and that it could be "from lawyer to lawyer, if that is the best way of handling it". Mr Dureau said that as ABB was the EPC contractor it could not be a party to such an arrangement, and that he was curious to know how it would work and how much equity the defendant regarded as significant. Mr Gillen replied that the defendant would be looking for "something significant, say between twenty per cent and fifty per cent of the equity", that it was cash rich "at the present" and had no problem in financing the project. He continued:- "With EA financing the project, the overall cost will reduce and there will be a lower cost to the investors. On the environmental side, we understand that the design cannot be substantially changed but we should do all in our power to make it appear that this is a more environmentally friendly power station. This would be a politically good move. We would also like to re-visit the PPHA and we would require some changes in it." 
Mr Clemson replied that ABB would not be in favour of any substantial changes to the PPHA, and Mr Gillen said that he could get a letter out within a few hours "and I will get straight onto it".

Mr Clemson's evidence as to this conversation was in essentially the same terms and, on 9 March 1998, Mr Gillen sent the following facsimile transmission to Mr Clemson, which referred to the discussions on 6 March 1998.
It stated:- "As you will have gathered we are not optimistic that the Redbank project in its present form will reach financial close. National Power's refusal to give us information essential to our due diligence has prevented us from making the required assessments of financial capability and the additional security required.

In line with our discussions, I wish to confirm that Energy Australia would like to proceed with further discussions with ABB to determine whether the Redbank project could be adjusted from its present form, to achieve advantages such as: enhanced performance from overall environmental considerations; more efficient pricing on the EPC contract and hedge; and `Green credits' availability.

We would also like to discuss wider issues such as other projects elsewhere in Australia, and the possibility of a longer term relationship or strategic alliance between EA and ABB in the Asia Pacific region.

However, for the present we are constrained by the time frame of the existing PPHA which is held by National Power Australia (NPA). To discuss matters further with ABB, we would need either: 
NPA's consent to do so; the existing PPHA to be released or perhaps be assigned; 
ABB to step into NPA's shoes in the PPHA.

If you wish to take an assignment of the PPHA for NPA, we would be prepared to discuss with you: releasing the requirement that National Power and AIDC participate in the generator; and/or once ABB is the only party involved, extending the time frame for financial close to explore enhancement or adjustments to the current Redbank structure." 
In paragraph 137 of Exhibit 2 Mr Gillen said that on 6 March 1998 he attended the meeting, and that his recollection of the substance of what was said was "broadly consistent" with that stated in the affidavits of Mr Dureau and Mr
Clemson, although he denied that Mr Clemson said "ABB is against substantial changes to the PPA (sic)".

Mr Gillen asserted that Mr Clemson said that it would be difficult for ABB to achieve substantial changes to the PPHA, that the National Power people are difficult to deal with and litigious "so whatever we do, we have to bear that in mind and ensure they are in full agreement", with which Mr Gillen agreed.

On any view of this conversation and the letter of 9 March 1998 it did not amount to the provision of all reasonable assistance.

At Tp.324 Mr Gillen was referred to a meeting at the offices of the solicitors for the plaintiff on 6 March 1998, which was transcribed. Mr Daniel, a solicitor for the plaintiff, asked, in response to a statement by Mr Gillen that the defendant had determined that by financial closing the Generator would not, in the defendant's opinion, be an entity with adequate capacity to meet its financial obligations under Section 2 of the PPHA and to pay interest and repay principal in a timely manner:- "What do you consider is an adequate capacity?" and that the answer from Mr Gillen was:- "No, we are relying on you to satisfy us that there is an adequate capacity." 
I shall refer to the meeting in more detail subsequently.

On 9 March 1998 Mr Flato, the Project Finance Director of the plaintiff, wrote to ABB in the following terms:- "Following our conversation and at your request, National Power Partners consents to ABB Energy Ventures BV and its affiliates (`ABB') continuing discussions with Energy Australia regarding the reconfiguration of the Redbank power project and its power purchase and hedge agreement with Energy Australia. This consent is without prejudice to any rights we may have with respect to Energy Australia.

Please be advised that your discussions with Energy Australia are premised on our understanding that the outcome will be mutually beneficial to both ABB and National Power." 
This letter made plain that, conformably with the defendant's suggestion if not earlier, the plaintiff was aware of the discussions between the defendant and ABB, took no objection to them having taken place or to their continuance, subject to the qualification stated, and was content to have the "reconfiguration" take place provided it was without prejudice to the plaintiff's rights and was mutually beneficial.

On 11 March 1998 Mr Clemson met with Mr Gillen, Mr Weekes and Mr Robertsson.
He introduced Mr Robertsson, who was a senior executive with ABB Energy
Ventures, tabled the letter from the plaintiff of 9 March 1998 and, after Mr
Gillen read the letter, Mr Gillen said that the defendant was pleased to continue discussions with ABB. Mr Robertsson said:- "There is a willingness by ABB and National Power to continue discussions which could lead to a resolution of some of the so-called difficulties, however the time frame which we face with the financial close by the end of March makes it very difficult for the discussions to be productive. The Redbank investor group is committed to achieve financial close by the due date." 
Mr Clemson asked whether the defendant would consider the possibility of an extension of time to allow those discussions to continue, and that such extension needed to be agreed and arranged in such a way "that none of the existing rights of the parties would be jeopardised".

He annexed to his affidavit a diary note of the conversation, and he said that in addition to what was recorded in it he asked Mr Gillen whether the defendant wanted to be the operator and Mr Gillen replied:- "No, we don't want to be the operator. We are quite happy with LG & E being the operator." 
In paragraph 144 of Exhibit 2 Mr Gillen referred to the meeting on 11 March and said that his recollection of the substance of what was said then was "broadly consistent" with what was stated in the affidavit of Mr Clemson. On March 1998 Mr Gillen wrote to Mr Clemson concerning the discussions on 11
March 1998. The letter said:- "I refer to our discussions yesterday in which you indicated that you would wish to discuss further with Energy Australia a proposal under which the ABB Group and Energy Australia examined revising the Redbank project so as to overcome some of Energy Australia's concerns with the project, and perhaps include Energy Australia as an equity participant.

As we have both agreed, we wish to progress these discussions further.

However, as you are aware, we are currently a party to the PPHA with National Power Australia LLC, and we would not wish to be seen to be circumventing National Power, interfering with National Power's existing contractual arrangements, or doing anything inconsistent with providing reasonable assistance for National Power to meet its financial close. You would also be aware from the meeting held on 6 March 1998 that Energy Australia believes that National Power has defaulted in its obligations to provide Energy Australia with sufficient time to conduct its due diligence, and that National Power has until this week withheld most of the commercially sensitive information which is relevant to that due diligence.

We understand that National Power has consented to you conducting discussions directly with us and you have provided us with a copy of a letter to that effect.

As we have discussed, to take the matter further, we request that you seek a letter direction from National Power to Energy Australia, which would authorise us to conduct further discussions with you regarding the Redbank project or some alternative arrangement to the Redbank project. We would also discuss the concept of a `moratorium' for a period of three weeks to enable ABB and Energy Australia to pursue these discussions. Accordingly, as it would be necessary for the request from National Power to defer the 28 March 1998 date for satisfaction of the conditions precedent to some later date to enable these discussions to take place, the letter from National Power should also contain that request.

To ensure that Energy Australia's current position is not prejudiced, the letter from National Power would also need to confirm: 
National Power will not allege that, in engaging in these discussions with you, Energy Australia has committed any breach of the PPHA, causing any loss or damage in any way to National Power, or failed to provide reasonable assistant (sic) to National Power to meet the conditions precedent under the PPHA; and 
Energy Australia's claim that National Power has failed to provide sufficient information and adequate opportunity for due diligence prior to the financial close will not be prejudiced by any extension of the date for satisfaction of the conditions precedent, but instead will be judged on the basis of the original date by which the conditions precedent were to be satisfied; and during the three week `moratorium', no correspondence will be entered into between National Power and Energy Australia.

I look forward to the opportunity to resolve this matter in a way that fairly meets the objective of all parties involved in the Redbank project." 
The letter is eloquent of Mr Gillen's concern that his conduct may well have breached the requirement to provide "reasonable assistance" and, in my view, was an attempt to repair what must have been perceived as the damage done by the previous conversations.

Mr Clemson concluded his affidavit by stating that so far as he was aware there was no agreement as to the "moratorium".

In paragraph 149 of Exhibit 2 Mr Gillen referred to a meeting of 19 March 1998 with Mr Weekes, Mr Cassimatis and Mr Robertsson. It appears that Mr Clemson was also present and, according to Mr Gillen, Mr Clemson said that the plaintiff would not agree to the wording in a draft about "the moratorium" and that everyone was "extremely focused" on 28 March. Mr Robertsson said that ABB was "on an express train to financial closing and I can't see how it can be done", and Mr Clemson said that ABB had the best intentions but the one week remaining was not enough, and that the plaintiff was being advised not to allow "the 28th of March date to be compromised".

Mr Gillen said that he thought it was achievable in the time frame and:- "We would need to come up with a new maximum strike price and a new return to equity assuming Energy Australia participates in up to fifty per cent equity and changes can be made by ABB to the EPC. I think it is do-able." 
There was further discussion, according to Mr Gillen, as to how the arrangement could be re-worked and the difficulties of doing that after financial closing. All of these matters were directed, as I understand it, to the possibility of a further agreement, which becomes clear from the introduction by Mr Gillen of Mr Cassimatis as a financial modeller and:- "John is available full time to work on modelling the re-configured commercial arrangement. We will need to define the objectives in order to establish a different basis for the project going ahead in line with my proposal. This would involve a lower strike price and a re-jigged EPC contract." 
The Proper Construction Of Clause 4.2 
In his written opening Mr Ellicott submitted that the principal question for determination was whether the defendant failed to provide reasonable assistance to the plaintiff "to obtain fulfilment of conditions in clause .2(a) of the PPHA". He submitted that that question should be answered in the affirmative, although put more fully the question would seem to be whether the defendant failed to provide reasonable assistance to the plaintiff "in its endeavours to obtain fulfilment of the conditions". The submission recognised that a question of construction arose in relation to the meaning of clause .2(c), and continued:- "If a relevant condition was unfulfilled, and in relation to that unfulfilled condition the defendant failed to provide reasonable assistance to the plaintiff to obtain its fulfilment, is that a fact alone enough to deprive the defendant of any right it would otherwise have had under clause 4.2(c) to terminate the PPHA? That is the plaintiff's position. The defendant contends that, if the relevant condition would not have been fulfilled even if the defendant had provided reasonable assistance, then the defendant's right to terminate under clause 4.2(c) is preserved." (The first emphasis is mine, the second Mr Ellicott's.) 
In his closing submissions Mr Ellicott stated, paragraph 9:- "The defendant failed to provide `reasonable assistance' of the kind referred to in clause 4.2(b) in relation to the fulfilment of conditions (ii) to (iv). Importantly, the reasonable assistance which the provision required was for the plaintiff in its endeavours to obtain fulfilment of the conditions." (My emphasis.) 
He submitted further that Giles CJCommD had found in the December proceedings that the right to terminate was only to be found in clause 4.2(c) if there was a breach of the conditions in clause 4.2 and:- "Reading clause 4.2(c) in the light of what was held by Giles CJCommD, it follows that there is no entitlement in either party to terminate for the non-fulfilment of clauses 4.2(a)(i) to (iv) unless it has provided reasonable assistance to the other in its endeavour to obtain the fulfilment of" those clauses.

I am not convinced that for the purpose of his decision his Honour was determining the issue whether there had to be a causal connection. I rather think his decision was based on his view that the relevant time had not arrived to terminate for failure to assign by 1 February 1997 and would not occur until at least 28 March 1998.

In paragraph 10 the submission continued that that failure clearly constituted a breach by the defendant of clause 4.2(b), and that no question of causation arises or could conceivably arise in relation to the issue of such a breach because:- "Reasonable assistance had to be provided. If it was not provided there is a breach of that obligation." 
In paragraph 11 the submission continued:- "That conclusion is critical because it is in itself sufficient to entitle the plaintiff to the declaration it seeks in prayer 2 of the Further Amended Summons and, further, to a separate hearing on the damages caused by that breach." 
The relevant prayer for relief is number 3.

In paragraph 12 the submission was repeated that no question of causation, in the sense given by the defendant in its Outline of Opening at paragraph 22, arises on the proper construction of clause 4.2(c), and:- "13. Even if, contrary to the plaintiff's primary submissions, causation were a necessary element in clause 4.2(c), the requisite level of causation is made out. It is not necessary to consider any of the other complexities which might (cf par 20 of Outline of Defendant's Opening), in other circumstances, arise as a matter of construction. The three conditions not fulfilled ((ii), (iii) and (iv)) all would have been fulfilled on, but not before, financial closing. Given the intensive and wide-ranging assault by the defendant on the plaintiff, the project and the PPHA, there was no chance of financial closing occurring. Thus the defendant's conduct prevented all three conditions from being fulfilled. No question arises of whether one might have been fulfilled but not the others. At the very least the defendant's conduct was the major cause of their non-fulfilment, which is as far as it is necessary to go. However, there is every ground for concluding that the defendant's conduct was the sole factor." 
Mr Sullivan made mention of the fact that the construction for which the plaintiff contended was set forth in a letter from its solicitors to the defendant's solicitors, which incorporated sub-paragraph (b) of a proposal for the separate question, which was determined by Giles CJCommD, namely whether, on the proper construction of clause 4.2:- "The defendant has failed to provide reasonable assistance within the meaning of clause 4.2 in relation to the fulfilment of any of the conditions not fulfilled." 
In the way in which the case was ultimately argued by the plaintiff the words
I have emphasised in the opening of Mr Ellicott, which include "in relation to that unfulfilled condition", and which were repeated in his closing submission are significant because the failure to provide reasonable assistance is related to obtaining fulfilment of the unfulfilled condition.

Mr Sullivan's written opening acknowledged the criticality of construing clause 4.2 and of determining the circumstances in which a failure to provide reasonable assistance "in respect of the fulfilment of the conditions therein specified" would result in the loss of the right to terminate. The written submissions anticipated that the plaintiff would submit:- that if the defendant failed to provide reasonable assistance in respect of any of the conditions specified in clause 4.2, then it is not entitled to terminate the PPHA even if the defendant's basis for termination is a condition other than the one in respect of which reasonable assistance has not been provided; or that if the defendant has not provided reasonable assistance in respect of one of the conditions specified in clause 4.2 it cannot rely on the non- fulfilment of that particular condition, even though the failure to provide reasonable assistance is not causally linked to the plaintiff's non-fulfilment of that condition.

This anticipated, albeit correctly in the end, a different approach by the plaintiff to the way in which the case was opened, and submitted that either anticipated construction was inconsistent with the language and obvious intention of clause 4.2 and commercially unreasonable and absurd. The defendant submitted that the true construction, as pleaded in paragraph 7(c) of its Defence, was that pursuant to clause 4.2 the defendant is entitled to give a notice of termination if there has been a failure to comply with any of the conditions, save where that failure was caused by the defendant's "lack of provision of reasonable assistance in respect of the fulfilment of the particular unfulfilled condition". This point was illustrated by noting that if the plaintiff would not or could not obtain approval in any event "despite all the assistance in the world", or if there was another unfulfilled condition, the non-fulfilment of which was "totally unrelated to the failure of the defendant to provide reasonable assistance" to obtain the fulfilment of another condition, the defendant would still be entitled to terminate.

Mr Sullivan submitted that if that be correct the plaintiff could only obtain the declaration of non-entitlement to give the Notice of Termination if it proved that its failure to fulfil each condition was caused by the defendant's failure to provide reasonable assistance in respect of that particular condition and, further, that the plaintiff carried the onus of proving that the failure to provide assistance caused the non-fulfilment of the condition.

It is convenient to pause to consider what is involved in the provision of assistance. It was not in issue that there are two aspects to this concept.
Firstly, there is an obligation to actively provide reasonable assistance.
Secondly, there is an obligation not to act in a manner which will make it more difficult for the plaintiff to obtain fulfilment. As McLelland CJinEq said in Hunyor & Anor versus Tilelli (24 April 1997 - unreported), in considering a condition precedent for the registration of a strata plan where the vendor was under a contractual obligation to "use his reasonable endeavours to promptly carry out all matters contemplated by this clause", a party to a contract is not entitled, as against the other party, to rely on an event caused or materially contributed to by the first party's own breach of contract: Suttor versus Gundowda Pty Limited <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 418.] He noted the contractual obligation imposed by the "best endeavours" clause, and continued:- "Implicit in this express obligation, which is in positive terms, was a correlative negative obligation not to do anything inconsistent with his positive obligation (see e.g. Shepherd versus Felt & Textiles of Australia Limited <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 359] at 585-6)." 
This passage sets out the nature of the obligations created by such a clause and the existence of those obligations was not in issue in the present proceedings. It also pointed to the need that, on the construction of that clause, non-fulfilment had to be caused or materially contributed to by the defendant's default, on which issue the onus rested on the plaintiff. Finally emphasis was put on the evidentiary requirements which, relevantly for the purposes of the present case, may require the plaintiff to establish why the conditions were not met, the information being, essentially, within its knowledge.

Plumor is now reported in [[1996] 41 NSWLR 30.] In that case a contract for the sale of residential property included a special condition whereby it was subject to the purchaser's obtaining the written consent of the Foreign Investment Review Board to the contract within fourteen days from its date. It was provided that if the consent was not obtained within that period, or such further period as might be agreed between the parties, "then in that event either party shall be entitled to rescind this contract by notice in writing whereupon the provisions of clause 19 hereof shall apply". It was further provided that the purchasers were to apply for the consent within twenty four hours of the date of the contract and to provide to the vendor copies of all correspondence from the Foreign Investment Review Board relating to that application. 
In dealing with a submission that the defendant was precluded from exercising a right of rescission under Special Condition 28 because he had breached his obligation to make an application for the requisite consent within the period specified his Honour said, at p.34:- "Compliance with the express obligation imposed on the defendant to `apply for the said consent within twenty four (24) hours of the date of this contract' is not, by the terms of Special Condition 28, made a condition of the exercise by the defendant of the right of rescission conferred by that provision, nor should there be any implication to that effect. It is only if non-compliance with that obligation had a sufficient causal relationship with the defendant's failure to obtain the requisite consent within the fourteen day period that the defendant would be precluded from exercising the right of rescission arising by virtue of that failure, in accordance with the principle to be later discussed. If that failure would have occurred in any event, non-compliance with the obligation would not affect the defendant's right of rescission: see Nina's Bar Bistro Pty Limited versus MBE Corporation (Sydney) Pty Limited [[1984] 3 NSWLR 613] ..." 
His Honour nextly considered a submission that in addition to the express obligation to apply for the requisite consent, the special condition imposed on the defendant an obligation to take all reasonable steps available to him to obtain it within the stipulated period. He considered that proposition was undoubtedly correct, and that if the failure by the defendant to obtain the consent within the period resulted from any default by him in the performance of either his express or implied obligations, then the defendant was not entitled to exercise the right of rescission of the contract otherwise available to him under the special condition. His Honour was of the view that that was an application of the principle that a party to a contract is not entitled, as against the other, to rely on any event resulting from the first party's wrongful act.

At p.35 his Honour considered where the onus lay on the issue of whether an event, on the happening of which an entitlement by a party to rescind or avoid a contract arises, has resulted from that party's breach. He observed that there were conflicting authorities and that in Nina's Bar Bistro all three
Judges of the Court of Appeal expressed themselves:- ".. in terms which appear to me to support the proposition that the onus of proof lies on the party alleging the absence of an entitlement to rescind." 
However his Honour did not think that that case could properly be regarded as a binding decision on the point. Having considered the matter for himself he concluded that the decision of the House of Lords in Joseph Constantine
Steamship Line Limited versus Imperial Smelting Corporation Limited [[1942] AC ], the dicta in Nina's Bar Bistro and the decision of Powell J in City of
Gosford versus Marim Pty Limited (1996) 6 BPR 13871 should be followed:- ".. with the consequence that it should be held in the present case that the onus of proof on the issue of whether the non-obtaining of the requisite consent or advice within the period stipulated in Special Condition 28 resulted from a breach by the defendant of his contractual obligations, rests on the plaintiff. In other words, the relevant principle can be briefly formulated as: `Non-fulfilment of the condition will justify rescission unless it is proved to be self-induced' rather than as: `Non-fulfilment of the condition will not justify rescission unless it is proved not to be self-induced'." 
Mr Ellicott, in his concluding submissions, submitted that there was no need for the plaintiff to establish a nexus between the failure to provide reasonable assistance, (which term I shall use to cover both parts of the obligation), and the non-fulfilment of the conditions. The submission was that on a proper construction of clauses 4.2(b) and (c), the failure to provide reasonable assistance in any respect was sufficient to disentitle the defendant to rely on the right to give the Notice of Termination, because if there was such a failure the defendant had failed to comply with its obligations under clause 4.2(b) and, therefore, was precluded from terminating. A literal reading of the clauses would permit that interpretation.

He submitted that it mattered not that the plaintiff had not met, nor even would meet, the fulfilment of the conditions, and that it did not matter whether the defendant's failure to provide reasonable assistance caused the non-fulfilment "to any degree", provided that there was evidence that the defendant had failed to provide reasonable assistance, on the one hand, and the plaintiff had failed to meet one or more of the conditions, on the other.
He submitted there was no requirement of any nexus between the two occurrences, and that in construing the clauses the question of causation was irrelevant because, so he submitted, the ordinary meaning of the words was "very clear" and unless there had been the provision of reasonable assistance in any respect, and irrespective of whether it caused or contributed to non- fulfilment, there was no compliance with the requirement to provide reasonable assistance and, accordingly, the mechanism, which was required for the giving of a Notice of Termination, was not activated.

Mr Ellicott also referred to the requirement to provide reasonable assistance in the endeavours to achieve fulfilment of the conditions, and submitted that this made it clearer that there was no requirement of a causal nexus between the failure to provide reasonable assistance and the achieving of the fulfilment of the conditions.

Mr Sullivan's response was to take various examples, which showed that this literal construction led to a commercially unacceptable result. He pointed, firstly, to certain problems in the wording of the clauses, which he submitted, in itself, would lead the Court away from the literal construction, and submitted that the only conclusion, which did not produce anomalous results, was that for which he contended, namely that the plaintiff must prove that in so far as there are unfulfilled conditions that was caused by the failure of the defendant to provide reasonable assistance in respect of each such condition. In addition to Hunyor he referred to the unreported decision of Harper J in the Supreme Court of Victoria in Australian Milk
Marketing Pty Limited versus Victorian Dairy Industry Authority (19 February ), which contained a "best endeavours" clause and noted that such a clause did not require one to act, necessarily, to one's substantial detriment.

Mr Sullivan pointed to what he submitted was the inconsistent approach taken by the plaintiff for the interpretation between its opening and closing submissions, the former necessarily requiring a nexus between the failure to provide reasonable assistance and the non-fulfilment of the conditions. I do not place great weight on inconsistency in submissions or matters of construction. He encapsulated his submission thus:- ".. once it is established that one of the conditions has not been fulfilled it is the plaintiff who bears the onus of showing both that the defendant failed to provide reasonable assistance and that the failure to provide reasonable assistance was the cause of the non-fulfilment in question." 
He submitted that the plaintiff's primary construction, i.e. that if there was only need for a failure and the non-fulfilment of the condition was correct, it would lead to a number of absurd results. Firstly, there may be a failure to provide reasonable assistance, but the condition may nevertheless be fulfilled. However, subject to one exception, in that instance the operation of the clause, at least in relation to the fulfilled condition, would not come into effect because the condition would be met and there would be no basis on which, in relation to it, a Notice of Termination could be given. On the other hand the argument would be available that the failure to give reasonable assistance, even though not affecting that condition, was sufficient to preclude reliance upon the non-fulfilment of other conditions to which that reasonable assistance was irrelevant. Secondly, there may be a failure to provide reasonable assistance but the circumstances could be such that even if it had been given, the plaintiff could not, apart from that failure, have complied with the condition. Hence, so the submission ran, the failure would be irrelevant, in the sense of not being causative of the non-fulfilment of the condition and the inability to give a Notice of Termination, in those circumstances, would be an absurd result. Thirdly, taking the second example, the mere failure could exculpate the plaintiff from the obligation to try to comply with other conditions to which the failure had no relevance and, so it was submitted, it would be absurd that in relation to the non-fulfilment of other conditions, because of the failure to give that reasonable assistance but unrelated to the non-fulfilled conditions, Notice of Termination could not be given by the defendant.

Mr Sullivan also submitted that the construction for which the plaintiff contended in its written opening, which he characterised as its secondary construction, would lead to absurd results, although it did not depend on a strict literal construction of the words. He said that on the alternative construction the right to terminate would be lost if the defendant failed to give reasonable assistance, even though this did not cause the non-fulfilment.
Thus the failure cannot be "in relation to" the unfulfilled condition unless it can be established by the plaintiff that there is a causal link between the failure and the non-fulfilment.

He submitted that the view for which the defendant contended was borne out by the obvious intention of clause 4.2, namely that the conditions should be fulfilled by a date certain in the context that the parties understood that achieving this result may well require reasonable assistance, but that that would only be required to the extent to which it was causally related to the fulfilment.

In Hunyor the question of causation did not seem to be in issue. The submission was that it was a question of fact to be decided in a commonsense way. McLelland CJinEq dealt with the various authorities in negligence cases, although it is clear that his Honour accepted that causation was necessary.

All these considerations satisfy me that, in the absence of compelling words to the contrary in the agreement which do not appear in the PPHA, the clause requiring the giving of reasonable assistance, even in relation to endeavours to fulfil a condition, should be construed as requiring that the failure to provide it has to be causally related to or has to materially contribute to the non-fulfilment of the contractual requirement, in the sense that but for the failure to provide reasonable assistance the condition would have been fulfilled, the onus being on the plaintiff to establish this. The view which finds favour with me removes the anomalies and absurdities to which Mr
Sullivan referred, without doing violence to the language used. The question of construction must be approached to eradicate such results, if that is possible in conformity with the language the parties have decided to adopt. In my opinion, in the present case that is possible, it does not produce a result inconsistent with principle, and it should be adopted.

In Australian Broadcasting Commission versus Australian Performing Right
Association Limited <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] at 109 Gibbs J stated:- "If the words used are unambiguous the Court must give effect to them, notwithstanding that the result may appear capricious or unreasonable, and notwithstanding that it may be guessed or suspected that the parties intended something different ... On the other hand, if the language is open to two constructions, that will be preferred which will avoid consequences which appear to be capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unjust, `even though the construction adopted is not the most obvious, or the most grammatically accurate' .." 
This passage has been consistently applied by the Court of Appeal (see e.g.
Urica Library Systems BV versus Sanderson Computers Pty Limited (Court of
Appeal - 2 October 1997 - unreported).

If there is an ambiguity, about which I have some doubt in the present case, then it seems to me that it must be resolved by requiring that there be a causal connection.

I have spent a deal of time in considering the point because the determination of it may be critical. If Mr Ellicott's view be accepted there are, in my opinion, several breaches of the obligation to provide reasonable assistance, one of which is conceded. Mr Ellicott, therefore, submitted that on his construction, without more, the plaintiff is entitled to the relief which it claims. However, if Mr Sullivan's submissions are correct, which I consider they are, the failure to provide reasonable assistance is only relevant if it can be established that the non-fulfilment, in the context of endeavours to obtain fulfilment, was caused by or materially contributed to by the failure to provide reasonable assistance for such endeavours. Therefore, in the view to which I have come, it is not sufficient for Mr Ellicott to establish only a failure to provide reasonable assistance. He must also show that it, albeit in relation to endeavours, caused the non-fulfilment relevant to it.

There are several other matters, which have to be considered in the contractual context. Firstly, the plaintiff asserted that there were two implied terms in the PPHA namely that the defendant was obliged to act fairly and in good faith in performing its obligations, and that the defendant would co-operate with the plaintiff in performing all acts necessary for its operation.

The Court will readily imply a term in any contract that the parties shall co- operate to ensure the performance of their bargain. The degree of co-operation required, however, is to be determined, not by what is reasonable, but by the obligations imposed - whether expressly or impliedly - upon each party by the agreement itself. If one party is in breach of its duty to co-operate, so that performance of the contract cannot be effected, the other will be entitled to treat itself as discharged.

Similarly, if an agreement is entered into which can only take effect by the continuance of a certain existing state of circumstances, each party is under an implied obligation to do nothing of its own motion to put an end to that state of affairs, under which alone the agreement can become operative.

As I understand it, it has never been suggested that these well recognised obligations go to the extent of requiring a party to, in effect, abandon looking after its own interests in relation to the contract at least in the sense of not pursuing, if such a remedy is available, the right to terminate the contract for failure on the part of the other party to comply with its obligations under it. Nor, as I would understand it, is there any obligation on a party not to pursue any available remedies it may have under the contract by virtue of the breach of the other party. In the present case, of course, there is a positive obligation on the defendant to provide reasonable assistance.

The Issues 
It is necessary to define with care the issues thrown up by the terms of the
PPHA and the obligations to which I have referred. The plaintiff, quite justifiably in my view, laid stress on the fact that from early 1997 the defendant did not consider that it was a commercially viable contract, and that thereafter its officers, basically Mr Gillen and those working under him, set out to find ways by which it could be terminated and, furthermore, positively sought to undermine it. The plaintiff submitted that this created circumstances which were both not conducive to and the very antithesis of the provision of reasonable assistance. It was submitted that this caused the defendant not to provide it in consequence of which, either because of that fact alone or because the failure to provide such assistance did not enable the plaintiff to meet the conditions, the defendant is not entitled to give a
Notice of Termination. I have rejected the first basis by my conclusion on the construction argument.

In the way the submissions were presented it is necessary to look with care at what happened. However, before doing that, it is, in my opinion, important to distinguish between actions on the part of the defendant whereby it was seeking to find ways of terminating the PPHA, on the one hand, and the failure by the defendant to provide reasonable assistance, on the other hand. The first does not, necessarily, lead to the second, although it provides a permissible background against which the facts may be assessed. It is also necessary to bear in mind that engaging in the first activity might lead to a failure to provide reasonable assistance and, if it did and if that failure was causally related to the non-fulfilment of a condition there would be failure to provide reasonable assistance in the endeavours to fulfil the condition.

I have set these matters out at some length because in some of Mr Ellicott's submissions he sought to portray that the attitude of the defendant that it should terminate the PPHA, which I am satisfied existed, reflected upon all its subsequent actions, such that the Court should draw the inference that those actions were directed to bringing about a situation in which the plaintiff could not meet the conditions, with the result that they amounted to a failure to provide reasonable assistance in the plaintiff's endeavouring to do so. With respect to those submissions I think that the matter requires a more detailed analysis of each individual allegation.

The Defendant's Claim For A Letter Of Credit 
I propose to consider firstly the defendant's assertion to the plaintiff that at the financial closing it required a letter of credit pursuant to clause .2(a)(iv)(B). Sub-clause (iv) provides that by closing the Generator shall be either:- an entity with adequate capacity to meet its financial obligations under
Section 2 of this Agreement and to pay interest and repay principal in a timely matter, as determined in Energy Australia's reasonable opinion; or the financial obligations of Generator under Section 2 of this Agreement be guaranteed by an entity that is creditworthy in Energy Australia's reasonable opinion; or 
Generator shall provide to Retailer a first ranking security interest, a guarantee, letter of credit or other credit support from a reputable and creditworthy bank in a form and an amount Energy Australia may reasonably require to satisfy itself of Generator's ability to meet its obligations under
Section 2 of this Agreement; or such other equivalent commercial terms, conditions or security that
Energy Australia may reasonably require to satisfy itself of Generator's ability to meet its obligations under Section 2 of this Agreement.

It is essential to bear in mind that each of these requirements is in the alternative, and that it is only the first which requires not only the ability to meet the financial obligations under Section 2, which each of the others requires, but also the ability to pay interest and repay principal in a timely manner.

Mr Gillen determined that a letter of credit was required and, in his letter of 18 July 1997, to Mr Alper he stated, firstly, that the defendant was "not yet satisfied" that the Generator would be an entity with adequate capacity to meet its financial obligations and thus to comply with the first alternative.
He gave various reasons for this and suggested that a situation could arise whereby the amount of difference payments to be secured would be about $750m.
The letter continued:- "We believe that we are not unreasonable in suggesting that the Generator should provide an initial security or demonstrated capacity to pay at least half of that figure, namely $375m, indexed. This anticipates the SMP averaging only 25% over the strike price over the term, rather than the 50% which was current in 1995. We recognise that (excepting inflation) the security should diminish over time as the difference payment obligations are met.

We recognise that this is a large initial security amount. It arises because at the commencement of the term there are 30 years of obligations of difference payments to be secured. If the Generator's backers are confident of the viability of the project over its long term, then presumably they will see little risk in providing such a security. Subject to the need to adjust for inflation, we would be prepared to adjust security amount downwards over time as the difference payment obligations are discharged over the term." 
In the penultimate paragraph Mr Gillen stated:- "Clause 21.13 of the PPHA contemplates that we need to be satisfied as to the Generator's capacity to meet its Clause 2 obligations at least 90 days before the anticipated financial closing date. We suggest that it flows from that clause that unless we are satisfied at least 90 days prior to the anticipated closing date, then clause 4.2(a)(iv)(A) can no longer apply and the only alternative is for clause 4.2(a)(iv)(B) to apply." 
The requirement for a letter of credit in the amount of $375m was clearly based on a number of erroneous assumptions. If, as in my view they should have been, they had been identified and given effect to the amount would have been much less. It failed to take into account the cap provisions in the PPHA and it sought to take into account an amount to which the defendant would be entitled on termination for which, it was ultimately conceded, the defendant was not entitled to security until a later point. I have referred to the evidence of Mr Gillen in which he agreed that for the defendant to be entitled to a letter of credit in that amount, it was necessary that the PPHA either to be re-written or, and this is essentially the same, for a fresh agreement to be negotiated. I have referred also to the evidence of Mr Conde to the effect that he would have anticipated that management of the defendant should have been aware of the requirement for a cap. None-the-less the demand for this security remained until 24 March 1998.

Mr Gillen, apparently, had proceeded on the basis that a method of calculation was the taking into account of all the difference amounts that may be payable over the thirty year period and, in adopting that approach, he had misconstrued the PPHA in the ways to which I have referred. I am satisfied by his evidence that he paid no real regard to the requirements of the PPHA, but sought to obtain a security to which the defendant was not only not entitled, but which would have provided it with absolute security.

Mr Kee, the expert called on behalf of the defendant, approached the matter shortly before 24 March 1998 in a different manner. He had regard to the uncovered hedge arrangement, which was not based on the terms of the PPHA, but on the possibility that one hundred hours of outages per annum would coincide with the time the pool price would be above the contract price, which would be a likelihood he regarded as remote. None-the-less he came up with a figure, which he subsequently conceded to be erroneous because of his failure to have regard for the cap, of $300m. This figure was put to the Board of the defendant at its meeting of 24 March 1998 and, in an attempt to be "reasonable", but without directing itself to any mathematical analysis of the figure, the Board reduced the amount to $275m. That remained the amount for which the letter of credit was claimed up to and including 28 March 1998, and it continued to be the amount until, by a letter dated 5 July 1998, the defendant stated that the amount for which the letter of credit was sought was $101,500,000. On the proper construction of the PPHA that was far too late a time to be putting forward that figure. None-the-less, it was a useful concession to the plaintiff of the total unreasonableness of the amount claimed as at 28 March 1998. This became the more apparent when Mr Kee said that it was based on the worst case scenario put forward in the report of the plaintiff's expert, Mr Gillings, and, further, that in his view the amount was more likely to be $60m to $90m.

Mr Ellicott in his opening submitted, firstly, that the plaintiff would have had adequate capacity on financial closing and that in forming the opinion that it would not, which was contrary to the evidence of the plaintiff's expert witnesses, the defendant "axiomatically failed to provide reasonable assistance for the fulfilment of the condition in clause 4.2(a)(iv)". The submission was that in any event it could not be seriously maintained that a requirement of a $275m letter of credit constituted reasonable conduct and that, at most, a requirement for a letter of credit securing a fraction of that sum, but no more, would have been reasonable. Therefore, so it was submitted, the requirement for a letter of credit in the sum of $275m, in all these circumstances, constituted, in itself, a failure to provide reasonable assistance.

In his oral opening Mr Ellicott stressed the change, which had occurred by reason of the reduction on 5 July 1998. In his closing submissions Mr Ellicott repeated his opening submissions, being heavily critical of Mr Gillen's approach, which criticism in my opinion was justified, and noting his evidence at Tp.195 that from the beginning he did not consider that the plaintiff could possibly meet the "adequate capacity" criterion with the result that he would ask for security, which was a view he maintained to the hearing not having been convinced otherwise. He was asked whether he regarded it as something that the plaintiff had to convince him about and he replied:- "In terms of providing information on the parties against which we could gauge their creditworthiness, yes." 
Mr Ellicott submitted that Mr Gillen's "focus" was not on the adequacy of capacity but on the extent of the defendant's risk and the need to cover it.
He submitted Mr Gillen did not understand that the defendant had to form a reasonable opinion as to adequate capacity. I am sure the first submission was correct. I am not so sure the second is. Mr Gillen struck me as an astute business man, whom I do not consider would have overlooked the relevant terms of the PPHA.

There are two threads in the basic submission. The first is that if the defendant had formed the opinion that the Generator had "adequate capacity" there would have been no requirement for a letter of credit. The second is that that having failed to look at that matter in a meaningful way a requirement for a letter of credit was imposed, in an amount which was wholly unjustified by the terms of the PPHA as at 28 March 1998. I have said sufficient about the failure to properly determine the amount of the letter of credit, at least for the moment.

Mr Ellicott submitted that there was a positive obligation on the defendant to determine in its reasonable opinion that the Generator was an entity with an adequate capacity. He submitted that Mr Gillen was concerned with "creditworthiness" on the basis that the defendant did not have "any information at that stage upon which we could form an opinion": Tp.194. It was suggested to Mr Gillen that the first task under the PPHA was to identify the people who would be involved with the operator and the financial arrangements.
Mr Gillen denied that was the first task, which he identified as determining the defendant's "exposure to risk under the contract, and having determined that, we could understand the implications of that on clause 4.2". This answer merely reinforced the view that Mr Gillen, regardless of the contractual terms, was seeking to eliminate risk. He was obviously concerned with the concept of creditworthiness.

Mr Gillen emphasised the need for the Generator to be "creditworthy", and he said that he believed that the defendant was looking at AA credit rating. He continued:- "The second test is, if our opinion of creditworthiness is implied by that, we would be seeking a letter of credit or something similar." 
He said that the notion of AA credit rating flowed directly from the defendant's policy and that there was nothing in the PPHA, which required the
Generator to have that rating, although he considered that the words "reasonable opinion" implied such a credit rating. He said, Tp.214, that he would probably not have ever agreed that the Generator had an adequate capacity in terms of the PPHA unless it had an AA rating.

In the result Mr Ellicott submitted that Mr Gillen and, therefore, the defendant, never directed attention to the correct requirement namely whether the Generator would have "adequate capacity" to meet the obligations specified in clause 4.2(a)(iv)(A). He made these submissions in the context that what was being provided to the project was "project finance", i.e. finance to enable the facility to be constructed and put into operation, so that it was inappropriate to be looking at the matter from the point of view of security being taken other than in that context. Accordingly, he submitted that a matter to which regard had to be had, and this was put to the witnesses, was the income stream which would be developed by the facility.

The second thread concerned the provision of a letter of credit.

Mr Kee recalled that at the Board meeting of 24 March 1998 when he suggested the amount should be $300m, the Board members were concerned with being reasonable and felt that by asking for a smaller amount than that "that that would be a reasonable thing to do" in the following sense:- "A. My understanding is by asking for a smaller amount it would be a smaller burden on the Redbank project and therefore it would be reasonable in that regard.

Q. Was there any reference to the extent of the burden of $300m? 
A. As I recall the number $300m was viewed as being a fairly large amount and the interest I think was - once again based on my recollection of what was said that the Board would like to be reasonable in this matter and selected a somewhat smaller amount.

Q. Was there any discussion as to whether $275m as opposed to $300m could be provided, in your presence? 
A. Well, I have to say that my recollection is that there was a bit of discussions about the fact that if there were low risk of these things being called upon, then a letter of credit of that amount should be available and wouldn't cost very much. I don't think that discussion really had much difference between 300 and 275 though. The discussions really was if there - if Redbank could demonstrate from a financial institution that this letter of credit presented few risks then it would be easy to obtain and wouldn't cost them very much. That was the extent to which I think the burden of that was discussed.

Q. On that basis the 25 million didn't make any difference at all? 
A. I suppose that is correct, yes.

ELLICOTT: Q. Was there any discussion about whether or not they should find it would not be costly to get such a security? 
A. Well as I just explained to his Honour, the concept here is that if indeed there is an event that is never likely to happen as Redbank has asserted in some of the statements then a provider of security would be willing to provide it and at very low cost but if on the other hand it would be costly and difficult to obtain that would be - that would be evidence perhaps of risks as assessed by a lender or financial institution that there are risks to be worried about, so, it was a bit of two-way sword. If it is a large amount and it is easy to get then that would perhaps mean that the risks aren't great. If it is very hard to get that then it would probably be proof that there is a risk that Energy Australia should be worried about.

Q. The answer to my question is no, is that right - that nobody expressed any opinion or view as to whether or not it would be easy to get such a security, by easy I mean? 
A. I am trying to recall.

Q. At low cost - 
A. My recollection is that there may have been some discussion if one of the project sponsors such as AAB wanted to put its corporate balance sheet on the line and guarantee such a letter of credit it would be fairly easy to get." 
It is necessary to bear in mind that as early as 24 February 1997 Mr Gillen, paragraph 12 of Exhibit 2, had advised the Board that as the PPHA was an unusual contract, which provided no opportunity for risk mitigation until later years, the defendant should be insisting upon security along the lines of conventional commodity trading agreements "to cover its financial exposure arising from fluctuations in the pool price". One of the directors said that he was in agreement with that course.

Mr Gillen said, paragraph 13 of Exhibit 2, that in his discussion with Mr
Alper on 27 February 1997 Mr Alper disputed that the contract was a conventional commodity agreement. He also said that he, Mr Gillen, said:- "That's not how the contract is written nor my understanding of it. We have a right to ask for security if we are not satisfied with our due diligence inquiries. In this respect the Board has recently approved a financial control policy covering energy trading and the management of financial derivatives associated with energy trading. This policy sets out a framework for security requirements related to credit risk." 
Mr Gillen referred, paragraph 15 of Exhibit 2, to the letter from Mr Alper of March 1997 in which Mr Alper said it would be helpful if Mr Alper was provided with the policy and views as to how it related to the Redbank project.

In paragraph 30 of Exhibit 2 Mr Alper set forth portions of his letter of 15
April 1997, which was said to be written "in respect of the issue of financial security" and which exposed Mr Gillen's misapprehensions as to the construction of the PPHA. He recorded, in paragraph 32 of Exhibit 2, that on or about 24 April 1997 Mr Alper responded that at the financial closing
Generator would be a very robust financial entity, which would satisfy the defendant's reasonable expectations that it could meet its financial obligations and stating, in those circumstances, that assuming that to be the case there would be no need for any security.

On 6 May 1997 Mr Gillen wrote to Mr Alper seeking further information and, in paragraph 37 of Exhibit 2, he stated that Mr Alper expressed puzzlement at the size of the possible letter of credit. In the light of subsequent events his puzzlement was hardly surprising.

Mr Gillen agreed that Mr Alper continued to press that so long as Generator was an entity with adequate capacity to meet its financial obligations, the plaintiff did not see the contractual basis for a letter of credit.

On 21 July 1997 Mr Gillen wrote stating, inter alia, that the defendant was not yet satisfied that Generator would be an entity with adequate capacity, to which I have referred, and claimed a letter of credit in the sum of $375m.
Thereafter there was a dispute as to the provision of financial information and the obligation of the plaintiff to provide "commercial-in-confidence" information.

Mr Conde gave evidence that he considered the amount of the letter of credit at the meeting on 24 March 1998. On 11 March 1998 he had chaired a specially convened Board meeting at which either Mr Gillen or Mr Dennis told the Board that a financial close was planned for 28 March 1998 and:- "We now have some of the financial information which Energy Australia has been seeking for many months and are in a better position to assess the creditworthiness and financial capacity of the Generator." 
Once again the first word used in relation to the assessment was "creditworthiness" which tended to deflect attention from the contractual requirement. Mr Conde was also told, at that meeting, that Mr Kee was investigating the position and that his preliminary indication was that he was likely to recommend that the defendant should request security.

At the meeting of 24 March 1998 Mr Kee made that recommendation, which as to the amount at least was clearly erroneous and, in paragraph 35 of his witness statement, Exhibit 7, Mr Conde said:- "Mr Kee was firm in his view that the reasonable amount of credit support to request was an initial amount of $300m. However, the Board at the meeting directed that the amount of credit support to be requested, after the first opportunity for an outside expert to review the Redbank financial model had occurred, be set at the initial amount of $275m. Most of the Board discussion focused on what amount the Board considered reasonable in the circumstances of Mr Kee's advice. In my thinking the reduction of the amount was not based on a scientific analysis, or because I thought that there were any flaws or mistakes in what Mr Kee had told us, rather it was intended to ensure that the amount required was in fact no more than what was reasonably required to protect the position of PPHA and it was my view that the reduction in what was requested would protect the interests of Energy Australia even if somewhat less than what Mr Kee recommended." (My emphasis.) 
This answer made clear that the Board was only seeking to obtain the security the PPHA provided. But the Board was not made aware of the facts relevant to decide that and, accordingly, it fixed on a completely unreasonable amount.

Mr Conde said, Tp.474, that both $300m and $275m were significant amounts and that the motivation was that the Board wanted to go forward with something that they were confident was a reasonable figure and, in relation to the figures, he said, Tp.479, that he assumed that all relevant terms of the PPHA were factored into whatever analyses were prepared and that he would have expected the senior management of the defendant to know of the cap term in the
PPHA and to ensure that Mr Kee took it into account when he came up with his figure. The Board's decision, albeit made in ignorance, was inconsistent with the provision of all reasonable assistance both as to the amount of the letter of credit, and the failure to consider "adequate capacity".

The plaintiff made a strong case for asserting that by failing to consider properly "adequate capacity" and/or by demanding a totally inappropriate letter of credit the defendant had failed to act reasonably. In the first instance it had failed to take into account a term of the PPHA, save in a very restricted sense, and, in the second instance, it had failed to properly construe and apply the PPHA, which led to the Board's attempt to be "more reasonable" being defeated. These problems for the defendant were made manifest by what transpired at a meeting held on 6 March 1998, which reflected upon what happened thereafter.

At that meeting Mr Dennis recognised, page 4 line 16 et seq of the transcript, that the defendant had to form a view as to the financial viability of the
Generator after closing. At page 7 of the transcript of that meeting Mr
Daniel, the solicitor for the plaintiff, expressly asked what the defendant considered was an adequate capacity, to which Mr Gillen replied:- "No, we are relying on you to satisfy us that there is an adequate capacity." 
Mr Daniel pointed out, not unreasonably in my view, that to know the benchmark of the defendant's view of an adequate capacity was necessary so that the plaintiff would have a chance of satisfying it, to which Mr Dennis replied:- "We have asked you for certain information which you have to provide. If that information had been provided we might have been in a position to make a different assessment but our assessment is on the basis of the information we have been provided and the information which has been withheld. There are a number of different issues that we could spend several weeks discussing which have gone towards Energy Australia's assessment of the financial capacity. We will start with the identity of the investors." 
Mr Daniel repeated his request to know what the defendant considered was "adequate capacity", to which Mr Dennis' answer had not been responsive, and
Mr Dennis replied that he did not think "it is for us to do that at this meeting". Mr Daniel pointed out, again I think very reasonably, that the plaintiff was trying to satisfy the conditions, that the defendant had an obligation to assist it in doing so, and that it was not sufficient for the defendant to adopt the approach of saying that "adequate capacity" had not been reached without saying what it was. Mr Dennis, no doubt recognising the force in this, said, transcript page 8, that if the plaintiff gave certain of the information "we may be able to answer you more specifically". On the other hand Mr Dennis persisted in stating that until all the information had been provided the defendant could not say what was adequate capacity and, at transcript page 9, Mr Daniel said:- "I should start off by saying that I find it completely unsatisfactory for you not to identify what you consider to be adequate capacity so we can then go about achieving it." 
If I may say so, with respect, there was much force in the approach being taken by Mr Daniel and, in my opinion, little in that being adopted by Mr
Dennis. No doubt Mr Dennis was bound by his instructions.

Mr Daniel also made the point, which once again I think had much validity, at transcript page 11. This followed a discussion about whether sufficient information had been provided. Mr Daniel said:- "If you had said `we can't make an assessment because we have not got the information' I would understand that but you have said `on the information provided you don't make the grade'." 
It was obvious that Mr Daniel was looking at the position that if further information was required it was reasonable, as in my view it was, for the defendant to be advising to what the further information needed to go.

The discussion then turned to the provision of the letter of credit. This led to Mr Gillen's saying that the defendant would prepare a check list to which
Mr Alper responded that the plaintiff needed to know the reason for the decision that the defendant had already made. There was discussion about assistance in satisfying the conditions. At the end of the meeting Mr Gillen said that a check list would be provided "by the close of business on Monday".

As I have indicated in a consideration of this transcript I have formed the view that the plaintiff was seeking to find out why the decision in relation to "adequate capacity" had been made, which, in my opinion, was totally reasonable, and that whatever problems the defendant had could be overcome.
For some reason the defendant was not prepared to say. I can only infer that it was not prepared to be helpful.

In this context it is necessary to have regard to paragraph 8 of the witness statement of Mr Alper of 8 June 1998, part of Exhibit A, in which he set forth a conversation held on 27 March 1998, i.e. three days after the Board meeting on 24 March 1998, in the following terms:- "MR DENNIS: `Energy Australia would be prepared to sign the necessary documents and proceed with the project if National Power posts a $275m letter of credit tomorrow. We have reviewed and analysed the information you have sent us and we have been able to produce (sic) the amount of the letter of credit from $375m to $275m.' 
ROY ALPER: `The project meets internationally accepted standards of financial adequacy for a non-recourse project financial entity. No letter of credit should be required. Any obligations due to Energy Australia for difference payments are senior to that of the senior lender and the investors including the subordinated debt. All of the parties are quite experienced in making these determinations and are satisfied with the financial adequacy of the project.' 
MR DENNIS: `I was not aware of that but it will not change Energy Australia's determination. The instructions we have from the Board of Directors leave us with no flexibility.' 
ROY ALPER: `Will you provide us with the assumptions and analyses you have conducted to make your determination?' 
MR DENNIS: `We can do that but it will take several hours and you will still disagree with our conclusion. It would be a futile act and we do not want to go into it in any detail.' 
ROY ALPER: `I will speak with the other participants in the project but it is highly unlikely that we will be able to post a letter of credit in that amount'." 
It was agreed by the parties and, in any event, Mr Gillen stated it in paragraph 152(a) of Exhibit 2, that the word "produce" in the first quotation attributed to Mr Dennis should have read "reduce". Although Mr Gillen took issue with the statement attributed to Mr Dennis in the third quotation, he did not mention the initial statement attributed to Mr Dennis. He said Mr
Dennis said, in relation to the third quotation:- "We can do that but it will take a lot of time to go through the details and I don't think that it will be very fruitful. We would still end up disagreeing on the fundamental issue which is whether or not National Power or the other project participants can provide a letter of credit as requested by Energy Australia." 
Of course the outstanding point was that the figure of $275m could not be justified and the review and analysis, which threw that figure up, was flawed.
The refusal to provide the further calculations on the basis that they would not help was another example of lack of co-operation.

Of further significance, as Mr Ellicott stressed, was that Mr Dennis was stating that subject to being furnished with the letter of credit the defendant would proceed. This, so Mr Ellicott submitted, indicated that concern expressed about the non-fulfilment of other conditions was totally wrong and that, in essence, what the defendant wanted was a "gilt-edged security" against any conceivable loss. Of more significance, in my opinion, was that what the defendant wanted, by way of a letter of credit, was something to which it was not entitled and, notwithstanding the attempts of the Board to be reasonable, which I accept to have been the position, the
Board was proceeding on the false premise that Mr Kee and the management of the defendant had taken into account all relevant matters under the PPHA to come up with the figure of $300m, which the Board reduced to $275m.

Mr Sullivan's response to these submissions was, firstly, that the sum of $375m was not excessive because it was about one half of the amount of $700m, which had been calculated. In my opinion to suggest that the $700m had been calculated, which I take to imply in a meaningful way, does not accord with my view of the evidence. Firstly, there was no calculation provided and, secondly, in so far as the figure was calculated, that was not done conformably with the PPHA. The demonstration of the invalidity of the $375m necessarily carried with it the invalidating of the figure on which it was said to be based.

Mr Sullivan submitted that in so far as the defendant ignored any claim by the plaintiff that it was an entity with adequate capacity to meet its obligations, and therefore claimed a letter of credit was appropriate, Mr
Ellicott overlooked that the Business Evaluation, upon which he had placed much reliance, described the plaintiff as "financially weak". Mr Sullivan also submitted that the structure of the proposed joint venture company with very limited share capital, with subsidiary companies with $2 shareholdings, and with no underlying legally enforceable guarantees from their parents, was hardly a structure "which would inspire confidence, over a thirty year contract of this nature, in the capacity of the legal entity which was chosen to be the Generator to fulfil the potentially very onerous financial obligations under the agreement".

There are, in my opinion, several answers to this. Firstly, it was recognised at all times that the plaintiff was financially weak. The PPHA was entered into with that firmly in mind. Secondly, it was always the intention that the
Generator would provide project funding. I think there is much force in Mr
Ellicott's submission that the likelihood of the wealthier parent companies abandoning the subsidiaries was remote, particularly after they had advanced substantial amounts. In any event, it seems to be a matter to which the defendant paid little, if any, attention. Indeed, it was trying to induce ABB into another arrangement. As has been made clear the defendant adopted the attitude that the plaintiff should continue to furnish it with information without it being prepared to state what it considered to be "adequate capacity". Why one may ask rhetorically did the defendant not call for guarantees from the parent companies if the absence of them caused concern? 
Mr Sullivan, in his oral submissions in reply stated, firstly, that there was no evidence that the plaintiff had sought to obtain a letter of credit for either $375m or $275m; that it had not been able to obtain one; or that the cost to which it would have been put could not have been met. It goes without saying that such a letter of credit would not be granted unless its provider had security. In any event that was accepted by the Board and the reduction from $300m to $275m was in an attempt to be "more reasonable". That was done at a time when, according to Mr Kee, it was not known whether it would be difficult or easy for the plaintiff to obtain the letter of credit. This recognition by the Board made it clear that it appreciated it was imposing a significant burden on the plaintiff.

In circumstances where the contract involved the building of a facility for some $315m, it could not be thought easy to have obtained a letter of credit in either of the amounts claimed, particularly where it was appreciated that the plaintiff was financially weak and reliant on project funding. This must be the more so in circumstances where the defendant not only did not provide details as to how it had calculated the amount, nor was the Board aware of any scientific basis on which that had been done, but in circumstances where the amount was grossly excessive on the defendant's admission. It is also necessary to keep firmly in mind that the figure of $101,500,000 was worked out on the plaintiff's expert's worst case scenario and that Mr Kee agreed that the figure was more likely to be between $60m and $90m.

In my opinion the evidence of Mr Kee and Mr Conde, to which I have referred, would be sufficient to justify the conclusion, when combined with the evidence of the utter unreasonableness of the claimed amount, that the plaintiff would have difficulty in obtaining a letter of credit in that amount. Certainly the demand for such a letter of credit, in all the circumstances, did not amount to the provision of reasonable assistance.

It now becomes necessary to consider whether a letter of credit was necessary in any event. The expert called by the plaintiff, Mr Ian Gillings, whose witness statement became Exhibit F, expressed the view that it was not necessary. His evidence was challenged and I shall return to it.

The Finance Director for the Asia Pacific Region of ABB, Mr John Stefan
Robertsson, whose witness statement became Exhibit D, said without objection:- "8.5.6.1 In my opinion, a letter of credit of any amount was unnecessary. From my analysis of the project economics, I formed the view that the Generator would have an adequate capacity to meet all of its financial obligations without the need for a letter of credit in favour of EA. .5.6.2 The requested amount in itself was so large that I concluded that this request was meant to prevent the Project going ahead. The explanation for how the amount was derived did not make sense, in my opinion.
 .5.6.3 From my experience I have not seen a request like this for an independent power project. As far as I know, this type of security is not part of the financial structure for any other similar project including projects based on a production backed hedge off take contract." 
Objection was taken to paragraph 8.5.6.2, which I admitted. On reflection I do not consider the first sentence should have been admitted and I do not propose to pay regard to it. I consider, however, that Mr Robertsson was qualified to express the opinion in the second sentence.

Mr Robertsson said, Tp.497, that uncertainty as to who was going to underwrite the subordinated debts was resolved about a week before 28 March 1998 in that his company was to underwrite the full amount with a "backstop from Babcock & Brown for half the amount". He agreed that the project company was to be financed by the partners subscribing for small amounts of shares, but investing large sums by way of subordinated loans or shareholders' loans. He said that structure was envisaged to allow distributions out of the company of cash "that otherwise would be stuck in the company": Tp.498. He denied the structure was "directly tied to losses", but rather it sought to accommodate the situation that if the amount of the cash flow exceeded book income, then money could be paid out thus increasing the return to the investors.

Mr Robertsson would not agree that as a "stand alone statement" the economic return of the project did not provide an adequate return on the investment, given the risks, but rather that one had to take into account, so far as his company was concerned, the risks and the relative allocation of the profits, the latter of which were to go to other companies before his.

Mr Robertsson agreed the project had upside and downside possibilities of a significant nature dependent upon the future course of inflation and because of the need to speculate over a thirty year period as to the effect of inflation.

Mr Robertsson said, Tp.503, that the ABB partner company in the joint venture was not guaranteed by any other company in the ABB Group. He said there was no obligation to give a guarantee, and the failure to offer a guarantee was deliberate to avoid any legal obligation on the part of any other ABB company.

At Tp.506 Mr Robertsson said that as at 28 March 1998 there was an outstanding issue between AAB and Dresdner concerning a request to have ABB guarantee a successful syndication of the loan covering approximately $90m, which ABB was resisting and:- "Q. And that was a reason why final approval wasn't given by the ABBEV Board? 
A. There was that reason and also the other matter which was the Board wanted to see some type of proof of the co-operation of Energy Australia." (My emphasis.) 
The reasonable inference is that had there been that co-operation from the defendant the problem would have been overcome.

Mr Robertsson said, Tp.508, that by 12 March 1998 he did not consider the economics were questionable. He said, Tp.512, that whilst the defendant was seeking the financial model his reading of the correspondence made it clear that it was asking for incomes, "that they also stated that they had made a view about the financial capability without the model". He agreed that it would be much more difficult to form an opinion about the financial viability without the full pro forma.

In relation to inflation Mr Robertsson said, Tp.507B, that higher inflation would mean more money was made and, at Tp.508C, he was asked about the outstanding issue with Dresdner in relation to the guarantee covering approximately $90m, which he said was made in the context of the concern
Dresdner had in respect of the defendant "and this was a way for them to mitigate that risk". In both the passage of transcript I have quoted from
Tp.506 and this passage Mr Robertsson made clear the concern ABB and Dresdner had in respect of the defendant flowing from its lack of co-operation. I accepted Mr Robertsson's evidence totally. He impressed me as a highly competent businessman, who was completely truthful.

Mr Robertsson was not challenged on his assertion that the letter of credit was unnecessary, or that the Generator would have an adequate income to meet all of its financial obligations without the need for one.

Mr Warren David Murphy, who is a Director of Project Finance and whose witness statement, which became Exhibit E, was made on 4 July 1998, referred to the statement of Mr Kee and said, in paragraph 42, that he disagreed with many of his assumptions and all his conclusions for the reasons he then gave. This, obviously enough, included the concession about the absence of adequate capacity. In cross-examination Mr Murphy said that the having of a $2 company as part of the project was "just standard business practice", to minimise the risk of financial loss which the AIDC Group may suffer in the event of some unforeseen financial misfortune. He said that with project finance one looked at the cash flows for creditworthiness and to the putting of money in "up front". He was of the view that guarantees were more appropriate to corporate than project finance, although it would be a factor to bring into the analysis, and he returned to stating that the matter to which he would look would be the putting in of money "at the front of the project". The logic and commonsense of this are obvious.

In relation to clause 4.2(a)(iv)(A) he said he had assumed that the words "principal and interest" related solely to principal and interest in respect of senior debt. Mr Murphy gave his evidence frankly and he impressed me as competent.

The Position Of Dresdner 
It is necessary to explain in a little more detail the structure of the entity to which I have referred as Dresdner. The parent company is the well known
German bank, Dresdner Bank AG. Its Australian branch, of which Mr Rodney Keith
McPherson is the Divisional Director, Structured and Infrastructure Finance, is Dresdner Kleinwort Benson Australia Limited, ("DAL"). The credit committee of Dresdner Bank AG is known as KS Kredite, to which the credit committee of
DAL is a subservient. DAL, with the concurrence of KS Kredite, was to commit funds to and underwrite the project. Mr McPherson's statement is dated 6 July and became Exhibit G.

In paragraph 46 of his witness statement Mr McPherson said:- "Within transactions of this nature, I would, from my experience, have expected to be negotiating directly with the defendant in relation to the preparation and execution of the Tripartite Consent Deed. I would, from my experience, have expected the defendant, as the hedge provider, to be speaking with the plaintiff or its advisers to discuss the deal, and to deal with any perceptions of risk the defendant may have. I have never been involved in a deal where a fundamental party to the deal has not been an active participant in the negotiating process." 
In its memorandum of 2 December 1997 KS Kredite raised certain questions to which DAL responded in a memorandum dated 8 December 1997. There was no suggestion that KS Kredite did not consider that an adequate response.

In paragraph 27 of Exhibit G, Mr McPherson said DAL had been working towards a financial close for many months; that significant efforts and resources were expended by it in proceeding towards that; and that a significant amount of time was spent, in addition to his, by a number of DAL personnel including Mr
Isenbeck, who was shown to be a member of the credit committee.

In a memorandum of 12 December 1997 Mr Isenbeck wrote to Mr John Pattinson, who was also a member of the credit committee. He set out his understanding of "the approval situation", which was subject "to satisfactory independent engineering reports".

He continued:- "Our updating and modification dated 27.11.97 clear reaction from KS Kredite: materially worsened risk. So, recommendation to seek underwriters or, otherwise, improve the structure. Fax from Project Finance refers.

This was before the litigation was - verbally - communicated to KS Kredite and PF. I am just wondering whether the recommendation to syndicate still stands for the following reasons: 
The modification has not yet been approved and more importantly does Dresdner still want to deal with a government owned buyer of electricity, based on (assumed) serious legal interpretation, seeks to escape an economically unfavourable obligation and where an industry/financial investor driven group is suing them to stick to it. To complicate the global background according to press cuttings, a tax break worth A$30m seems to have reignited the sponsors interest. Dresdner lends against a 2+ 17 year hedging contract whose watertightness is under scrutiny right now. Agreed a National Power win legally confirms the contract we are lending against but given the intended privatisation in NSW we have little influence over where Energy Australia's long term obligation will end up at the end of the day.

The litigation as such might be a sufficient reason for Dresdner not to go ahead with this already difficult transaction. 
At least details of the legal battle should become available now and be communicated to KS Kredite and PF.

Our review/Due Diligence of the PBHA is now even more important and should be completed." 
There is a note that this memorandum was discussed with two people who both agreed that "we" should continue with the transaction seeking sub- underwriters. However, the memorandum evidenced the impact of the December litigation and the receipt of the knowledge that the defendant was seeking to withdraw from the PPHA.

One of the people to whom the author of the note spoke was Mr Ibrueger. He was a member of KS Kredite. The notations on the memorandum indicate that the main subject of discussion was the matter set forth in sub-paragraph (b).

On 16 January 1998 Mr Isenbeck sent a memorandum to Mr Pattinson and Ms
Bellingham, who was also a member of the local credit committee, and a facsimile transmission of that memorandum was sent to KS Kredite for the attention of Messrs Ibreuger and Rodriguez-Bustelo. It stated that due to the modifications and the litigation DAL's "underwriting commitment has lapsed and
National Power is aware of that". Reference was made to the "exit" of Axiom and Hastings and the roles of ABB and AIDC. It continued:- "Assuming ABB fills the gap then in my opinion, prior to syndication we should: clarify whether the litigation as such (and the economically fully understandable attempts of Energy Australia to escape this unfavourable long term hedging obligation) is not a reason for our bank to drop out (and to maintain our position for future NSW power privatisation), and if yes, get EA Board behind this project." (The author's emphasis.) 
However, on 19 January 1998 Ms Bellingham and Mr John Dawson, who was also a member of the local credit committee, sent a facsimile transmission to KS
Kredite, with a copy to Mr Isenbeck, stating:- "Management does not concur with the way the issues have been raised in Mr Isenbeck's memo dated 16 January 1998. All relevant issues have been considered and have been or will be addressed prior to financial close.

Outstanding issues will continue to be addressed in the appropriate manner which is via our local credit committee in conjunction with staff responsible for the transaction." 
This called for a response from Mr Isenbeck, in which he required that the local credit committee discuss the matter as a committee and stated, inter alia:- "Following the positive decision of ABB, I herewith would like to ask you to now deal with the issues raised in my memos dated 16/1/1998 and 10 and 12/12/1997." 
The memo also referred adversely to the litigation.

Meanwhile KS Kredite, in the form of Messrs Ibreuger and Rodriguez-Bustelo sent a facsimile on 20 January 1998 stating:- "We welcome your updating us on this transaction.

The off take agreement was recognised as economically disadvantageous by the off taker and was challenged in court. We recommend that you clarify with EA's Board and its shareholder (the New South Wales Government) whether they accept the court decision unfavourable to them without reservations and have not appealed. If this were not the case we doubt whether we should continue lead-arranging such controversial project.

Your co-underwriting strategy should aim at a substantial reduction of our underwriting commitments. Please approach the banks that you deem appropriate to reach this goal." 
One thing which is perfectly clear at this stage is that the disputation between the plaintiff and the defendant, which was caused by the activity of the defendant, was giving both Dresdner and DAL serious concern, and causing a serious division of opinion within the DAL credit committee.

On 3 March 1998 Mr McPherson and Mr Endersen sent a facsimile transmission to
KS Kredite referring to the financial close being scheduled for 13 March 1998.
They noted that they had been instructed not to sign the loan documentation until permission was received from Dr Fahrholz and, in aid of receiving that submission, they provided a final update.

On 3 March 1998 Mr Isenbeck sent a memorandum to the credit committee, raising a number of queries including:- "Exit of potential equity providers: 
The reasons why Hastings and Axiom have not contributed equity still have to be made known. Apart from the reasons they might give, is there any potential possibility that the legal case (which has now been settled) and the clear attempt of Energy Australia to avoid this disadvantageous contract has influenced the decision of Hastings and Axiom in order to keep their powder dry for the coming privatisation of the NSW electricity industry? Is it thinkable that similar global strategic reasons make other major players in the Australian electricity sector hesitate towards the Redbank Power Station? 
The present attitude of Energy Australia: 
In my opinion there is no `some speculation as to their desire to unwind the contract'. Legally speaking they might have given in, but as a matter of fact they do not want this contract and we are lending against for 2+ 17 years. In order to maintain the statements made with regard to off take agreement, lenders meeting with the Board of Energy Australia should be held now." 
Mr Isenbeck concluded:- "Our bank's global business attitude towards this `hostile situation' and our medium-term objections towards the NSW power privatisation should determine the final decision, rather than risk and income aspects associated with this transaction." 
On 4 March 1998 Mr McPherson and Mr Endersen sent a further facsimile transmission to KS Kredite updating the situation and, under the heading "Energy Australia" they stated:- "There is no additional risk in regard to the Offtake Agreement. It will either be confirmed by Energy Australia as a valid and binding document and the transaction will proceed or it won't and the transaction won't proceed. We have provided you with the letters from the finance director of Energy Australia stating that they will sign all required documentation provided the condition precedents within the PPHA are met. We take more comfort from this than unsubstantiated press reports that do not attribute comments to any specific people within the organisation." 
On 5 March 1998 Mr Isenbeck sent a facsimile transmission to KS Kredite. Mr
Isenbeck was confirming that substantial sub-underwriting would be required and was a "must". Mr Isenbeck seems to have been at odds with the other members of the local credit committee and, on 5 March 1998, Mr McPherson sent a memorandum to KS Kredite responding to Mr Isenbeck's memorandum of the same date. He was far more sanguine about the situation and, in relation to the attitude of the defendant he said:- "We were surprised by the comment that we would not have been aware of the litigation without a press report as this is clearly incorrect. The only litigation within this transaction was in fact brought by our sponsors to remove any doubt in regard to a specific aspect of the conditions precedent on the PPHA. The sponsors discussed this approach with Dresdner before they took this action and we have previously explained in memos (of which Mr Isenbeck has been copied) the full situation.

Dresdner remains fully appraised of the situation with EA and if they do not execute the outstanding documents we will not need to proceed with the transaction." (My emphasis.) 
The passage I have emphasised makes clear that the plaintiff's conduct caused
DAL no concern. It was the defendant's conduct, which was affecting DAL adversely.

On 5 March 1998 KS Kredite sent a facsimile transmission to DAL relating to substantial sub-underwriting, the syndication risk, and the amount of the commitment. On 17 March 1998 KS Kredite sent a further facsimile approving the transaction subject to the maximum underwriting commitment being A$90m. It also required that apart from WestBank a prime Australian bank, such as
National Australia Bank, should participate. This was the first time these conditions had been imposed. The response from DAL of 18 March 1998 stated that it was assumed that the conditions imposed related "to your concerns over
Energy Australia". On the same day KS Kredite responded:- "We would like to reiterate that the approval and the conditions imposed do reflect a Board decision on the basis of recommendations of KS Kredite. Given the present circumstances which take into account the full (legal and moral) obligation of Energy Australia there is no room left for any modifications." 
On 27 March 1998 Mr McPherson and Mr Endersen sent the following memorandum to
KS Kredite:- "As we have previously noted, the provision of finance to the project was always conditional on Energy Australia providing the required documentation to the sponsors and ourselves confirming the validity of the PPHA and its commitment to it. 
Energy Australia has consistently stated that it will provide the required documentation if it is satisfied that National Power has satisfied the conditions precedent under the PPHA. During the past week, Energy Australia has said that it does not believe National Power has achieved this. As a result, Energy Australia has indicated that it will not be providing the documents and assurances necessary to enable financial close to occur.

National Power disputes Energy Australia's claim. Earlier this afternoon, National Power commenced an action in the NSW Courts seeking damages for the loss suffered by Energy Australia's actions." 
It is now necessary to turn to the evidence of Mr McPherson.

In paragraph 8 of Exhibit G Mr McPherson dealt with the suggestion that DAL would not have committed funds to the project at financial closing. He set forth the background and, in paragraph 14, referred to DAL's making its recommendation to fully underwrite the project. In paragraph 15 he set out the significance of the hedging arrangement and referred to the receipt, on 22 May , of written approval to make a bid to underwrite the project. That bid was accepted by the plaintiff on 17 June 1997 and its terms were set forth in a document entitled "Term Sheet".

Mr McPherson then considered the conditions of approval and the steps taken towards the preparation of documentation and, in paragraph 29, he referred to the importance of the defendant's participation of which he had already made mention.

In paragraph 30 he said that from about mid-September 1997 numerous press reports, business briefings and in particular an article from a publication known as "Project Finance International" came to his and the local credit committee's attention. This led to various communications between Germany and
Sydney with the imposition of further conditions on 17 March 1998 requiring that at or prior to financial closing DAL's maximum underwriting commitment would be $90m; that if the underwriting commitment was to be higher than that
DAL would obtain the difference by way of a take-out from ABB; and that apart from WestBank a prime Australian bank, such as National Australia Bank, would participate in the underwriting with $90m.

In paragraph 39 Mr McPherson said that in his experience one of DAL's approaches to an environment where the political risk is such that it is uncertain whether a Government owned entity would seek to walk away from a legally binding document is to require the involvement of a large domestic bank in the financing so as to mitigate the risk of such behaviour, as it would have a negative impact on a local financier. The condition imposed on 17
March 1998 was consistent with this approach.

Commencing at paragraph 53 Mr McPherson considered whether the Generator would not be an entity with adequate financial capacity as required by clause .2(a)(iv)(A), and he said that he understood that the defendant, through its consultant, had expressed the view, in substance, that there may be a significant exposure on the plaintiff's part to bearing large difference payments during lengthy forced outages. He said he was aware that the defendant had requested a letter of credit from the plaintiff for $275m.

Mr McPherson said he was comfortable with the level of any such exposure and that it was not a significant exposure for the reasons he gave. He concluded with the opinion that essentially for the reasons set out in paragraph 25 "the defendant's insistence upon a $275m letter of credit is difficult to justify".

At Tpp.559-560 Mr McPherson gave the following evidence:- "Q. Was it the case that as at 28 March 1998 Dresdner was committed to financing the Redbank Power project? 
A. What do you mean by committed? 
Q. Bound? 
A. Can you be a little bit more definitive for me? 
Q. Bound in a legal way to finance the project? 
A. Dresdner, at that point, was in a position whereby if they could fulfil their conditions, we could sign the documents, yes.

Q. I suggest to you that as at 28 March 1998 there was still an outstanding issue with ABB which had not been resolved, namely, their guarantee of $90m worth of sub debt? 
A. That's correct, though that was only one way in which that particular condition could have been met. 
Q. That condition had not been met, had it, as at 28 March 1998? 
A. No.

Q. Do you refer to that in your statement anywhere? 
A. I don't know that I particularly refer to that particular point, no.

Q. Why not? 
A. I don't know.

Q. In paragraph 8 you purport to respond to an allegation of the defendant and then purport to deal with it. Why, in that context, would you have not dealt with a feature which was still outstanding from Dresdner's point of view, as at the date for financial closing, namely 28 March 1998? 
A. OK, I think in regard to point 8, what it actually says is that, `I will respond to this assertion below' and then set out the actual events that took place leading up to that date, and building the reasons why those were changed conditions in that last period leading up to the expected date for financial close and there are memos which are attached to my statement, which refer to particular conditions that had to be fulfilled.

Q. Is it the situation that Dresdner, as at 28 March, was committed in principle to going ahead with financing this project? 
A. No.

Q. I beg your pardon? 
A. No.

Q. It wasn't? 
A. Not at that point, because there were still those conditions that had to be met.

Q. Which conditions? 
A. With regard to syndication of the facility. 
Q. What had to be done in respect of that, as at 28 March this year? 
A. OK. In regard to syndication, that was a change across the process that our credit committee required us to sell down a level of the transaction which we were in the process of achieving, and they, in the last couple of weeks leading up to financial close, they said to us they required us to have a major Australian trading bank involved in that transaction and at that point we had not a major Australian bank for syndication." (My emphasis.) 
Mr McPherson elaborated upon this by saying it was necessary to bring in a major Australian bank or get ABB to underwrite a particular part of the deal.

At Tp.563 Mr McPherson agreed that DAL would not have been able to financially close on 28 March 1998 conformably with his instructions from head office, but subject to the fulfilment of those conditions from head office it was prepared to go ahead and close at the earliest possible time.

Mr McPherson said, Tp.565, that the conditions had not been met by 28 March although DAL had "tried as hard as you could, but you couldn't achieve it".

It was put to Mr McPherson, at Tpp.565-566, that although in the memorandum of December 1997 KS Kredite were insisting on sub-underwriters, by 17 March they had imposed a condition that the maximum underwriting would be $90m.
He was asked:- "Q. And the reasons for that, I suggest, are those which are set out in this fax of 2 December 1997? 
A. No, that's not correct. 
Q. Well, the reasons why they express the view that there had been negative changes in the project from a risk point of view are those set out in that document aren't they? 
A. Those were the changes that had been made - the changes in the transaction to that date, correct. At that point it was stated as a preference that we seek a sub-underwriter." 
At Tp.568 it was put to Mr McPherson that in paragraph 39 he had proffered an opinion about Dresdner's approach in certain circumstances and:- "Q. Did you have discussions with anyone from head office from KS Kredite where they in any way indicated to you the reason for imposing the conditions which you refer to in paragraph 38? 
A. 38? Sure, it was because of the actions of Energy Australia.

Q. Did you have any such discussions; just answer with a yes or no? 
A. Yes, sorry.

Q. With whom? 
A. With the two people, the signatories here who are Mr Wolfgang Ibrueger and Mr Enrique Rodriguez-Bustelo.

Q. Do you refer to those conversations in your statement? 
A. No, I don't.

Q. Were those conversations oral or were they by means of written communications? 
A. No, they were oral.

Q. Oral? 
A. Mm." 
Mr McPherson was asked why he did not refer to the conversations rather than proffer the opinion. He asked whether it was "admissible" and he said that it "is my understanding that I couldn't include them in my affidavit". Mr
Sullivan attacked this evidence on the basis that he regarded it as extraordinary that Mr McPherson would state opinions, rather than set forth what he had been told. I am satisfied Mr McPherson was a truthful witness in stating why he had not included the conversations in his statement and, further, in setting forth the conversation in answer to Mr Sullivan.

Mr McPherson was asked, in re-examination, why DAL was not ready to close on March 1998 and he said, Tp.572:- "Because we hadn't, at that point, achieved the changed syndication requirements which was put on us with a very short amount of time before financial close was planned. The syndication strategy that had been agreed with KS Kredite would be that we would bring in two banks with $90m each and it was agreed that that reduction of 315 down to 135 would be viewed as sufficient and adequate. We did achieve that by getting in those two banks, but unfortunately, with a week or so to go, we were then faced with this additional requirement of reducing the amount further or bringing in a major Australian bank and because of the fact that they were already down 235, both of those conditions basically meant the same thing and that requirement was there because purely, and simply, KS Kredite were very nervous ..." 
In my opinion the evidence makes it transparently clear that KS Kredite imposed the conditions very late because of the way in which the defendant was behaving. It was the defendant's conduct which necessitated the December 1997 litigation. This litigation proved the start of the apprehensions Dresdner and
DAL had about the transactions. That situation was made worse by dint of the defendant's opposition to the project. Such conduct could not in any view be considered as providing reasonable assistance. It was the contrary of doing so and the proper inference from the evidence is that it was that conduct which caused KS Kredite to change the conditions at a time when DAL had insufficient time to comply with them. Mr McPherson made clear, in paragraph 39, why the conditions were imposed, and in re-examination why they could not be met. In my opinion, that conduct caused DAL not to be able to complete on 28 March and, hence, there was a direct causal nexus between the failure of the defendant to provide reasonable assistance and the inability of the plaintiff to meet the condition of a financial closing.

It is also important to bear in mind that in the light of Dresdner's conditions ABB's participation was necessary to assist completion. As Mr
Robertsson had said, as I have noted, the Board of ABB EV had not given its final approval, inter alia, because it "wanted to see some type of proof of the co-operativeness of" the defendant. Mr Ellicott submitted that this evidence should also be read in the light of Mr Conde's concession at Tp.447 that the discussions between ABB and the defendant "may have influenced ABB's interest". I am not certain how far this should be taken. I think the evidence of Mr Robertsson on this point is far more potent.

A Conclusion On Adequate Capacity 
It is necessary, finally, to have regard to the evidence of Mr Gillings, whose various reports became Exhibit F. He expressed the view that there was "adequate capacity" and that, accordingly, no letter of credit was required.
Mr Gillings was subjected to a thorough cross-examination, but, in my view, he did not resile from the view that adequate capacity had been established, which accorded with the views of other witnesses called on behalf of the plaintiff. In dealing with that evidence and the evidence of Mr Kee I am, of course, dealing with highly trained men, who are experts in their field. I have no doubt that all these gentlemen, in putting forward their expert views, were doing their best to explain what they genuinely believed to be the proper position. I have, to some extent in these reasons, reviewed this evidence and, prior to writing them I have reconsidered it. I have come to the conclusion that the evidence that there was adequate capacity within the structure should be accepted. Not only is it the preponderance of the expert evidence, but I found it more satisfying, in the sense of intellectually acceptable, than the evidence of Mr Kee and, to some extent, it was not sought to be contradicted.
Mr Kee's evidence suffered from the initial difficulty that he had to concede that in coming to his conclusion of $300m he had overlooked the cap provision, notwithstanding that in an earlier memorandum he had drawn attention to it and, accordingly, his figures had to be amended substantially. He was prepared to do this, albeit in line with the worst case scenario, consistently with the approach put forward by Mr Gillings. This tended to validate Mr Gillings' approach. Mr Kee's failure to note this point and also certain other material matters in the PPHA, including the force majeure clause, leads me to the conclusion that it would be less safe to rely upon his assertions than those of the witnesses called on behalf of the plaintiff.

In the result I have come to the conclusion that had the defendant undertaken a proper analysis of the PPHA, it should have come to the conclusion that there was adequate capacity such that no letter of credit was required.
Alternatively, had it performed that task and none-the-less formed the "reasonable opinion" that a letter of credit was required, which I am not satisfied it could have formed, it was obliged to require one conformably with the terms of the PPHA. This, on any view, it did not do.

The question then arises as to the consequences of these failures by the defendant. I do not think there can be any doubt that, by failing to reach the conclusions I consider the defendant should have reached, it raised obstacles to the plaintiff's bringing about financial closing. The nature of the obstacles, for the reasons to which I have referred, were totally inconsistent with the defendant's providing reasonable assistance in the plaintiff's endeavours to have the conditions fulfilled. In my opinion those failures would constitute a breach of contract if it be established that but for them financial closing could have taken place on 28 March 1998. A potential difficulty from the plaintiff's point of view in this regard is that financial closing on that date was dependent upon the co-operation of DAL. However, for the reasons I have given I am satisfied that DAL was not able to complete because of the defendant's breach of its obligation to provide reasonable assistance.

I have set out, already, the way in which the defendant's officers sought to influence ABB in relation to the project. I have commented on Mr Davies' conduct and, rightly in my view, Mr Sullivan did not seek to defend it. I also regard the attempts by Mr Gillen to influence Messrs Clemson and Dureau as lacking commercial merit both in general terms and in the light of the express contractual provisions. They were dictated by his attempts to bring the PPHA to an end. However, the plaintiff must connect these matters causally to the non-fulfilment of the conditions. The initial effect of the approaches to ABB seems to have been rather to encourage them to bring about financial closing.
ABB did not indicate, at least initially, that in consequence of the approaches it would not proceed to financial closing and, furthermore, at the behest of the defendant it obtained the consent of the plaintiff to continue negotiations with the defendant. Whilst in many cases the type of conduct engaged in by the defendant may not have provided reasonable assistance and whilst, perhaps, in the present case it did not provide reasonable assistance nothing flowed from that detrimentally to the plaintiff until the further involvement of ABB EV was required by DAL. There was clear evidence from Mr
Robertsson that the Board of ABB EV would not give its consent until it was satisfied that the defendant would co-operate. That lack of satisfaction would only have flowed from the defendant's earlier conduct. In my opinion, its lack of co-operation was a failure to provide reasonable assistance, which was causally related or materially contributed to the attitude of the Board of ABB
EV.

So far as Axiom and Hastings were concerned there were two possible reasons why they ceased to be interested as financiers. Firstly, one of the reasons was the statements made to them at the meeting of 5 December 1997, which could hardly have encouraged them to proceed as financiers. Secondly, one of the reasons was the highly questionable conduct on the part of Mr Wohadlo in using photostat copies of signatures of officers of those companies in an admittedly improper way. Either of those could have led to each of Axiom and Hastings withdrawing from the transaction. On this issue the plaintiff carried the onus and no attempt was made to call any evidence from either of those companies to show why they withdrew. However, there is, in my opinion, a third point, namely that even though Axiom and Hastings withdrew the plaintiff was none- the-less able to obtain another financier.

The plaintiff relied upon the failure of the defendant to meet with it and to have discussions with it. In these respects there were allegations and counter allegations, but my view is that these matters are essentially subsumed in my findings in relation to the adequate capacity and letter of credit issues, which I consider should be answered favourably to the plaintiff.

A Consideration Of Sub-Clause 4.2(a)(i) 
It is now necessary to turn to sub-clause (i), which bears repetition:- "(i) Generator having received the approval as a wholesale trader on terms reasonably acceptable to it, by the Electricity Transmission Authority under the Electricity Supply Bill of 1995 (if such approval is legally required)." 
As Mr Sullivan pointed out no legal obligation is created by a Bill. He submitted that the words in parenthesis mean "if that Bill came into law as an
Act". It was not in issue that the plaintiff had not received that approval, although it had applied for it in early March 1998. Mr Alper expressly disclaimed that any conduct on the defendant's part led to the approval not being granted by 28 March 1998. Mr Ellicott's submission was that it was not under an obligation to obtain such approval.

Mr Sullivan submitted that the only real issue was whether "approval as a wholesale trader" was "legally required" under the [Electricity Supply Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/esa1995242/), ("the
Act"). He referred to the plaintiff's submission that approval under the Act was not legally required because s.8, in its original form, was repealed by s.3 of the Electricity Legislation Amendment (Wholesale Market) Act 1997, and the replacement section made no reference to wholesale supplier authorisation.
He submitted that that was incorrect because the replacement s.8 of the Act dealt with authorisation in the changed definition of "wholesale supplier", which was also amended by the Electricity Legislation Amendment (Wholesale
Market) Act 1997. By that Act "wholesale supplier" was defined as meaning:- ".. a person who holds a wholesale trader's authorisation authorising the person to supply electricity under a wholesale supply arrangement".

The new s.8 of the Act, which came into force on 18 July 1997, provided:- "It is a condition of a network operator's authorisation that the network operator must not operate its transmission or distribution system for the purpose of conveying electricity for or on behalf of any person unless the person is: a wholesale supplier, or a retail supplier, or the Market and System Operator, or an interstate wholesale market operator." 
Mr Sullivan submitted that the definition of "a wholesale supplier" required sub-s.(a) to be read as importing the whole definition of those words, so that a network operator must not operate its system for the stated purpose unless, being a wholesale supplier, the person holds a wholesaler trader's authorisation to supply electricity and thus, has received approval as a wholesale trader. It concluded, obviously enough, that that had not happened.

Mr Ellicott noted that a "Network Operator's Authorisation" is defined by the
Act to mean an authorisation of the kind referred in s.7, which, in turn, provides that the Minister may grant an authorisation to a network operator.
"Network Operator" is defined to mean "a transmission operator or an electricity distributor", which would include the defendant.

However, Mr Ellicott's submission was that whilst the defendant was a "network operator", which was required to obtain an authorisation, that authorisation would be made subject to a condition that it not operate its transmission or distribution system, unless it held a wholesale trader's authorisation authorising it to do so.

In my opinion it is correct to say, subject to the words "if such approval is legally required", that there was an obligation on the plaintiff to obtain approval as a wholesale trader on terms reasonably acceptable to it by 28
March 1998. The question is, however, whether there was a legal requirement for that to be done by that date.

Mr Ellicott submitted that upon a proper reading of the legislation the obligation to have the authorisation depended upon whether the plaintiff was then obliged to have it, in the sense that if it did not then have it it could not then operate its transmission or distribution system.

Mr Sullivan submitted that the qualification imported by the words "if such approval is legally required" did not relate to the time when any approval, which may be legally required, must be obtained, but rather obliged the plaintiff to be a wholesale trader on terms reasonably acceptable to it under the Act by 28 March 1998, whether or not that approval was legally required to be obtained by that date under the Act. His submissions continued that there was no basis, as a matter of construction of clause 4.2, for reading that qualification to apply to the "second anniversary of the date of" the PPHA. He further submitted that given the importance of such approval being in place, if it was legally required, there is no sensible basis for construing clause .2(a)(i) "as some sort of target date which can be extended if an approval will not be legally required for some years".

Ultimately it seems to me that this question must be determined by a consideration as to whether, as at 28 March 1998, the approval was legally required. In my opinion the better construction is to make the obtaining of that approval dependent upon such approval being legally required for the purposes of the legislation as at 28 March 1998. There are several reasons which satisfy me about that construction.

Firstly, it was obviously contemplated by the parties that as at 28 March 1998 the plaintiff would not be operating its transmission or distribution system.
Therefore, as at that date and as the legislation then stood, there was no need for any approval. Secondly, as at the date when the PPHA was entered into the amendments were still in the form of a Bill, which was always susceptible of amendment and, perhaps, amendment to require approval before the commencement of operations. Thirdly, it would be otiose for the plaintiff to apply for such approval at a date when it did not need approval, and would not need approval for some time, unless the approval was "legally required". It would seem that the time to apply for the necessary authorisation, and thus approval, was when the plaintiff was ready to start operating its transmission or distribution system. On the other hand if, as at 28 March 1998, the legislation, for some reason, required that the plaintiff hold such an approval at that date there was a clear reason for requiring that it had received it. Fourthly, if the approval was required at some time in the future, namely when the operator was ready to operate its transmission or distribution system, an application would have to be made and approval given.
If it was not given the plaintiff could not distribute, and if it could not distribute no detrimental financial consequences would flow to the defendant unless, of course, the defendant wished to maintain that it was essential for it that the plaintiff should be able to distribute to it. However, that was not the case made by the defendant.

In my view the proper construction of sub-clause (i) is that the necessary approval only had to be obtained if it was "legally required" as at 28 March having regard to the facts and circumstances which existed on that date.
This construction is further supported by the fact that there would obviously be a lead time of several years before the facility commenced operation by which time one would not know what the legislative requirements were.

In the result I am of the view that having regard to the terms of the legislation there was no legal obligation on the plaintiff to have the approval contemplated. Even if this construction is wrong, it may not affect the matter because all the conditions had to be fulfilled and I am satisfied that those in sub-clauses (ii), (iii) and (iv) could not be by reason of the defendant's failure to provide reasonable assistance.

The Conclusions I Have Reached 
In relation to the demanding of the letter of credit 
I have referred to the need for the plaintiff to have adequate capacity for convenience. I shall continue to do so, although there was to be an assignment to a new entity. The evidence to which I have referred was directed to this situation and entity.

I am satisfied that the defendant should have been satisfied that the plaintiff had "adequate capacity". This was the view constantly put forward by the plaintiff, and the failure of the defendant to form that opinion was not in consequence of any reasonable opinion to which it was entitled to come. The failure of the defendant to be satisfied in that respect constituted a failure to provide all reasonable assistance.

This failure was compounded by the defendant's seeking a letter of credit to which, for reasons I have given, it was not entitled and, which, in any event, was grossly in excess of that to which it would have been entitled on the assumption that it could call for one. The evidence satisfies me that the request for that letter of credit was not only totally unjustified, but that the obtaining of such a letter of credit would have cast a substantial burden on the plaintiff. Mr Conde and the other members of the Board recognised this.
Thus the demanding of the letter of credit in that amount was a failure to provide all reasonable assistance.

Those failures to provide all reasonable assistance caused or materially contributed to the inability of the plaintiff to fulfil the conditions, which had to be completed on closing in part for the reasons I have stated in the preceding paragraph. There was an additional factor. On 27 March 1998 Mr
Dennis stated that financial closing would take place if the letter of credit in the sum of $275m was provided. In other words he insisted, no doubt in accordance with his instructions, that subject to the provision of a letter of credit to which either the defendant was not entitled or to which it was certainly not entitled in that amount, financial closing would take place.
Because there was no entitlement to the letter of credit or the letter of credit in that amount, that was either an independent failure to provide reasonable assistance or it was a continuation of the original failures. It affected each of the conditions in sub-clauses (ii), (iii) and (iv) in the sense that each, from the point of view of the PPHA, was dependent on financial closing and was to occur when that happened.

In relation to the changed conditions of DAL 
I am satisfied that Dresdner changed its conditions too late to allow DAL to comply with them, and that it did so because of the conduct of the defendant to which I have referred, which conduct, in my opinion, amounted to a failure to provide reasonable assistance. But for that conduct Dresdner would not have imposed those conditions and DAL would have proceeded to financial closing.
The defendant's conduct caused or materially contributed to this position.
Equally the refusal of DAL to complete affected each of the conditions in sub- clauses (ii), (iii) and (iv). In this respect I accept Mr Alper's evidence that all these matters were to "dove-tail" on financial closing, as a matter of fact. That is not only the evidence I accept, but it accords with the commercial probabilities and the defendant's acceptance that that was when the assignment document would be executed.

There was, in my opinion, no legal requirement for the plaintiff to obtain the authorisation referred to in sub-clause (i) by 28 March 1998.

In the result there was no requirement, as at 28 March 1998, for compliance with sub-clause (i), and the defendant cannot rely on the failure to comply with the conditions in sub-clauses (ii), (iii) and (iv) as grounding its right to give a Notice of Termination under clause 4.2(c), because it had not complied with its obligation to provide reasonable assistance, as required by clause 4.2(b). That failure to comply was the cause of or materially contributed to the inability of the plaintiff to fulfil those conditions.

Although the defendant was stating that it would complete the PPHA if it was legally obliged to do so, its actions, which amounted to a failure to provide reasonable assistance, prevented the plaintiff from fulfilling the conditions.

Documentation Required On Financial Closing 
The defendant raised the point that it had not been provided with all the legal documentation necessary, or satisfactory legal documentation, to complete the financial closing. For several reasons I do not consider, in the light of the defendant's obligation to provide reasonable assistance, that this submission avails it. Firstly, the parties were contemplating financial closing on 28 March 1998. If the defendant had been providing reasonable assistance it should have been satisfying itself as to the documentation.
There is no suggestion it was doing so. Secondly, when Mr Dennis referred to financial closing being subject to the letter of credit for $275m being provided, there was no reference to any documentation. I do not take from that that Mr Dennis was abandoning the necessity for the documentation, but rather that he did not foresee any difficulty in concluding it between the time he made the statement and 28 March 1998. There is no evidence that having made that statement he then called for documentation, so that the defendant could satisfy itself as to its appropriateness. Therefore, in so far as complaints were made about documentation, I consider they flow directly from the failure of the defendant to call for it and to satisfy itself about it. Substantial legal documentation had been prepared, no doubt at great expense, towards achieving financial closing. I am not satisfied that, in so far as there was an obligation on the plaintiff to have such documentation available, it was in any way in breach of its obligations under the PPHA.

I would add that the defendant's letter of 24 March 1998 stated that a number of documents, albeit in draft, were acceptable "provided that the other conditions precedent are satisfied and there is no subsisting breach of the
PPHA" by the plaintiff and "that the only other reasonable assistance you were requiring of Energy Australia was to meet with your potential investors and advise them whether Energy Australia was prepared to participate in the final closing". The letter continued that at a meeting on 6 March 1998 the defendant had stated that provided the other conditions precedent were satisfied and there was no subsisting breach by the plaintiff it would proceed to financial closing: see pp.23 and 24 above.

The Claim For Damages 
It follows from the view to which I have come that the defendant has breached the PPHA and, consequential upon that breach, it is entitled to damages. I make no comment as to the extent of such damages and I do not propose to make a declaration to that effect, but merely to list the matter at a future date for directions to put in place a regime for the determination of that issue.

The Trade Practices Act Claim 
I do not accept that the plaintiff has a claim under s.52 of the Trade
Practices Act. It, at all material times, suspected, at the least, that the defendant was not prepared to proceed with the PPHA, notwithstanding what was being said. On the other hand there was evidence from Mr Conde, whose credit was not challenged, that if the defendant was found to be legally obliged to continue with the contract it would do so. Consistently with that stance the defendant has not sought, prior to the determination of these proceedings, to terminate the agreement. Further, officers of the defendant, including Mr
Gillen, had frequently made the assertion that the defendant would comply with the requirements of the PPHA if legally obliged to do so. There is no evidence of any misleading or deceptive conduct, which induced the plaintiff to enter into or to continue with the PPHA.

What transpired in this case is that the plaintiff continued to seek to honour its obligations under the PPHA, which it was contractually obliged to do.
There is no assertion by the plaintiff that by reason of any conduct on the part of the defendant it was induced to continue to act in that way. Any damage suffered was suffered by virtue of the breaches of contract I have found and not by virtue of any representations amounting to misleading and deceptive conduct. In all these circumstances I am of the view that the claim under the Trade Practices Act should be dismissed.

Some Other Matters 
Whilst I have not dealt with every submission for the reasons stated, there are several matters which I shall note. Firstly, both parties alleged that there were other witnesses the other could have called and, in so far as such witnesses were not called, that I should draw the Jones versus Dunkel inference. I prefer to determine the matter on the basis of the evidence adduced and, in the view to which I have come, there is no need to have recourse to that point.

Secondly, Mr Ellicott submitted that I should draw an adverse inference against the defendant by reason of its making and persisting in the claim for client professional privilege in respect of the material not disclosed in the minutes. He relied on the decision of Hodgson J in Standard Chartered Bank of Australia Limited & Anor versus Antico & Ors [(1995) 36 NSWLR .]
I am not certain that the principles discussed by his Honour at pp.94-95 govern the facts of the present case. In any event I am of the opinion it is not necessary to make that finding.

Thirdly, Mr Sullivan submitted that Mr Alper "gave the game away" when he said that some financial information had not been furnished because he was concerned that it may be used by the defendant to seek to avoid the PPHA:
Tp.115. In my opinion, Mr Alper was merely reflecting his concern at the attitude which the defendant was evidencing. He was not in any way conceding that there would have been any validity in the defendant's taking that approach to the information.

Fourthly, Mr Ellicott submitted that nothing in these proceedings could or should be construed as a waiver by the plaintiff of its right to take whatever action may be available to it if the defendant wrongly terminated.

Injunctive Relief 
Although the claim for injunctive relief was mentioned during the hearing in the context of the perceived difficulties that may arise in relation to the making of the declaration that the defendant was not entitled to terminate the
PPHA, it was not pursued. I do not consider that the evidence enables me to decide whether this would be an appropriate case in which to grant such relief. One matter, which may well be significant and to which attention was not directed was whether damages would be an adequate remedy.

Orders And Declaration
I make a declaration in terms of paragraph 3 of the relief claimed in the
Further Amended Summons filed on 19 June 1998.
I dismiss the claims for relief made in paragraphs 4 and 6 of that Further
Amended Summons.
I stand the matter over until Friday, 14 August 1998 for directions as to the hearing of the claim for damages for breach of contract.
I order the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings thus far.
I order the exhibits be returned at the expiration of twenty eight (28) days unless within that time an appeal or an application for leave to appeal has been brought.
 * * * 
