

Ryan versus Kazacos Matter No 104947/97 [1997] NSWSC 210 (21 May 1997) 
Ryan versus Kazacos - Estate M H Kazacos /97 May 1997 
Hodgson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Probate Division 
NO 104947 OF 1997 RYAN V KAZACOS 
ESTATE M H KAZACOS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Michael Harvey Kazacos died on 2nd November 1996. He left a will dated 14th August 1990, apparently duly executed, by which he appointed his father, Michael Constantine Kazacos executor, made a gift of a home unit or $450,000.00 to a friend, and divided the residue equally between his father, his mother and his son. He also left a document dated 1st November , that is, the day before his death, apparently in his handwriting and signed by him, expressing a wish to leave to Michelle Ryan a home unit and "my % share in the business The Penthouse".

At his death, the deceased owned 50% in a company, Interest Pty. Limited, which owned the business The Penthouse. It appears to be common ground that the reference in the document of 1st November 1996 to "my 50% share in the business The Penthouse" should be taken as applying to this 50% shareholding.

These proceedings are brought by Michelle Ryan, as plaintiff, against the deceased's father, as defendant. By the summons filed on 9th April 1997, the plaintiff seeks the appointment of an administrator of part of the personal estate of the deceased, being the business known as The Penthouse Club.
Originally, the summons also sought the appointment of a receiver of part of the deceased's real estate, namely a home unit mentioned in the document of st November 1996, but this has not been pursued.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
I will commence with a brief outline of the facts, as they appear at present.

At the date of the deceased's death, the company Interest Pty. Limited was equally owned by the deceased and the defendant, and it appears that the deceased and the defendant were the two directors of the company. The company conducted a business at 250 Pitt Street, Sydney, which is described by the plaintiff in her affidavit as being "a high-class escort agency which also provided in-house services". The affidavit goes on to say that the business is open seven days per week, twenty-four hours per day, with up to thirty female hostesses working each day. At the date of the death of the deceased, the plaintiff was a manager of the business; and she claims also to have been the de facto spouse of the deceased.

The evidence before me suggests that cash sums of the order of $70,000.00 per week or more are received by the business, from which some of the expenses are paid before income of the business is banked. It appears to be common ground that, in the period prior to the death of the deceased, and also for some time following the death of the decease, significant sums of the cash received by the business were not included in the business records. Some of this cash was accumulated, and it appears that some at least of it was dealt with by the defendant. It seems also that the plaintiff had some knowledge and involvement in this activity.

On 16th January 1997, there was a raid on the premises of the business and other places by the police and the National Crime Authority. Following that raid, fifteen charges were laid against the defendant. Three charges alleged that the defendant defrauded the Commonwealth by failing to declare income received from the business to the Australian Taxation Office. Six charges related to operating bank accounts in a false name. Two charges related to conducting non-reportable cash transactions in circumstances where it was reasonable to conclude that these transactions were so conducted for the purpose of ensuring that the currency would not give rise to a significant transaction report. Two charges related to having a false passport, and two charges related to having a driver's licence under a false name.

There are substantial disputes in the evidence between the plaintiff and the defendant as to what has happened to some of the cash derived from the business. Perhaps the most striking of these disputes concerns the sums of $250,000.00 and $46,193.00 of which the defendant says, in effect, that they were the property of the plaintiff, and that he gave these sums to the plaintiff; as to the $250,000.00, some time after the death of the deceased, and as to the other amount, on 20th January 1997. The plaintiff denies that these sums were given to her by the defendant.

On 17th February 1997, the defendant dismissed the plaintiff as manager of the business, alleging unsatisfactory conduct of various kinds. On 24th March , the defendant appointed new directors of the business. In about early
April 1997, the company, Interest Pty. Limited, engaged an agent to sell the business, and the business has since been advertised for sale.

ISSUES 
The issue in the matter, as put on behalf of the plaintiff by Mr. Gormley, is that the case was one where there should be a protective order to ensure that a large cash business is protected. In support of that approach, he relied on the facts that I have outlined above, and also on some additional evidence which he referred to in his submissions, and to which I will come.

Mr. Wilson for the defendant has relied on cases such as Mortimer v. Paull [(1870) 2 LR P&D 85], to the effect that an administrator pendente lite will not be appointed where the contested proceedings concern a disputed codicil which does not affect the appointment of an executor by an undisputed will.

In my view, it is necessary to look at a number of more specific issues. In the first place, it seems to me that the facts do raise a question as to whether it is appropriate to appoint an interim administrator because there is a real question as to whether the defendant will be granted probate, notwithstanding his appointment by the will. The next issue that I think has to be considered concerns the right of a beneficiary of an unadministered estate to obtain orders to protect a specific asset which the beneficiary has been given by the will. That issue is complicated in this case by the circumstance that the asset actually given by the will consists of shares, whereas the asset about which the evidence indicates concern, and of which a sale is proposed (to which the defendant objects), is rather an asset of the company in which the shares are held.

SUBMISSIONS 
Mr. Gormley submitted that an order of the kind sought was appropriate because of evidence concerning misapplication of cash of the business, and because of evidence concerning disruption to the management of the business. On the matter of whether it was appropriate to appoint an administrator when the deceased had selected the defendant as his executor, Mr. Gormley submitted that the deceased's intention that the plaintiff have the benefit of certain assets should be regarded as a more important intention which prevails over the intention as to the identity of an executor.

Mr. Gormley submitted that there was sufficient evidence to show real concern that the business was not being properly administered, and that cash was being misapplied. He submitted that, in response to the material produced by the plaintiff, the defendant had only produced very limited material, and had withheld other material. He submitted that although it was the deceased's contention that, following the police raid, all cash was being scrupulously accounted for, there was evidence in the plaintiff's case which suggested that this was not the case. In particular, Mr. Gormley relied on evidence of conversations between the plaintiff and the defendant, conversations between the plaintiff and Mr. Smith (one of the present managers of the business, and one of the new directors of the company), and also evidence concerning a statement made by the agent appointed to sell the business as to what he had been told about takings of the business.

Mr. Gormley submitted that, if it was not thought appropriate to appoint an administrator having direct control in some way over the business itself, it was at least appropriate to appoint an administrator in relation to the shares, who would then be able to exercise such rights as were attached to the shares in protecting the interests of the beneficiary of those shares. If that administrator then considered it was appropriate to seek further relief relating to the business itself, it would be open for that administrator to do so.

Mr. Wilson for the defendant, as well as relying on the authority to which I have referred, submitted that the material suggesting misapplication of the cash following the police raid was all denied by the defendant and the defendant's witnesses. Furthermore, there was evidence given by a witness,
Mrs. Stewart, as to which no real challenge had been made, as to practices which would have the effect of ensuring that all cash was being accounted for.

DECISION 
It appears that there is no dispute that I can approach a decision of this application on the basis that the plaintiff does have a prima facie case of entitlement to 50% of the shares in Interest Pty. Limited.

I think it is appropriate to look first at the question of whether there may be a basis for appointing an administrator on the ground that there is a real question as to whether probate will ultimately be granted to the defendant. I do not understand that the plaintiff has expressly put that she will seek, in probate proceedings, that the defendant be passed over in relation to the administration of the estate. However, even if this is not expressly sought by the plaintiff, it seems to me that this is a question that could conceivably be raised by the Court itself, especially where it seems that one of the other beneficiaries of the residuary estate is an infant. I am told that the deceased's son is 16 years of age.

There are only limited circumstances in which an executor appointed by a will may be passed over, but one of the circumstances is said to be where the executor is of bad character. That is referred to in Williams & Mortimer,
Executors Administrators and Probate, pp.334-5, Mason & Handler, Wills
Probate and Administration Service NSW, par.1201.2.6, Re S [(1968) P ], and
Bowler v. Bowler (No.2), Young, J., unreported, 7th June 1990.

In this case, the situation is that there are serious charges pending against the defendant which, on the material before me, may be of substance. I have already mentioned that the evidence suggests that the defendant may have been involved in activities designed to avoid tax concerning cash of the business, at least prior to the police raid. There is evidence before me by the plaintiff that the defendant has continued to misapply cash, although, as I have said, that evidence is vigorously disputed. There is also evidence by the plaintiff to the effect that the defendant has dishonestly withheld from the plaintiff something like $300,000.00: as I have already noted, there is a stark dispute as to that matter as well.

It seems to me that if some or all of these matters are made out against the defendant, then this is a case where the defendant could be passed over in relation to the administration of the estate, and it seems to me that that is one basis on which some other administrator might be appointed as an interim measure. As I have mentioned earlier, the plaintiff's Counsel has also relied on evidence of mismanagement of the business. In my view, that evidence is not of such a nature as could conceivably justify passing over the defendant as executor.

The second legal basis on which, it seems to me, that the plaintiff might conceivably be entitled to the appointment of an administrator concerns the right which a beneficiary may have to protect an asset given to the beneficiary by will, even where there is no question as to who should be the executor of the estate.

The evidence does not seem to indicate one way or the other whether the deceased's interest in the business, or rather in the company Interest Pty.
Limited, will need to be converted into money for purposes of administration of the estate. It seems that at this stage, the defendant is not suggesting that this is the purpose of the proposed sale of the business, that is, the provision of money for administration of the estate. As I understand it, the defendant rather says that this is a company decision validly and properly reached by the directors of the company.

Where there is a specific gift of an asset by will, then normally an executor should distribute that asset to the beneficiary unless it is required for payment of debts or expenses of the estate: see Williams & Mortimer, p.737. However, a beneficiary has no right to any specific asset of an estate until completion of administration. Until that time, the beneficiary's right is to have the estate properly administered: see Williams & Mortimer, p.849; Commissioner of Stamp Duties v.Livingston <case>; [(1964) 112
CLR 12](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281964%29%20112%20CLR%2012 "View LawCiteRecord" ), [(1965) AC 694]; Official Receiver v. Shulz <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 306]; and also see the note at [66 ALJ 553.]
It has been said that the beneficiary's only remedy pending completion of administration is to bring proceedings seeking general administration of the estate. However, as I understand it, the Court is now more willing to consider specific remedies for specific problems; and it is conceivable that, if an executor were threatening to sell a specific asset given to a beneficiary, in circumstances where that asset could not properly be called on for payment of debts or expenses, and where there was no other justification for selling the asset, the Court may grant an injunction against the selling of the asset.

As noted previously, in this case the alleged threat is not to the asset dealt with by the will, that is the shares, but to the business of the company. I do not think that consideration is conclusive against the giving of a remedy on this second basis however. As I understand it, the memorandum and articles do give a 50% shareholder a right to representation on the Board of the company.
It could be argued that, in those circumstances, it is fair that the plaintiff, who expects to receive the 50% shareholding, should have the possibility of representation on the Board, or at least the possibility that an administrator may make some input into the Board's decisions on her behalf.

The other possible basis on which it seems to me that interference by the
Court, at this stage, might be justified would be if it could be shown that there was such misconduct by the directors that it was appropriate for the
Court to intervene in the affairs of the company on behalf of the shareholders. I have to say that I do not think a case for intervention on that basis is made out at present; and in any event, the company would need to be a party to the proceedings.

However, having regard to the first possible basis of interference, that is because there is a possibility that the defendant may be passed over as executor, and as well as to the suggestion that fairness requires that the plaintiff, as a prospective beneficiary of a half interest in the company, should have some possibility of an input being made on her behalf in relation to the sale of the company business, it seems to me that there is enough of a question to be tried to justify the Court moving to the next question, that is, whether the balance of convenience favours the appointment of an administrator.

On the balance of convenience, it does seem to me that the evidence does suggest some risk in relation to cash of the business, which would be to some extent reduced by an independent administrator, who could, through control of % of the shareholding, secure representation on the Board of Directors. I think the consideration of fairness to which I have referred as regards the input by the plaintiff as a prospective 50% shareholder, is another factor in favour of the appointment of an administrator. The appointment of an administrator would involve costs and some disruption, and they are matters to be considered on the other side. At present, although I have not had submissions on this from either side, I think the question of cost could be dealt with, at least in part, by providing that the costs of the administrator would be debited, in the first instance, against the shares to which the plaintiff claims entitlement, and so, prima facie, would be borne by those shares, and not by any other part of the estate. At present, I think I would also require an undertaking as to damages by the plaintiff, so that if it turned out that she was not entitled to this assistance, then she would be liable for all the costs occasioned by it.

Subject to further submissions as to those conditions, my present view is that an administrator should be appointed of the 50% of the shares, subject to those conditions.
 [Further submissions] 
There are two main questions outstanding.

One relates to how the administrator is going to be paid.

As I see it, an administrator is usually paid out of the asset of which he is appointed administrator. It seems unlikely that he will be able to be paid out of the shares until there is some final resolution of this matter. The defendant submits strongly that there is no basis on which the Court could or should make provision that he be paid out of other parts of the estate. So it seems to me that there is a real question as to what provision should be made for the payment of the administrator. It may be that if the administrator is prepared to accept the appointment on the basis that his payment will ultimately come from the shares, then that might deal with the question.

The other matter is the question of costs.

The defendant, who is today appearing in person, submits that a costs order should be made in his favour, because the remedy I am granting is one which was not sought in the summons. However, Mr. Gormley tells me that in discussions between Counsel prior to the commencement of the contested hearing, the alternative remedy which I am proposing was discussed, and Mr.
Gormley indicated that he would be seeking this as an alternative; and Mr.
Gormley says that there was no indication at that stage, nor at any stage prior to the hearing, that there would be consent to that alternative remedy.
It seems to me that if that is the position, then it will be appropriate that the costs of these proceedings depend upon the outcome of proceedings in which a Court determines whether it is the plaintiff or the defendant who is telling the truth about these matters.

I stand the matter over to Friday 23rd May 1997 in the Probate List. If some other date is to be sought, then my Associate can be contacted.
 * * * 
