

Regina versus Timothy Vidler Birdsall [1997] NSWSC 66 (3 March 1997) 
REGINA versus TIMOTHY VIDLER BIRDSALL /96 
Monday 3 March 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
COLE JA, GROVE J, SIMPSON J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - PERMANENT STAY OF PROCEEDINGS - LONG SPAN OF YEARS BETWEEN ALLEGED OFFENCES AND MAKING OF COMPLAINT - NO REASONS OTHER THAN REFERENCE TO DELAY GIVEN - NO FINDING OF PRESUMPTIVE PREJUDICE AND NO EVIDENCE OF ACTUAL PREJUDICE TENDERED - ORDER QUASHED 
RESULT: Appeal allowed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: I shall ask Grove J to give the first judgment.

GROVE J: This is an appeal against an interlocutory judgment brought as of right pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act. The relevant order granted the respondent a permanent stay of proceedings upon an indictment containing five counts alleging indecent assaults and buggery committed upon the same complainant on various dates between January 1961 and December 1967. At the time of the earliest alleged offence the complainant was aged eight years and the respondent aged sixteen years. 
The subject matter of the charges was first drawn to the attention of police in mid 1995. Further written statements were obtained up until January 1996.
In October 1995 the respondent was interviewed by police and subsequently charged in December of that year. Committal for trial was ordered at the
Downing Centre Local Court in April 1996 and on 24 May 1996 the respondent was arraigned before Howie DCJ when he pleaded not guilty to each count. A trial date for 14 October 1996 was fixed.

On that date counsel appearing for the respondent filed before Court DCJ the allocated trial judge a Notice of Motion returnable instanter seeking that the proceedings be stayed. No affidavit in support of the motion was presented nor was oral evidence adduced. There were handed to the presiding judge two statements of the complainant and two statements made by the police investigating officer. The latter documents revealed that the respondent had exercised his right of silence in response to request for interview and had attended with his solicitor on the occasion that he was to be charged after which he said no more than that he was not guilty of the matters.

The proceedings leading to the interlocutory order are fully described in this extract from the transcript: "BERTINI: The notice of motion is that the proceedings brought against Mr
Birdsall be stayed. I do not anticipate the application to take a very long time, however, I do say that your Honour should hear this immediately.
 (Notice of motion handed to his Honour) 
If I could hand up two statements by the complainant and two statements by the investigative officer on the application.
 (Abovementioned statements and copy of Indictment handed to his Honour).

HIS HONOUR: What is the point of this Miss Crown? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: For what it is worth I have inquired similarly of (the named complainant), the alleged victim. He says that he is a psychiatrist himself.
He says he is still receiving therapy for the damage he says sustained to him as a youth, child, and for some time was unable to see himself as a victim of a crime. Now he appreciates that he is, and initially he complained, he tells me, with a view to attending therapy to deal with his problem and then he was able to see he was a victim of crime and something should be done about it in this arena. It is a matter which has gone to the Director of Public
Prosecutions for an opinion as to whether it should proceed. The Director said the matter should be prosecuted, and that's why we are here today.

HIS HONOUR: I direct that any further proceedings be permanently stayed, and I do that for the record, primarily because of the antiquity of the Crown." 
After that exchange it is recorded in the transcript that the Crown Prosecutor asked to be again heard and his Honour received some further submission. He also granted an adjournment for the purpose of the Crown Prosecutor obtaining instructions. Nothing of relevance to the present appeal emerged and the learned judge confirmed the order he had already made.

There was no expressed conclusion that any finding of guilt would follow upon a trial which must be necessarily unfair. As I have indicated, the respondent put nothing before the Court to that effect and it would appear that his
Honour took the view that the span of time between the alleged occurrence of the offences and the present was such that there would be presumptive prejudice of some sort.

It is trite to observe that there is no limitation period for the prosecution of crime at common law and it is not suggested that any statutory limitation has been legislated in respect of the charges upon which the respondent has been arraigned.

Attention has been drawn to the inhibitions upon the exercise of inherent power to stay prosecution and it is clear that in general terms, before any such order should be made, the applicant for stay must demonstrate that disadvantage or prejudice likely to be suffered would be in the relevant sense unacceptable, that is to say, would be such as to render the proposed trial unfair. There was no evidence before his Honour upon which to draw in order to reach such a conclusion except the time span.

Written submissions by the appellant/Crown were filed on 7 February last.
Written submissions on behalf of the respondent were not received in the
Registry until Friday last, 28 February, but for my part that delay has been satisfactorily explained.

It appears from those submissions that the respondent is content to seek to support the order made on the basis that it can be legitimate for a court to infer prejudice without proof of anything specific: R versus Telford Justices Ex
Parte Badham 1991 93 Crim App Reports 171. It should be noted that Court DCJ did not articulate that he inferred prejudice and it follows that he did not specify in what regard he inferred it if he did. He said no more than that he was staying the proceedings primarily because of the "antiquity of the Crown".
I assume that the word "allegations" or similar has been omitted from the transcription.

The late arriving written submissions dilate at length upon the power of a superior court to decline to hear criminal proceedings on the ground that they are oppressive or an abuse of process of the court. The existence of the power is not in doubt and I have already indicated the clear authority showing the restraint that should be exercised in relation to the use of such power particularly where delay alone is relied upon. In different language submissions were tendered under the separate headings "the age of the offences" and "the delay has deprived the alleged offender of an appropriate forum in which to have the allegations against him determined". All of the submissions accumulate into a proposition that right thinking people will regard the administration of justice as having been brought into disrepute if these matters proceed. The proposition infers the application of an undefined period of limitation without further circumstance but there is no warrant for implying this. It is to be remembered that the remarks of Mann LJ in Telford
Justices adverted to the inference of prejudice not the calculation of delay.

Next it is submitted that it can reasonably be said that any convictions obtained on the available evidence would of necessity be unsafe and unsatisfactory. It appears to be common ground that the prosecution case will depend upon the sworn evidence of the complainant. This submission flies in the face of adjurations such as that of Brennan J in Jago versus District Court CLR @ 46 that a power to ensure a fair trial is not a power to stop a trial before it starts.

Penultimately it is contended that the charges against the respondent involve an element of selective prosecution and that the respondent was not heard below. It is said that the substantive law has changed significantly since these offences were alleged to have occurred. That is so and I have already noted the age of the complainant relevant to the respondent at the material times. The reference to this matter is a diversion. Whilst it is true that the judge below did not call upon counsel for the respondent in any way, the order followed upon initiation by notice of motion which, as I have commented, was supported only by the statements of the complainant and the police officer investigating and nothing along the lines of this argument was foreshadowed in that material.

It is submitted that the judicial discretion was properly exercised. This
Court is invited to conclude that it would come to the same conclusion as
Court DCJ and that the proceedings ought be stayed in any event. There is no material before this Court other than that that was before the District Court supplemented by specification of presumptive prejudice and the arguments lately raised. I am unpersuaded that the discretion of the District Court judge is shown not to have miscarried or that an order for permanent stay should have been made. It is a matter for the respondent whether he elects to bring another application in that Court supported by some positive evidence.

I propose that the appeal be allowed. The order permanently staying proceedings upon the relevant indictment should be quashed and the matter returned to the District Court.

COLE JA: I agree. The principles governing this matter are set out in Jago versus District Court <case>; [1989 168 CLR 23] in particular at page 34 in the judgment of Mason CJ. His Honour there said: "In any event, a permanent stay should be ordered only in an extreme case and the making of such an order on the basis of delay alone, will accordingly be very rare." 
A little later his Honour expanded upon that saying: "Where delay is the sole ground of complaint, an accused seeking a permanent stay must be able to show that the lapse of time is such that any trial is necessarily unfair so that any conviction would bring the administration of justice into disrepute." 
It is not apparent that the trial judge had those matters to mind. In my judgment such material as was placed before his Honour did not show that any trial would necessarily be unfair, nor has any material been put to this Court which would so indicate.

I agree with the orders proposed.

SIMPSON J: I also agree with the orders proposed. In my opinion, it is the precipitous way in which the application was dealt with that signifies that the discretion miscarried.

It may well be that material in the form of either evidence or argument might have been put before his Honour that would have permitted a reasoned and sustainable stay to have been granted. The procedure that was adopted deprived this Court of the capacity to review or even understand the basis on which the orders were made. There were no relevant findings of fact.

For these reasons I am persuaded that the discretion miscarried. That does not mean that the question of a stay is foreclosed. There is nothing to prevent a further and supported application being made.

COLE JA: The orders will be as proposed by Grove J.
 * * * 
