

Chapmans Limited versus Yandells and Anor Matter No 11194/96 [1998] NSWSC 195 (18 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
CHAPMANS LIMITED versus YANDELLS & ANOR /96 May 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The first defendants are a firm of solicitors practicing under the name of Yandells. During 1993 and 1994, they performed legal services for the plaintiff. The retainer came to an end in December 1994. During the period of the retainer, accounts for fees were rendered and payments were made. 
Yandells prepared a Bill of Costs (in the order of $67,000). It is dated 27
July 1995. Payments had been made of a total in the order of $47,000. The plaintiff brought proceedings in this Court for the referral of the Bill to a
Costs Assessor for assessment. The application was accompanied by a document containing objections to the Bill which extended over about 10 pages. There were general objections and a specific objection to each and every one of the items contained in the Bill ("Unnecessary and/or Excessive"). The Court referred the application for assessment to the second defendant (Mr
Hattersley).

In about October 1995, the second defendant notified the other parties of the referral. At this time, he asked that he be provided with, inter alia, the reasons or grounds for each objection. A considerable body of correspondence was generated between the parties. It contained material which gave further opportunity to make submissions and submissions that were made to the Costs
Assessor. On 26 February 1996, he issued his Certificate As To Determination
Of Costs. He determined the amount of costs to be paid to the practitioner in the sum of $19,980.09. In substance, the Bill was allowed in full.

These proceedings were brought by Summons filed on 11 March 1996. They appear to have languished for a couple of years. Ultimately, they came on for hearing on 12 May 1998.

At the commencement of the hearing, it became obvious that the plaintiff had misconceived the nature of the process before the Court. The plaintiff brings both an appeal and seeks leave to appeal (sections 208L and 208M of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the
Act)). The plaintiff had approached the process as though it involved a fresh hearing (involving affidavits and cross-examination) of the determination that had been made by the Costs Assessor.

Section 208L confers an appeal as of right "as to a matter of law arising in the proceedings to determine the application". It is a limited avenue of appeal. The section provides for the giving of "fresh evidence, or evidence in addition to or in substitution for the evidence received at the original proceedings" on a re-determination.

Section 208M enables the Court to grant leave to appeal. Leave is not readily granted and is reserved for those cases where justice requires that it be given. The section provides for the giving of, inter alia, fresh evidence when leave has been granted and the Court proceeds to hear the appeal.

After some considerable delay, the material which the Costs Assessor had before him was assembled and placed before the Court. The hearing then proceeded.

The plaintiff has formulated three grounds upon which the claim for relief is founded. These are as follows:- that the material submitted to the Costs Assessor to establish the alleged agreement as to costs was insufficient; that the plaintiff was not given an opportunity to respond to the contention made by Yandells that there was an agreement as to costs; that the Costs Assessor failed to apply the principles of taxation in assessing the costs for work done prior to 1 July 1994.

Largely, the material before the Court consisted of a bundle of documentation that comprised material placed before the Costs Assessor (Exhibit A), a copy of the Bill of Costs (Exhibit B) and a copy of the Objections made by the plaintiff (Exhibit C).

The onus rests with the party seeking relief to demonstrate an entitlement to that relief. In my view, the plaintiff has failed to discharge that onus. The plaintiff has failed to demonstrate an error of law or any ground for the granting of leave. In my view, no justification for disturbing the determination has been demonstrated.

The task confronting the plaintiff is bordering on the impossible. The Costs
Assessor did not deliver reasons. This was not the subject of complaint. No request has been made to the Costs Assessor to volunteer the reasoning process behind his determination. The plaintiff is left to embark on an exercise of speculation as to what that process might have been.

I now turn to the three grounds upon which the determination is challenged. It seems to me that these grounds can be dealt with without embarking on any detailed analysis of the documentation.

The first ground is dependent upon the Costs Assessor having made a finding that an agreement as to costs as alleged by Yandells had been made between the parties. If he did make such a finding, it seems to me that he had material before him which would have enabled him to reach that result. However, whether or not he did so remains in the area of speculation. In any event, it seems to me that the determination was consistent with the proper performance of the assessment process prescribed by the Act.

During the course of argument, the second of the two grounds was more or less abandoned. It was obviously lacking in substance. This was a case where the relevant matter had been raised at the outset in the plaintiff's Objections.
It was repeated and/or addressed in the correspondence that passed prior to the determination. During that period, the plaintiff had more than a reasonable opportunity to put whatever else it wanted to say in relation to that matter.

The plaintiff concedes that the third of the grounds becomes relevant only if the Costs Assessor has rejected the contention advanced by Yandells as to the existence of an agreement as to costs. The Costs Assessor may have accepted that contention. Certainly, it was open to the Costs Assessor to find that such an agreement had been made. His determination is consistent with that having happened.

In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that he should have applied the taxation principles in assessing the costs for the work done prior to 1 July .

Largely, the third ground is founded on the proposition that clause 79 of the
Legal Profession Regulation, 1994 (the Regulation) applies to the assessment of a part of the costs claimed by Yandells. The Regulation has been drafted in terms which have been productive of difficulty in determining the application of its provisions. The submissions made in this case did not venture into that troublesome territory and the matter was not fully argued. In the circumstances, if the view was taken that clause 79 did have application, I am not satisfied that the Costs Assessor failed to approach the assessment in the manner provided therein.

In my view, none of the challenges to the determination have been made out. It seems to me, that the Court should affirm the decision of the Costs Assessor.

The Summons is dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons.
The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
