

Lin versus Tang [2007] NSWSC 1193 (25 October 2007) 
Last Updated: 31 October 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Lin versus Tang <case>  
JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 12732/07  
HEARING DATE{S): 25/10/2007  
JUDGMENT DATE: 25 October 2007  
PARTIES: 
Hui Fen Lin (Pl) 
Judy Tang (Def)  
JUDGMENT OF: Associate Justice Malpass  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Local Court  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 71/06  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: n/a  
LOWER COURT DATE OF DECISION: 18/05/2007  
COUNSEL: 
Mr. H. Lu (Sol) 
In Person (Def)  
SOLICITORS: 
Luminous Legal (Pl)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Appeal against refusal to set aside default judgment  many opportunities to file a defence  no denial of natural justice  interlocutory decision and leave  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CASES CITED: 
Carr versus Finance Corp of Australia Ltd (No 1) <case>; [147 CLR 246]  
DECISION: 
The Summons is dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons.  
JUDGMENT:  - 3 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
ASSOCIATE JUSTICE MALPASS  OCTOBER 2007  /07 Hui Fen Lin versus Judy Tang  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff and the defendant were parties to proceedings in the Small Claims Division of the Local Court. The claim was brought by the defendant. It was in the sum of $10,000,00, plus interest. Because the plaintiff failed to file a defence, default judgment was entered against her.
For completeness, I should add that there is dispute between the parties as to whether or not the original process was served on the plaintiff.  Thereafter, she made applications to have the default judgment set aside and be given leave to file a defence. Despite having opportunities to file a defence (at least two), she failed to do so. She has ascribed this failure to poor English, ignorance of legal procedures and financial difficulties.  The final application made by her was refused. This took place on 18 May On 31 May 2007, the plaintiff filed a Summons in this Court. It seeks to challenge what was done in the Local Court. She claims to have been denied natural justice.  The appeal was heard on 25 October 2007. Both parties appeared and relied on their respective affidavits. The plaintiff only was legally represented. There have been written submissions, together with the opportunity to supplement that material by oral argument.  What is appealed against is the decision not to set aside the default judgment on the plaintiff's final application. The decision was made following a contested hearing. Both parties were self-represented. No transcript of the hearing or reasons for decision are before this Court. The absence of this essential material presents the plaintiff with a formidable hurdle. There is a lack of evidence to suggest that in any way she was not given a reasonable opportunity to present her case or was in some other way denied a fair hearing.  An application to set aside a default judgment has been regarded as an interlocutory application and the refusal to set it aside has not been regarded as a final order (see inter alia Carr versus Finance Corp of Australia
Ltd (No 1) <case>; [147 CLR 246).]
Whether or not that approach has application in the present case has not been debated before me and for present purposes it does not have to be decided.  In the circumstances, it is inevitable that the Court comes to the conclusion that the evidence (such as it is) fails to support a contention that the plaintiff has been denied natural justice. What it does reveal is that she has in fact been given more than an adequate opportunity to file a defence and present her case. It seems to me that this appeal has been brought simply because she was unhappy with the decision below and is intent on frustrating the enforcement of the judgment entered against her. It should not be necessary to stress that the plaintiff has no "merits" appeal.  The reaching of this view suffices to dispose of this appeal. However, for completeness, I shall mention one other matter.  If leave is required the appeal is lacking in what might attract the grant of it. There is no evidence of manifest error. There is nothing that gives rise to any matter of public interest or question of principle.  The Summons is dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons.  
LAST UPDATED: 30 October 2007 * * * 
