

Stavert versus Stavert and Anor Matter No 21432/96 [1998] NSWSC 487 (30 July )

Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
STAVERT versus STAVERT & ANOR /96 July 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 20 December 1996. The plaintiff is an elderly lady who brings a claim for damages. She suffered serious personal injury on 2 October 1995 when she fell whilst walking down a sloping driveway on a property owned by the defendants. The claim is said to be founded on negligence and breach of duty as an occupier. 
On 28 May 1998, the defendants filed a Cross-Claim. It has been brought against Blue Mountains City Council (the Council). The Cross-Claim was served on 3 June 1998. A Defence to that Cross-Claim (the Defence) was filed on 3
July 1998.

The Cross-Claim alleges, inter alia, that the driveway was constructed in or about 1981 in accordance with a Building Permit issued by the Council.
Further, or in the alternative, it is alleged that the construction of the driveway was approved by the Council. The Cross-Claim is founded on alleged negligence or breach of statutory duty. Largely, the Defence traverses the allegations made in the Cross-Claim.

A status conference was held on 23 June 1998. Because of oversight, the
Council did not appear. The Court made certain directions (including a direction that any application for discovery by the defendants be filed and served by 3 July 1998).

On 29 June 1998, the defendants filed a Notice of Motion. It seeks verified discovery of the categories of documentation identified in a document entitled
Notice of Discovery. It is an annexure to the Notice of Motion. It specifies five categories of documents and requires discovery for the period 1 January to date. In support of the application, the defendants rely on an affidavit sworn by Mr Edelman (the solicitor for the defendants).

The application is opposed. The Council relies on an affidavit sworn by Mr
Gibbons (the solicitor for the Council).

Part 23 of the Supreme Court Rules contains a regime which is applicable to proceedings commenced on or after 1 October 1996. It is a regime that so far has been productive of limited interlocutory activity.

Part 23 confers a discretionary power to order that a party give discovery (see rule 3). As these proceedings involve a personal injury claim, it is governed by the provisions of rule 5. Rule 5 is in the following terms:- Rule 2(1)(b) and rule 3 shall not apply to proceedings on a common law claim for damages arising out of the death of, or bodily injury to, any person or for contribution in respect of damages so arising, unless the Court, for special reasons, otherwise orders.

It seems that the question of the proper construction of rule 5 is relatively untrammelled by authority. I was not referred to any decision which has approached the problem of the proper construction to be given to this rule.

The rule contains the words "special reasons". The meaning to be attributed to these words was not the subject of full argument. It may well be unproductive to dwell on an attempt to elaborate on the plain and unambiguous literal meaning of those words.

Each case is going to be determined having regard to its own particular circumstances. The task for the Court is to look at the material placed before it and determine whether or not "special reasons" are present in that case.

The aim of the present Part 23 is to establish a regime whereby, in the case of personal injury claims, rule 3 does not apply "unless the court, for special reasons, otherwise orders". In the case of a personal injury claim, the applicant for discovery must first obtain an otherwise order. An otherwise order cannot be made unless there are special reasons. If the Court makes an otherwise order, it then has jurisdiction to exercise the discretionary power to make an order for discovery. The onus rests with the applicant to demonstrate an entitlement to both an otherwise order and an order for discovery.

I have had regard to what appears in the affidavit sworn by Mr Edelman and the other material placed before the Court, together with the submissions made by
Counsel. In my view, the defendants have failed to discharge the onus of demonstrating an entitlement to an otherwise order. It seems to me that the material falls well short of showing that there are special reasons justifying the making of an otherwise order. Further, even if rule 5 had not applied in this case, I still would not have been satisfied that the defendants had demonstrated an entitlement to an order for discovery.

I should briefly refer to some specific matters that emerged during the hearing. My reference to these matters should not be understood as an attempt to exhaustively recite the relevant circumstances of the case.

In September 1997, the plaintiff had served a subpoena on the Council for the production of documents. A copy of that subpoena is annexure `A' to the affidavit sworn by Mr Gibbons. There is evidence that the Council produced documents to the Court in answer to that subpoena. There is nothing to suggest that the purported answer is in any way inadequate. There is the evidence contained in paragraph 24 of the affidavit sworn by Mr Gibbons.

There has been some debate concerning the respective width of the subpoena and
Notice of Discovery. There seems to be force in the submission that the subpoena is the wider of the two, but it is not necessary to reach any final view on this debate. At the very least, there is much common territory which covers the matters pleaded in the Cross-Claim. The Notice of Discovery is drafted in unnecessarily wide terms and it has been said that the Council does not have relevant documentation other than that which has been produced to the
Court.

A final conference has been listed for 3 September 1998. The plaintiff is elderly (81 years of age) and has suffered serious injuries. She is entitled to have her proceedings heard and disposed of without unnecessary delay. I am not satisfied that there would be utility in making an order for discovery against the Council. Indeed, on one view, it might be unkindly said that the material fails to throw up any reason for the making of an order. If an order was made, it may cause further delay in the disposition of the proceedings.
Although the proceedings were brought in 1996, a Defence was not filed until
May 1997. The Cross-Claim itself was not brought until May 1998. The delay in the bringing of the Cross-Claim is not explained.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The defendants are to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
