

The Educational Experience P/L versus Hermes Precisa P/L [1997] NSWSC 48 (20
February 1997) 
THE EDUCATIONAL EXPERIENCE PTY LIMITED versus HERMES PRECISA PTY LIMITED /96 
Thursday, 20 February 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, The Educational Experience Pty Limited (Educational), is a distributor of educational toys, materials and equipment to learning institutions throughout Australia, operating from an office and warehouse complex in Gateshead New South Wales. Its principal method of sale involves use of an annual catalogue (the catalogue) which is distributed to those institutions at the commencement of the calendar year, a time considered by Educational as "traditionally ... the time when customers make purchasing decisions". The institutions are identified by research activities maintained by Educational and are recorded in a customer list kept on computer by Educational. In the years 1992 to 1996 inclusive, Educational engaged Australia Post for the distribution of the catalogues "through the Australia Post mailing network". For the 1996 distribution, Educational entered into a contract with Australia Post which was evidenced by an offer by Australia Post in the form of a facsimile to Educational of 5 December 1995 and a facsimile of acceptance by Educational to Australia Post of 12 December 1995. The terms of the facsimile of 5 December 1995 is set out below: "Thanks for the opportunity to quote for the distribution of your 1996 catalogue.

I am happy to quote the same price as last year = $3.50 each. This quotation is based on the following:-
Catalogue weighing approx. 1.6 kgs
Volume 18,238 approx
Lodged at Underwood Mail Centre, South Brisbane
Lodgement date: Wed 31 January 1996
To be lodged loose in ULD's and sorted to State only
Mailing costs to be charges on your account 15017-0 
If the above price is acceptable would you please advise me as soon as possible so further arrangements can be made." (Exhibit A, tab 3) 
That of 12 December 1995 was in the following terms: "We wish to confirm acceptance of your quotation dated 5 December 1995 for the distribution of our 1996 catalogues at a rate of $3.50 each.

Thank you again for your assistance." (Exhibit A, tab 4) 
The defendant, Hermes Precisa Pty Limited (Hermes), is a corporation which specialises in the preparation and delivery of articles for distribution by
Australia Post. Part of its specialty includes an understanding of Australia
Post's requirements, this knowledge being used to assist clients in the postage costs of delivery through Australia Post. Hermes was engaged by
Educational to prepare and deliver the 1996 catalogues to Australia Post. The terms of this agreement was the subject of an exchange of facsimiles dated 18
December 1995.

The facsimile from Educational to Hermes dated 18 December 1995 stated as follows: "Please provide an urgent quotation on for the following catalogue distribution. Our 1995 catalogue was prepared by yourselves for distribution using a quote by Sarah Robinson. Please see quotation to follow. Our requirements are as detailed below: * Mechanically apply Cheshire labels onto carrier (fly) sheets provided.
 * Plastic wrap catalogue with carrier (fly) sheet and pack into ULD's for lodging with Australia Post on our company account.
 * The quantity will be approximately 17,000.
 * Lodgement with Australia Post is required between 29th 31st January, 1996 * Catalogues would be delivered to yourselves approximately 23rd-25th January 1996 
All these dates would be confirmed once your quote has been received by us.
Please address this matter at your earliest convenience.

Should you require any further information please do not hesitate to contact me." (Exhibit A, tab 5) 
The Facsimile of Hermes to Educational of 18 December 1995 was in the following terms: "Please find an official quotation to Plastic Wrap 17,000 Catalogs (sic): * To mechanically apply Cheshire labels onto carrier sheets provided * To plastic wrap magazine with carrier sheet, pack into ULD's $2700.00 
Lodging in client's account * Lodging between 29-31 January 1996 * Magazine to HPA 23-25 January 1996. (Also Cheshire labels)." (Exhibit A, tab 6) 
That quotation was accepted by Educational on 19 December 1995. There was further communication between Hermes and Educational as was recorded in the facsimile of Educational to Hermes of 19 January 1996 as follows: "Further to our conversation of Friday 19th January, regarding our order no: E , for packaging our 1996 National School Catalogue ready for posting.
 * Fly Sheets and Cheshire labels have been sent from our office Friday 19th January and will arrive with you Monday 22nd January.
 * Catalogues will arrive Wednesday 24th January, on ?? pallets, (can not get this information today), I will fax you again, Monday.
 * Lodgment may commence Monday 29th January, at Underwood Mail Centre, South, Brisbane. Australia Post requirements are as follows: * Lodged loose in ULD's and sorted by state only * Mailing costs are charged to account 15017-0 
Please do not hesitate to call should you require any further information." (Exhibit A, tab 11) 
Also on 19 January 1996 Educational confirmed by facsimile to Australia Post the details of the proposed consignment in the following terms: "Further to your conversations with Stephen Thomas, please accept the following letter as confirmation of our postal arrangements regarding the postage of our 1996 National School Catalogue.
 * Approximate weight 1.3 kgs * Volume approximately 15,000 * Lodgment will commence 29th January, at Underwood Mail Centre, 
South, Brisbane, Lodged loose in ULD's and sorted by state only all mailing costs will be charged to account 15017-0 
Should this arrangement in any way be unsuitable, please contact our office immediately." (Exhibit A, tab 12) 
Immediately prior to delivery of the catalogues to Australia Post it appears that Educational informed Australia Post that the number to be lodged would be ,762, commencing on 29 January 1996. The Bulk Postage Listing dated 6
February 1996 and the Bulk Postage Docket dated 7 February 1996, both issued by Australia Post, recorded the lodgment of catalogues as numbering 14,999.

The Mailing Statement prepared by Hermes and stamped with a received stamp by
Australia Post records the quantity as 15,432. However, it appears that in assessing the damages said to have been suffered by Educational in the circumstances that are described below, the correct figure has been taken by the parties as being 14,999.

As agreed between Educational and Hermes, Educational provided catalogues, carrier sheets and Cheshire labels to Hermes. The carrier sheet was of the same dimensions as the catalogue. It carried a promotional description of
Educational and was endorsed to the attention of "Principal/Director". It also carried a printed statement, "Postage Paid Australia". The Cheshire labels carried the name and address of the particular addressee for each catalogue.
Hermes affixed the Cheshire label to the carrier sheet and the carrier sheet was then placed on the back of the catalogue which was then mechanically wrapped in plastic by Hermes. What was then required of Hermes, in accordance with the instruction of Educational to Hermes of 19 January 1996, was to lodge the catalogues "loose in ULDs ... as sorted by state only with Australia
Post's Underwood Mail Centre (Underwood)". Instead, at greater cost to itself,
Hermes employed staff to bind the catalogues into bundles of three by means of nylon tape which was tied along the length and across the width of the bundle which had the effect of exposing only the carrier sheet with the affixed
Cheshire label showing the address of the addressee of the top catalogue in the bundle. The other two carrier sheets were concealed from view.

ULD is an acronym for unit load device which is the name given by Australia
Post to an iron cage approximately four feet cubed which has a blackboard on its side used for marking the designation of the ULD's contents. Australia
Post arranges with its daily customers for the customers to have a constant supply of ULDs on the customer's premises for facilitating the delivery of postage by the customer to Australia Post. Hermes was one such customer.
Hermes then placed the catalogues, so bundled, in ULDs and delivered them to
Australia Post. Australia Post, for the most part, delivered the catalogues in bundles of three to the addressee whose address appeared on the top catalogue.
As a result something between a quarter and a fifth of the catalogues did not reach the address shown on the respective Cheshire labels.

The evidence discloses that some of the addressees who received catalogues addressed to other institutions re-posted the wrongly delivered catalogues. It also can be inferred from the evidence of Yates that in some areas the delivery centres of Australia Post had realised that the bundles were to be untied and had effected a delivery in accordance with Australia Post's agreement with Educational.

When the deficiency in distribution of its catalogues was ascertained by
Educational it went to considerable expense in identifying its prospective customers who had not received the catalogue as intended and in printing and distributing further catalogues to those customers. In these proceedings
Educational seeks to recover those costs and the damages in the form of profits said to have been lost by it as a result of its prospective customers not receiving the catalogues in a timely way.

Educational's cause of action is in contract. Hermes has cross-claimed against
Australia Post in negligence and for damages caused by conduct proscribed by the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) (the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)) and seeks contribution or indemnity pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s5.html) of the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions ) Act 1946 (the Law Reform Act). Its claim in contract has not been pursued.

In evaluating the evidence in this case I have regarded all of the witnesses as both credible and reliable. I have not been assisted by any opportunity to observe witnesses giving evidence other than to observe that they all appear to be truthful witnesses. Where differences have arisen between witnesses recounting events, I regard those differences as both understandable and of no significance. As between Educational and Hermes the contest on liability has concentrated on the effect of what transpired between them rather than on any dispute as to what took place.

In my opinion, the contractual liability of Hermes to Educational is clear. I think that the agreement reached on 19 December with the acceptance by
Educational of Hermes' quotation of 18 December called for the placement with
Australia Post of individually wrapped catalogues individually addressed into
Australia Post's ULDs marked with the state of destination for delivery by
Australia Post. If there was any doubt about the need to place the catalogues in individual loose form that ambiguity was removed by the facsimile of
Educational to Hermes of 19 January 1996 directing Hermes to place the catalogues "loose in ULDs and sorted by state only". The origin of that requirement lay in the terms of Australia Post's quotation of 5 December 1995.
Australia Post sought to adduce evidence as to the meaning of the term "loose". In the form in which that evidence was originally tendered, namely, as set out in par 5 of the affidavit of evidence in chief of Adrian John Yates sworn 24 September 1996 (exhibit X-D3) it was inadmissible and that paragraph was rejected with leave to the cross-defendant to adduce oral evidence. It was clear from the oral evidence of Yates that the term is not a term of art, is not the subject of any custom nor of any practice outside of the internal workings of Australia Post and it was clear that in the understanding of the representatives of Educational and Hermes it had no special meaning. The ordinary meaning of the term is "free from bonds, fetters, or restraint ... free ... from fastening or attachment ... uncombined ... not bound together" (The Macquarie Dictionary, Second Revised Edition) and "Free or released from bonds, fetters, or physical restraint, not confined or tethered ... not bound together not forming a bundle or package, not tied up or secured" (The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary). Quite clearly the catalogues as bundled by Hermes and placed in the ULDs for delivery to
Australia Post were not placed "loose" in the ULDs. The ULDs were marked so as to identify different destinations within states and were not simply marked "by state only". This came about as a result of a conversation between Yates and Kylie Torpy (Torpy) the mailing administrator for Hermes shortly prior to the delivery of the catalogues to Australia Post. The recollection of Torpy and Yates differed as to the precise content of that conversation. However I regard that difference as of no consequence. Further, the conversation itself
I think has little bearing on the issues in this case. It resulted in a more precise destination being provided to Australia Post by Hermes than Hermes was obliged to provide under the agreement with Educational and it was more than
Educational was required to provide under its agreement with Australia Post.
It, undoubtedly, would have made the task of sorting the catalogues into areas of delivery easier for Australia Post than if they had been sorted by state only.

Catherine Watson (Watson) was the client support officer of Hermes whose tasks included the processing of orders such as that received from Educational. She gave evidence in some detail of the manner in which the order was processed by
Hermes. I do not regard that material as of particular assistance in relation to the issues in this litigation. She prepared instructions for those in
Hermes charged with the task of preparing the catalogues for delivery to
Australia Post. This was in the form of a mail processing order which contained the following " description of job": "1. Mechanically apply Cheshire labels to carrier sheets.
 ., Mechanically plastic wrap with carrier sheet on back cover
Lodge with Aust Post in ULDs" 
There is nothing exceptional in that description and in my opinion it accords with the agreements reached between Educational and Australia Post and between
Educational and Hermes. It was the evidence of Stephen Frederick Thomas , an executive director of Educational, that it had engaged Hermes and
Australia Post in years prior to the 1996 catalogue distribution for similar distributions of previous annual catalogues. It was the evidence of Olive
Edge-Williams (Edge-Williams), the mail manager for Hermes, that it had experienced packaging problems in the previous years' distribution of
Educational's catalogues with the plastic splitting and permitting catalogues to fall out of the plastic packaging. This matter, she said, had been brought to her attention by John Robert Reynolds (Reynolds) the manager-customer services for Australia Post in Queensland, shortly prior to the packaging by
Hermes of the 1996 catalogue. The response of Hermes was to use heavier plastic packaging of the catalogues. She was absent on leave when the work of preparing the 1996 catalogues and delivering them to Australia Post was actually performed.

June Moy (Moy), the supervisor of the mechanical area for Hermes, was made aware by Edge-Williams of the difficulty experienced with the previous year's packaging of Educational's catalogues. One infers that this led to the decision to tie the catalogues into bundles of three. As to that decision, she gave the following evidence in chief: "To the best of my recollection in years before last year I am sure that we bundled the catalogues. We also did a similar job for a client called ComsWare with catalogues of similar size and weight and we have always bundled them. To the best of my knowledge we have been doing that for at least four to five years. Usually jobs involve thinner documents and virtually all such jobs are bundled in this way. However as magazines are thinner they tend to be bundled in parcels of about 25 each." (Exhibit 3, par 5) 
It was her evidence in cross-examination that the instruction of Educational to Hermes of 19 January 1996 was not brought to her attention. It was her evidence that the term "loose" was not one with which she was familiar as a packaging requirement.

As a matter of construction, I think the agreement between Educational and
Hermes was constituted by the exchange of facsimiles of 18 December 1995 and
Educational's order of 19 December 1995. That agreement called for the individual addressing and wrapping of the catalogues by Hermes and their individual delivery by Hermes to Australia Post. If there was any doubt about the correctness of that construction, the doubt was removed by the facsimile of 19 January 1996 which spelt out the need to deliver the catalogues "loose" and not bundled.

Clearly, in my opinion, Hermes was in breach of that requirement in delivering the catalogues to Australia Post not "loose" but tied in bundles of three. It matters not that the decision to tie the catalogues into bundles was well intentioned and performed at extra cost to Hermes.

Hermes' breach of its agreement with Educational carried with it the risk that an insufficiently alert Australia Post would fail to detect that this form of delivery of the catalogues was contrary to Australia Post's agreement with
Educational, and would fail to detect that catalogues for different destinations were bundled together, resulting in Australia Post failing to deliver a significant number of catalogues to their correct destination. The fact that Australia Post could be regarded as having contributed to any such resultant damage by its inattentiveness is no answer to Educational's action against Hermes. The nature of Hermes' breach carried with it the risk of damage which in fact occurred.

I think there is ample scope for criticism of Australia Post in its failing to realise that the delivery of the catalogues in bundles called for the untying of the bundles by Australia Post prior to delivery to addressees. In addition to the evidence of Moy that, in previous years, catalogues with different addresses, had been delivered to Australia Post in bundles, there was the evidence of Edge-Williams in cross-examination by Australia Post as follows: "Burton: Q. Mrs Edge-Williams, just so that we are clear, the catalogues that you have there in front of you are for posting as a parcel, is that correct? 
A. Well I would say not because they haven't got three ties - normally anything that we send out as a bundle should have three ties and if you have got an Australia Post book of any sort even envelopes, big envelopes, anything that goes out in bundles should have three ties on them so they are secure and won't come undone." (T101.38) 
The catalogue bundles as delivered by Hermes to Australia Post had two ties only.

Edge-Williams elaborated on this in further cross-examination as follows: "Burton: Q. Mrs Edge-Williams just also to clarify, from your previous answers, the absence of those ties would have caused you a concern if you had been there and seen the job without those ties on it? 
A. Yes because in the past we have just had ordinary envelopes which are nowhere near this weight and even if we had three ties they do come undone, so that would have been a concern, yes.

Q. And that, when you are saying that you had very few parcels, the three catalogues together that you have there in front of you, to your understanding, constitute a parcel? 
A. I would say no because they are not securely tied. I mean there is a chance that this can come undone. It really should have the three ties." (T102.13) 
In giving this evidence Edge-Williams had before her exhibit B2 which was a bundle of the catalogues tied and packaged in accordance with the manner in which that was done by Hermes prior to their delivery to Australia Post.

I would add to that evidence the fact that the form of bundling by Hermes did have some indication of a requirement that the bundles be untied and the catalogues dispatched individually. The fact that the catalogues were individually wrapped I think was one such indication. A further indication lay in the form of addressing of the catalogues. The address was carried on a
Cheshire label which was attached to a carrier sheet. The only apparent function of the carrier sheet was to carry the individual delivery address of the catalogues. It was possible to see from the bundles that each catalogue was accompanied by a carrier sheet even though it was not possible to see whether a Cheshire label was attached to each of the catalogues in the bundle without untying the bundle. As appears later in these reasons, one bundle was untied by Australia Post in order to weigh a single catalogue.

Finally the nature of the contract between Australia Post and Educational, not to mention the knowledge gained from past years of delivery of Educational's catalogues by Australia Post, in my opinion make it quite clear that the contract required the individual delivery by Australia Post of some fifteen thousand catalogues and not of five thousand parcels consisting of bundles of three catalogues.

In further cross-examination Edge-Williams referred to a practice of double facing of bundles. She explained that this expression meant that the bundle bore on its front and back the name of the addressee and its address for delivery. She explained that this practice existed when the bundle was "going to just one postcode (by) forward regular mail or deferred mail". It was common ground that Australia Post had no regulations specifying the method of strapping or wrapping parcels at least where parcels exceeded the weight of one kilogram.

Neil Gerrard Dawes (Dawes) was Australia Post's revenue officer at Underwood.
He gave evidence that it was his responsibility to check the weight and number of articles received by Australia Post to ensure that it was paid for all the articles to send through the post. That involved, when dealing with the contents of ULDs, weighing the loaded ULD to obtain the gross weight which was then adjusted by the known weight of the ULD when empty.

The evidence of Torpy established that a "Parcels Contract Mailing Statement" document would be prepared by Hermes and provided to Australia Post's driver employed to collect the loaded ULDs. The mailing statement contained "DETAILS
OF LODGEMENT" which designated a "Delivery Area" for the subject consignment.
The delivery areas were divided into metropolitan areas and county areas throughout the various states of Australia and the Northern Territory. Such a statement was prepared for the 1996 consignment of the catalogues and disclosed the number of articles for delivery into particular areas. For example, it showed that 2,308 catalogues weighing "3,000 kg" had a destination within the delivery area known as "Sydney 2000 - 2249", with 2,750 articles to be forwarded to "NSW Country: Rest of State". The evidence disclosed that, since the delivery of the catalogues to Australia Post was to take place over a period greater than one day, the mailing statement did not accompany the first delivery. For the purpose of checking the deliveries against the agreed terms of the consignment, Yates provided Dawes with an Australia Post memorandum dated 23 January 1996 which, so far as is relevant, was in the following terms: "I spoke to Neil Dawes briefly this afternoon about the above lodgment. He surgested (sic) I address this advice to you. Should you need to contact me for further info ... you can do so on 049-692166 or 018-498636.

Hermes will be lodging 14,762 catalogues on behalf of: 
The Educational Experience 
PO Box 860 
Newcastle NSW 2300 
Weight: 1.3 kgs.

Volume: 14,762 
Lodgment to commence on 29/01/96.

Lodged in ULDs - sorted to states.

Price: $3.50 each. Flat rate Aust wide.

All charges to Ed Experience account # N150170." (Exhibit A, tab 14) 
In cross-examination Yates gave the following evidence as to what that memorandum conveyed: "Q. And so far as you were concerned on reading through it, it was referring to a job which would involve the lodgement of 134,000 odd separate postal articles into the system? 
A. Initially we would have expected it to be single items, into the system, yes.

Q. And that was your expectation looking at that document, and arising out of its contents? 
A. Yes.

Q. You would have expected from that document at the time you received it that each of the articles - the postal articles would have a weight of 1.3 kilograms? 
A. That's exactly right." (T20.7) 
He passed that memorandum onto Dawes who gave evidence that in checking the first delivery of ULDs he used the memorandum for details such as the number of catalogues and the weight of each. His evidence in chief was as follows: " The prior advice form (referring to the memorandum) I was working off had been sent to the mail centre at Underwood by Australia Post Newcastle. I was expecting approximately 14,762 catalogues each of which was to weigh 1.3 kgs.
I needed to know the net weight of 1 catalogue so I pulled out 1 parcel, opened it, pulled out 1 catalogue and weighed it. I made a note of the weight.
I then put the catalogue back with the other 2 catalogues in the parcel, rebound it and put it back into the ULD. The ULD was then taken to the dispatch points at the centre for delivery to other states or to delivery points within Queensland.

When I ascertained the weight of 1 catalogue I recorded the weight on a check sheet I was using. The mailing statement was received from (Hermes) with the last lot of ULDs... the total weight of the consignment is recorded on the mailing statement. When I received the mailing statement and knew the total weight of the consignment I divided the weight of 1 catalogue into the total weight and from this exercise I ascertained the number of articles posted. I needed to compare the number of articles obtained from this exercise with the number of articles recorded on the (memorandum) ... the number of articles dispatched was approximately the same as that advised by Australia Post
Newcastle" (Exhibit X-D2, pars 9 and 10).

It was his evidence that he did not look at the address on the catalogue which he weighed nor at the address on the other catalogues in that bundle. He explained that " it (was) not my job to look at the addresses". In his experience it was not unusual for more than one copy of an item to go to a single address and that it was cheaper to send such articles as a single parcel rather than as individual items. He described the rate quoted by
Australia Post of $3.50 for the catalogues as being a cheap rate and one which "would as a matter of practice and in (his) experience lead (him) to believe that there may be more than one item going to the same address". I have little doubt that was a matter that had little bearing on the manner in which the deliveries were processed by Dawes. As far as Dawes was aware Australia Post had no guidelines to employees as to the manner in which parcels of 1.3 kilograms were to be bundled by a mailing house, such as Hermes, "before being put into the system".

It was the evidence of Yates that it was "not an uncommon practice for
Australia Post to accept parcel items ... bound together going to one address which (were) then processed as one item in their manner of posting". In the case of the delivery of the catalogues by Hermes, he observed that they came as "bundles of three catalogues bound into one parcel (with) nothing to say that they were going to three separate addresses and each parcel was processed as an individual item". He further stated that, in his experience, it was not the practice of Australia Post to break open each parcel it receives to ascertain if there are items within that parcel that are to be delivered to addresses other than the address visible on the parcel". It was his experience that "postal parcels are accepted from the customer in the form in which they are presented and they are delivered in that same form in the absence of special mailing instructions at the time of delivery". It was his evidence that parcels would only be opened for inspection of individual items if the parcel was marked with a postcode range which disclosed a variety of addresses of items within the parcel. He also stated that "a parcel might be broken open ... to check the weight of the individual items as was done in this case without inspecting individual addresses".

Yates distinguished "parcel post" from "Print Post" and "mail items". In the case of the last two categories, the practice was for bundled items to be accompanied by delivery instructions, such as, in the case of mail items, by bundling according to area codes identified by labelling on the bundle. In this way he stated Australia Post was alerted to the need for individual delivery of the contents of each bundle. He stated that Hermes was well aware of these processes as they used them every day. He stated that while Australia
Post accepts the bundling of items for delivery "there (was) a process to be followed and the process was not followed by (Hermes) in this case".

Yates agreed that the Australia Post memorandum of 23 January 1996 received by him from Newcastle and which he passed onto Dawes was in a form which involved "the lodgment of 13,000 to 14,000 odd separate postal articles into the system". In his evidence in chief, Yates evidenced certain guidelines put out by Australia Post in relation to "Print Post, Pre-Sort Letters" and in a document entitled "Print Post Charges" relating to various business services parcel post and the like. He agreed in cross-examination that they did not contain any directions in relation to the handling of parcels of greater weight than one kilogram. He confirmed that he regarded the delivery of the three catalogues bound as one as a single item or as one parcel.

In my opinion, Australia Post bears significant responsibility for the failure to deliver the catalogues in accordance with its agreement with Educational. I have outlined those matters above. Australia Post had the choice of either rejecting the delivery of the bundles as not in conformity with the agreement to deliver the catalogues "loose", or accepting it and untying the bundles to enable it to satisfy its obligations to Educational. It could not simply accept the bundles and proceed to misdeliver two thirds of the catalogues. I note that there was no system in place regulating the delivery of a consignment of parcels in excess of one kilogram nor any system regulating the bundling of items of such weight, nor is it clear that Australia Post had any system for ensuring that the consignment conformed with the terms of the agreed postage other than to check the number of items and the weight of each items against some record such as the mailing statement, or, in this case, the memorandum of 23 January 1996. It appears that the agreement between
Educational and Australia Post was arranged through Australia Post's "Country
North (Retail)" regional manager. The evidence does not disclose that the full terms of that contract were provided to the employees of Australia Post situated at Underwood prior to the delivery of the catalogues to Australia
Post.

The question of damages narrowed itself considerably during the hearing and still further during the course of submissions. Hermes prepared a schedule identifying the amounts claimed and those accepted by it as set out below: 
Item 
Amount Claimed 
Amount Accepted  --- 
Cost of 4000 catalogues (no dispute on quantum or recoverability) 
Postage on 4000 catalogues (no dispute on quantum or recoverability) 
Preparation for mailing (no dispute on quantum or recoverability) 
Telephone calls (dispute as to quantum)  ,652.00 ,131.00 .57 ,737.87  ,652.00 ,131.00 .57 .69  
Casual Labour (dispute as to recoverability) 
Internal Labour (dispute as to recoverability) 
Photocopying (no dispute as to quantum or recoverability) 
Computer programming (Invoice 53 is a cost of litigation not damage - bundle 32).

Travel Expenses (dispute as to recoverability) 
Loss of profit (dispute as to quantum) 
TOTAL  ,339.63 ,898.40 .60 .00 .80 ,868.00 ,625.87  .00 .00 .60 .00 .00 .00 ,287.26  
The amount claimed in relation to item (d) was reduced to $11,405.34 during the course of submissions. Educational also accepted during submissions the amount allowed by Hermes of $213 for item (h).

Item (d) telephone calls: This item of claim concerns the cost incurred by
Education in conducting surveys to ascertain the number and identity of addressees who did not receive the catalogue. I do not understand there to be any dispute as to the methods adopted by Educational in conducting those surveys nor was there any challenge to the accuracy of the results produced by it. No question of admissibility was raised as to the evidence of those surveys, the results of which were treated by the parties as evidence of the fact of non-receipt of the catalogues by addressees. There may be some doubt as to that evidentiary basis in the absence of evidence of the addressees as to that fact. However, I regard that matter as academic in that I think the evidence of the surveys is admissible as evidence of reasonable steps undertaken by Educational to mitigate its damage and as evidence of the reasonableness of the method adopted by Educational in quantifying its loss through the expert analysis of Paul Alexander Mather (Mather), a chartered accountant and partner of KPMG Pete Marwick. Briefly, the method of surveying took the form of a sample survey followed by a full survey of the addressees.
The survey was performed by telephone calls to the addressees for which the caller was provided with an instruction sheet by Educational together with a print out of addressees and their listed telephone numbers. The content of the required telephone call was proposed as follows: "QUESTION: "This is a courtesy call from the Education Experience .... have you received your copy of our salmon coloured, 1996 National School
Catalogue?" 
CUSTOMER: "Yes ...

Thank the customer for their time.

No ...

As there has been a slight postal delay we will contact you again in approximately one week to check that you have received our catalogue." 
The caller was then required to note on a report the outcome of the call and to complete a time sheet for all hours worked. The method of costing adopted by Educational was to divide the total hours spent as recorded by the staff on their time sheets by the total number of calls and to apply that time per call to the cost per minute of a call as advised by Telstra. This cost per call was then multiplied by the number of calls to give the amount claimed. The average time per call so calculated was 2.08 minutes. Hermes challenged that calculation on the basis that the total time recorded on the time sheets included the time of the caller in completing the survey other than the time spent in conversation with an addressee. In this Hermes was quite correct and
Educational reduced its claim to one based on an average time of one minute thirty seconds. There is no way of being precise about the quantification and
I think the reduction proposed by Educational is, probably, close to the mark.
I have rounded off the claim to $11,000 as representing a reasonable estimate of the telephone charges incurred in the surveys.

Item (e), casual labour: There was no dispute that this cost was incurred by
Educational. The issue raised by Hermes was based upon the assertion that
Educational had acted unreasonably in undertaking the surveys without the benefit of Hermes' offer to provide assistance in the rectification of the defective distribution of the catalogues. I think this issue reflects the commercial integrity of Hermes in its response to this problem. There is no doubting the bona fides of the Hermes offer. However, that is not the issue. I think the issue is the reasonableness of Educational in rejecting the offer and in insisting that the exercise of mitigating its loss remained firmly under its direction and control. I do not see much point in examining the detail of the Hermes offer. It does not appear to have contemplated a response as detailed as that pursued by Educational. However, it was made promptly and, if it had been taken up by Educational, the end result of Educational's effort in conducting surveys may have been achieved with possibly less cost to it. In an ideal world that may have been the better way to overcome the detriment to
Educational arising out of the faulty distribution of its catalogue.

However, I am firmly of the opinion that it was reasonable for Thomas to reject the offer, as he did, and to insist that he personally supervise control and direct the rescue operation that he considered essential in the interests of Educational. This turns on the view that I have formed of the importance of the catalogue as a marketing tool to Educational. The catalogues had been delivered to Australia Post by 31 January 1996 at a time when Thomas was in Germany acting in the interests of Educational. He was accompanied by at least one other representative of Educational. On 3 February 1996, he received the first hint of there being a problem in the distribution of the catalogue in a telephone conversation with his wife who was in Australia. This was followed up by a facsimile enquiry to Samantha Malone (Malone), a marketing assistant employed by Educational. Malone responded by facsimile of February 1996 setting out the problem as she then understood it. It was a concise and informative report on the situation and set out what steps were then being undertaken by Educational to overcome the problem. The effect of the evidence of Thomas could be stated as follows: The timely distribution of the catalogue was the life blood of Educational and the value of the catalogue as a major marketing tool depended upon its receipt by prospective customers of Educational by February each year. For those reasons the decision was taken within Educational that Thomas should return immediately to Australia to carry out whatever was necessary to rectify the situation. While the problem was recognised as an extremely serious one, the full extent of it had not been accurately ascertained at that time. Clearly, it was reasonable for Thomas to return to Australia. In doing so Educational forfeited a portion of the cost of air travel which had been paid for Thomas to travel to Europe and then on to Barbados. There should be allowed to Educational the costs of air travel thrown away in that manner. There is no dispute that the amount of those costs is as claimed.

I think it follows from those reasons that Educational should be allowed the cost of casual labour employed in the surveys. Once it is accepted that this item of claim is properly made, no further dispute arises as to quantum and the amount of $8,339.63 should be allowed.

Item (f), internal labour: As I understand this dispute, there is no issue concerning the quantum, as distinct from the entitlement of Educational to recover these costs, which consist of the costs of the time of Educational's staff and that of Thomas as spent in ascertaining the extent of the breakdown in distribution of its catalogue and in arranging for the redistribution of catalogues to those who had been identified as not receiving it. While the evidence is unchallenged that the time as evidenced by Educational was so spent, it was contended that those costs were part of the overheads of
Education and, accordingly, were not recoverable. There was no evidence to suggest that the costs represented costs additional to those that would have been incurred by Educational in any event as the wages or salary of the persons involved. For example, there was no evidence that the staff were engaged in overtime occasioning additional costs. Moreover, it is conceded by
Educational that the costs of staff are not costed in its accounts as a cost of sales. Further it is not suggested that Educational was operating in a loss situation so as to justify recovery of an overhead type cost of this kind.
When one adds to that the fact that the loss of profits claim of Educational is based on gross profits and so encompassing, to that extent, a recovery of overheads, I think this claim should be rejected.

Item (i): For the reasons given in respect of item (e) the amount claimed should be allowed.

Item (j), loss of profit: The quantification of this claim has been carried out by Mather in a series of reports to Educational for the purpose of these proceedings. In substance, Hermes and Australia Post challenge this quantification on the basis that (a) it is dependant upon assumptions which have not been made out; and (b) it is an inappropriate method of quantification when, it is submitted, there was an accurate and reliable method of quantification available to Educational but which it chose not to follow.

I do not regard either basis as having been made out. So far as is relevant in the reasons that follow, the assumptions made by Mather were justified on the evidence, particularly that of Thomas. As to his methodology, in Mather's initial report dated 5 August 1996 (the August report), he quantified
Educational's loss by identifying the different rate at which customers who received the catalogue placed orders and the rate at which customers who did not receive a catalogue but who still placed orders. He did this in respect of three periods, namely, from 5 February to 29 March 1996, from 30 March to 21
June 1996 and from 22 June to 29 July 1996, by which time it was estimated that the effect of the non-delivery, or of the delayed delivery, of the catalogues would have ceased. He calculated that the percentage of customers who placed orders and who had received the catalogue exceeded the percentage of customers who placed orders but who did not receive the catalogue by 9.9 percent, 3.3 percent and 1.1 percent respectively for those periods. He applied that rate to the total number of customers assumed not to have received the catalogue. This product he treated as the number of lost sales.
To that figure he applied the average value of orders placed to give a total value of lost sales. From this he calculated the gross profit lost. In his report of 21 November 1996 (the November report), Mather adjusted the base data which had been adopted by him for the purpose of the August report. In particular he dropped from the calculation of the total number of customers a group of 2,225 customers to whom catalogues were despatched by Educational directly. This adjustment was made as a result of Mather's consideration of a report dated 17 October 1996, submitted by Michael Edward Wayland (Wayland), a chartered accountant who had been retained by Hermes to comment on the August report. In Wayland's October report, he observed that the customer population adopted by Mather had included "a particular group of customers, totalling ,225 (who) were mailed catalogues directly by the Educational Experience Pty
Ltd prior to 5 February". In the November report, Mather accepted that this group "should be excluded from the calculations". Wayland also observed that
Mather did not appear to take account of the fact that customers who did not receive the catalogue "actually placed orders at a higher rate than customers as a whole". Mather acknowledged this fact in the November report and identified the substantial cause of that apparent disparity as being the inclusion in the group of customers who had not received catalogues of customers who placed orders customarily by "tenders or personal representation". These order values were removed by Mather from his calculations as a result of Wayland's criticism. These adjustments had the effect of reducing Mather's estimate of loss of profits from $102,719 to $73,868.

Wayland's October report listed eleven matters which he suggested put in question the reliability or validity of the methodology adopted by Mather in
Mather's August report. I have dealt with some of those matters but list the eleven matters as follows as they form a convenient basis for examining the loss of profits issue. This approach is encouraged by the approach adopted by the parties to this issue, namely, one in which there was a series of reports by Mather and Wayland commenting on each other's analysis of this issue. In addition to the reports to which I have referred, there was the report of
Wayland of 9 December 1996 (Wayland's December report) which commented upon
Mather's November report and the statement of Mather of 13 December 1996 (Mather's December report) commenting on Wayland's December report. The effect of this interchange of opinions was to narrow considerably the difference between the parties on this issue and to reduce the need for cross-examination to a point which did little to advance the position reached between the experts through their respective reports. The initial eleven areas of contention listed in Wayland's October report were as follows: "1. It is noted that the first mail out should have reached customers by 5
February, 1996. However, the second mail out, which would have reached customers by 29 March, 1996, appeared to redress any shortfall in the number of catalogues to be sent to customers and potential customers. The contract with Hermes Precisa Pty Ltd required that 14,999 catalogues be dispatched and by 9 February, 1996, as a result of surveys made it appeared that 13,778 customers received catalogues, compared with the contracted amount of 14,999.
It is noted however, for reasons that are not explained, a particular group of customers, totalling 2,225 were mailed catalogues directly by the Educational
Experience Pty Ltd prior to 5 February." 
This criticism is based on a confusion over the number of catalogues affected by the breakdown in delivery. The confusion arises out of the inclusion in the group of customer under consideration of the 2,225 who were mailed catalogues directly by Educational. I think that is now accepted by Hermes and Australia
Post. I think it is also accepted by those parties that 2,225 customers were in a discrete category and should not have been included in the loss of profits analysis. In any event, I think it is clear that those customers should have been excluded from the analysis if Mather's methodology was to be adopted. The inference that the effect of the original breakdown in delivery would have been overcome by the end of March with the re-posting of additional catalogues is at odds with the opinion of Thomas of the importance of the dispatch of the catalogues at the commencement of the educational year of the subject institutions. In substance I accept the evidence of Thomas on that aspect, subject to qualifications which are expressed later in these reasons.
It follows that the tentative expression of opinion by Wayland that the follow up delivery of additional catalogues would have "redress(ed) any shortfall in the number of catalogues to be sent to customers and potential customers" should not be accepted.
 "2. In the periods to 29 July, 1996 the total number of catalogues dispatched to customers and prospective customers was 18,160, however, a survey carried out appeared to show that 3,446 customer did not receive a catalogue. It is not known whether this survey can be relied upon and it is pointed out that there is at least one customer who is included in this number who was in fact dispatched a catalogue as part of the group of 2,225 dispatched by the company. (The Edge Hill State School, Queensland)." 
To a certain extent this matter continues the confusion over the number of catalogues intended to be dispatched to institutions under Educational's agreement with Australia Post. Again, I think it is accepted by Hermes and
Australia Post that this is so and that the 2,225 catalogues dispatched directly by Educational, on Mather's methodology, should be excluded as has been done by Mather in Mather's November report.
 "3. From the key data an attempt is made to conclude that the order rate (the percentage of customers placing orders) was less from the group of customers not receiving the catalogues when compared with the customers as a whole. The results of these calculations are questionable because the evidence shows that customers who did not receive catalogues actually placed orders." 
There is no issue that institutions who did not receive the catalogue as a result of the misdelivery of catalogues by Australia Post, nevertheless placed orders with Educational prior to the receipt of the follow up delivery of further catalogues to those institutions. I think the evidence is clear that, at least in part, this was due to the advertising activities of Educational in the prior year or years to 1996. I think Mather has adequately taken those factors into account in the methodology adopted by him. It is not a precise calculation of the effect of such factors but, in my opinion, it is a reliable method of evaluating those factors. They do not bring into question the validity of Mather's methodology to a point which is either "questionable or unreliable".
 "4. No analysis is made or explanation given as to why customers sho did not receive catalogues placed orders. It is likely that many of these customers would have had catalogues from the previous year and placed orders from the previous year's catalogue. If this is the case then it would seem to be important to differentiate customers who did not receive the catalogues but had catalogues from the previous year." 
This is really an elaboration of the matter raised in item 3 by Wayland and calls for no further comment by me except to say that the refinement suggested of differentiating customers who "had catalogues from the previous year" would seem to be quite unjustified given the approach adopted by Mather.
 "5. As already stated, the profile of the customers and the products has not been analysed in the approach by KPMG. An examination of the customer list shows the different types of customers in different geographical locations ranging from schools to pre-schools to Government departments, to play groups, and there are also different types of products all of which can impact upon the results of an analysis being undertaken for the purpose of determining a claim for loss." 
In my opinion, there is some substance in this criticism by Wayland. Hermes adduced evidence from a variety of institutions which, I think, clearly established that different institutions have markedly different purchasing procedures that do not fit the pattern of purchasers as evidenced by Thomas.
The differences stem largely from budgetary considerations. For example, the director of the Balmain Children's Centre gave evidence that her purchasing decisions were "determined solely by the Centre's budget" and that in 1996 those considerations caused her to defer purchasers of educational aids at the commencement of the school year. The Centre in fact purchased goods from
Educational in mid 1996. She also down played the importance of the receipt of a catalogue at the commencement of the year in evidencing her practice of requesting catalogues if catalogues were not to hand at the time she wished to make purchasing decisions. The co-ordinator of the Leichhardt Family Day Care
Centre explained that her Centre did not purchase educational aids from
Educational in early 1996 as she had satisfied her need for such things by purchases made at the end of the preceding school year. She also gave evidence that she usually made purchases before the end of the calendar year. The principal of Newtown Public School explained that the failure of Australia
Post to deliver the 1996 catalogue to the school at the commencement of the school year had no bearing upon her purchasing decisions as she usually obtained educational aids from a competitor of Educational. Furthermore, she evidenced the fact that purchases were made towards the middle of the school year as a result of the method of funding which the school received. The principal of Dulwich Hill St Paul Lacrosse evidenced the fact that that institution had purchased goods from Educational on 23 April 1996 and that the absence of a catalogue earlier in the year would have no bearing upon her decision to purchase educational aids. A director of Mosman Kinderland evidenced the fact that she was uninfluenced by the timing of the receipt of
Educational's catalogue as she usually purchased from Educational's competitors. The headmistress of Kent House of MLC School, Burwood stated that that institution's purchasing decisions were usually made at the end of the school year and, inferentially, that she would not have been influenced by the late receipt of the catalogue from Educational, particularly as the institution's purchases were for the most part obtained from Educational's competitor. The acting director of Blacktown Happy Days Kindergarten also stated that the purchasing decisions for 1996 were made by that institution at the end of the previous school year and so its purchases were unaffected by the later delivery of Educational's catalogue in 1996. Furthermore, she stated that she retained the previous year's Educational catalogues for such purchases. The director of Kookaburra Kindergarten also made purchasing decisions in the last quarter of the school year and so was uninfluenced by any delay in the receipt of Educational's catalogue.

Without examining in detail the whole of the evidence on that aspect, I think it is clear beyond argument that a significant number of institutions make purchasing decisions which would be completely unaffected by a delay of say a month in the delivery of Educational's catalogues at the commencement of the school year. It does not follow that Thomas' opinion should be rejected that it is important to have the catalogues delivered by the commencement of the school year to capture the majority of institutions which, in his opinion, made purchasing decisions about that time. I think his opinion evidence is born out by exhibit 10 which lists the total "net sales" of Educational for the 1994 and 1995 calendar years. Those figures, while they support Hermes' contention that purchasing decisions are made by educational institutions throughout the calendar year, clearly establish the importance of the first few months of the school year to marketing organisations such as Educational.
The month of March appears to be the most significant period in which purchases of its products are made, after adjusting for months which contain a four and five week period respectively. The same picture emerges from the graph and schedule forming exhibit 9A, although the graph and that schedule are somewhat distorted by the inclusion of sales other than the subject sales which are identified as "core" sales and by the absence of a differentiation of four and five week monthly figures. While I think, in substance, that
Thomas' opinion is correct, it is quite clear that purchases are made by different educational institutions throughout the calendar year. By way of example I set out the core sales for the year 1994 unadjusted for the differing four and five week monthly periods which are simply identified as the calendar months: "  
HOME PROMOTION 
CHRISTMAS CRAFT 
LITTLE TIKES 
CORE 
TOTAL  ---|---|---|--- 
JANUARY       
FEBRUARY     
MARCH     
APRIL     
MAY     
JUNE     
JULY     
AUGUST     
SEPTEMBER       
OCTOBER        
NOVEMBER        
DECEMBER        
TOTAL       "  (Exhibit 10) 
I consider that there is some substance in the further criticism of Wayland that the Mather analysis does not specifically address the "different types of products" which are offered for sale in Educational's catalogue. A superficial examination of the catalogue reveals the great number and variety of the products carrying an extraordinarily wide range of prices. To some extent,
Mather's methodology addresses this feature by a process of averaging the value of orders placed by the average customer of Educational. Whether these imperfections in the Mather methodology warrants its rejection as contended for by Hermes and Australia Post, or whether some adjustment is called for, while accepting the general validity of that methodology, is addressed later in these reasons. For present purposes I think it is sufficient to say that, in my opinion, the methodology is reasonable and, to some extent, addresses both the difference in timing of purchasing decisions of institutions and the varying value of purchases made by the various institutions.
 "6. It is noted that included in the total number of customers for the purpose of calculating the average order rate and average order value are the 2,225 customers who were dispatched catalogues directly by the company for reasons that are not explained. It is submitted that this group have responded by way of a higher order rate and higher order value than the general population.
This is analysed in more detail subsequently." 
This matter has been addressed by Mather correctly, in my opinion, in Mather's
November report.
 "7. The calculation for damages has taken into account two factors, a theoretical drop in the order rate, together with a calculation of the average order value. This average order value has been used to calculate lost sales and, again, no analysis is made of this figure by customer type, geographical area or products. The product range incorporates a wide range of prices for products of different types. There could also be a different gross margin for these as well." 
This in substance addresses the matter adverted to in item 5 and calls for no further comment at this stage other than to observe that the different gross margin in broad terms has been accommodated by Mather in his calculation of the loss of gross profit.
 "8. Because it appears that certain customers purchased off the previous years catalogue it would seem appropriate to consider new products listed in the catalogue for which orders may have been lost, together with prospective new customers who did not have customers who did not have the 1995 catalogue.
Neither of these factors were addressed in the KPMG report." 
These criticisms are closely associated with the matter raised in par 4. The refinement said to be missing from the Mather methodology is one that, if applied, would probably have the effect of tightening the accuracy of the
Mather analysis. However, I do not regard its omission as one which calls for the rejection of Mather's analysis, although it is a matter to which regard should be had in deciding whether Mather's quantification of loss should be accepted blindly.
 "9. The period that has been considered relevant for the calculations was that from 5 February, 1996 to 29 July, 1996. This period was examined at three points of time, the period to 29 March, the period to 21 June and the period to 29 July. The KPMG report states that the period from 5 February to 29 March is critical because it is that period when schools reopen and purchases for the coming academic year are considered. The sales analysis in Annexure A, however, indicates that sales are made throughout the year and it is noted that in 1995 and 1996 the month recording the highest sales was in fact May." 
The reference to the "highest sales (being) in fact May" is a misreading of the core sales of Educational as referred to earlier in these reasons which have also addressed the fact that substantial sales do take place throughout the school year to an extent that qualifies any proposition that the overwhelming preponderance of sales take place at the beginning of the school year.
 "10. There is an attempt in the analytical review to justify the methodology used. In our opinion this evidence shows that the month of May has been the highest month for sales in both 1995 and 1996 and it is submitted that there are too many unexplained factors influencing these figures for a reliable conclusion to be reached." 
As stated in relation to par 9 this criticism is based substantially on a misunderstanding of the monthly sales figures.
 "11. The most significant failing in the KPMG report is the failure to adjust in the calculation of loss for the sales value actually achieved from customers who did not receive the catalogues. Customers who did not receive the catalogue actually placed orders at a higher rate than customers as a whole. The effect of this calculation is shown later in this report." 
As stated earlier in these reasons, the criticism based upon the placing of orders by customers who did not receive a catalogue at a higher rate than customers of Educational as a group was addressed satisfactorily, in my opinion, by Mather in Mather's November report. The other criticism that
Mather failed to reduce his calculation of loss of profits by the value of sales received by customers who had not received catalogues, in my opinion, is misplaced. In an indirect way, Mather does take account of the value of sales from such customers by his methodology which calculates loss of profits by reference to the percentage difference between the number of customers who placed orders and who had received catalogues and the number of customers who placed orders and who had not received catalogues. If one accepts that broad approach as a generally reliable approach to the estimation of loss of profits, which I do, then, in my opinion, that methodology does not require further adjustment in the manner contended for by Wayland.

In Wayland's October report, Wayland applied those criticisms to the data adopted by Mather to show what, in his opinion, was a "catch-up" of sales in the post 30 March period resulting in a small loss of profits of approximately $5,000. I think that analysis and those conclusions should be rejected having regard to the deficiencies in the Wayland criticisms to which I have referred.

In Mather's November report he addressed each of those eleven criticisms by
Wayland. Most of the responses of Mather I have addressed. Two further matters should be noted. In relation to par 5 Mather's response was as follows: "The point is irrelevant as the industry is characterised by a large number of potential customers, large product ranges, small unit product sales and low average order values. There is little if any product differentiation between customer types or geographical locations as requirements are extremely homogenous." 
I am not sure that the evidence justifies complete confidence in that analysis.

As to par 7, Mather took issue with the gross profit margin calculations adopted by Wayland in Wayland's October report. As explained in the oral evidence of Mather, I think it is quite clear that the gross-profit margin used by Mather is correct when the management accounts of Educational are adjusted to ensure that the costs to be brought to account match the relevant profit periods. I think Mather has correctly made that adjustment and I do not understand Wayland to further challenge Mather's calculation of gross profit margin.

In Wayland's December report he comments on each of Mather's responses in
Mather's November report. In substance, he resurrects the criticisms raised in
Wayland's October report. In broad terms he challenges the premise that imposes a criticality on the timing of the dispatch of Educational's catalogues, referring to the evidence of continued sales throughout the school year, and challenges the assumptions of uniformity in customer characteristics and requirements.

Mather responded further to those matters in Mather's December report. These matters are taken up in more detail in the written submissions of counsel for
Hermes and Australia Post. The submissions of counsel for Hermes I think accurately take up the criticisms offered by Wayland. It is convenient however to refer to the submission of counsel for Australia Post which takes Wayland's criticisms a step further by asserting that there was source material in the possession of Educational which could have been made available to Mather so as to permit a true estimate of any loss of profits to be made. The submission was in the following terms: "13.1 The expert report of Mr Mather on which the plaintiff relies is fundamentally flawed by its speculative assumptions, when the material to determine an actual result (1996 sales by individual customer and dates when individual customer received 1996 catalogue) was available (T 44.17 - .25, .30 - .39) and not even inquired about, to establish the reason for a non- receiving customer not ordering, or the likely size of order: Ex D para 24 (and Ex 1 thereto); Ex L paras 4-6 (which show customers were identified by code); T20-21, 25-26, 27, 28-29, 30.53-32.10, 48, 50-51, 52-53, 54-56, 58, -61. There was no tracking of the percentage difference after 29 July 1996 between the 2 customer groups to see if the non-receivers increased their purchases once received to "catch up". Mr Mather's report cannot be relied upon, and the plaintiff has sought to adduce no other evidence of actual loss of profit. The actual sales figures for "core sales" do not seem to have been affected, even when looked at on a weekly rather than monthly basis, in
February to May [1996: Ex 9], 10. They show an improvement (on a weekly basis) over previous years." (Cross-Defendants Submissions, p 14 par 13.1) 
I am unable to agree that Mather's failure to adopt the course suggested by counsel on behalf of Australia Post should lead to a rejection of his methodology and of his estimate of profits. In my opinion, the approach proposed on behalf of Australia Post is one which, in many respects, is highly impractical, involving individual enquiry of customers and potential customers and confronting them with a series of questions which in many instances would necessarily be hypothetical. While I think some of the considerations raised in this submission may call for some qualification or at least the closer scrutiny of the conclusion reached by Mather, I am firmly of the view that the submissions made on behalf of Hermes and of Australia Post do not warrant a rejection of the general approach adopted by Mather.

However, I think there is some justification in the criticism of Mather's methodology in that I think there is bound to be some distortion arising out of his use of the average value of orders placed by customers in 1996 and the analysis of customers simply on the basis of those placing orders who received catalogues, expressed in percentage terms, and the determination of the percentage of customers placing orders who had not received catalogues. From a practical viewpoint, however, I think that methodology was a sensible and reliable way of attempting an estimate of Educational's loss of profit. I do not think one should lose sight of the fact that the overall delay in completing the delivery of catalogues was something in the order of seven weeks. The initial dispatch of catalogues to Australia Post was completed by
Wednesday 31 January 1996. The sample survey was conducted by Educational on 9
February. On 13 February the full survey of potential customers of Educational was commenced and that was completed on 12 March 1996, following which additional copies of the catalogue were lodged with Australia Post on 22 March .

I think the comparison of 1995 and 1996 core sales, while providing some significant support for the contention of Educational that its market base has a strong support in the first months of the school year, nevertheless adds some point to the contentions of Hermes and Australia Post that there is a strong sales influence in the latter part of the year, as reflected in exhibit
Ignoring sales for the month of December 1995, a comparison of the first eleven months of that year with the corresponding months of 1996 shows a significant growth in core sales in 1996 - some $723,520. While I do not think this is convincing evidence of the "catch-up" referred to by Wayland, I think it does emphasise the strength of the market throughout the school year, a feature supported by the evidence of principals of some of the educational institutions targeted by Educational.

However, still referring to exhibit 10, if one takes the core sales for the first eleven months of 1994, that produces a total of net sales of $5,647,891.
If one compared that with the comparable figure for 1995 of $6,467,025 and the comparable figure for 1996 of $7,190,545, there is revealed a steady growth in
Educational's market, although less in real and percentage terms in 1995-1996 than for 1994-1995. If one applied the growth rate in percentage terms for those eleven months for the 1994-1995 years as the growth rate for the -1996 years, and applied the appropriate gross profit margin to the difference between that theoretical sales figure for 1996 and the actual sales figure for 1996, one is left with a gross profit figure on the difference which is not dissimilar to the estimate of gross profit loss made by Mather.
Independently of those considerations, I have not been persuaded that the estimate as adjusted by Mather in Mather's November report of $73,868, requires any adjustment other than a rounding off, to give effect to the criticisms raised against his methodology on behalf of Hermes and Australia
Post. Accordingly the amount of $70,000 should be allowed as the loss of profits suffered by Educational as a result of Hermes' breach.

There remains to be considered the liability of Australia Post to Hermes.
Hermes has cross-claimed against Australia Post in contract, tort and for damages for proscribed conduct within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) and seeks indemnity or contribution in respect of any damages found against it pursuant to the Law Reform Act. The cause of action in contract was not pursued. Australia Post in its defence has raised its immunity under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/apca1989337/s34.html) of the [Australian Postal Corporation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/apca1989337/) (Cth) (the Postal Act) which section is in the following terms: "Immunity from certain actions . (1) An action or proceeding does not lie against Australia Post or any other person in relation to any loss or damage suffered, or that may be suffered, by a person because of any act or omission (whether negligent or otherwise) by or on behalf of Australia Post in relation to the carriage of a letter or other article by means of the letter service.

Subsection (1) does not apply if Australia Post provides the sender with a receipt for the article." 
Before considering that defence, I think it is necessary to scrutinise carefully the basis of any liability in tort of Australia Post to Hermes. I do not see the cause of action as one arising out of the loss of property, the responsibility for the care of which has been assumed by Australia Post.
Although some of the damages recoverable by Educational include the cost of reprinting catalogues, that claim arises more out of the misdelivery of catalogues rather than a claim for property lost. Accordingly, I do not see
Hermes' case as capable of resting successfully on an assumption of liability of Australia Post arising out of its possession of the catalogues. Hermes' case, I think, should be characterised as one in which the alleged duty of
Australia Post is said to arise out of the relationship of proximity. It is there that I think Hermes' case presents some difficulty. Putting aside the possible operation of <case> of the Postal Act it would have been open to
Educational to sue Australia Post in damages for breach of its contract to deliver the catalogues in accordance with Educational's instructions. I do not think it is a case in which Educational would be blocked in such an action by the defence that its claim rested upon its own default. True it is that I have found that the method of delivery of the catalogues by Hermes on behalf of
Educational was contrary to the terms of Educational's agreement with
Australia Post. However, the nature of that breach was such that, in my opinion, it was incumbent upon Australia Post to reject the delivery as contrary to the terms of its agreement with Educational or accept the delivery as a variation, the cost of which would have been to the account of
Educational, namely, the cost of disengaging the catalogues from the tied bundles. Australia Post did neither of those things. It accepted the bundles and then proceeded to distribute them other than in accordance with
Educational's directions as disclosed on the Cheshire labels attached to the flier associated with each catalogue. As a corollary to that analysis of the relationship between Educational and Australia Post, I think it follows that
Australia Post had a duty of care in its handling and distribution of the catalogues to avoid damage to Educational occasioned by a careless performance of its contractual obligations to Educational. I think this is a case where there were concurrent duties in contract and in tort owed by Australia Post to
Educational - always leaving aside the operation of <case> of the Postal Act.

I see no reason why comparable duties did not fall upon Hermes in its relationship with Educational: that is, that it had concurrent duties in contract and in tort, in the latter case to avoid damage to Educational occasioned by its careless performance of their contractual arrangements.
However, in my opinion, it does not follow that some correlative duty of care to Hermes reposed in Australia Post. If it existed, it would be a duty of care to avoid damage to Hermes arising out of Australia Post's handling and distribution of the catalogues, that damage consisting of the damages to which
Hermes was exposed to Educational by reason of its breach of its contract with
Educational. That, in my opinion, is an extremely difficult case to sustain and in my opinion, no such duty of care was owed by Australia Post to Hermes.
cf the reasoning of Clarke JA in National Australia Bank Ltd versus Hobit Pty Ltd & Ors [(1996) 29 NSWLR 377] at 404.

In my opinion, the case of Hermes is not advanced by its reliance upon [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). As I understand Hermes' case as based upon that section, it relies upon the acceptance of the catalogues in bundles by Australia Post without any objection by the latter as to the departure which that delivery represented from the contractual obligations of Educational. It is Hermes' contention that this constituted a representation arising out of silence on the part of
Australia Post that it would deliver the catalogues to the respective addressees as required under Australia Post's agreement with Educational.
There is much to be said for that proposition. As I have stated, the relationship between Educational and Australia Post was such that I consider the acceptance by Australia Post of the bundled catalogues constituted a variation to the agreement between those two parties. Consistently with that, in my opinion, lies a representation by Australia Post, in accepting from
Hermes bundles of catalogues under Australia Post's agreement with
Educational, that the catalogues would be delivered to their individual addressees. The question that is then posed is whether Hermes could be said to have relied upon that representation. That reliance has to be drawn from the fact that Hermes was aware that the contract between Educational and Australia
Post called for the delivery of the catalogues "loose", from the individual packaging of each of the catalogues which indicated individual delivery and from the temporary nature of the manner in which the bundles were tied such that Hermes understood, from Australia Post's acceptance of the bundles without objection, that Australia Post would remove the temporary ties and deliver the catalogues in accordance with Australia Post's agreement with
Educational. However, I have some considerable difficulty in accepting the proposition that, notwithstanding that implied representation and the reliance upon it by Hermes, Hermes is entitled to damages at the hands of Australia
Post represented by the damages to which Hermes was exposed by reason of its breach of contract with Educational. In my opinion the damages claimed by
Hermes were not damages suffered by the proscribed conduct of Australia Post rather than damages occasioned by Hermes' breach of its contract with
Educational. If all else failed, policy considerations should, in my opinion lead to that result.

There then remains the question of contribution under the Law Reform Act.
Again, leaving aside the possible operation of <case> of the Postal Act, it is my view that Australia Post and Hermes would have been liable to Educational if sued in tort and, having regard to my findings of the factors making up the respective failures of Hermes and Australia Post, I would apportion responsibility for those damages equally between Australia Post and Hermes.

For that finding to have any effect it is necessary to resolve the question whether <case> of the Postal Act provides Australia Post with an immunity from liability for such damages.

The section has been the subject of judicial consideration in this Division in the dicta of Giles CJ in Comm D in Westpac Banking Corporation & Anor v
Royal Tongan Airlines & Ors (1996) Aust Tort Reports 81-403. In that case his Honour took the view that the immunity extended to the carriage of a parcel, in that case consisting of a considerable number of bank notes, by the letter service as then identified in <case> of the Postal Act. That provision has undergone change since the decision in Westpac. At that time it was described as follows: "27 (1) Australia Post shall, as far as practicable, perform its function in a manner consistent with sound commercial practice.

The letter service shall be for the carrying by physical means (both within Australia and between Australia and places outside Australia) principally letters that Australia Post has the exclusive right to carry.

Australia Post shall make the letters service available at a single uniform rate of postage for the carriage within Australia, by ordinary post, of letters that are standard postal articles.

Australia Post shall ensure: that in view of the social importance of the letter service, the service is reasonably accessible to all people in Australia on an equitable basis, wherever they reside or carry on business; and that the performance standards (including delivery times) for the letter service reasonably meet the social, industrial and commercial needs of the
Australian community.

In this section: `Australia' does not include an external Territory to which this Act extends." 
It now reads: "Community service obligations . (1) Australia Post shall supply a letter service.

The principal purpose of the letter service is, by physical means: to carry, within Australia, letters that Australia Post has the exclusive right to carry; and to carry letters between Australia and places outside Australia.

Australia Post shall make the letter service available at a single uniform rate of postage for the carriage within Australia, by ordinary post, of letters that are standard postal articles.

Australia Post shall ensure: that, in view of the social importance of the letter service, the service is reasonably accessible to all people in Australia on an equitable basis, wherever they reside or carry on business; and that the performance standards (including delivery times) for the letter service reasonably meet the social, industrial and commercial needs of the
Australian community.

In this section: "Australia" includes Christmas Island and Cocos (Keeling) Islands, but does not include any other external Territory to which this Act extends." 
As <case> presently stands there is room for treating the operation of <case> as being directed to the service which Australia Post is compelled to provide under <case>, as distinct from the use of the letter service under some commercial arrangement which took it outside the scope of "ordinary post" as defined by <case>. This seems to be the sense of the reasoning behind <case>.
Indeed, in the explanatory memorandum it was stated that Australia Post's "protection from action (was) to be limited to the provision of the reserved letter service and (would) not apply where contractual arrangements are entered into for a service, for example, where Australia Post provides customers with receipts for articles lodged with it" (emphasis added) and, in describing the terms of the proposed <case>, it was stated that it: "Provides that Australia Post, or another person is not liable for financial loss or damages which are incurred in relation to the supply of a reserved service. This immunity is intended to apply only where losses or damages are incurred in the provision of reserved services or in the use of Post's facilities used to provide the basic letter service." 
However, as was pointed out in Westpac, the use of the phrase "letter or other article" in <case> must encompass the sending of a parcel other than a letter, by means of the letter post and so extending the immunity to other than the "reserved service" within the meaning of <case> of the Postal Act: otherwise, as was observed in Westpac, the use of the words "other article" is otiose. There has been no real dispute that Educational used the letter service for the delivery of its 1996 catalogues. In any event, I think the evidence discloses that the form of the delivery was by means of the letter service.

It then needs to be considered whether the contractual arrangements entered into by Educational with Australia Post were such as to bring the carriage of the 1996 catalogues outside the scope of <case>. To do this, it seems to me that the question is limited to ascertaining whether <case> applied.

The evidence concerning the provision by Australia Post of a receipt for the catalogues may be extracted from the following material. Dawes stated that the mailing statement, referred to earlier in these reasons, "was received from (Hermes) with the last lot of ULDs". The mailing statement to which he referred was on Australia Post's "Parcel & Post" letterhead, bears a caption `PARCELS CONTRACT", makes provision for the "Address of
Customer", sets out "DETAILS OF LODGMENT" under which is noted the delivery areas and the number of parcels in the consignment divided on an area basis as to number and weight of parcels.

It makes provision for and bears the signature of the customer, bears the received stamp of Australia Post of 1800 hours on 2 February 1996 and makes provision for acknowledgment of lodgment on behalf of Australia Post. It is a document of delivery and of receipt signed on behalf of the deliverer and
Australia Post.

The mailing statement is prepared in triplicate and self-carbonated. A copy is provided to the customer on delivery.

Australia Post also generated a document entitled "Australia Post Bulk Postage
Listing" dated 6 February 1996. It made provision for the insertion of details of the customer, the number of articles to which it related, the postal rate and the total postage. These details were completed on the document to show that Educational was the customer and that 14,990 articles at a postal rate of $3.50 totalling $52,496.50 was the subject postage. It bore an Australia Post
Bulk Postage receival stamp of 6 February 1997. It was a document used to check the consignment against the agreement between Educational and Australia
Post. It was only used by Australia Post where the receival centre does not have certain computer links with Australia Post's financial system. It was used for the raising of monthly accounts by Australia Post. The document is prepared in triplicate and a copy is provided to the customer.

Finally, Australia Post uses a "BULK POSTAGE DOCKET" the original of which is sent to the customer "to confirm the number of items which have been lodged, the rate and the rate per item and the total postage charged". It is compiled from the other documents to which I have referred. It was dated 7 February and identified the "Time Lodged" as being 11:15 am. It also provided details of the customer, the articles the subject of posting and the postal rate. There was provision for signing by the "Accepting and Checking Officer" which, in this instance, was unsigned. It carried an endorsement making it clear that it was not a statement of account and that a statement for payment would follow.

It was submitted on behalf of Australia Post that each of Australia Post's mailing statement, bulk postage listing and bulk postage docket does not constitute the providing by Australia Post of a receipt for the articles to the sender of the articles within the meaning of <case>.

Of the mailing statement, it was submitted that it "was the only document passing between (Australia Post and Hermes) contemporaneous with delivery of the catalogues; (that) it was not a receipt; it contained no acknowledgment of payment (or, to the extent this is a criterion in the circumstances, of delivery) or a discharge in that respect." 
As to the bulk postage listing and the bulk postage docket, it was submitted that as they were "issued after the event (they) do not constitute the relevant contemporaneous acknowledgment to be a receipt; at best they are a later record or source document for administrative ... purposes ...".

There is nothing in <case> of the Postal Act that requires contemporaneous provision of a receipt upon delivery, although that may be the usual circumstance in which a receipt for goods is given. Nor is there anything in s (2) that calls for the receipt to acknowledge the payment of money. In fact s 34(2) is concerned with a record of receipt of articles. I have no doubt that the mailing statement with its stamped acknowledgment of the receipt of the subject catalogues by Australia Post, with the provision of a duplicate to the "sender", together with its contents and purpose, give it an unmistakable characteristic of a receipt provided by Australia Post. Probably, the bulk postage listing and docket should be similarly characterised, particularly when one has regard to the use of Australia Post's receipt stamp on the bulk postage listing, the contents of the documents and the provision of copies to the customer. I do not regard the passage of time between first delivery of the catalogues to Australia Post and the issuing of these documents as affecting the character of receipt which I consider attaches to these documents.

Accordingly, I am of the view that <case> affords no defence to an action for damages in contract or in tort at the hands of Educational and, if sued in tort by Educational for its careless performance of its agreement with
Educational, that Australia Post would have been liable for the damages suffered through the non-delivery of the 1996 catalogues. For the reasons earlier given, I consider that the damages should be apportioned equally between Australia Post and Hermes. The parties are requested to bring in short minutes in accordance with these reasons, including calculations of any interest calculated to 21 February 1997, together with any submissions as to costs which the parties may wish to present.
 * * * 
