

Bott versus Meagher and Anor [1996] NSWSC 154 (24 May 1996) 
BOTT versus MEAGHER & ANOR /95 
FRIDAY 24 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Stephen Forrester Bott, seeks a declaration that the adjudication of the Licensing Court made on 25 September 1995, that it had no jurisdiction to hear and determine the application of the plaintiff was made in error of law. A further order is sought that the Licensing Court's adjudication of that date that it had no jurisdiction to hear and determine the application, be set aside. The plaintiff seeks consequential relief including an order that the application made by the plaintiff for conditional removal from 79 Lachlan Street, Forbes to Cnr Rooty Hill Road North and Bottles Road, Plumpton be remitted to the Licensing Court for the purposes of the conditional granting of the removal application.

The particular ground relied upon by the plaintiff is that the Licensing Court of New South Wales wrongly interpreted <case> of the [Liquor Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) (the Act).

An original application for the conditional grant of an off-licence (retail) at certain premises at Plumpton was lodged by one Danuta Margaret Szubert on March 1993. Prior to that date the relevant development consent had been granted by the Blacktown City Council on 26 June 1991. The Blacktown Council also issued a building permit in respect of the proposed works on 22 January
It would appear that on 26 June 1993 the development consent would have lapsed unless the development had commenced in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s99.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) (the
EPA Act). On 23 July 1993 the Blacktown City Council advised that it was satisfied that commencement of the relevant development had been satisfied and further confirmed that the development consent had not lapsed.

On 14 and 15 September 1993 the Licensing Court heard evidence in respect of the conditional grant application. At the request of the parties to that application the Court agreed to determine in the first instance the issue of "needs" under <case> of the Act. It would appear that the then objectors,
Liquorland, had served upon the applicant notice in accordance with <case>(11) of the Act. Upon the determination of the "needs" issue the parties also agreed that any remaining issue arising under <case>(10) of the Act. be deferred for later consideration, on the subsequent lodging of a removal application.
On 20 December 1993 the Court found that there was a need for a liquor licence at the proposed premises, and that the applicant had discharged the onus in respect of the needs objective. It does not appear that any issue had been raised in relation to whether the development consent had not lapsed or otherwise questioning or challenging the statement of the Council that it had not lapsed. The application apparently did not proceed to finality because of the provisions of <case>(10) of the Act. This section precludes the grant of a new licence where there is available "at a reasonable market price for removal to the premises" an existing off licence retail.

On 28 June 1994 the Blacktown Council again confirmed that the development consent was still current. On 27 October 1994 the Blacktown Council issued a further building permit.

After some considerable delay the applicant lodged the application for removal of the licence at Forbes. On 18 January 1995 application was lodged for the conditional removal of the licence to the proposed premises at Plumpton. That application was made pursuant to <case> of the Act. It was returnable before the
Licensing Court on 20 February 1995. That application came on for hearing on 3 and 10 August 1995. The original objectors, Liquorland, to the grant application did not wish to be heard further in respect of that application, nor did they lodge an objection to the removal application. When the removal application came before the Court there was a new objector - Woolworths
Limited by its liquor controller, the first defendant, Robert Michael Meagher.
Woolworths Limited was not an objector to the grant application, although one of its representatives had given evidence on behalf of the objectors.

The matter again came before the Licensing Court in August 1995. The new objector then sought to re-open the earlier determination of the Licensing
Court in respect of the needs objection. By majority the Licensing Court ruled in favour of the objector. At the resumed hearing, the Court also made a direction under regulation 32(2) of the [Liquor
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/lr216/) that each of the applications should be heard together.

In respect of the removal application an issue arose as to whether the applicant had complied with the requirements of <case> of the Act. That section, relevantly, provides as follows: "(1) An application: for removal of a licence may be made as a conditional application if the premises to which the licence will relate, or to which the licence is to be removed, are premises proposed to be erected, or premises proposed to be added to or altered, in accordance with an approved plan lodged with the application or are premises already erected in respect of which there is lodged with the application any consent required under another Act for the proposed use, or proposed change of use, of the premises.
 
In this section: "approved plan" in relation to proposed licensed premises, or a proposed addition to or alteration of licensed premises, means a plan of the proposed premises, or of the proposed addition or alteration, that is accompanied by: each approval that, by the Local Government Act, 1919 or any other Act, is required for the carrying out of any work represented by the plan; and any consent required under the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) for the carrying out that work." 
In respect of this matter, in its written decision the Licensing Court set forth the contention of the objectors. It was that the original development consent which had been granted on 26 June 1991 by the Blacktown City Council, had lapsed and that consequently the copy of the consent which had been lodged in purported compliance with <case> was not a valid consent and did not satisfy the requirements of that section. It appears that the applicant argued in relation to such contention of the objector that firstly, at the relevant dates the consent was still in force by virtue of certain works having commenced pursuant to the consent, and, secondly, that <case> only required the consents to be lodged and that no inquiry as to their status or validity was permitted or required by <case>.

It was accepted both in the proceedings before the Licensing Court and before me that the requirements in <case> are conditions precedent to jurisdiction of the Licensing Court: Minahan versus Baldock <case>; [(1951) 84 CLR 1]; Hill & Ors versus King & Ors [(1993) 31 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281993%29%2031%20NSWLR%20654 "View LawCiteRecord" )

In respect of the August 1995 proceedings, there was no dispute between the parties, that the relevant law applicable in determining whether the development consent of the Blacktown City Council was still in force was to be found in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s99.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/). The relevant parts of that section (prior to the 1993 amendments) provide: "(1) A consent granted under this Division to a development application shall lapse - unless the development the subject of that consent is commenced except as provided in subparagraph (ii) - within years (or, if the consent authority so approves in accordance with subsection (3), 3 years of the date upon which that consent becomes effective in accordance with [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s93.html) (in this section referred to as 'the prescribed date'); or 
For the purposes of subsection (1) (a) where development comprises the erection of a building or the carrying out of a work or the subdivision (involving physical work) of land (including, where applicable, the subsequent use of that building when erected, the work when carried out, or that land when subdivided) that development is commenced when building, engineering or construction work relating to that development is physically commenced on the land to which the consent applies; or ".

It is appropriate to refer to certain other matters that appear from the written reasons of the Licensing Court. In its reasons the Court said (at pp -5): "On 28 June, 1994 the Blacktown City Council wrote to Construction Management
Services Pty Limited in the following terms: 'This letter is to confirm that the development consent has been substantially commenced, by the dedication of the Open Space and Drainage land and creation of 
Lot 42, (see condition 3 of the Notice of 
Determination); and the physical commencement of the development has been satisfied by the diversion and extension of the sewer line onto the subject property." 
On 10 August 1995, the council wrote to the applicant's solicitors in similar terms to the above and also attached a copy of a letter sent to Michael
McCarthy & Associates on 23 July 1993. The relevant portion of that letter states: "Please be advised that Council is satisfied that commencement of the abovementioned development has been satisfied by the following:
Condition 3: Dedication of the open space and drainage land and creation of Lot 42.
Condition 7: Physical commencement of the in accordance with [section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s99.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/), has been satisfied by the diversion and extension of the sewer line onto the property.

Council can thus confirm that the development consent has not lapsed.

Whether the Council's opinion is right or wrong it is of the view that the consent was still current on 23 July 1993, 28 June 1994, 27 October 1994 (being the date of the second building permit) and 10 August 1995.
Consequently it is reasonable to assume that the applicant could carry out the various building works authorised by the development consent and building approval without any fear that the council would object to the undertaking of those works." (my emphasis).

The emphasised words are also of importance for reasons that will appear.

As I understand the submissions made before the Licensing Court, and inter alia, repeated in the proceedings before me, other arguments were advanced in respect of the parties' positions. On behalf of the plaintiff it was submitted that it was no part of the Licensing Court's task to "entertain collateral challenges to the validity of the consents", and that the consent must be accepted as being valid unless shown to be otherwise by some competent authority. Further it was submitted that the Licensing Court should not, in effect, go behind the face of the documents or expression of opinion by the local council.

Indeed, as I understand Mr Whealy QC's submissions both before the Licensing
Court and before me, despite the Blacktown Council's view that the commencement of the development had been satisfied and its confirmation that the development consent had not lapsed, the Licensing Court was not required to accept such a view but in effect was required by <case> to carry out a fresh and independent examination of that very matter. He also submitted that it was not necessary to go behind the face of the development consent. Indeed his submissions were not directed to "a collateral challenge", to the validity of the initial approval or consent, but rather to the issue, as to whether the development consent remained in force or had lapsed.

The Licensing Court appears to have accepted that it was not the appropriate
Court to determine the validity or otherwise of consents and permits issued by the local authority. It held that the Land and Environment Court had been vested with jurisdiction in relation to such matters. It nevertheless concluded, "that the requirements of section 40 require this Court to very reluctantly become involved in such issues". It then proceeded to become involved in such issues particularly the issue as to whether the development consent had lapsed despite the Blacktown Council's clear and one may think unequivocal statements and confirmations that it had not. Of course, it is the plaintiff's contention that the Licensing Court should not have become involved, not only for the reasons cited by Smart J in Hill & Ors v
King & Ors (10 June 1993, unreported) and referred to in part at p 6 of its reasons, but also for the reasons given on appeal in that case: see
Hill & Ors versus King & Ors [(1993) 31 NSWLR 654.] At pp 660
E-F and 661 the Court of Appeal appears to have doubted that the Licensing
Court proceedings should be used to question or to challenge the validity of development consents. In Hill the view of the Council was that the development consent was not required. Here, the view of the Council was that the consent was current. Mr Whealy's attempt to distinguish Hill should not be accepted. What was said by the Court of Appeal would appear to meet or address both situations.

Mr Lawry submitted to the Licensing Court and repeated to me, that the
Licensing Court in consequence of its ruling (at p 7) that "in the circumstances the applicant must establish not only that they hold the requisite consents and approvals but that such consents and approval remain in force", had revealed not only error in relation to the requirements and construction of <case> of the Act, but that this also was a ruling in effect entertaining "collateral challenges" which the Licensing Court could not, or should not entertain. It appears to me that there is much to be said for Mr
Lawry's view. In my opinion the Licensing Court conducted in effect a collateral challenge-type inquiry. As was said by the Court of Appeal in
Hill's case at p 661: " ... although we will deal with this issue we would not wish to give any encouragement to the view that the objectors are entitled to entertain collateral challenges to the validity of building approvals and development consents." 
In my opinion what the Licensing Court ultimately did was in effect to give encouragement or support for the type of approach that the Court of Appeal in
Hill suggested ought not to be given, namely to permit a collateral challenge of the specific type that I have discussed. The Licensing Court appears to have taken the view that the Court was not required to accept as binding upon it the Council's stated position or view. Indeed, in stating its position at p 7, the Licensing Court seems to have adopted a construction of s of the Act that appears at first blush not to be supported by the language of that section, but which involves the Licensing Court having to be satisfied at the hearing of the application, of the then currency of the approval and the consent. It does not appear to me that <case> supports such a view. However, if I be wrong on this point for reasons which will appear the consents and approvals, were in the event in force at all relevant times.

Further, there is much to be said for the view that <case> on its proper construction prevents a collateral attack on the Council's view that the consent had not lapsed. Nor would I support a view that it is really part of the Licensing Court's role to examine the correctness or otherwise of the
Council's view, or to form a view, that it was wrong.

It thus appears clear that the Licensing Court was not prepared to unquestionably accept the Council's view that development consent had not lapsed, or that the works had commenced. It permitted those matter to be questioned. It did so upon the basis in effect that the requirements of <case> required it to become "reluctantly" involved in such issues. It is appropriate to here repeat part of a passage earlier quoted by me. The Licensing Court said (at p 5): "Whether the Council's opinion is right or wrong it is of the view that the consent was still current on 23 July 1993, 28 June 1994, 27 October 1994 (being the date of the second building permit) and 10 August 1995.
Consequently it is reasonable to assume that the applicant could carry out the various building works authorised by the development consent and building approval without any fear that the council would object to the undertaking of those works." 
Several comments may be made about this passage. Firstly, it clearly indicates the Licensing Court was not prepared to unquestionably accept the Council's view that the consents were valid. Secondly, the finding as to the reasonable assumption referred to could suggest or could imply that the works could not be carried out if the consent was not on foot. The passage would also suggest that the Licensing Court was not merely finding that the consent was thus on foot, but that the applicant could carry out the works authorised by both the building approval and the development consent, without objection from the
Council. To put it another way, the Council would not be able to stand in the path of performance of the works because of its view that the consents and approvals were in place. Indeed, it might also be thought that the statements by the Council amounted to representations by the Council and for that matter, and an applicant has acted upon them. It would perhaps be difficult for the
Council to resile from its stated position although I express no concluded view on this matter: The Commonwealth of Australia versus Verwayen (1990) 170
CLR 394. So far as the Council is concerned the works may still be carried out, despite the Licensing Court's view that the consent has lapsed. It may not accept the Licensing Court's view as not being bound by it. Indeed, the
Licensing Court has no power to prevent the carrying out of the work. The finding in effect, that the Council is wrong in its view, has a potential for the production of a somewhat artificial or even anomalous situation.

It would also appear that in consequence of the Court's views as to what the applicant's had to establish, apart from the evidence adduced as the Blacktown
City Council's views, oral evidence was called on the question. Such evidence also included the evidence from a town planner in effect to contradict the
Council's stated views and opinions. Such evidence would not have been necessary if the Council's statement, confirmation and views had been accepted.

Ultimately, after hearing evidence the Licensing Court concluded as follows (at pp 8-9): "In the light of that evidence there is nothing to support the contention that construction work relating to that development has been physically commenced on the land to which the consent applies. Even the work in respect of the sewer, except for the length of approximately one metre, was not carried out on the land to which the consent applies. Accordingly, we are of the view that in terms of [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s99.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/), the consent has lapsed. That being the case we are of further view that section (1) has not been complied with. Since section 40(1) is a condition precedent to jurisdiction (Hill versus King) the applications must be marked accordingly.
However, to cater for the possibility that we may be held to have erred in arriving at the conclusion, and because of the protracted nature of these proceedings and the departure of Mr Swanson from this Court to the Local
Courts Bench, we consider it desirable to record what would otherwise be our findings in respect to the 'needs' objection." 
This finding that the consent has lapsed is consistent with a construction of s 40 that the Licensing Court is entitled to be satisfied at the hearing of the currency of the consent (and approval). The finding is consistent with the view of the Licensing Court that it is not bound to accept as binding upon it the views of the Council. It is a finding that would suggest that despite
Hill's case, a collateral challenge may be made upon the Council's view that the development consent is current and remains in force. It is a finding that in a sense appears to be inconsistent with its finding at p 5 that the applicant could carry out the various building works, authorised by the development consent without any fear of the Council's objection.

The Licensing Court ultimately concluded that the applicant had discharged the onus which they were said to bear. No proceedings have been brought challenging such a finding. The Court said (at p 14): "If it was not for the finding which we have previously made in relation to the jurisdiction issue we would grant the removal application. However, because of that finding each application is marked 'No jurisdiction'." 
I turn now to consider the additional submissions put to me by the plaintiff.
Some were in part a more detailed elaboration of arguments advanced to the
Licensing Court. Mr Lawry argued that the only relevant matter about which the
Licensing Court was to be satisfied for it to have jurisdiction was that there was lodged an approved plan with the application: ss 40(1) and 40(6). I believe that he correctly makes the valid point that there was never any dispute that such a plan was lodged; nor was there dispute that such approval and such consent were valid. This submission was rejected by the Licensing
Court. At p 7 it appears to have adopted a view that it has to be satisfied at the hearing (my emphasis) of the then currency of the approval and consent. I am of the view that the plaintiff's submission is correct and that the Licensing Court's approach is inconsistent with the proper interpretation of <case>. On this approach the Licensing Court had jurisdiction. The defendant's construction that the consent must be current appears to look outside the actual words of <case> and is rather based upon a purpose of the enactment argument. I shall return to discuss further that purpose in due course.

Secondly, it was submitted that if, contrary to the first submission that the definitions in <case> are to be given such a meaning, the phrase in each para " ... the carrying out of ... work" requires that the approval and consent still be current when the application is lodged (my emphasis) with the
Licensing Court (as also asserted by the defendant), that position was in any event reached and satisfied. The plaintiff's argument may be stated as follows. With the conditional removal application in the name of the plaintiff, Bott, there was heard at the same time the application by Mrs
Szubert for the conditional grant of a licence. The application for conditional grant was made on 16 March 1993. The hearing commenced on 14
September 1993. The parties to that application asked for the Court to first determine the issue of "needs" under <case> of the Act; with any removal application to be dealt with later. The Court having found that there was a need for a liquor licence at the proposed premises, an existing licence thought to satisfy <case>(10) was found and an application made to the Court for its removal. When that matter came before the Court there was a new objector,
Woolworths by its liquor controller, the first defendant. At the resumed hearing, the Court made a direction under clause 32(2) of the [Liquor
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/lr216/) that both applications be heard together. It was submitted to me that in the circumstances the proposed premises for the grant and for the removal application were identical, hence the approval and the consent were really the same. At no stage before the Licensing Court was there any challenge to the validity of the approval and consent, nor to the currency of both as at the time of making the application for conditional grant on 16 March 1993 (still within the two year period). This alternative submission made by the plaintiff does not appear on the face of it to be one acted upon by the Licensing Court.
It does not appear on its face to be a submission that reflects the actual words in <case>. However, were it necessary for me to so decide, I would be disposed for reasons referred to, to accept this second alternative submission as advanced by the plaintiff.

The third alternative submission advanced on behalf of the plaintiff, is that if, the defendant's primary submission be correct, to the effect that the
Licensing Court is entitled ("required")to be satisfied at the hearing, of the then currency of the approval and consent, then in any event the statement by the Council that it is satisfied that its approval and its consent are still valid is binding upon the Licensing Court and there was in place each approval and each consent required for the carrying out of the work: see also Hill's case. In relation to this matter it appears that the Council was of the view that the consent was still on foot in 1993 and 1994 and perhaps more significantly as on 3 and 10 August 1995. The 10 August was the second day of the hearing. If the Council could not object to the undertaking of the works such of itself might also well suggest that the building approval and development consent were thus on foot. I have already pointed to the Court's findings on this point (at p 5) wherein it appears to have accepted that the various building works could be carried out without Council objection. In my view there is much force in the submission of the plaintiff made both to the
Licensing Court and to this Court that the Licensing Court was bound to accept the views of the Council, and should not have gone behind the Council's documents, its expressions of opinions or statement(s) as to its position.
Next, the statements of the Blacktown Council reflected how the consent authority regarded the standing of a consent which it had issued. It was the only authority which could permit works to be done. It seems to me that there is force in the plaintiff's arguments that the Licensing Court could not reasonably determine whether such consent was still on foot, indeed it had no jurisdiction to do so let alone the expertise to commence that task.

In argument in support of the last submission it was put that the relevant question for the Licensing Court to ask really in effect was: "Will the consent authority permit the building work as depicted in the plans lawfully to be executed and the proposed use as a liquor store to be commenced?".
Whilst not endorsing such an approach, nevertheless, posing such a question enables the plaintiff's submission to be also given some further practical content and meaning. There can be but one answer to such a question. The
Council has indicated that it has and will so permit. One finds it difficult to understand why such a view without more, is not of itself acceptable to satisfy the jurisdictional requirements of <case>. Indeed, the Court as I have said appears to have answered the question as postulated in a manner favourable to the applicants. It is pertinent to repeat part of what it said on this point (at p 5): " ... that the applicant could carry out the various building works authorised by the development consent and building approval without any fear that the
Council (my emphasis) would object to the undertaking of the works." 
In my view such a finding would further or alternatively support the conclusion that the requirements of <case> were fully satisfied and the
Licensing Court possessed jurisdiction. There were in place all required valid and current approvals and consents. Thus even if it were necessary to adopt a construction of <case> to the effect that the Licensing Court is entitled to be satisfied at the hearing of the then currency of the consent (and approval) then in my view the plaintiff has established such matters by reference to the
Council's statement and position, and that the Licensing Court had jurisdiction.

I turn to several of the other arguments advanced by the plaintiff in support of the claim that the Licensing Court had jurisdiction. It seems to me that the collateral challenge anomaly is supported by an illustration given by the plaintiff in argument. The Council has said the work can be carried out and when completed the business of a liquor store can be conducted there. The
Licensing Court has said that: "although the Council permits the work to be done and the business to be conducted, and although we would grant a liquor licence for that business to be conducted, yet we cannot grant that because we disagree with the Council's conclusion". Such a situation would suggest a surprising approach. Clearly the Council cannot force the Licensing Court to issue a licence. The matter can be tested another way. Assuming a dispute with the Council and an appeal to the Land and Environment Court in proceedings involving inter alia the question of whether the development consent had for example, lapsed on the eve of the Licensing Court hearing, and the Land and
Environment Court had held that it had not. What would have been the status of that decision: see [Land and Environment Court Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/) [s (5).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s39.html)
The decision on any appeal to that Court would become the final decision of the body whose decision is the subject of appeal to that Court. Some of the difficulties and matters to which I have referred are not answered by the defendant's argument to the effect that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) in its present form is apt in extreme cases to give rise to questions of difficulty, (yet claiming no such difficulty arose in the instant case) and that the resolution of these difficulties for the Legislature. Nor are such difficulties dealt with by a construction of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) which permits, as the defendant also suggested that in some cases [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) may involve a duplication of functions. Once it be conceded that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) may involve in some cases a duplication of functions, this of itself is a good reason for rejecting a construction of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) that might create that situation: see Hill's case. The defendant's arguments of the type mentioned also supports a rejection of its approach to the construction of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html)
Likewise, I would not regard as attractive the defendant's submission that if, for example, the Land and Environment Court made a decision in relation to the currency of the development consent in an appeal, then the Licensing Court in considering whether the jurisdictional requirements of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) might in effect still form a view about it, and if it accepted the decision, then act upon it. This approach would suggest that in such a situation, it would not be bound to act upon that decision for the purposes of meeting the jurisdictional requirements of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) 
The defendant also submitted that the Licensing Court is required to be satisfied as to the matters set out in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) and that in the circumstances of this case the question posed by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s40.html) was whether the consent has expired, or, whether its life has been extended by virtue of the factual situation contemplated by <case>(a) of the EPA
Act. It submitted that the true answer was in the factual conclusion by the
Licensing Court. I believe I have said enough to indicate why I should reject these submissions.

Indeed there are some other reasons as to why the defendant's arguments should not be accepted. Once the evident policy in <case> is appreciated and allowed to take its proper place in the process of interpretation, any suggested difficulty in relation to it can be avoided and in reality would disappear:
Tickle Industries Pty Limited versus Hann <case>; [(1973-1974) 130 CLR 321] per
Barwick CJ at 330. Indeed, as his Honour said (at 331) it is a sound rule of statutory construction that a meaning of language employed by the legislature which would produce an unjust or capricious result is to be avoided. The approach of the defendant has the potential to produce such an unjust or capricious result.

Further it seems to me appropriate to also bear in mind the need to give proper force and effect to the language used by the Parliament whilst at the same time preventing the frustration of the remedial and reformatory objectives which Parliament had in mind in enacting <case> of the Act. If there be ambiguity or uncertainty on the face of <case>, it is appropriate to have regard to the Second Reading Speech of the Attorney General.

The relevant Second Reading Speech (3 April 1990) offers no decisive guidance. Nevertheless, whilst the Minister speaks in some generalities, his speech, upon the assumption that regard may be had to it offers some guidance.
In his speech the Minister said (at p 1497) of Hansard: "[T]he amendments proposed by the bills will overcome much of this duplication by requiring applicants for new licences to present development and building approvals from local councils to the court. This will mean that approvals must be obtained from councils prior to lodging the applications with the court.

In the present circumstances applicants for liquor licences may first obtain the approval of the Licensing Court, but ultimately be refused development approval by council. In those situations there is a loss of time by the court, police and other parties. The proposals will still require the approval of both court and other parties. The change is one of procedure only. As well, the existing appeal rights from the decisions of the council and the court will be retained. Police will not be required to provide written reports on these matters. However, police may object if there is concern about any aspect of the application. In effect this will give local councils the primary responsibility for the standard of licensed premises as is the case with other buildings. The proposal represents a logical and cost-effective procedure.
Applications will be processed by councils as part of their normal administrative functions with no additional costs. As I have said, council decisions will continue to be subject to appeal rights. The Licensing Court will maintain its present oversighting role, and may refuse applications where it is of the opinion that the premises are unsuitable. The bills will also remove the present administrative burden for police in providing written reports where licensees wish to undertake alterations to licensed premises.
This will result in considerable saving of police time." 
Were it necessary to so find, I consider that the Minister's speech is supportive of the plaintiff's construction of <case> and of the arguments advanced on behalf of the plaintiff.

The defendant's primary submission that the consent must be current at the date of the hearing in my view is not supported by the actual words of <case>.
It would seem to me that the legislative purpose was that by the enactment of s 40 itself (my emphasis) there would be an avoidance of possible confusion and duplication between Local Government and licensing authorities.
Acceptance of the defendant's submissions would lead to confusion and duplication, neither of which would be desirable and both of which <case> is intended to prevent. As I have said the defendant's argument acknowledges that s 40 on its proper construction may in some cases involve a duplication of functions. Yet in my view apart from the language of <case>, even if one were to consider the purpose of the enactment, it seems to me that it was enacted to exclude inter alia such a duplication of the type referred to by the defendant.

Indeed, were the defendant's arguments correct such could also frustrate the remedial and reformatory objective which Parliament had in mind in enacting s
If the defendant's arguments are to be accepted then such could create uncertainty of position of parties before the Licensing Court and affect the length (and the cost) of proceedings in that Court. It could invite "collateral challenges" of the type discussed. I say nothing further as to the anomalies and other difficulties created if the defendant's submissions were to prevail.

In my view the plaintiff has established that there has been compliance with s and that the Licensing Court has jurisdiction. The requirement in <case> as to conditions precedent to jurisdiction have been met. In my view the
Licensing Court was in error in holding that it had no jurisdiction.

I make the following declaration and orders:
The declaration sought in paragraph 1 of the amended summons.
The order sought in paragraph 2 of the amended summons.
An order that the application made by the plaintiff for conditional removal from 79 Lachlan Street, Forbes to Cnr Rooty Hill Road North, and
Bottles Road, Plumpton be remitted to the Licensing Court of New South Wales for the purpose of the conditional granting of the removal of the application.
An order granting liberty to the plaintiff to apply and seek such further or other orders as may be considered appropriate to give effect to my reasons herein.
An order the defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
