

Regina versus G M Khan [2001] NSWSC 1356 (23 November 2001) 
REGINA versus Gulam Mohammad KHAN /95 May 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Gleeson CJ, Allen J, Sperling J 
CATCHWORDS: SENTENCE - Crown appeal against sentence of 2 years minimum term and 3 years additional term for manslaughter - provocation - devout Muslim repeatedly stabbing his wife's lover - provocation extreme because of religious beliefs - religious beliefs otherwise irrelevant - relevant that respondent waited to surprise the lovers and thereby had more time to prepare himself to cope without killing - sentence of 4 years minimum term and 2 years additional term substituted.

RESERVED/EX TEMPORE:Ex Tempore.

ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I would ask Allen J to give the first judgment.

ALLEN J: This is a Crown appeal against what is said to be the leniency of a sentence imposed by Hidden J.

The principles to be applied in the consideration of such an appeal are established in cases such as Griffiths versus The Queen (1977) 137 CLR 293 and
Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295.] 
It is clear that notwithstanding the great reluctance with which an appellate court will interfere with a sentence imposed, where the appeal is by the
Crown, it is the duty of this Court to interfere where it is necessary to avoid such a manifest inadequacy in sentence or inconsistency in sentencing standards that the error, which has occurred in the sentence being reviewed, is of such gravity that it is essential in the administration of justice that the error be corrected.

It is not necessary to identify any particular error of law made. The error can be implicit in the excessive leniency in the sentence imposed, excessive in the magnitude to which I have referred.

On 13 November 1995 the respondent pleaded not guilty to a charge that on 4
December 1993 he murdered Mohammed Abbas. The jury returned a verdict of not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter.

The only issue fought at the trial was the issue of provocation.

The respondent was born in Fiji and is a devout Muslim. He married his wife in and they have two children.

He met the deceased, also a Muslim, in 1987 and they became friends, to the extent that the deceased called him "brother".

As a result of the breakdown of the deceased's marriage in 1992 he moved into the home shared by the respondent and his wife and occupied a bedroom on the ground floor. He also drove a taxi which was owned by the respondent.

In August 1993 the respondent travelled to Fiji and the deceased remained living in the house for the two months of his absence. During that time a relationship developed between the deceased and the respondent's wife.

On 3 December 1993 the respondent left his home telling his wife that he was going to the Lakemba Mosque and would spend the night there.

The deceased was driving the taxi and was due to end his shift at 3 am.

The respondent, who had been suspicious of the relationship between his wife and the deceased for some time, left the Mosque after midnight and drove home.
He arrived home at about 2 am, having been heard to come in by a resident in a granny flat at the rear of the premises who was still awake, watching TV. An hour later the same resident heard a banging or thudding noise and shouting.
He heard the respondent shouting and heard the victim screaming and crying. He identified, in the confusion of noise, the words "kill me" screamed out by the deceased on several occasions. He did not otherwise get the context of those words. This was about an hour after the respondent had returned to the home.
That time was verified by evidence of the recording of an emergency 000 call at 3.08 am.

Upon the police entering they found the body of the deceased in the family room in the downstairs portion of the house. He clearly was dead from multiple stab wounds inflicted during an attack which had commenced in the victim's bedroom in the front portion of the downstairs of the house and which continued through that portion of the house to the family room.

When the police arrived the respondent was present. He showed them the knife which he had used in the attack and which he had put into the kitchen sink.

In his remarks on sentence Hidden J accepted as accurate the account given later in the morning at Maroubra Police Station to a Constable Gentle. That account, in which the respondent is referred to as the defendant, was as follows: "The defendant said, 'It's hard you know'. I said, 'What's that?' He said, 'When your wife thinks nothing of you no more and she has to find another man.
Are you married?' I said, 'No'. He said, 'What's worse is that I saw it with my eyes you know'. ... He said, 'I was at the Mosque at Lakemba. I was over there thinking about him (pointed to a photo of the deceased on the table) and my wife. You know I've been suspicious of them for a while. I had these thoughts going around in my mind so it was about midnight I left the Mosque and drove back home. I didn't park the car outside because I told my wife that
I would be staying overnight at the Mosque, so I parked down in the car park next to the beach.

I walked home and walked into a spare room'. I said, 'A what?' He said, 'Spare room. The room next to his room (again the defendant pointed to the photo of the deceased on the table) and waited. I heard him call at a quarter to three and speak to my wife'. I said, 'How did you know what the time was?' He said, 'He has a mobile phone and I knew he finished at 3'. I said, 'How did you know he'd finished work at 3?' He said, 'Because he drives my taxi and finished work at 3 and then the day driver comes and takes the taxi'. I said, 'I understand'. He said, 'I was in the room and I heard my wife say to him, 'He's not here. I will be in your room waiting for you'. I heard her come downstairs and wait in his room (again pointed to photo of the deceased on the table). I heard him (against pointed to the photo of the deceased on the table) come in at 3 and walk into his room.

I heard them having sex. In my mind I was so angry' - Q. Is that 'In my mind'?
A. Excuse me, 'In my head I was so angry so I walked into the kitchen and got the knife. I couldn't believe it, I walked into his room and saw them together. I was so angry. He got up and there was pushing. I stabbed him but he was pushing and shoving. He ran out and I followed him. That's it'. I said, 'Where was your wife at this time?' He said, 'I can't remember, I think she ran upstairs'." 
That account is generally consistent with what he said to a number of police.

In his remarks on sentence Hidden J summarised those further statements by the respondent to police as follows: "Reference has already been made to the prisoner's conversations with police at the scene and at the police station prior to, and during, the recorded interview. Later, to other police after the recorded interview, he said, 'What would you do if you had seen someone on top of your wife in the bed? He was supposed to be my best friend ... I just snapped'. To the jury he said of the deceased, 'For him to do what he did was a sin and a crime against my faith and my religion. It is the gravest sin against me. I just lost control'." 
It is not necessary to refer in greater detail to the statements which he made to the police. They are all in the same vein.

Appalling injuries were inflicted upon the deceased during the attack. The injuries were so gross that they were close to disembowelling the deceased.
There were a total of sixty-seven knife wounds, of which only eight could be identified as defence wounds, leaving fifty-nine wounds inflicted deliberately by the respondent into the body of his victim. Indeed the medical evidence, not in challenge, was that a number of wounds into the abdomen were inflicted after the heart of the deceased had stopped beating.

The respondent had not attacked the victim immediately upon hearing and seeing the affront. He went into the kitchen, got a knife, and then returned to the room where the couple were and commenced his attack.

His Honour sentenced the respondent to a term of penal servitude for five years, comprised of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of three years.

It is the submission of the Crown to this Court that that sentence is so manifestly low that it is the duty of this Court to intervene and to re- sentence the respondent notwithstanding the caution which this Court exercises in respect of a Crown appeal against sentence.

The defence of provocation has recently been dealt with by the High Court in
Masciantonio versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 575.] In the joint judgment of Brennan, Deane, Dawson, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ it is said (at 580, 581): "Homicide, which would otherwise be murder, is reduced to manslaughter if the accused causes death whilst acting under provocation. The provocation must be such that it is capable of causing an ordinary person to lose self control and to act in the way in which the accused did. The provocation must actually cause the accused to lose self control and the accused must act whilst deprived of self control before he has had the opportunity to regain his composure.

It follows that the accused must form an intention to kill or to do grievous bodily harm (putting recklessness to one side) before any question of provocation arises. Provocation only operates to reduce what would otherwise be murder to manslaughter. Since the provocation must be such as could cause an ordinary person to lose self control and act in a manner which would encompass the accused's action, it must be such as could cause an ordinary person to form an intention to inflict grievous bodily harm or even death.

The test involving the hypothetical ordinary person is an objective test which lays down the minimum standard of self control required by the law. Since it is an objective test, the characteristics of the ordinary person are merely those of a person with ordinary powers of self control. They are not the characteristics of the accused, although when it is appropriate to do so because of the accused's immaturity, the ordinary person may be taken to be of the accused's age.

However, the gravity of the conduct said to constitute the provocation must be assessed by reference to relevant characteristics of the accused. Conduct which might not be insulting or hurtful to one person might be extremely so to another because of that person's age, sex, race, ethnicity, physical features, personal attributes, personal relationships or past history. The provocation must be put into context and it is only by having regard to the attributes or characteristics of the accused that this can be done. But having assessed the gravity of the provocation in this way, it is then necessary to ask the question whether provocation of that degree of gravity could cause an ordinary person to lose self control and act in a manner which would encompass the accused's actions." 
The issue in this case before his Honour was provocation and on that issue the respondent succeeded.

Central to his Honour's remarks on sentence were considerations of religion and ethnicity which related to the extent of the provocation to which the respondent was subjected.

His Honour accepted a considerable body of evidence which was adduced at the trial and which was before the jury. His Honour summed it up as follows: "Mr Humphrey, Senior Lecturer at the School of Sociology at the University of
New South Wales, who had made a particular study of the Islamic Community in
Australia, gave evidence of the significance of marital infidelity to a committed Moslem. He explained that adultery is seen as both a sin and a crime and is viewed extremely seriously. The family unit is the essential institution in Islamic culture and, for someone such as the prisoner, its preservation is part of the code of honour. A person's personal integrity is focused on being a member of a family and supporting its values, and is so viewed in the community. The sort of hospitality which the prisoner extended to the deceased was such as to convey that he had been accepted as part of the family and would be expected to behave as such. Accordingly, for him to have sexual relations with the prisoner's wife would be a breach of trust of the utmost gravity ..." 
His Honour correctly treated that evidence as directed to the extent of the gravity of the provocation to the respondent. The Crown, nevertheless, submits that the resultant sentence was so excessively lenient that this Court must intervene.

It must be understood that the defence of provocation is a defence which the law gives only to a charge of murder or, possibly, attempted murder. It is not a defence available in respect of any other crime. In respect of any other crime if the accused establishes that he was gravely provoked and lost self- control as a result of that provocation, the response of the law is: "You should not have lost your self control". That response is in respect of a loss of self control resulting in far less heinous conduct than the taking of human life.

The defence of provocation to a charge of murder does not absolve a person who establishes that defence either from criminal culpability or moral responsibility. What it does is that it reduces both. It does not absolve.

In his clear submissions Mr James QC has relied upon the gravity of the provocation, in the present case, as decreasing the criminality for sentencing purposes. Certainly the gravity of the provocation is most material. That it is material underlines what I had already said, namely that in general the attitude of the law to provocation leading to loss of self control is "You should not have lost your self control". It is so in respect of homicide as it is in respect of any other crime.

Why, then, does the law accord for a charge of murder the defence of provocation? It is the product of humanity. The crime of murder is so heinous, the taking of human life so criminally serious, that the full measure of the retribution available under the law is ameliorated to some degree, where the defence succeeds, by categorising the homicide as manslaughter rather than murder. This, of course, involves difficulties in sentencing. In Alexander [(1995) 78 A Crim R 141]
Hunt CJ at CL said (at 143): "The tensions involved in the imposition of the appropriate sentence in a provocation case - where necessarily there has been at the same time both a loss of self control and an intention to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm - were discussed by the former Chief Justice, Sir Laurence Street, when speaking for the Court of Criminal Appeal in 1981 in Hill (181) [3 A Crim R ] at 402 in a passage which bears quotation in full: 'The circumstances leading to the felonious taking of human life being regarded as manslaughter rather than murder can vary infinitely, and it is not always easy to determine in any given case what should be done in the matter of sentence. At the start it should be recognised that the felonious taking of a human life is recognised both in the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and in the community at large as one of the most dreadful crimes in the criminal calendar. The Courts have, however, over the decades gradually manifested a willingness to recognise factual contexts which provide some basis for understanding the human tragedies that can lead to the taking of a life. The manifestation of this humanitarian tendency is necessarily attended by the utmost caution'." 
In assessing the criminality it cannot be overlooked that the respondent came home from the Mosque because he suspected that his wife was having an adulterous association with the deceased. He waited for an hour in an adjoining bedroom to see what would happen. He must have known full well what was likely to happen because he heard his wife speak to the deceased on the telephone saying that he, the respondent, was not there and that she, the wife, would see the deceased in his bedroom when he came in from his taxi run at 3 am. This is material in that he did have time within which to steel his self control, as he should have, but failed to do so.

In his remarks on sentence his Honour said: "... in my view the fact that what he heard and saw realised his worse fears does not in any way mitigate the seriousness of the affront to him of the deceased's conduct." In the sense that the deceased's conduct was no less, for the appellant, an act of treachery by a man accepted into his house as his "brother", an act which was a grave sin and an act striking at the unity of family life so essential to a devout Muslim his Honour's view is doubtless the correct one. Nevertheless the respondent had far more time than often is the case in tragedies of this type within which to prepare himself to cope with the provocation without resorting to the taking of human life. That is relevant to sentencing.

His Honour properly gave full weight, in assessing the criminality of the respondent, to his religious convictions and ethnic background. It is, of course, not only devout Muslims who highly value family life, who regard it as central to their role in life and who recognise that obligations of open- heartedness to others extend to treating as if they were family members persons living in their home. His Honour fully accepted that those views are held particularly strongly by devout Muslims. That is relevant to the gravity of the provocation to the respondent. But what matters is not why the provocation was so grave, whether it was because of religious beliefs or for any other reason, but what the gravity in fact was. Adulterous abuse of hospitality can be highly provocative for the irreligious as well as for the religious. Cultural pressures are manifold. For many men adultery committed with his wife is an intolerable insult to his manhood and an act of gross betrayal. Violent reaction to adultery is no new phenomenon. It has existed as long as men have been men and doubtless it will continue for as long as men are men. The law does not recognise that the particular reason why in any given case the provocation was as grave as it was is relevant to the criminality. What matters is the gravity of the provocation, not the reason why it was so grave. No cause for provocation justifies the taking of human life.

In the present case the provocation was, as his Honour found, very grave.

Is then this sentence so excessively lenient that this Court must interfere?
It is necessary to return to basic sentencing principles, some of which were summed up in Camilleri in this Court on 8 February 1990 where this was said: "In seeking to determine in any case the sentence appropriate to a particular crime, it is always of importance to have regard to the gravity of the offence viewed objectively. Unless that is done, the other factors requiring consideration in order to arrive at the proper sentence cannot be given their rightful place. A sentence imposed must be commensurate with the seriousness of the crime in the sense that it should, having regard to all the proved circumstances, accord with the general moral sense of the community.

It should also serve as a sufficient deterrent both to the offender and to others. The purpose of that deterrence is to prevent the commission of such offences and whilst justice and humanity require that the previous character and conduct and the probable future life and conduct of the individual offender should be given the most careful consideration, those are factors which are necessarily subsidiary to the main consideration which determines the appropriate amount of punishment, that is the protection of the public.
The fundamental purpose of punishment is the protection of society.

Unless those basic principles of sentencing are adhered to errors will occur ..." 
In the present case there is nothing in what his Honour stated in his reasons for sentence to indicate that he was unmindful of those principles. The sentence, however, manifestly fails to give effect to them.

His Honour very properly gave considerable weight to the excellent prior character of the respondent. He accepted that he was a devout man, a man who felt strongly about marriage issues and responsibilities. He was forty-five years of age and had no previous convictions. He had an incredible employment record and was a man of integrity, both honest and conscientious. He was a devoted man, placid in temperament, a stranger to aggression. Hidden J accepted that he was deeply remorseful. He expressed confidence that the offence was the product of unusual circumstances and that he would not re- offend. All those are powerful considerations. However, the sentence remains so excessively lenient that this Court is bound, in my judgment, to intervene.

There is a further aspect of the Crown's submissions. It is that, it is argued, the division which his Honour made between the minimum term and the additional term was wholly without justification. I agree.

The circumstances upon which his Honour relied to effect that division of the sentence were all circumstances which pointed rather to the lack of necessity for any additional term in excess of one-third of the minimum term.
Considerations of this type were dealt with by Gleeson CJ in R versus Farroukh in this Court on 29 March 1996. The Chief Justice said this: "It is well established by authority that when [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) speaks of 'special circumstances' it is referring to circumstances relevant to the sentencing exercise which is being addressed by that part of the legislation.

The question in issue is a question of the relationship between the minimum and additional terms and, in particular, the question of the need or justification for an additional term which bears to the minimum term, or to the total sentence, a relationship different from the relationship referred to in the statute. When a sentencing judicial officer finds special circumstances he or she does so in a context involving a decision that there is something about the case that warrants a longer than usual additional term by comparison with the minimum term.

In the present case the subjective circumstances to which her Honour referred were undoubtedly proper matters to take into account in the sentencing exercise but there was nothing about them that indicated the need for a longer additional term by comparison with the minimum term than would have resulted from the application of the prima facie statutory relationship. Indeed one could go so far as to say that, in the present case, it could have been argued that there was no need for an additional term at all. This is a case in which it would not have been surprising to find a sentencing Judge dealing with the respondents by way of the imposition of a fixed term of imprisonment. These respondents are extremely unlikely to re-offend. Both of them are people of previous good character. It may confidently be expected that, following their release from prison, they will be unlikely, in the future, to come into conflict with the criminal justice system. It could have been argued that there was so little purpose to be served by subjecting them to supervision on parole, following their release from prison, that no additional term at all was required.

However that may be, the case was not one of special circumstances calling for a relationship between minimum and additional terms of the kind established by
Karpin DCJ." 
Those remarks, to my mind, are wholly pertinent to the present case. There is nothing here which pointed to the need for an extended period of supervision of the respondent after his release from gaol.

It is to be borne in mind, in respect of minimum term and additional term, that previous decisions must be read in the context of what this Court said in
GDR [(1994) 75 A Crim R 319] in a specially constituted Court of five Judges. Not all decisions prior to GDR are consistent with it.

In my judgment the appeal must be allowed and the respondent must be re- sentenced. I bear firmly in mind that this is a Crown appeal; that there is an element of double jeopardy involved; and that the sentence which this Court would impose now would be less than the sentence which it would have been appropriate to pass at first instance.

I propose that the appeal be allowed; that the sentence be quashed; and that in lieu thereof the respondent be sentenced to penal servitude for six years comprised of a minimum term of four years commencing on 24 November 1995 and expiring on 23 November 1999 on which date he will be eligible for release on parole and an additional term of two years commencing on 24 November 1999 and expiring on 23 November 2001.

GLEESON CJ: I agree. In my view, whilst the learned sentencing Judge gave entirely appropriate consideration and weight to the gravity of the provocation under which the present respondent was acting, his Honour failed to give sufficient weight to the taking of the human life that was involved in the conduct for which the respondent stood to be punished.

SPERLING J: I agree for the reasons that have been given.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Allen J.
 * * * 
