

Corporate Express Australia Ltd versus Swift-McNair and Ors Matter No 3307/98 [1998] NSWSC 593 (2 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 December 1998 `CORPORATE EXPRESS AUSTRALIA LTD versus CRAIG SWIFT-McNAIR & ORS` `3307/98` `2 October 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a former employer of the first defendant to prevent him from breaching restrictive covenants that purportedly prohibit him, after the termination of his employment, from being employed as a competitor of the plaintiff or using its confidential information. 
The plaintiff is one of three companies which currently between them control the wholesale bulk stationery market. The other such companies are the Blue
Star Group, of which the second and third defendants are members, and Boise-
Cascade Ltd, which I will refer to as Boise.

The first defendant commenced employment with the plaintiff on 23 November as the purchasing officer. By 1994 he had risen to the position of
National Product Manager and by this time he reported directly to Mr David
Gourley, the Chief Executive Officer.

In late 1994, in anticipation of a public float, the plaintiff offered to what it called "selected executive employees" an invitation to subscribe to shares of the plaintiff on a favourable basis, in that such persons were able to acquire more shares than other employees. The first defendant accepted that invitation.

A restriction was placed on employees accepting this offer. The last page of the offer contained cl 5, which is as follows: "5. No Competition 
If you accept this invitation, you will thereby be deemed to have convenanted that you will not for a period of 12 months from the date on which your employment with Macquarie or any of its subsidiaries (" Macquarie Group") terminates: alone or with any other person (whether as principal, agent, director, executive officer, employee, shareholder, partner, joint venturer, member, adviser, consultant or otherwise howsoever) directly or indirectly carry on, be engaged, concerned or interested in (except as the holder of not more than % of the issued capital of any company whose shares are listed on a recognised stock exchange) or otherwise associated with any trade or business in competition with any business carried on by the Macquarie Group at the date of such termination; canvass, solicit or endeavour to entice away from the Macquarie Group any person who at any time during your said employment was a customer of the
Macquarie Group; solicit, interfere with or endeavour to entice away any employee of the
Macquarie Group; or counsel, procure or otherwise assist any person to do any of the acts referred to in clauses 5(b) or (c)." 
I will call this the "1994 Restraint".

The first defendant acquired 25,000 shares under this invitation.

In September 1996 the plaintiff envisaged a further invitation to its employees to apply for shares. The offering was 15,000 shares at $1.30 each.
This is not a completely accurate description as the formal application could not be made until at least the end of 1998 The right the employee gained was more like a share option. Again a condition of participation was that the employee sign a restraint. On this occasion, the restraint took the form of a
Deed of Confidentiality and Restraint. Clauses 2, 3, 6 and 7 were as follows: "2. CONFIDENTIALITY OBLIGATIONS .1 Acknowledgments 
The Employee acknowledges that: the Confidential Information has been and will be acquired by the Company or its Related Bodies Corporate at the Company's or the Related Body
Corporate's initiative and expense; and the Company and its Related Bodies Corporate have expended and will expend effort and money in establishing and maintaining its customer base, employee skills and the Confidential Information.
 the Confidential Information is of independent economic value to the
Company because it is not generally known or is the subject of efforts to maintain its secrecy.
 the disclosure or improper use of the Confidential Information will cause damage to the Company.

Accordingly, it is reasonable that the Employee should make the warranties and representations set out in clauses 2.2 and 3 of this Agreement and, if this
Agreement is terminated, the Employee should continue to be subject to the restrictions set out in these clauses.
 .2 Undertakings 
Except as permitted by clause 2.3, the Employee undertakes and agrees not to, at any time either during employment or after termination of employment, either directly or indirectly; disclose or permit (to the extent that it is within his control) the disclosure of, the Confidential Information to any Person; use or permit (to the extent that it is within his control) the use of the
Confidential Information to compete with the Company, or in any manner which may injure or cause loss to the Company.
 .3 Permitted Use 
The Employee undertakes and agrees to use the Confidential Information only during the course of, and for the purpose of, his employment.
 . NON-COMPETITION .1 Restraint 
In order to protect the Company's Confidential Information, its trade secrets and its business connections, the Employee represents and warrants that he will not, during his employment and for that period of time after his employment as determined in accordance with clause 3.2, either directly or indirectly, whether solely or with any other person: carry on, or be engaged, concerned or interested in or associated with, in the area determined in accordance with clause 3.3, any business or activity which is competitive with any business carried on by the Company or any of its
Related Bodies Corporate. This clause does not prohibit the holding (whether directly or through nominees) of shares listed on a recognised stock exchange provided that the Consultant and its Executives do not collectively hold more than 5% of the issued capital of any company.
 canvass, solicit or endeavour to entice away from the Company any person who or which at any time during this employment or at the date of termination of this Agreement was or is a client or customer of or supplier of the Company or any Related Body Corporate or in the habit of dealing with the Company or any such Related Body Corporate; solicit, interfere with or endeavour to entice away any Employee of the
Company or any of its Related Body Corporate; or counsel, procure or otherwise assist any person to do any of the acts referred to in clauses 3.1(a), (b) and (c).
 .2 Period of Restraint 
The period applicable to clause 3.1 will be: year, or if that period is determined to be unenforceable; then months, or if that period is determined to be unenforceable; then months.
 .3 Area of Restraint 
The area applicable to clause 3.1(a) will be: 
Any and all geographic markets in which the Company and/or its Related
Bodies Corporate are then doing business, or if that area is determined to be unenforceable; then 
Australia, or if that area is determined to be unenforceable; then 
Each of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia, South
Australia or if these areas are determined to be unenforceable; then 
New South Wales.
 . CONFLICT 
The provisions of this Deed are in addition to, and not in lieu of: any similar agreement to which the Company and the Employee are now or may hereafter become a party; or any applicable law.

In the event of any conflict between the provisions of any such agreements and applicable laws, all such agreements and laws shall be cumulative and shall be construed in such a manner so as to as consistent as possible and enforceable to the fullest extent.
 . SEVERABILITY 
Each of the agreements, obligations and restrictions set out in this Deed is severable and independent so that any provision of this Deed is deemed invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such provisions shall be considered to be automatically deleted from this Deed. Any such deletions shall apply only to that portion of any provisions so adjudicated, and the operation of such provisions shall only deemed inapplicable in the particular jurisdiction in which the adjudication is made." 
The first defendant executed this Deed on 27 September 1996. I will call this the "1996 Restraint". However, no shares were allotted to him.

In 1998 the plaintiff's share price had fallen dramatically. It thus purported to cancel the 1996 invitation to purchase shares and replace it with a similar offer of 85 cents per share.

On 2 June the first defendant accepted the invitation and gained the right to apply for 15,000 shares at 85 cents between 31 December 1998 and 31 December
Again the invitation was subject to the employee signing a Deed of
Confidentiality and Restraint. The covering letter submitting the new invitation noted that the restraint periods in the new documentation were the same as before. It did not draw attention to the fact that the restraints were not the same. I will set out in the appendix the text of the latest deed, which I will call the "1998 Restraint".

No shares have been allotted to the first defendant under this invitation. Of course, the first issue date has not yet been reached. The employee share plan is in evidence. It would seem that an employee who accepts an invitation does not have to remain an employee at the date of issue, though there may be some compulsory buy-back provisions that come into play. I have not gone into that question with any thoroughness.

On 20 July 1998 the first defendant resigned from the plaintiff's employ. He agreed to be employed by Blue Star as National Products Manager.

On 28 July 1998 the plaintiff filed the summons in the present proceedings. It sought to restrain the first defendant's employment with Blue Star before 21
July 1999 plus ancillary orders to protect confidential information and prevent solicitation of customers. An application for interlocutory injunction came before Cohen J on 5 August 1998. His Honour reserved judgment overnight and then restrained the first defendant from being engaged in any work for
Blue Star up to the conclusion of these proceedings. He also restrained the first defendant from disclosing confidential information to Blue Star. His
Honour's orders were naturally set out in great detail. I have only summarized the broad effect. His Honour then stood the proceedings into my Expedition
List where they were fixed for hearing on 30 September 1998.

The case was estimated to take two and a half days. In fact the evidence finished at 3.30 pm on the first day. On the second day, at 10 am, Mr Trew QC and Mr Orlov for the plaintiff presented a thirteen page outline of submissions, which Mr Trew QC briefly addressed. Mr West QC and Mr M Steele for the defendants, produced at about 10.20am a thirty page outline and then addressed it for half an hour. Mr Trew QC then asked, and was granted, with some reluctance on my part, twenty-four hours to reply.

Mr Trew QC presented his reply of twelve pages, which he very briefly addressed.

In his submissions in chief Mr Trew QC submitted as follows: (Part of this is quoted and part is a summary)
These proceedings are to protect the plaintiff's confidential information.
The plaintiff seeks injunctions to restrain the first defendant from working with the second defendant for a period of twelve months, expiring on 21 July .
The plaintiff seeks to enforce covenants that the first defendant gave on three separate occasions between December 1994 and June 1998, not to disclose or use confidential information and not to compete with the plaintiff for a period of twelve months from the date of termination of his employment.
The three restraints were cumulative and overlapping.
The confidential information which the plaintiff wished to protect was that set out in MIO1 viz: Information about; (a) total trading rebate arrangements between the plaintiff and its suppliers; (b) product specific rebate arrangements between the plaintiff and its suppliers; (c) other details of the supply arrangements negotiated between the plaintiff and its major and strategic suppliers, specifically pricing basis information; (d) the plaintiff's total trading volume in dollar terms with major strategic suppliers; (e) the annual volume of purchases made by the plaintiff, the price payable and the rebate applicable for certain generic office products forming part of the plaintiff's product range; namely whiteboards, insert binders, suspension files, office pads, laminating supplies and spiral notebooks; (f) the plaintiff's trading arrangements with W C Penfold, particularly the plaintiff's pricing structure and profitability; (g) the price for which the plaintiff buys products from major strategic suppliers; (h) the price at which the plaintiff supplies those products to its customers.
This material was confidential under the tests laid down by the Court of
Appeal in Wright versus Gasweld Pty Ltd [(1991) 22 NSWLR 317], 334.
Whilst it is acknowledged that an employer cannot protect itself against mere competition from an ex-employee, the only practical way of limiting an ex-employee's use of confidential information is to restrain the employee from working for a competitor for a reasonable time.

I note that there does not appear to be any dissent from this submission and it is one that I would accept as being the case since the decision in
Littlewoods Organisation Ltd versus Harris [[1977] 1 WLR 1472], 1479.
It was likely, at least viewed at the date when the covenants were entered into, that the first defendant would have access to confidential information which he consciously or subconsciously might use to aid a competitor and that in such a situation it is reasonable to provide for a restraint. Mr Trew QC referred to NUS International Pty Ltd versus Edwards [(1981) 1A IPR 599], 608.
The restraints were valid under the general law.
If the restraints were not valid under the general law they would be saved under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the [RestraintS of Trade Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/) (the
Act). Although the court cannot remake the covenant under this section, all it needs to do is to read down any excess.

Mr West QC made a series of closely reasoned submissions which are a little more difficult to summarise, but essentially they are as follows:
When it is realised that the 1994, 1996 and 1998 restraints are cumulative and inconsistent, it must follow that they are void for uncertainty and that is the end of the case.
The court cannot apply <case> of the Restraint of Trade Act 1976 to read down a covenant that is void for uncertainty because of <case> of that Act.
No consideration was given for the 1996 or 1998 restraints.
The information particularised in MIO1 was not "confidential information" within the accepted meaning of that term.
Even if <case> of the Act was available to be applied, it should not be employed because of the manifest failure of the plaintiff to create a reasonable restraint.
If one has to look at the restraints individually, as a matter of construction the 1998 restraint either extends no further than trade secrets or is too wide and is unenforceable; the 1996 restraint must be taken as cancelled; the 1994 restraint is either part of a later restraint or must be considered as having been superseded; if one looks at the 1994 restraint alone, there is insufficient evidentiary material to judge whether in 1994 the plaintiff had legitimate interests to protect as the evidence suggests that neither Blue Star nor Boise were active competitors in 1994 (see Mr Guest's affidavit PA04/21-2, and Mr
Gourley's affidavit PA01/86); the 1994 restraint is too wide.
In any event, any confidential information has a very limited life and would not justify any of the restraints;
If any part of the claim might succeed, the court needs to consider the cross-claim and <case> of the Act;
The upshot is that the claim must be dismissed with costs and there should be an enquiry before a Master pursuant to the undertaking for damages.

The convenient course is to deal with the submissions of both sides using the structure of Mr West QC's submissions outlined above. I will thus now discuss each of those matters, so far as is relevant.
Mr Trew QC relies on the Queensland decision in JQAT Pty Ltd versus Storm [[1987] 2 Qd R 162] that one can validly have overlapping and cumulative restraints of trade by an employee. Although there have been some criticisms of this decision, see for instance Brendon Pty Ltd versus Russell [(1994) 11
WAR 280](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%2011%20WAR%20280 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Mr West QC is content to accept the broad proposition from the JQAT case that Mr Trew QC makes. However, Mr West QC puts that the fact that one can have overlapping restrictions does not take the matter very far. He concedes that a person in the plight of the plaintiff could have drafted a valid restraint, overlapping or otherwise, but submits it has not done so.

The first exercise to be performed, on the basis that cl 7 of the 1998 restraint applies to its tenure, is, accordingly, to see just what is the cumulative effect of the three sets of provisions.

This is a very awkward exercise. The attitude taken by the plaintiff was really that it did not matter very much that all of these provisions were in the ring, and that the court could, by either construction or by the application of <case> of the Act, work out whether in the circumstances there was a case for an injunction.

Unfortunately this mode of approach makes my task far more difficult. That is because there are no submissions put in reply to the submissions of Mr West QC which I have numbered 2, which state that if the cumulative effect of the covenants is that they are void for uncertainty, then they cannot be saved under <case> of the Act.

Furthermore, as there has been no discussion in the plaintiff's submissions as to what the cumulative effect is, it is almost a matter at large for me to work out, if I can, what they mean.

Of course, the court leans against declaring invalid on the ground of uncertainty a commercial agreement because it takes the view that parties do not enter into commercial agreements for the mere fun of making an agreement, but intend that their agreement would mean something. I, of course, refer, as hundreds of judges have done over the last thirty years, to Upper Hunter
County District Council versus Australian Chilling and Freezing Co Ltd <case>; [(1968) 118 CLR 429.] However, in a proper case, despite this initial reluctance, the court may have no choice but to say that a covenant is void for uncertainty.

As Mr West QC put in para 5.8.2 of his submissions what is required is to take the three overlapping agreements and: (a) construe the provisions of each agreement separately; (b) compare those provisions as construed and ascertain where they conflict; and decide which of the various ways in which those conflicts might be resolved such as to make the agreement "enforceable to the fullest extent".
The words I have just quoted are, of course, the last five words of cl 7 of the 1998 restraint under the heading of "Conflict".

It is perhaps necessary before entering into that exercise to construe cl 7 itself. The clause provides that the provisions of the 1998 restraint are in addition to any similar agreement to which the company and the executive are now or may hereafter become a party. That, of course, does not make grammatical sense, but commercially it includes the 1994 and 1996 restraints, as long as the latter still had some applicability. It then says that in the event of any conflict: "All such agreements and laws shall be cumulative and shall be construed in such a manner as to be consistent as far as possible and enforceable to the fullest extent. " 
These words are quite obscure. Mr West QC puts that they signify an intention that clauses which treat the same subject matter differently are not to stand side-by-side, but are to be reconciled into a single consistent treatment of that subject matter.

Mr West QC then puts that the court is left to determine which of a series of possible ways of resolving inconsistencies between the three agreements is to be preferred, but is given no guidance as to how this is to be done. However, it is so that the agreements are to be enforceable to the fullest extent.

The 1994 restriction was only directed against competition. It said that for twelve months from the termination of the employment the employee was not in any role at all to be associated with any trade or business in competition with any business carried on by the plaintiff at the date of termination nor to solicit, canvass or entice away any of the plaintiff's employees, or any person who was at any time during the employment a customer of the plaintiff.

In essence, the 1996 agreement, first, contains a purported acknowledgment that confidential information has been and will be acquired by the plaintiff, which information will be disclosed to the employee, and that the employee will not disclose any of that information. Further he will not during his employment or for a period of time as determined in cl 3.2 be associated with any business or activity which is competitive to any business carried on by the plaintiff or any of its related bodies corporate. Clause 3.2 gives three alternative periods of one year, six months and three months. Clause 3.3 sets out the applicable area, which was not mentioned in the 1994 restraint at all, of (a) the plaintiff's markets; (b) if that was unenforceable, Australia; (c) if that was unenforceable, each of the mainland Australian States; and (d) if all else failed New South Wales.

The 1998 restraint defined "confidential information" in a different way, at least slightly, to the 1996 agreement. It set out, for instance, a provision as to what was non-confidential information, despite the fact that what is in that clause might at first blush fall within the definition of confidential information. It restricted the use of confidential information without the prior consent in writing of the plaintiff. It expressed the non-competitive clause in slightly different words, and it defined "enforceable area" slightly differently. It is probably not necessary to go into any further detail than this.

What then is the restraint and at what date does one take the restraint? 
The question of date is important because, generally speaking, all restraints of trade are void. However, the court will enforce those restraints of trade which protect the legitimate interests of the employer.

The plaintiff in the instant case has moved considerably between 1994 and
The evidence shows that in 1994 it had not become a public company, nor had Blue Star and Boise come into the market as such as real competitors. In the plaintiff very much expanded its business. It became a public company and took over a whole series of other companies in the market. By 1996 there was some competition between the three major players in the market and that seems to have continued until 1998, though the value of the plaintiff's share seems to have dropped considerably in that last period, which may have some indication as to just how successfully it was performing.

If one takes the cumulative effect, does one somehow or other, in the same way as a will, republish all the existing restraints so that they are made as at , or does one still have the situation that there is a 1994 restraint to be judged as to what were the legitimate interests in 1994, a 1996 restraint to be judged on the basis of what was the situation in 1996, and a 1998 restraint that must be judged on the conditions in 1998? Although little argument was put on this point, it seems to me that the latter must be the correct interpretation. That, unfortunately, muddies the waters further.

It is very tempting to take a simplistic broad brush approach and say that all of these restraints at least involve the employee not working for or being involved with a competitor of the plaintiff as at the date of termination of employment. Accordingly, one can shear away all other expressions and say that that is the essence of the covenants which has remained constant throughout.
Unfortunately, cl 7 of the 1998 agreement, to my mind, does not allow the court to do that because it is not the minimum extent of the covenant that is to be enforced but it is to be enforceable to the fullest extent.

It is to my mind almost impossible to work out what the fullest extent is of the various permutations and combinations contained in the three different covenants. Even setting aside the fact that one has to have a series of permutations between four different areas and three different time periods, there are also a whole series of other alternatives. The parties may not just enter into some overriding covenants or set out some general words and leave it to the court to determine what their contract really means; see Davies v
Davies [(1887) 36 Ch D 359];
Austra Tanks Pty Ltd versus Running [[1982] 2 NSWLR 840], and
Lloyd's Ships Holdings Pty Ltd versus Davros Pty Ltd <case>; [(1987) 17 FCR 505.] 
As I have said, Mr West QC's submissions set out a full analysis as to what the various covenants mean and I would to a great extent go along with what he says, especially as there are no submissions the other way. I do not, however, consider that it is necessary to burden these reasons with a detailed analysis. I will leave Mr West QC's submissions in the file.

However, as Mr West QC puts it in 5.10, if one is being mathematical about it there are at least five hundred and eighty-five separate restraints and it seems to me that, for the reasons that I have outlined, the number of restraints involved and the use of very wide expressions, that the cumulative effect of the restraints is that one has a situation where under the general law they are void for uncertainty.
I must then consider whether the restraints can be saved by the Act.

Very often these days the court can short circuit the construction process and the question as to whether a restraint is unreasonable under the general law by merely looking to see what is the matter which the plaintiff wishes to restrain, and see whether under the reading down of the general covenant it is covered. A recent example is Kone Elevators Pty Ltd versus McNay. My decision is reported in [(1997) 19 ATPR 41-563], and the Court of Appeal decision, which reversed it, in the same volume at 41-564, but the principle comes through clearly from both judgments.

However, Mr West QC puts that you cannot do that in the instant case because of the presence of <case> in the [Restraints of Trade
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/). This section simply says: "[Subsection ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s1.html) does not affect the involvement of a restraint of trade by reason of any matter other than public policy." 
Mr West QC submits, and his submissions are supported by reference to the Law
Reform Commission paper, which preceded the enactment of the section, that if a covenant is void for uncertainty then one cannot use [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) to read it down. I have not heard any contrary submissions. Indeed the only possible argument that was mentioned during oral submissions was that just as a contract void for uncertainty can be rectified (see Issa versus Berisha [[1981] 1 NSWLR 261] though cf Coolibah Pastoral Co versus The Commonwealth [(1967) 11 FLR 173], 190-1) so there can be statutory rectification of a void covenant under the [Restraints of Trade
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/). However the analogy is false as the equitable remedy of rectification merely reforms the form of the agreement not the agreement itself. In my view what Mr West QC puts is correct. Accordingly, I cannot read down the covenant.

It is really unnecessary then to deal with the rest of the submissions of Mr
West QC, apart from those numbered 9. I would just make some brief comments on some of them before disposing of the case.

As to submission 3, I would have thought that the issue of share options was a sufficient consideration for taking a covenant. However, I am very concerned about the way in which covenants are taken from employees by a standard form document which is a condition of getting share options. One can understand an employer taking a covenant on the commencement of employment or on promotion to a new position, but the idea of dangling the carrot of a share option before an employee with a series of restraints of trade attached in a schedule is not one to be commended. Indeed, this may mean such as is put in submission in the present case, that there has been no real attempt to create a reasonable restraint.

As to 4, I think there is a lot to be said for the proposition that the information in the instant case was not confidential information. Sure it is that the plaintiff considered it as such, and it is true that Kirby P in the
Gasweld case (supra) said that one of the indications that something is confidential information is that the party considered that it was so.
However, when one strips away what I might call the corporate froth and bubble of expressions such as "competitive advantage", what is really being dealt with here is the ability of a person, who has a large volume of business, to negotiate with suppliers for rebates, especially volume rebates and promotional rebates. Essentially these are rebates that are judged by performance rather than anything else.

It must be clear to any business person of acumen that if one has a capacity to buy a large amount of product that one is capable of negotiating out those rebates, or some similar deal. Just the price detail of any particular rebate for any particular period of twelve months does not seem to me to be necessarily confidential information. Even if it were, there is a lot to be said for Mr West QC's submission 7 that the confidential information had a very limited life and that at least each year new deals would be done in accordance with the pressure of the marketplace. It may just have been possible for Mr Swift-McNair to know that a particular supplier was amenable to giving a volume rebate or some other rebate and use that to the advantage of his new employer, but I cannot see why that is confidential information. It is really just material that any sensible business person would realize was available to be used to advantage.
As Mr West QC put, the upshot is that the plaintiff has failed to make out its case and the claim must be dismissed with costs. The cross-claim is unnecessary and I dismiss it. There should be an enquiry before a Master as to damages pursuant to the undertaking as to damages. In accordance with a policy that I have adopted over many years that enquiry will lapse unless on or before 2 November 1998, or such other time as the court may fix, a notice of motion seeking such enquiry is filed with the court.

The exhibits before Cohen J, which are still in court, can be returned. The other exhibits should be retained for twenty-eight days, or if there is an appeal pending the determination of the appeal.
 (Mr Trew QC sought an interlocutory injunction for a limit period of time, being seven days, in the same terms as granted in the earlier application to allow a notice of appeal to be filed and also to approach the Court of Appeal to extend the injunction until the hearing of the appeal. Opposed).

My feeling is I should grant an injunction but only until Wednesday.

Upon the plaintiff by its counsel giving to the court the usual undertaking as to damages so as to preserve an appeal, I will regrant the injunction in the same terms as that granted by Cohen J up to and including 7 October 1998 and I will stay the condition requiring the notice of motion for enquiry as to damages to be filed by 2 November 1998 until further order.

I order in relation to the confidential documents that the affidavits be placed in an envelope marked "not to be opened or inspected without the approval of a Judge or Master" and the confidential exhibits to be returned on the basis that they will be handed back to the court if they are required. I will leave the plaintiff's submissions in chief and reply, and the defendants' submissions in the file.
 * * * 
