

Le Tan Thanh versus Van Tri Huynh [1996] NSWSC 406 (5 September 1996) 
LE TAN THANH V VAN TRI HUYNH /90 
Monday 20 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The first plaintiffs, Dr and Mrs Le, and the first and second defendants, Mr and Mrs Huynh, are all Vietnamese born people now permanently resident in Australia.

Mr Huynh left Vietnam in 1976 and arrived in Australia in 1977. In 1981, he set up a factory for the manufacture of plastic bags in Bomaderry near Nowra.
He set up a company, Rossville Pty Ltd, to be trustee of a unit trust, Trivu
Unit Trust, which trust operated the business as Trily Plastics.

Dr and Mrs Le came to Australia in 1979 and moved to Sydney in 1983. Mrs Le's mother, Mrs Mai, came to Australia in 1983 and since her arrival has lived in close proximity to her daughter.

The Les and the Huynhs got to know each other in 1986. Mrs Huynh became a patient of Dr Le. Mr Huynh used to drive his wife from Nowra to Cabramatta to see her doctor. Mr Huynh met Mrs Mai on one of these occasions. The parties dined together and became friendly.

The first plaintiffs and the defendants entered into a business relationship in November 1986 when they agreed jointly to purchase land in the Wollongong
City area.

In March, 1987, Mr Huynh showed Dr and Mrs Le and Mrs Mai around his Nowra factory. Mr Huynh told Dr Le that he could improve the business if he could move the factory to Wollongong, enlarge it and install additional machines.
The parties also discussed the possibility of setting up a plastic bag factory in Vietnam.

Dr Le says that Mr Huynh said to him at one visit to the factory, "I know everything about these machines and can do everything that needs to be done to make the plastic bags, but I don't have the money ... . If you put money into the business, every month we sell offcuts which are recyclable for a profit of $20,000 - you'd get $10,000 per month and I'd get $10,000 per month. At the end of the year, you will also get 50% of the business' profit." Mr Huynh denies that he said that he did not have the money to move to Wollongong or that he said anything about offcuts. Indeed, his evidence was that at the relevant time the offcuts were being disposed of at the rubbish tip.

In early December 1987, Mr and Mrs Huynh were invited to dinner at Mrs Mai's house. Mr Huynh produced a document, a copy of which is annexure "A" to PA01.
The document bears date 5 December 1987.

Dr Le says that as Mr Huynh handed the document to him he said, "I have checked the equipment in the factory at Nowra, and have prepared this document to give you an indication of the value of the business as at 5 December. The first page lists the assets of the business - the machinery and equipment and so on - and their value. The second page lists the amounts we owe other people and the amount owed to us by people we've supplied bags to who haven't paid us yet." Mr Huynh pointed out particular items and said, "Extruder single head one line pro' - if we were to buy that from Japan it would cost about $350,000 to $400,000". He also said "You've seen my car. I bought it for $30,000 and
I've only had it for one year, but I've said its only worth about $18,000 here." He said in respect to other items that their real value was also more than he had put down. He then went through the debts and then moved on to the capacity of the various machines. Dr Le says he made notes on the copy of the document he had in his hand. After this explanation Mr Huynh turned back to page 1 of the document and pointed to the total of $1,216,872 and said "That's the value of the business, even underestimated ... Let's say it's roughly $1,000,000 ... dollars. If you put in $500,000 you can have half the capital."
Dr Le said, "No I don't have that much money." Mr Huynh then said, "The profits are split at the end of the financial year. But you can be sure you'll get $10,000 every month before the left over plastic is sold because it is recyclable. We get about $20,000 per month just for that. We would split that -50 and you would get $10,000 per month." 
Mrs Le says in her affidavit that she was present at the conversation and can remember Mr Huynh saying "This sets out what the business is worth. You see, it is worth more than $1 million." She also recalls Mr Huynh saying, "The factory works 24 hours a day, seven days a week." 
Mrs Le also remembers Mr Huynh saying, "If you buy out my partners, you would have to put in more than $500,000 as the business is worth more than $1 million. We could then move the factory from Nowra to Wollongong to a new and bigger factory so that all the machines could be used and we could make more profit. Also, Wollongong is closer to Sydney than Nowra and we would save on transport costs. In any event, there is the monthly profit of $10,000 cash which you would receive from the sale of the recyclable plastic left over after the bags are produced." 
Mr Huynh agrees that he went through the document on this occasion. He says that by this time he had had many discussions concerning equipment used in the manufacture of plastic bags in respect of the consultancy work he was doing for Dr Le in connection with projects in Vietnam. He says that Dr Le said that he would not want to go into purchasing low density machinery and it was while he was saying this that Dr Le made the notes on the document.

Mr Huynh says that at the end of the conversation Dr Le said he would like some time to think about it. Mr Huynh protested that he had received no money for consultancy work in respect of projects he had done for Dr Le in Vietnam and that he would like to be paid his consultancy fees to date before Dr Le bought into the business. Dr Le promised to give that matter some thought as well. He says that in the weeks that followed he mentioned the matter to Dr Le on several occasions, and each time Dr Le said he had not yet made up his mind.

Mr Huynh denies most of what Dr Le put in his affidavit, particularly he denied that he suggested that the Les put in half a million dollars or that there was any discussion about selling leftover pieces of plastic. Mr Huynh says that in the last week of 1987 he had another meeting with Dr Le in Nowra.
Dr Le said that he wanted to see a plastic bag factory operating in China before he committed himself. Arrangements were made, Dr Le saying, "I will pay the costs of our trip to see the plastic bag factory but I cannot make any payment of any of your other expenses until I sell my Bankstown surgery. Even then, I only want to pay the amount of your expenses for the consultancy work and I would like to pay your fees next year. What would your expenses be?" Mr
Huynh says that he got out his business diary, turned to the page headed "Monday 28 December 1987" and wrote on the page "agreement, Mr and Mrs Le and
Van Tri". He then put certain items down on the paper and totalled it at approximately $153,824.

Mr Huynh and Dr Le then inspected plastic bag factories in Hong Kong and
China. After their return to Australia, Dr Le said, according to Mr Huynh, "I don't think I'm really interested in getting involved in a new business in
Australia: I would rather start a plastic bag business in Vietnam. I would like, however, to have a foothold in an Australian business which is manufacturing plastic bags, particularly one which has big clients like
Woolworths. I would like to buy into the business but I don't wish to be involved in the additional expense of purchasing the low density machinery we spoke about and I do not want to contribute to the purchase of new high density machinery - this business should buy that machinery from its own profits. I have now sold my surgery at Bankstown but I've only got $250,000 available to spend. If I pay you about $150,000 for your expenses on the
Vietnam projects, it will only leave me with $100,000 to pay for the shares in the business." Mr Huynh says that he told Dr Le he would speak to the accountant to see if he could calculate some proposal that would cost less than $100,000.

Dr Le puts the matter quite differently. He says not long after returning from
Hong Kong, he and his wife had a conversation with Mr Huynh at Mrs Mai's home and again Mr Huynh said, "You would have to pay $500,000 for half the business." Dr Le replied, "I have sold a shop and have roughly about $250,000." Mr Huynh then said, "$250,000 is enough to buy the others out.
We've got the land at Wollongong already so you just put the money in and we'll open the factory at Wollongong. Maybe later, if you have the money and we need to expand the business, we can both put money in to buy some more machinery." Dr Le then says that on a night in February 1988, again at Mrs
Mai's house, Mr Huynh asked whether Dr Le wanted to buy into the business and said the cost would be "$250,000 to buy the others out but will need more later if we're going to expand the business." Dr Le and his wife then said to
Mr Huynh said, "Okay". One of the Les said, "We'll get a solicitor to do the paperwork". Mr Huynh said, "No, it's not necessary. He'll charge a lot of money and make it complicated. I have a solicitor who knows about the company already. We'll just go in there and sign whatever is necessary." 
Dr and Mrs Le say that a couple of days later they went and saw a Mr
Williamson, a solicitor in Dapto. Mr Williamson showed Mrs Le a number of transfer of share forms and said, "Would you please make out cheques to each of the people named on these forms. The cheque to Quoc Hung Vu should be for $54,023.76. The cheque to Jim Tran should be for $13,850.94. The cheque for
Ngoc Chi Holmick should be for $14,150.95. The cheque for Bich Sight Yiu should be for $14,150.95. The cheque for Colin Robert Manning should be for $14,147.95." Mrs Le wrote out the cheques accordingly. Mr Williamson then asked Dr Le to sign some transfer forms. Dr Le says that he noticed the names "Rossville Pty Ltd" and "Trivu Unit Trust" when he signed the transfer forms but he did not know who they were.

A few days after the meeting with Mr Williamson, Mr Huynh telephoned Dr Le and said, "How about the rest of the money - I need it." Mr Huynh made it clear that the balance was about $150,000. Dr Le, Mrs Le and Mr Huynh met at a coffee shop in Dapto shortly afterwards and Mrs Le wrote out a cheque payable to Mr Huynh for $153,824.

Dr Le says that some weeks afterwards his wife gave him a letter which bore the date 2 March, 1988 and a cheque which she had received from Mr Huynh. The letter purported to be one from Dr Le himself. Dr Le says it is a complete forgery. The letter was addressed to Mr Williamson and refers to a conversation between Mr Williamson and Mr Huynh, indicates cheques were being handed over for certain amounts (four cheques only were mentioned, the cheques which I have described above other than the cheque in favour of Manning) and the letter then concluded "Before these cheques are handed over, please be sure the shares and units in the Tri Vu Unit Trust been signed and transferred to my name and my wife name with you acting as witness." 
Dr Le then says sometime afterwards he received transfers of shares. The transfers are in evidence. They are transfers from the payees of the cheques to Dr Le of units in the Trivu Unit Trust or in Rossville Pty Ltd bearing date March 1988.

Mr Huynh says that Dr Le agreed to pay $96,176.60 to pay out the holders of 42 units in the Trivu Unit Trust. This trust had operated the Trily Plastics business, the trustee being Rossville Pty Ltd. The units other than Mr Huynh's own units were then owned by Mr Vu, Jimmy Tran, Ngoc Chi Holmick and Bich
Sight Yiu. He says that Mr Porter, who is Mr Huynh's accountant, sent a breakdown of the settlement figures, the figures being for the purchase of the units as I have recently outlined.

According to Mr Huynh, after the transactions of 11 March, 1988 the structure of the company and the unit trust was as follows:- 
Huynh 18 shares 12 units; 
Members of the Huynh family 16 shares 16 units; 
Dr and Mrs Le 36 shares 42 units; 
Colin Manning six shares and six units there being 76 issued shares and 76 allotted units in the company and the unit trust respectively.

At this stage I should turn to the pleadings. The amended statement of claim pleads that the parties first entered into business relationships wherein they agreed to purchase the Wollongong land possibly as a new site for a plastics factory. The defendants agree with this. The plaintiffs then plead that the document of 5 December 1987 was provided at a meeting early in December and that various representations were made by the defendants to the plaintiffs.
The production of the document was, of course, admitted, but almost every alleged representation pleaded by the plaintiffs was denied. The amended statement of claim then goes on to plead that during the trip to China in
January 1988 Mr Huynh made further representations. Paragraph 10 then pleads that in reliance upon these various representations the plaintiffs agreed to buy a 50% interest in the business of "the plastics factory" for the initial sum of $250,000 (the term "plastics factory" is not defined in the statement of claim but it would seem to indicate the plastics factory operated under the
Business Name "Trily Plastics"). It is then alleged that the plaintiffs paid $250,000 by four cheques totalling $96,176.60 and an additional cheque made out in favour of the first defendant Mr Huynh of $153,824.

The plaintiffs then say that on 14 May 1988, because Mr Huynh told them that in order to complete the purchase of a 50% interest in the business a further amount of $28,350 was required, they paid him those additional moneys.

The pleading then states that at all material times the business was insolvent, the misrepresentations were misleading and deceptive and were fraudulently untrue and the plaintiffs want damages plus an account, interest and costs.

There are further claims. One is that in March 1988 there was a supplemental agreement that Mr Huynh would retain $10,000 profit per calendar month otherwise due to the plaintiffs and apply such moneys towards the building of a new factory at Bellambi. It is alleged he failed to do this and for 17 months between March 1988 and July 1989 retained $170,000 of the profits of the business which should have been paid over to the plaintiffs.

The first defendant put on a cross claim. This document contained explicitly four counts. Each count was for consultancy fees for work done at the request of the cross defendants, the total being $164,100 plus interest. The defence to this was merely a denial.

The first defendant also put on a second cross claim for consultancy fees and expenses in connection with establishing a plastic bag factory in Vietnam. The claim was for $321,893. It gave credit for the $153,824 paid on 5 March 1988 and claimed the balance of $168,069 plus interest. Again, the defence was a denial with a superadded statement that the cross claimant had never made any demand for that sum.

Originally the proceedings also included a claim for moneys paid by the plaintiffs towards an interest in land at Wollongong. The plaintiffs had asserted that they had paid $17,000 in December 1986 and $30,000 in October towards the payment for an interest in this land. Mr Huynh's defence was that this money was the purchase price for gold. Mr Huynh said that he first had met Dr Le in July 1986 when he had taken his wife to Dr Le's surgery at
Marrickville. Thereafter his wife consulted Dr Le on many occasions and Mr
Huynh usually drove her to the surgery. It was rumoured among the Vietnamese community that Dr Le bought and sold gold and in December 1986 Dr Le agreed to buy from Mr Huynh 26 pieces of gold leaf for $17,000. Later a further $30,000 was paid to Mr Huynh for more gold leaf. The gold leaf was supposed to be in
Vietnam and the arrangement was, according to Mr Huynh, that Dr Le or his representative would present a copy of the receipt to Mr Huynh's brother Vo
Van Tam and Mr Tam would give the bearer the gold. Mr Huynh says the gold was handed over. However, Mr Huynh consented to judgment on Dr Le's claim that the $47,000 was in connection with the purchase of some land at Wollongong. Mr
Huynh says he consented to this judgment because he could not bring his brother Vo Van Tam out from Vietnam to give evidence.

I agree with Mr Carson, who appears for the plaintiffs, that this seems to be a very strange explanation. It seems fairly incredible that Mr Huynh would permit Dr Le to end up not only with the gold but also with his $47,000 back together with interest.

However, whichever way one looks at the facts in this case as alleged by the two principal combatants, one gets into the realm of the incredulous.

The primary representation sued on by Dr Le is that the nett value of the business into which he was buying a 50% share was $1.1 million and that there was a profit from surpluses of $20,000 a month which would be distributed as $10,000 a month each.

It is hard to credit how anyone would think that they could buy a business for $250,000 that would be producing that sort of money. The scenario presented is that a business with a nett value of $1.1 million produced an annual nett profit of $1.8 million and would produce cash in hand of $10,000 a month and that this bonanza could be purchased for a mere $250,000.

The next problem with the plaintiffs' story is that this $10,000 cash per month did not eventuate. Dr Le says that in April 1988 Mr Huynh gave the Les approximately $3,000 in cash and then they asked where the rest was. Mr Huynh said that because a screwdriver had dropped into one of the machines he needed funds to get the machine fixed. In the following month they also asked for their money and Mr Huynh said that he could not sell the product. Later in
May, Dr Le said that Mr Huynh told him that the business was going down and that Dr Le should have paid more than $250,000. He had no money to pay the supplier and he had bills including a bill from Hoechst for $28,350 and that if this bill were paid he would be able to sell stock. Mrs Le then made out a cheque to Mr Huynh for $28,350 and handed it to him. From June 1988 to the second half of 1989 the Les said that they had conversations with Mr Huynh asking why they hadn't received their money, but Mr Huynh said that he could not sell the bags and "You actually don't need that money. I am keeping $10,000 each month to spend it on building the new factory at Wollongong." 
Mr Harris, who appears for the defendants, says that it is incredible that people who are not getting their money as promised would invest more money in an enterprise that they were told was "going down".

Then there is a problem with accepting what is pleaded in paragraph 41 of the amended statement of claim that in or about March 1988 there was an agreement whereby their $10,000 profit per month would be applied towards the building of a new factory at Bellambi. One might ask if this was the agreement why Dr and Mrs Le, as they said they were doing in their first affidavit, continually demanded their $10,000 per month. The answer that could be given is that this story about the $10,000 a month going into the factory is really "in the ring" to solve the problem that the Les took so long before they started taking any serious steps to recover the $10,000 per month that they say they should have been receiving right from the beginning.

The next problem in the plaintiffs' case is that it is inconsistent with Mr
Williamson's evidence.

Mr Williamson was a partner in a firm named Devitt Partners, now named Devitt
Williamson & Isabella. Mr Huynh introduced Dr and Mrs Le to Mr Williamson and then left them with the solicitor. Mr Williamson had previously been informed by Mr Porter that Mr Huynh was arranging for a transfer of the shares and units to a Sydney doctor.

Mr Williamson says that before Dr Le and his wife came to see him, he had seen a number of Vietnamese people who were introduced to him by Mr Huynh and he witnessed their signatures to transfer of shares forms. He then says, "When Dr
Le and his wife came to my office to sign the transfer forms my recollection is that Dr Le had with him a number of cheques drawn in favour of the various transferors and he gave those cheques to me. The cheques had already been written out before Dr Le and his wife came to my office. I did not see them written out, they were not signed in my presence and I had not told Dr Le or his wife the amounts which the cheques should be made out for." 
In cross examination Mr Williamson said (T 231): "I cannot recollect that they wrote the cheques out in my presence. I am not saying that that did not happen, but I cannot recollect that happening and as far as I can recollect they already had the cheques." 
Mr Huynh says that there were only four cheques totalling $96,186.60. There was never any cheque for Mr Manning. He then says that on 5 March 1988, Dr Le contacted him and said, "We have paid $96,176 to buy the shares in the business. I can pay you another $153,824 for your consultancy fees. Can you come up to Sydney and I will pay you?" Mr Huynh said that he was in Nowra and busy and Dr Le said that they could meet half way at Dapto. They met in a coffee shop at Dapto and Dr Le proffered the cheque for $153,824, but said he would need an invoice. Mr Huynh said, "I can't get an invoice now" and Dr Le replied, "Just give me that page out of your diary that will do. But write that you have received the money on it." The diary page of 28 December 1987 was then handed over with the words "Paid 5.3.88 chq $153,824" written in the lefthand margin.

On 15 March 1988, Mr Williamson sent to Mr Porter a letter reporting that the transfers were signed as at 11 March and "Cheques were paid on the basis of the written instructions from Dr Le of the 2nd March 1988. A copy of which we enclose." 
The letter of 2 March was the one to which I have already referred setting out the four cheques totalling $96,176.60. Dr Le says he never signed this letter and that his wife received it in the post some weeks later. Dr Le also said, of course, that Mr Williamson asked him to make out the cheques when he was in
Mr Williamson's office and Mrs Le wrote out the cheques then, signed them and handed them to Mr Williamson.

In cross examination, Dr Le said of the letter in question that it was a forgery, it looked like his signature but he recalls that he never in his life wrote his company name and address as it appeared in the letter.

I find it very difficult to accept Dr Le's account of the way in which the cheques were paid over, and in fact I do not accept it.

There are various other reasons for not accepting Dr Le's evidence. He made statements on more than one occasion which he later had to correct in cross examination. Some of these may have been explained through a misunderstanding because Dr Le gave evidence in English which was not his first language, but it seemed that there were too many of these events to be explained that simply. His denial of knowledge of many of his mother-in-law's affairs, even though he was a director of his mother-in-law's company, Sercir Pty Ltd, and his denial that he ever heard of the company Spacex, an emanation of the
Vietnamese Government until November 1993 are incredible.

Then there is DX14. The document is a fax sent from Dr Le's company Helleh
Holding Pty Ltd to Mr Huynh on 9 April 1989.

It would seem that Helleh Holding Pty Ltd sent the fax on Sercir Pty Ltd letterhead in handwriting in Vietnamese. The request was to know how much Mr
Huynh claimed was still owing in respect of the supply of cables to Vietnam
Telecom. The letter concluded, "Mother has given you $35,000, hence there should be a surplus of $3,288. I cannot see how we could still owe you any money? Could you please telephone ME TONIGHT?" 
It was then said that Mr Huynh replied by typing details onto a copy of the fax. Mr Huynh claimed $28,029.

Mr Harris says that DX14 is significant for a number of reasons, (1) the use of the word "we" tends to show that Dr Le's mother-in-law's business was not really separate from him; (2) having accepted from the document itself that this was the chronological order of the creation of the document, the evidence of Dr Le and his mother-in-law to the effect that the first defendant prepared the typing and then sent it to Mrs Mai who had Dr Le handwrite his comments could not be correct; (3) Dr Le and Mrs Mai denied that Dr Le had any interest in the telephone cables for Vietnam Telecom. When asked why it was Dr Le who had written DX14 it was said that because he spoke English and Mrs Mai did not. However, this is hardly an answer to a communication which, whether an original fax or a reply, was in Vietnamese.

Some evidence was given that Dr Le had had complaints made against him to the
Medical Board because of cosmetic surgery he had undertaken. I thought that part of the reason for pleading this evidence was to blacken Dr Le's name and
I regarded most of this material as irrelevant and it had no effect on my mind except for one aspect of it. That aspect was that I thought that the scenario presented by Mr Harris in address could well be correct, and that is, that Dr
Le thought that he may very well have to find something else to do while he was suspended as a medical practitioner, or even if he was struck off the
Register and accordingly he invested his money in the plastic bag business wihtout as much care as he might otherwise have done.

I really could not rely on Dr Le as being a witness of truth in anything.

The second plaintiff, Mrs Le, again did not show up as a witness of credibility. She again denied involvement with her mother's Sercir business, but the evidence showed that she did in fact sign cheques on behalf of Sercir and kept the cheque book.

Again Mrs Mai was a witness whose evidence I could not accept. She commenced giving her evidence on 31 October 1995, but her evidence was not completed and she commenced again on 1 November. She said that the inconsistency in her evidence the previous day had been due to the fact that she had had a headache and was confused. However, there were inconsistencies on the evidence given on November 1995. She also, at one stage, said that her affidavit had been prepared by Mr Huynh and she just signed it. This really couldn't be right.
The affidavit bears the Blake Dawson Waldron imprint and was, according to the interpreter's certificate, translated by the interpreter in the presence of
Elizabeth Johnstone, solicitor of Blake Dawson Waldron and Mrs Mai. Indeed, in the end Mrs Mai just had to say that she had a very poor memory.

Accordingly, it is difficult to accept any of the plaintiffs' witnesses.

It is also difficult to accept Mr Huynh as a witness of truth. I have already referred to the gold incident which threw great doubt on Mr Huynh's credibility. There are other matters as well. First, there are various allegations that he forged Dr Le's signature. One instance is in connection with the letter of 2 March 1988 which was sent to Mr Williamson. I do not really know the truth about this document. I find it hard to accept in view of the other evidence that the letter did not emanate from Dr Le, but I do think there is probably some truth in Dr Le's assertion that it was not one of his regular letters and was not on his regular letterhead. It may well, accordingly, have been prepared by Mr Huynh or his accountant on behalf of Dr
Le.

Another problem is the document which was allegedly written out on 28 December in Mr Huynh's diary. This was headed "agreement Mrs and Mr Le and Van
Tri" and showed that there was due to be paid $153,824 including "Goodwill Mr
Vu family $11,000 Jimmy Tran family $4000". Mr Carson says it is one of "life's magical coincidences" that this is the very sum which was paid over as part of the purchase of the one-half share in the business in February/March
Mr Carson puts that the document is inconsistent with Mr Huynh's then solicitors' reply to a request for particulars of 7 March 1991 which is PX27.
With respect, I do not consider this is so. The answer to the particulars appears to me to have been derived from this document. It is merely more detailed. Mr Carson then puts that annexure "E" of Mr Huynh's affidavit, DA06, a document dated 19 May 1988 in which a Japanese engineer acknowledges receiving 7,962,300 yen including 1.9 million yen advanced on 12 July 1987 tends to show that at least the 1.9 million yen had nothing to do with Dr Le.
Further, the currency conversions used by Mr Huynh at the rate of 108 yen to an Australian dollar and 4.6 Hong Kong dollars to one Australian dollar bear no relation to the exchange rates as at the relevant date. This appears to be the case, but one does not know when the exchange rates were 108 yen to the
Australian dollar and 4.6 Hong Kong dollars to the Australian dollar. Mr
Carson puts that the document in Mr Huynh's diary was in fact drawn up somewhere in 1990 or 1991. Mr Huynh denied that.

Mr Huynh's evidence was that on 5 March 1988 Dr Le said, "I have a cheque for you, but I would like to see the list of expenses in your diary again", he just happened to have his 1987 diary with him, showed it to Dr Le, got paid and then wrote the words paid 5 March 1988 on the diary together with the word "banked". Mr Carson puts that Mr Huynh forgot when he was recreating the document later that 5 March 1988 was a Saturday so there could be no banking.
However the words "banked" do not necessarily mean "banked on that day", nor was it necessarily the case that the word "banked" was written in the same hand or on the same day.

Mr Carson points to the letter of 28 February 1988 allegedly sent by Mr Huynh to Dr and Mrs Le which is annexure "L" to Mr Huynh's affidavit DA06 of 8
December 1993. Dr Le denied having seen that letter before his solicitor had shown it to him as an annexure to an affidavit. Mr Carson says that it is inconsistent with Dr Le's request on 5 March to see the list of expenses again.

Again, I have some doubts as to the authenticity of annexure "L". It does seem rather strange that if Dr Le had been given all the information by letter of February, he would have asked to see the diary agreement again on 5 March.

Another problem with Mr Huynh's evidence was the way in which he dealt with Mr
Tran. According to the documents, Mr Tran's interest in Trily Plastics was worth $13,850.94 and Dr or Mrs Le handed Mr Williamson a cheque in Mr Tran's favour in that amount. According to the diary agreement of 28 December 1987,
Jimmy Tran's family had goodwill valued at $4,000.

Mr Tran swore an affidavit for Dr Le's solicitors. Mr Tran said that his mother had lent Mr Huynh money in connection with the plastics factory. He and his mother were trying to get details from Mr Huynh as to their "investment" for some time without success, but in March 1988 they were told to see Mr
Huynh's solicitor and were handed a cheque for $14,000 or thereabouts and Mr
Tran's mother said, "It's better than nothing". Mr Tran said that he did not ever recall Mr Huynh mentioning that there was a thing called a Trivu Unit
Trust, and indeed, was not aware of the business structure which Mr Huynh had adopted at all. He denies that he contributed $18,000 towards setting up the factory, he denies that he had signed any application for shares or units in
Rossville Pty Ltd or the Trivu Unit Trust or that he had ever attended any meetings though his name appeared in the minutes. He denies that Mr Huynh ever promised to pay him or ever did pay him the $4,000.

In answer, Mr Huynh says that he negotiated mainly with Mr Tran's mother and the Tran family received $42,000 from the moneys given by Dr Le. He also says that he had a conversation with Mrs Tran in which he said, "I want to pay Jim the $4,000 I promised him for his work. But first I would like you to pay me back $4,000 that I gave you over the past few years." Mrs Tran replied, "That will not be necessary: we are all square now." 
All this seems rather odd and tends to suggest to my mind that Mr Huynh was in the position of so many entrepreneurs who are representatives of an ethnic group that they are given funds by members of their ethnic group and trusted with arranging transactions without reference back as to the exact details. In the end result, I cannot see any effect on Mr Huynh's credit because of his dealings with the Tran family.

The final matter that Mr Carson puts up is that the claim made in the second cross claim for $2,100 air fares and for 19 days' accommodation and 512 hours' consultancy fees is an obvious sham. Exhibit PX33 is a copy of Mr Huynh's departure card showing he left Australia on 9 May 1989 to spend most of his time in Japan for 21 days on holiday. When cross examined as to how he, an experienced traveller, could have filled in the card wrongly, his only answer was "Maybe wrong" and that "I didn't pay attention to what I did". He denied that the May trip was a holiday. I think the form completed by Mr Huynh again tells against his credit as a witness. It is just inconsistent with the claim for working for Dr and Mrs Le overseas during May 1989.

Mr Huynh was cross examined for some time. Unfortunately, the cross examination was not as productive as it could have been. The cross examiner tended to ask long questions and the interpreters employed had great difficulty in interpreting the questions. Accordingly, it was not always possible to ascertain whether the witness's answers were responsive to the questions asked. It was, I think, more likely than not, having observed Mr
Huynh that he did understand the English used in the questions on some occasions but many of the questions were in such a long convoluted form that even a person whose first language was English might have some trouble with them. Because of this problem, the cross examination did not achieve the end that its creator designed it to achieve.

Mr Harris submitted on more than one occasion that it would be incredible for
Mr Huynh to expend a lot of time and even his own moneys in overseas business trips and obtaining sub-contractors if it were not for the agreement between the parties that he would be remunerated by Dr Le and Mrs Mai for his efforts.
This submission is in my view correct up to a point. I formed the view that Mr
Huynh was one of those entrepreneurs who would cast his bread upon the waters and that he would be likely from time to time to take the risk that he might not be reimbursed. Furthermore, there were a few projects in which both Dr Le and Mr Huynh were involved and it may be that there was a loading on one of the other projects to make up for the fact that Mr Huynh might not be paid for the current project. However, as I say, the submission is convincing up to a point and I have taken it into account.

In the end, I am not sure whether I should completely disbelieve Mr Huynh or not. Certainly I could not accept everything he said and I am of the view that some of the documents upon which he relied are extremely suspicious. I also consider that he finds it difficult to distinguish between what happened within the confines of his own mind and what as agreed to by other parties.
This, I think, has been exacerbated by the fact that I referred to earlier that he has had to act as agent for his country men and women who have entrusted their affairs to him. 
Mrs Huynh gave evidence by affidavit. She was not cross examined. She does affirm what her husband said about not making any statement about selling plastic offcuts in her presence; indeed, she denied that the business did sell plastic offcuts. She also says that she cannot recall her husband saying, "One machine can make a profit of at least $2,000 per day", though she does remember him saying that the business was a good one and the machines were capable of operating 24 hours a day seven days a week. I think her evidence does give some slight additional weight to the defendants' case.

The thought went through my mind that I should completely disregard everything that Mr Huynh had said as unreliable. I do not think I can go that far. Most of the attacks made on Mr Huynh's credibility did not succeed. Some certainly did succeed and his credibility was weakened. If I had to choose between Dr Le and Mr Huynh, I would choose the latter as being slightly more reliable.

The thought entered my mind as to what I should do in the event that I disbelieve all the five main witnesses in the case. This unfortunately happens from time to time. When it does, the Court must still examine all the salient matters in the case including the documents and the surrounding circumstances; see Pryer versus GIO Court of Appeal, 18 September, 1989 unreported, noted in [65 ALJ 479.] That has difficulty in the instant case because there are very few documents in the case of great significance whose authenticity is beyond doubt. Furthermore, there are very few surrounding circumstances which help one get to the truth because not only was Mr Huynh involved with Dr Le in the present matter, he was also involved with Mrs Mai and her company Sercir
Pty Ltd in other transactions in Vietnam. Again, not only was Dr Le involved with Mr Huynh with respect to the Wollongong land and the acquisition of the interests in Rossville Pty Ltd/Trily Plastics, he was also interested, at least at one stage, in a plastic bag factory in Vietnam and the China trip which was undertaken in January 1988 was not necessarily one connected with the Australian plastic bag business.

So far as the claim is concerned, it follows from the above that I am not satisfied that the contract was to buy a 50% share in the business for $250,000. I think it is more likely than not that the contract was to buy an interest in the business for approximately $100,000 with the balance of the "purchase moneys" to go to Mr Huynh for past services. I am also not satisfied that the representations alleged by the plaintiffs were made.

Accordingly, there must be a verdict for the defendants on the claim.

I now turn to the cross claims. The full details of the matters which went to make up the cross claims are dealt with in Mr Huynh's affidavit of 20 January, (DA13).

There appears to be no doubt at all that some consultancy was done by Mr Huynh for Dr Le and Mrs Mai. The rate charged by Mr Huynh for this work has not been put in dispute, and indeed, it was the rate which was paid by Dr Le when he paid $153,824 on 5 March 1988. There was little cross examination of Mr
Huynh's account as to what he did in the course of his consultancy work, or whom he saw, as detailed in that affidavit (DA13). The only real attack was that the outgoing passenger card signed by Mr Huynh for the May 1989 trip showed that he was going on holiday.

There was no case in reply presented to Mr Huynh's evidence on the cross claims.

It thus seems to me that (a) as I have accepted Mr Huynh's evidence as against
Dr Le's; (b) there is no answer to Mr Huynh's cross claims; (c) Mr Huynh was not cross examined on the details of the cross claims; and (d) the details given by Mr Huynh are credible, the cross claimant is entitled to a verdict on his cross claims. The exact amount now due including interest will need to be worked out by Mr Harris and his instructing solicitors when they bring in short minutes.

Accordingly, in my view the claim should be dismissed with costs. The cross claimant is entitled to judgment on his cross claims with costs and the exhibits should be returned after 28 days. However, the only order I make at this stage is that the matter stand over to my list on 11 June at 9.50 am for the purpose of handing up short minutes and the defendants/cross claimant are the persons to draft these short minutes. Should the legal representatives of the parties contact my Associate at least a week before that date, some other more convenient date in the same week can be substituted for 11 June 1996.

LE TAN THANH versus VAN TRI HUYNH /90 
TUESDAY 11 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute which I heard last year. It was a very complicated dispute which took many days and I did not give judgment until 20
May this year.

Today the matter is in the list for short minutes. Mr Harris, who appears for the cross-claimant, has handed up a set of short minutes which bear the name of T V Martin & Co seeking a verdict on the cross-claim of $322,483 and costs. Mr Carson, solicitor for the plaintiffs, asks that the quantum of the cross-claim be referred to a Master to determine. He does this on the basis that his recollection was that I said during the cross-examination of the cross-claimant that there was no need for cross-examination on the question of quantum and that he would be protected. I have no recollection of saying those words. On the other hand, I cannot deny saying them either. There is no reference in the transcript to them and Mr Harris has no recollection of them.

The view that I have taken in the odd case where this has occurred is that if a barrister or solicitor tells me that he or she remembers such an utterance that I accept it, at least unless there is material which shows the contrary.

The matter either is I said those words, or I did not say those words, or someone misunderstood what words I did say. In the first and third situations the party concerned should have an opportunity of remedying a misapprehension, or should have an opportunity because of what the court said to present its case on a particular aspect of the matter. Any prejudice hopefully will be able to be dealt with by way of costs.

Mr Harris strongly opposes Mr Carson having a further opportunity to put on further material. It may be that Mr Carson will not take advantage of the liberty that he is given at this stage in any event. I think the thing to do, however, is to say that any further evidence in reply and any further submissions as to the quantum of the cross-claim may be filed by 21 June 1996, but I will not at this stage rule as to whether the court should receive those. That matter can be argued out before me on 16 July 1996.

The probabilities will be that if I then accept that the quantum of the cross- claim should be determined including the extra material and submissions that I will do it myself for two reasons. First, the Masters have become tremendously overburdened and, secondly, this case has gone on long enough with a relatively small amount of money involved, and I think the parties deserve an early determination on the question of quantum.

Mr Carson has indicated he will appeal, as is his clients' right. He has asked for a stay. There is no need to rule on this at the moment, but I am concerned that his clients are not able to give any security for the costs, et cetera, of an appeal, so that it should not be assumed that once the quantum is determined there will necessarily be a stay. However, I will deal with that matter also on 16 July 1996.

LE versus HUYNH (NO 2) /90 
TUESDAY 23 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 20 May 1996 I gave reasons for judgment in proceedings that had commenced before me on 30 October 1995 and had proceeded for some six days at the end of 1995. I stood the matter over for short minutes to be brought in. On 11 June 1996 short minutes were brought in, but there was then raised before me an allegation that the issue of damages on the cross-claim had been postponed and that my reasons of 20 May 1996 had overlooked that fact.

On 11 June I indicated what my then view was about the problem and stood the matter over so that the plaintiffs' solicitor could file submissions and any evidence that he considered should be taken into account when considering which of two courses I should take, either (a) give judgment on the cross- claim now, or (b) allow further evidence or submissions to be made.

On 16 July 1996 Mr Brereton of counsel appeared for the plaintiffs. He had not appeared in the matter earlier. He made submissions as to why it would be appropriate not only for there to be further cross-examination of Mr Huynh on the quantum of damages on the cross-claim, but also why further evidence should be received on that matter. In other words, there should be a remission to the Master or, if the Master were too busy, to a Judge in lieu of the
Master to inquire what were the proper damages that flowed from the liability established to pay the cross-claimant money under his cross-claim.

There is no doubt that the Court can at this stage reopen the matter. There has been no formal order entered and it is always open to the Court, if it is proper to do so, to review its reasons, particularly if there has been some glitch which has only become apparent after the reasons have been delivered.
As Mr Brereton says, it is an a fortiori case to that dealt with by the High
Court in Autodesk Inc versus Dyason <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 300], 309 and following.

The question thus is should the Court reopen the matter? It is, to my mind, axiomatic that the Court should not ordinarily do so and that it is in the interest of the community that litigation be fought once and only once.

Mr Brereton put the matter on two bases. First, he said there had been an undertaking made by the Court that Mr Carson, who then appeared as solicitor- advocate for the plaintiffs, would be protected and that he would not be required to test the cross-claimant on the matter of quantum of damages. That protection having been offered by the Court and accepted, it would be quite unjust to now preclude the matter of quantum being ventilated. Secondly, he says that even if that is not accepted, then a bona fide error has been made by those who appeared for the plaintiffs and in the interest of justice the plaintiffs' lawyers should be permitted to reopen the matter to avoid the clients suffering from a bona fide error where the hardship on the defendants is not so great that there is some countervailing aspect of justice.

Mr Carson was assisted at the trial by a Ms Cheeseman. Mr Carson left
Australia for what might be called sabbatical leave, his last day in Sydney being 21 June 1996. On that day he signed further submissions, which he himself had composed. Mr Carson, however, did not give evidence on the application to reopen. Ms Cheeseman did give evidence. Her evidence was that in the afternoon of the fourth day of hearing the following exchange took place between Mr Carson and myself: "Mr Carson: I am conscious of the time your Honour, the amount of the claim for consultancy services should that perhaps be dealt with separately or referred to a Master, if that becomes necessary.

Mr Justice Young: Yes Mr Carson, you will be protected on that." 
I make it clear right from the start that I accept Ms Cheeseman as an honest, careful and credible member of the legal profession and I do not have anything at all adverse to say about her reputation and credibility. Despite this, I cannot accept on the balance of probabilities that what she said occurred.
However, I have no doubt at all that she now bona fide believes it did occur.

The matters which make me come to this view are in summary as follows: (a) Ms
Cheeseman was completely inexperienced in Equity procedure. She did not understand the difference between dividing liability and quantum in a trial at
Common Law from one in Equity. In Equity one actually has to prove some damage and then the quantum is assessed so that some aspects of damage must be considered at the trial, Enkelmann versus Glissan (1982) 2 BPR 9640, 9643; (b) although the failure to appreciate the distinction is not of vital significance, it does affect the way in which the Court is asked to consider preparations for the trial in the plaintiffs' camp. Ms Cheeseman says the way in which the case was prepared on behalf of the plaintiffs was that Mr Carson did all the advocacy, Mr Carson spoke to her very little about what was to happen in court. Ms Cheeseman had virtually no input into any of the questions to be asked in examination in chief or cross-examination. Ms Cheeseman had no input into the issues which were to be dealt with in the Court as part of the plaintiffs' case and, indeed, she had limited understanding as to what those issues were. Her role was certainly not the role of a junior counsel who is briefed with a senior barrister and who would be the person who was conducting the case, though his or her leader would be the person whose voice would be heard in court. Nor did she take the role of an instructing solicitor who was giving to the barrister instructions as to how the case should proceed. She appears more to be in the subservient role of a person who was looking at the transcript, making sure witnesses were available and above all preparing what she called a chronology.

This chronology was rather a mystery. It did not appear to be a chronology in the true sense, but rather a document which dealt with the various claims being made by the litigants and relating dates and circumstances to those various claims. At one stage Ms Cheeseman said that she was almost finished the chronology before the trial began, but she also said she was working on it up until at least the fourth day of the hearing. She says that on the fourth day of the hearing she changed direction in the completion of this chronology because of what was said in court; 
Ms Cheeseman said that before Court on the fourth day, which was 2
November 1995, she and Mr Carson had a conversation that the case was overrunning and that there would be a need to sever the issue of damages. She says that she thought that that was a very important matter. However, there are various things that happened on that day which tend to run counter to the view that it was a very important matter; viz (i) no-one said anything about the matter to the Court on any account until the afternoon. Why, one asks, if it was so important was it not raised at the beginning of the day; (ii) the case had originally been set for five days, so that on day four it was not overrunning. Ms Cheeseman had little idea as to what Mr Carson's cross- examination was. It is hard to see the reasons for her thinking that the case would overrun, unless perhaps she knew from previous experience that Mr
Carson's cross-examination would be lengthy. However, Mr Carson had only commenced his cross-examination of Mr Huynh at 3.30 the day before; (iii) Ms
Cheeseman made no note of the conversation at the time; (iv) Mr Harris, who was appearing for the defendants and who is a very experienced counsel in this
Court, made no note; (v) Ms Cheeseman's belief that she was partly involved in the subpoenas to the Commonwealth Bank at the relevant time as to why she did not make a note is hard to accept as anything more than a reconstruction in view of the importance of the matter; another problem is that there were three Court Reporters recording the proceedings on 2 November in the afternoon. At least two of these ladies were very experienced Equity Division Court Reporters and there is no mention in the transcript of any indication of the type contained in Ms Cheeseman's affidavit; and no-one sought to amend the transcript at the beginning of day five. It is well-known that it is the duty of advocates at the beginning of the next day to make sure that anything that has been omitted from the transcript is rectified; see Vakauta versus Kelly [(1988) 13 NSWLR 502] at 525.

Again, neither Mr Harris, nor the solicitor who instructed him, has any recollection that what Ms Cheeseman now recollects was said was indeed said. I have no recollection. I certainly say regularly in cases, and particularly where there is a natural break, such as a changeover of the Court Reporters, words to the effect, "How long is this cross-examination going to last?" or perhaps more directly, "Have you almost finished?", but I have no recollection of that happening in this case. If it did happen it was more likely to happen when there was a changeover of Court Reporters. I have looked at the transcript for the afternoon of 2 November and there does not appear to me to be any change in the flow of the questions that were being put by Mr Carson before and after the changeover of Court Reporters.

The usual rule appears to be that if there is a contest as to what was said in open Court the Judge's recollection is adopted; see Vakauta's case at 525 and Goktas versus GIO [(1993) 31 NSWLR 684] at 699.
However, I accept Mr Brereton's submission that if the Judge has no recollection these cases are of no assistance.

A further point is that Ms Cheeseman's evidence and the submissions drafted by
Mr Carson on 21 June show that the real defence to the cross-claim was "no retainer". Mr Carson and Ms Cheeseman thought about total failure of consideration but Ms Cheeseman agrees that that defence was never actually run, but she cannot explain why. Mr Carson did in fact in the afternoon of 2
November in the transcript, which begins at p 196 and ends at p 211, ask questions which could be thought to go to the quantum of damages, particularly at p 207A. However, it may very well be that these questions were asked because it was thought that they went to credit and indeed, this is borne out by the way in which the submissions were made at the end of the evidence.

It is possible that all the factors that I have mentioned are coincidence, but it seems to me that when they all flow in the same direction and one has to find as a matter on the balance of probabilities what occurred, they all flow in the direction that the words were not said. Accordingly, as I have said, although I accept Ms Cheeseman as a reputable member of the profession who is endeavouring to do the best she can, I cannot accept on the balance of probabilities that the words were said.

However, the fact remains that Ms Cheeseman and Mr Carson were both of the view that something like this was said. It is easy enough in a complex case to make such an error and the present was a fairly complex case. When two reputable lawyers say that they were under such an apprehension then one should not lightly disbelieve it. When lawyers operate under a misapprehension, it seems to me, provided that something can be done without radically affecting the rights of the other party, that the balance of authority points towards the Court doing as much as it can to put the client into the same position as he would have been in had the error not been made.
Cases such as Cohen versus McWilliam [(1995) 38 NSWLR 476] point strongly in this direction.

However, the plaintiffs must not be put in a better position than had no mistake been made. There is no allegation of any mistake made before the fourth day. The fourth day was well into the case and before the proceedings commenced there had been directions as to the filing of affidavits, so that all affidavits were to be filed and served before the proceedings commenced.
Without there being any misunderstanding, Dr Le did not file any affidavit disputing the quantum of the cross-claim and, indeed, as I have said, his defence really was he never retained the cross-claimant to do any work for him, with the idea of total failure of consideration still floating in the background.

The plaintiffs now seek to file an affidavit by a civil engineer, Mr Easton, who has carried out certain examinations of the cross-claimant's evidence and suggests that very little work was done by the cross-claimant. I think if I were to allow that material to be put on it would give the plaintiffs an advantage that they would not have had had it been made clear one way or the other on the fourth day where the case was going. There is no evidence that Ms
Cheeseman was preparing any evidence of this sort of nature before she thought
I made an order giving her clients protection.

However, the consequence of the misapprehension on the part of the plaintiffs' lawyers was that there was a foreshortening of the cross-examination of Mr
Huynh. That cross-examination lasted over a day. It is hard to see how realistically it could have gone very much longer, but it seems to me that at the plaintiffs' cost there should be an opportunity to remedy the mistake by permitting further cross-examination of Mr Huynh, but only on matters going to quantification of damages on the cross-claim.

There is a practical difficulty about this. The case was a 1990 case which was heard in 1995. I think it took longer for me to give judgment in this case than any other case I have heard since I was called to this Bench in 1985.
There were a number of factors for that, but it was unfortunate. I am now due to proceed on long leave on 7 September and my calendar is fairly full up until then. Mr Carson, the person who conducted cross-examination, is himself overseas. The general rule is enunciated by Allen J in Phillips versus Phillips WN (Pt 1) 445, that prima facie only one counsel may cross-examine a particular witness, unless there be some special reason to allow a departure from that proposition.

There is some time available to hear the rest of the case on 2 August 1996.
However, there will need to be some debate as to what is to happen on that day, if indeed that date be the appropriate occasion to continue the case.
 (COUNSEL ADDRESSED.) 
The matter of what relief, if any, should be given from the rule in Phillips v Phillips has now been canvassed. Mr Brereton says that this is a case where, as mentioned by Allen J in Phillips' case, there has been through illness or other event which renders it impracticable for the same person to cross-examine, the need for a change of cross-examiner.

The case is not like Phillips' case itself, where it would appear that silk had been brought in to cross-examine after several days cross-examination by a member of the junior Bar, nor is it like Eva Pty Ltd versus Charles Davis
Ltd <case>; [[1982] VR 515], where because of the number of issues involved it was appropriate that more than one counsel cross-examine.

As Mr Brereton mentioned, I set out what I thought were the guidelines in
GPI Leisure versus Herdsman Investments Pty Ltd (No. 3) [(1990) 20 NSWLR ]
at 22-23. These were guidelines because the rule is really one which is for the judge to administer in the interests of fairness, rather than absolute rules of law.

I am very conscious of the five points Mr Harris raises, that is that if there are any special circumstances in this case they have been caused by the plaintiffs' lawyer's mistake and the plaintiffs' lawyer going on leave, rather than any chance happening or illness. It is also certainly possible for Mr
Carson to come back to Australia or to cross-examine by video link from
London. However, in a relatively small case it seems to me that the advantages to be gained by anybody in having Mr Carson put to all this inconvenience are not worth the effort.

The rule is there, not because it is nice to have a rule from which one will never depart, but rather to secure fair conduct of a trial. It is normally fair that the witness should only be cross-examined by one counsel in the one interest. However, it is recognised that there may be circumstances where bearing in mind all relevant matters it would be appropriate to depart from the general rule.

I really cannot see any real disadvantage for another person to conduct the cross-examination, so long as, for instance, that person is not so expert in the art of cross-examination that one is really getting back into the situation that Allen J avoided in Phillips' case, where a silk was brought in to replace a junior whose cross-examination at that stage was apparently not satisfying the client.

Accordingly, I think that I should give leave for a junior member of the Bar or a solicitor to continue the cross-examination in lieu of Mr Carson. I fix the matter for 2 August 1996 at 10 am.

Mr Harris of counsel may uplift the exhibits and Mr Huynh may look at the exhibits in the presence of either Mr Harris or his instructing solicitor.

LE TAN THANH V VAN TRI HUYNH (NO 3) /90 
Thursday 5 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I gave judgment on the principal issues arising in this dispute on 20 May 1996. For the reasons outlined on that occasion, I dismissed the claim and held that the cross claimant was entitled to succeed on the cross claim. For the reasons set out in my second judgment on 23 July 1996, the question of the quantum of the cross claim and only that issue was reopened. I took further evidence on that question on 2 August 1996 and after receiving further written submissions, indicated that I would give a written judgment.

Mr Huynh's cross claim can be segregated into four years of work, 1987, 1988, and 1990. Each claim is for so many hours of work at $150 an hour plus accommodation and meals expenses when away from Australia at $250 a day plus airfares and other out-of-pocket expenses.

Mr Brereton, who now appears for the cross defendants, puts that just because
I took the view that it was difficult to believe either Dr Le or Mr Huynh and
I found for Mr Huynh on the claim does not in itself mean I should find on the cross claim for Mr Huynh. The reason for this proposition is simply that on the cross claim Mr Huynh bears the onus of proof. This submission goes beyond the question of quantum. However, I can very quickly deal with it and should do so.

The submission is, of course, correct in principle. It does not advance Dr
Le's position in this case. I thought it more probable than not that Mr Huynh should be accepted even though I was very conscious of his deficiencies as a witness and that on occasions I could not accept him. Mr Brereton's further cross examination of Mr Huynh again demonstrated Mr Huynh's unreliability in many respects. However, this merely decreased his "credibility rating" from say 58% to 55% and did not otherwise affect the fact that on at least the cross claim, I could accept that what Mr Huynh said was more likely than not to have been what happened.

The next attack that Mr Brereton makes is on the rate of $150 per hour. Mr
Brereton says that there is just no evidence of any agreement to pay $150 an hour, nor would such a rate be fixed by any reasonable court as the appropriate hourly rate for a quantum meruit claim based on reasonable remuneration. There was no contrary evidence as to what was the appropriate rate. The only extra evidence I received was cross examination of Mr Huynh, and even had Mr Brereton completely destroyed Mr Huynh (which he didn't) that still would not have affected the position that the only evidence was that bills were rendered in the sum of $150 an hour, there was never any quarrel with that rate, and indeed, there was a part payment of $153,824 on 5 March
I would adopt the figure of $150 an hour as reasonable.

I will now deal with each of the four years in turn.
The claim is - consultancy fees 82 hours at $150 an hour $12,300; 
Dr Vu $11,000; 
Mr Jimmy Tran $4,000; 
Overseas engineers' fees: 
Mr Luu Tung Si $73,725 
Mr H Sakura $31,899 
Mr A San $9,200 
Airfare $4,726; 
Accommodation and meals 26 days at $250 per day $6,500 a total of $153,350.

The cross examination by Mr Brereton quite clearly shows that the moneys that were paid to Dr Vu and Mr Tran had nothing to do with the project for which Mr
Huynh was sent overseas to accomplish. The moneys paid to those gentlemen were for being on stand-by back in Australia while Mr Huynh was on the task. If payments for stand-by labour back in Australia were charged against Dr Le he in fact would be paying twice for the same service. He would be paying both for the representative of the cross claimant and also a substitute for that representative. Accordingly I will not allow the $4,000 and the $11,000.

Turning to Mr Luu Tung Si, Mr Huynh said that he paid him over $73,000 for his time on researching machines and equipment and assessing these things and getting information. Mr Luu Tung Si's acknowledgement, DA06, annexure E, suggests that at least part of this bill was for payment to two Japanese specialists and for three return flights to Vietnam for those specialists.

Mr Brereton asserts that there has been a double payment and that the amount paid to Mr Luu Tung Si incorporates the amount that was paid to Mr Sakura.
Whilst there is a little suspicion about this, and whilst the onus of proving his cross claim lies on Mr Huynh, it seems to me that in the absence of contrary evidence, the receipts from Mr Luu Tung Si and Mr Sakura show, for the reasons set out by Mr Harris for Mr Huynh, in his submissions in reply, that more likely than not there were two payments. However, there is not the same satisfaction about the payment to Mr San and I could not be satisfied that this was not a double payment.

So far as accommodation and meals are concerned, Mr Brereton points out that if 82 hours' work was done overseas, it is strange that 26 days' accommodation was charged. Even only working six hours a day would occupy 14 days, and if one added another 4 days for weekends, that would make 18 days. I just do not accept Mr Huynh's evidence that he did not spend one waking moment other than on Dr Le's work. Accordingly I would disallow 8 days' accommodation. The disallowances of $11,000, $4,000, $9,200 and $2,000 means that I need to take $26,200 off the claim for 1987 reducing it to $127,150.

In 1988, Mr Huynh charged for 378 hours' work, two lots of airfares, one for
April and one for November, and 22 days' accommodation and meals.

PX46 is typed notes from Mr Huynh's diary. The original notes he says he lost with the help of the liquidator of one of his companies. The document was made up in January 1991. Mr Brereton complains that the bill is excessive. However, the evidence as to what work could be done or was done could of necessity only be provided by Mr Huynh and I basically accept that he did spend a considerable amount of time on Dr Le's work. Suggestions in cross examination that some of the projects were for Mrs Mai (Dr Le's mother-in-law) or otherwise outside the retainer were denied by Mr Huynh and the attack did not really strike home. I think I should discount the amount claimed for consultancy fees by 10% because I am not completely satisfied with the figures, but otherwise I think the claim should stand.

Accordingly, deducting $5,670 I would allow $61,023 for 1988.
 sees a claim for 512 hours' consultancy fees, airfares plus accommodation and meals for 19 days. Two main attacks were made on the hours spent. The first is that 192 hours as claimed could not have been spent on preparing a report. The report in evidence is DX09 which is not really a very complete or comprehensive report. Mr Harris says that there are some obvious misunderstandings in the evidence given by Mr Huynh. Perhaps this is so, but if it is, then that just means that Mr Huynh has not made out his case.

Doing the best I can, I would allow one-half of that 192 hours.

The second attack is on the 101 hours allegedly spent between 10 May 1989 and May 1989. As I said in my earlier judgment, Mr Huynh's departure card indicated that this trip was a holiday. Although I believe that some work for
Dr Le was done on the trip, I think it is not established on the balance of probabilities that the majority of the time on that trip was spent on work. I think I should only allow a third of the 101 hours claimed, namely 34 hours to the nearest whole integer. This means reducing the claim for consultancy fees by $24,450 to $52,350.

The claim for accommodation and meals should also be adjusted downwards by %. This reduces the claim under this head by $2,375. Thus I allow $56,825 for 1989.

The 1990 claim is for 112 hours work plus $1400 accommodation and meals. All of this work was done allegedly between January and May. There is no breakup of the total amount of hours. Details are given by Mr Huynh in para 16 of his affidavit, DA13. I do not consider, despite the criticism, that I should reduce the 1990 claim. I think it is established on the balance of probabilities. The claim is for $18,200.

Accordingly the total of the four years' claims that I have allowed them amounts to $263,198. Of this amount $153,824 has been paid, so that there should be a verdict for the cross claimant for the difference of $109,374 plus interest.

Assuming that the oldest debts were paid first, the whole of the 1987 debt and half the 1988 debt would have been paid out of that $153,824.

Mr Harris has helpfully set out a calculation of interest as an appendix to his written submissions. I need to recalculate interest, though I will accept
Mr Harris' methodology (but not all his mathematics). I calculate that the $18,200 has grown to $32,215 by applying Supreme Court interest rates. I need to recalculate the interest on $34,349 from 1 January 1989 to date and $56,825 from 1 January 1990 to date. This means that to the principal of $109,374 one adds $103,166 interest to make a verdict for the cross claimant for $212,540.

Accordingly the formal orders must now be: 
Order that the plaintiffs' claim be dismissed.

Order that the cross defendants pay the cross claimant $212,540.

Order that the plaintiffs/cross defendants pay the costs of the proceedings.

Exhibits may be returned after 28 days provided that should an appeal be lodged they are to be retained until the disposition of the appeal.
 * * * 
