

Ong and Anor versus Leda Holdings Pty Limited and Ors [1997] NSWSC 21 (7
February 1997) 
Ong & Anor versus Leda Holdings Pty Limited & Ors /96 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiffs entered into a lease of premises being part of the property known as Rosemeadow Market Place. At the time of the granting of the lease, the first defendant was the owner of Rosemeadow Market Place. The third defendant was the agent for the first defendant. It is alleged that the third defendant made representations.

It is alleged that the representations were made in late 1993. The plaintiffs executed the lease on or about 11 February 1994.

The second defendant purchased Rosemeadow Market Place from the first defendant. The purchase was completed on 13 May 1994.

Thereafter, rent was paid to the second defendant until February 1996. On or about 11 March 1996, the plaintiffs vacated the premises. The second defendant maintains the view that the lease remains on foot.

The Statement of Claim propounds various claims for relief (including discretionary remedies). It seeks to propound causes of action founded on provisions of the Trade Practices Act, the Fair Trading Act and the
Contracts Review Act, as well as on the principles of negligence, estoppel and unconscionability. The prayers for relief seek remedy, inter alia, in respect of the lease (including a declaration that it is null and void).

The second defendant has brought a Notice of Motion. It is supported by an affidavit sworn by Mr Healy. The only other material placed before me is a copy of the contract made between the first and second defendants.

In substance, the second defendant seeks summary dismissal of the claim made against it by the plaintiffs and summary judgment in respect of a Cross-Claim brought by it against the plaintiffs (including judgment in respect of a claim for outstanding rent).

Neither the first nor the third defendants have moved for summary relief. The second defendant does not dispute that the plaintiffs may have an arguable claim for relief against the other defendants or either of them. It doesn't dispute that the Court may have power to grant to the plaintiffs relief in respect to the lease. It says that it would be unarguable to suggest that the
Court would exercise its power to grant relief which would affect the lease.

There is abundant authority for the proposition that a summary remedy should only be granted in what has been described as clear cases (Webster versus Lampard <case>; [116 ALR 545).] Summary relief is a discretionary remedy. The Court has regard to the relevant circumstances and the interests of justice between the parties. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court that the relief should be granted.

There is nothing before me to suggest that the second defendant is other than an innocent party in the sense that that expression is used in the authorities. There are judgments which support the view that the jurisdiction is, generally speaking, not exercised in such cases. But each case is going to turn on its own circumstances. Despite the assertion of the plaintiffs to the contrary, I do not feel that it can be said that the plaintiffs have a strong case against the second defendant. However, the situation is not free from some doubt. Accordingly, at this stage, I am not satisfied that the case is hopeless.

I should add that the parties have referred the Court to a number of decided cases (including Zaknic Pty Ltd versus Svelte Corporation Pty Ltd & Ors [(1996) ATPR (Digest) 46-159] and Nguyen & Anor versus Taylor [(1992) 27 NSWLR 48).] In my view, it is not necessary to make express reference to what was said in any of these cases. This is an application which falls to be determined on its own particular facts and circumstances.

It seems to me that this is one of those cases where the determination of the relevant issues is best left to the trial. The Court should then have the advantage of having all of the relevant material before it. I do not consider that the second defendant has discharged the onus entitling it to summary relief. There is a view that, in any event, the second defendant may be a proper party to the proceedings. In the circumstances of this case, I consider that justice is best done between the parties if the application is dismissed.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The costs of the plaintiffs and of the second defendant are to be costs in the cause. Appearances have been made on behalf of the other defendants. I do not consider that any order should be made as to their costs of the application. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
