

Danzey and Ors versus Nevada Pty Ltd Matter No 40234/95 [1997] NSWSC 214 (22
May 1997) 
Last Updated: 13 March 1998 `CLAUDE JOSEPH JOHN DANZEY AND ORS versus NEVADA PTY LIMITED` ` 040234/95` `22 May 1997` `Meagher JA, Powell JA, Beazley JA` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal` 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: The Court is in a position to give judgment and I will ask her Honour Justice Beazley to give the first judgment. 
BEAZLEY JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Acting Justice Spender in which his Honour gave leave to the respondent to issue a writ of possession against the second appellants and granted an injunction restraining the first appellant from letting, parting with possession, licensing or giving a right to occupy certain home unit premises at 109 Darling Point Road, Darling Point. 
The respondent, Nevada Pty Limited, is a home unit company which owns the company known as Nevada at 109 Darling Point Road, Darling Point. The property is an apartment building comprising 35 home units.

The appellant, Mr Danzey, is a shareholder in Nevada which entitles him to the exclusive use of unit 102 in accordance with Article 22 to which I will refer more fully in a moment.

In about the middle of August 1994, Mr Danzey leased unit 102 to the second appellants. Article 22 of Nevada's Articles of Association, in addition to conferring upon Mr Danzey the absolute and exclusive use of unit 102, also provided as follows: "No holder of a group of shares shall let, part with possession of or give any licence or right to occupy the unit in respect of which he has the exclusive use under these Articles without the prior approval of the board in writing. The board may decline to give any such approval without assigning any reason therefore".

Counsel for the appellants conceded that Article 22 did not create the relationship of landlord and tenant as between Nevada Pty Limited and Mr
Danzey. It follows that the right of possession to unit 102 remained at all times with Nevada Pty Limited and that Mr Danzey had a contractual right only, that contractual right being of exclusive use of the premises. It also follows that as Mr Danzey had no right of possession in the land, he had no estate in the land which he could let.

On 15 July 1994, Mr Danzey wrote to the chairman of directors of Nevada advising that recent renovations to unit 102 had been completed and it was intended to seek a suitable occupant for it as his daughters had no present requirements for the unit. He advised that real estate agents had been retained to recommend appropriate occupants. On 11 August 1994, Mr Danzey wrote to the secretary of Nevada requesting a meeting with members of the board so the proposed occupants "can meet and be introduced". The letter continued: "My letter of 15 July 1994 advised our agreement that occupants be interviewed prior to taking occupation of the subject unit".

A meeting was held on 15 August 1994 at which members of the board were present, as were Mr Danzey and, it would appear, the second appellants. An issue arose in the proceedings as to whether the correspondence to which I have referred or during the course of the meeting, Mr Danzey in fact made an application under Article 22 to have the board approve the occupancy of the second appellants of unit 102. The trial judge found that Mr Danzey had made no application. I should interpolate that Article 22 itself does not speak in terms of a member of the company being required to make an application, but it must follow that if the board's approval is sought under the Article, an application is required, although of course the application does not have to be made in any formal way.

The correspondence and the transcript of the meeting of 15 August indicates that the parties, who had been in a position of conflict up to then in any event, were not clear as between themselves as to precisely what it was that
Mr Danzey was doing. The transcript of the meeting goes on for several pages and there are indications in it that if the meeting could not be described as heated, it was certainly one where parties were exhibiting some discomfiture.

It does seem to me, however, that to be found amongst the material in that transcript is in fact an application to have the second appellants occupy the unit. This comes from Mr Danzey's statement to the meeting when he said, "All I'm saying is that I asked the board to seek information about these two young people whether or not they would be suitable tenants and will in fact add to the residential environment of this building and I believe they will and accept them as occupants for 103(sic)".

It is obvious the reference should have been to unit 102. It is apparent from correspondence which followed the meeting that the board was uncertain as to what in fact had transpired at the meeting and what it was that Mr Danzey had been saying. This is apparent in the contents of a letter from Nevada Pty
Limited to Mr Danzey of 16 August 1994 in which they said, amongst other things, "It was assumed until last night that you intended to grant a lease of the unit. So that there be no doubt as to what you are seeking the board's approval for, the board requests that you forthwith indicate in writing the precise basis upon which you propose that the unit be occupied by Mr Tietzel and Mr Scott".

They also requested in that letter that Mr Danzey put into writing all the factors which he wished the board to take into account in determining whether or not to grant approval pursuant to Article 22. They asked that this be done forthwith. Mr Danzey in fact did respond promptly in a letter of 18 August in which he put forward a number of points which he submitted were relevant to the board's consideration. He also said in that letter that he would be away from Sydney from the 19th to the 30th August and would put in a written submission within seven days of his return. As it turns out, he did not give himself the opportunity to do so, nor did he give the board the opportunity to consider the application which I have found was made, as on the same day as he wrote to the board, he permitted the second appellants to take up occupancy of unit 102.

In those circumstances, the board was never given an opportunity to consider the application and to consider whether it would give or would not give its approval under Article 22. It follows that the second appellants went into occupation of the unit without the approval of the board under Article 22 and that they were entitled to take proceedings to obtain vacant possession of that unit.

It follows from what I have said that save for ground 1 of the appeal which asserted that the trial judge erred in holding no application was made for approval under Article 22, the appeal should fail. Having said that, the orders of the trial judge do require some amendment as strictly this is not an area where a writ of possession ought to issue.

In my opinion, the orders of the Court should be that the appeal be dismissed; that orders 1 and 4 of the trial judge be set aside; that in lieu thereof there be an order that the second appellants deliver up to Nevada Pty Limited vacant possession of unit 102, but that orders 2 and 3 of the trial judge otherwise remain in place. I would further propose that the appellants pay the respondent's costs of the appeal.

MEAGHER JA: I agree. 
POWELL JA: I also agree. 
MEAGHER JA: The orders of the Court therefore are the orders proposed by Justice Beazley. * * * 
