

White versus Baycorp Advantage Business Information Services Ltd [2006] NSWSC (18 May 2006) 
Last Updated: 3 July 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: White versus Baycorp Advantage Business Information Services Ltd <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2219/06  
HEARING DATE{S): 8 & 9 May 2006  
DECISION DATE: 18/05/2006  
PARTIES: 
John Anthony White - First Plaintiff 
White Group Holdings Pty Limited - Second Plaintiff 
Baycorp Advantage Business Information Services Limited - First Defendant 
Capital Consumer Finance NSW - Second Defendant 
Capital Finance Australia Ltd - Third Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: Campbell J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
P King - Plaintiffs 
M Ashhurst - Third Defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
Segal & Associates - Plaintiffs 
Submitting Appearance - First Defendant 
Kemp Strang - Third Defendant  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACTS - PARTICULAR PARTIES - principal and agent - undisclosed principal - contract inherently incapable of being entered as agent for an undisclosed principal - need for agent to have actual authority to enter contract on behalf of undisclosed principal at the time contract is made - TRADE PRACTICES
AND RELATED MATTERS - consumer protection - criteria for deciding whether a representation is misleading and deceptive - whether necessary for a person making an implied representation to know that it was incorrect at the time it was made before it can be misleading and deceptive - whether all false statements are misleading and deceptive - CORPORATIONS - miscellaneous cases - effect of deregistration - effect of reinstatement of registration - extent to which effect of reinstatement is retrospective - TORTS - MISCELLANEOUS TORTS - other economic torts - injurious falsehood - element of malice - DAMAGES - causation - role of "but for" test - shifting the onus of adducing evidence  
ACTS CITED:  [Company Law Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/clra1998210/) (Cth)  [Company Law Review Bill ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/bill/clrb1997220/)  [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) 
Corporations Law  [Privacy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) (Cth)  [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth)  
DECISION: 
Entries in credit reference bureau database misleading and deceptive.
Injunctions requiring removal granted.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
EQUITY LIST  
CAMPBELL J  MAY 2006  /06 JOHN ANTHONY WHITE & ANOR versus BAYCORP ADVANTAGE BUSINESS INFORMATION SERVICES LIMITED & ORS  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs are a man and his company, who were both the subject of notification in the database maintained by a credit reference bureau. They contend that the notifications are inaccurate, and involve improper disclosure of personal information concerning the man. They seek a remedy concerning those notifications.  
The Principal Players  Mr John White conducts, through various companies, businesses which include that of a commercial printer and mail house. The White Holdings Group Pty Ltd ("White Holdings") is one such company.  Baycorp Advantage Business Information Services Limited ("Baycorp") conducts a credit rating information bureau. It has submitted to any order of the Court save as to costs.  Capital Finance Australia Ltd ("Capital Finance") is a finance company.
It is a subscriber to Baycorp's credit information bureau. It is the third defendant in these proceedings.  Capital Finance has a subsidiary, Capital Corporate Finance Limited ("Capital Corporate"). It is not a party to these proceedings.  The entries in the Baycorp database which are the subject of these proceedings, each contain a reference to "Capital Consumer Finance NSW". The plaintiffs named "Capital Consumer Finance NSW" as the second defendant in the proceedings. However, there is neither the name of a corporation, nor a registered business name, which contains those words.  At the hearing, the only appearances were Mr King, for the plaintiffs, and
Mr Ashhurst, for Capital Finance.  
The Rental Agreement  On 1 September 1999 Metronome Enterprises Pty Ltd trading as Cobb & Co
Mail entered an agreement with Konica Australia Pty Ltd ("Konica"), under which it agreed to rent four items of equipment (a Konica model 7040 photocopier, a finisher stapler, an interface, and a 2500 sheet paper supply) for a "Term" of 60 months. In that agreement Metronome was referred to as the "Hirer", and Konica Australia was referred to as "Konica".  That agreement contained the following provisions:  "1 Ownership of Equipment  
The Hirer is only a bailee of the Equipment. The Equipment is and will remain the sole property of Konica. On the expiry or termination of this agreement, the Hirer must return the Equipment as Konica may direct, at the expense of the Hirer.  Payment  
The Hirer must  pay the Rental as specified in this agreement;  pay interest on all overdue moneys at a rate which is 2% per year above
Konica's cost of funding the overdue amount. Unpaid interest will be compounded monthly;  repay on demand any expense (including legal expenses and outgoings)
Konica incurs in enforcing or protecting its rights under this agreement and any moneys Konica may pay to make good any failure by the Hirer to observe this agreement.  pay on demand all taxes, stamp duty, fees, duties, charges, costs and expenses relating to this agreement, the Equipment or payments received under this agreement; and  pay all amounts in full, without any deduction.  ...  Continuations and Variations  
This agreement will extend beyond the expiry of the Term until  either party gives 90 days prior written notice of termination expiring on or after expiry of the Term; and  at the expiry of the 90 day notice period, the hirer delivers the equipment, in good condition, as Konica may direct.  ...  Default  
Each of the following is an event of default under this agreement:  the Hirer does not pay any amount payable under this agreement when due;  ...  
If an event of default occurs Konica may, at its option, and without limiting any other remedy available to it,  seek to enforce the Hirer's obligation under this agreement; or  terminate this agreement by notice to the Hirer.  
If this agreement is terminated, Konica may retake possession of the
Equipment and the Hirer must pay to Konica by way of liquidated damages the total of  all unpaid Rental and other moneys due under this agreement;  the present value of all Rental not then due but which would have been payable until the expiry of the Term;  if the Equipment is not returned to Konica within 7 days of termination, the value of the Equipment;  any stamp duty or financial institutions duty payable in respect of the foregoing;  any costs and expenses incurred in repossessing the Equipment and making any repairs or reconditioning necessary to bring it to the condition in which the Hirer is required to return it; and  interest in accordance with clause 2(b).  
A certificate signed by an officer of Konica as to any or all of the above amounts will prima facie evidence thereof.  Miscellaneous  ...  "Konica" includes the successors and assigns of Konica and any person entitled to the benefit of this agreement.  ...  
Any notice to be given by Konica in connection with this agreement, in addition to any other manner in which it may be given,  ¦ may be sent by prepaid post to the Hirer at its last known place of residence or business and shall be deemed to be received on the second day after posting;  ¦ may be sent by facsimile to the Hirer's last notified facsimile number and shall be deemed to be received when Konica's facsimile machine prints a report of successful transmission."  The contract for hire was allocated a reference number 62900764.  
The Assignment Agreement and Guarantee  White Holdings purchased the business of Metronome. In connection with that purchase, an agreement entitled "Assignment of Rental Agreement" was entered, which stated that it was made on 23 October 2000. It provided that it was:  "BETWEEN the undermentioned Assignor Assignee and Owner respectively WHEREBY
IT IS AGREED as follows:- 
In consideration of the sum stated in the Schedule and of the agreements on the part of the Assignee hereinafter contained, the Assignor HEREBY ASSIGNS
AND TRANSFERS to the Assignee all his right title and interest under the
Rental Agreement between the Assignor and the Owner referred to in the
Schedule (hereinafter called the "Principal Agreement") subject to the observance and performance by the Assignee as if he were the "Renter" under the Principal Agreement. 
IN consideration of this Assignment and of the consent of the Owner thereto (testified by its execution hereof) the Assignee agrees with the
Assignor and (as a separate agreement) with the Owner as follows:  
To pay all rentals now due or to become due under the Principal Agreement at the place provided for in the Principal Agreement and to make good all defaults of the Assignor under the Principal Agreement.  
As if the Assignee were the Renter under the Principal Agreement and the
Owner had consented to the removal of the goods to the Assignee's address set out in the Schedule:-  to perform and observe all other stipulations and conditions of the
Principal Agreement binding on the Renter.  ...  
SCHEDULE 
Name of Assignor (original Renter): Metronome Enterprises Pty Ltd t/as
Cobb & Co Mail (ACN 052 446 107)  
Address: 162 Old Northern Road, Baulkham Hills NSW 2153  
Name of Assignee: The White Holdings Group Pty Ltd (ABN: 093 203 733)  
Address: 162 Old Northern Road, Baulkham Hills NSW 2153  
Name of Owner: KONICA AUSTRALIA PTY LTD ACN 001 065 096  
Date of Principal Agreement: 2nd September, 1999 Account Number: /900764  
Consideration paid or to be paid by the Assignee to the Assignor: The sum of $1.00."  
That agreement was executed by White Holdings. As well, someone executed it on behalf of Konica, opposite an attestation clause which said "SIGNED on behalf of the Owner ...".  Immediately below where White Holdings executed it, the agreement also contained a guarantee, as follows:  "In consideration of Konica accepting this offer, the Guarantor (jointly & severally) guarantees the payment of all Rentals and other money payable by the Assignee to Konica under this agreement (including any variation ...) which appears below and the due performance of all the Assignee's obligations under this agreement (and any such variation). ... The Guarantor must pay
Konica's costs of enforcing this Guarantee & interest on the guaranteed money at the rate in clause 2(b) which appears below, and must pay the guaranteed money on demand. This guarantee is a primary obligation, and Konica need not take action against the Hirer or any other person before enforcing this Guarantee.  Immediately below that guarantee clause appeared some variations to the terms of the Rental Agreement, as follows:  "2. Payments  
The Assignee must:  pay interest on all overdue moneys at a rate which is 2% per year above
Konica's cost of funding the overdue amount. Unpaid interest will be compounded monthly;  ... 
Default  
If an event of default occurs Konica may, at its option, and without limiting any other remedy available to it,  i) seek to enforce the Assignee's obligation under this agreement; or  ii) terminate this agreement by notice to the Assignee.  
And in either case Konica may also take action against the Assignee to recover damages for breach of this agreement."  
That document was signed by Mr White, under the heading "Guarantor", on 31
October 2000.  
The Rental Agreement Ends  From the time that White Holdings took over the lease of the equipment, it was nearly always in arrears in payment of rent. The usual pattern was that three or four months instalments of rental would accumulate unpaid, and then a payment would be made which reduced the arrears to zero. From October 2003, however, the arrears were never less than one month of rental. The last payment of rental which White Holdings made was on 4 March 2004.  On 9 August 2004 Mr White wrote a letter on behalf of White Holdings, addressed to the accounts department of "Konica Finance", referring to the contract, and saying:  "This letter is to confirm your advice that the Service Agreement for the abovementioned Photocopier is due to expire on 14th August, 2004, and we wish to advise that we will not be renewing this Service Agreement.  
Therefore, we are requesting that this Photocopier should be collected from our Company on that date, when this account will be fully paid up and our
Company has advised Michael, Capital Finance of this fact, as Michael has been contacting our Company for payment of this account."  The evidence contains a document bearing date 2 September 2004, as follows:  "NOTICE OF TERMINATION ISSUED BY CAPITAL FINANCE AUSTRALIA LIMITED ("CAPITAL")  
The White Holdings Group Pty Ltd  Old Northern Road, 
Baulkham Hills NSW 2153  
RE: Your Rental agreement number 62900794 with Capital Finance Australia Ltd dated 23/10/00 ("THE AGREEMENT")  
Events of default have been committed as defined in the Agreement and Capital hereby notifies you that it has terminated the Agreement.  
Accordingly, Capital hereby demands from you $4193.42 as liquidated damages as calculated below:  [&lt;br&gt;]  
Arrears Balance $3732.33  
Overdue Interest$ 441.20  
Adj Govt Charges (Incl. GST less rebated Govt. charges) $ 19.89  [&lt;br&gt;]  
Total Payable$4193.42  [&lt;br&gt;]  
We would like to advise that it is policy of Capital Finance, to list any defaulting accounts with Baycorp Advantage. This listing will remain on your credit file for a period of 5 years and may affect any future credit application.  
We therefore request that you contact this office within seven ( 7) days with a view of payment of the outstanding account.  [&lt;br&gt;]  
Please send payments to: Capital Finance Australia Ltd 
GPO Box 3660, 
Sydney NSW 2001 
Direct Line: 02 9210 1286 
Fax No: 02 9210 1280  [&lt;br&gt;] 
Yours faithfully,  
Loss Recoveries Department 
Capital Finance Australia Limited"  The evidence also contains two documents, each dated 2 September 2004, addressed to Mr White. One of them was addressed to him at 5 Chicago Avenue,
Blacktown NSW 2148. The other one was addressed to him at 14 Fairway Drive,
Kellyville 2155. The text of those documents was otherwise identical, namely:  "NOTICE OF TERMINATION AND DEMAND-RENTER/GUARANTOR  ...  
The White Holdings Group Pty Ltd 
RE: Your Rental agreement number 62900794 With Capital Finance Australia Ltd dated 23/10/00 ("THE AGREEMENT")  
Events of default have been committed as defined in the Agreement and Capital hereby notifies you that it has terminated the Agreement.  
Capital hereby demands from you as Guarantor of the Agreement the sum of $4193.42 as the amount payable by you pursuant to the Agreement calculated as set out in the schedule below.  [&lt;br&gt;]  
Arrears Balance$ 3732.33  
Overdue Interest$ 441.20  
Adj Govt Charges (incl. GST less rebated Govt. charges) $19.89  [&lt;br&gt;]  
Total Payable $4193.42  [&lt;br&gt;] 
We would like to advise that it is policy of Capital Finance, to list any defaulting accounts with Baycorp Advantage. This listing will remain on your credit file for a period of 5 years and may affect any future credit application.  
We therefore request that you contact this office within seven (7) days with a view of payment of the outstanding account.  [&lt;br&gt;]  
Please send payments to: Capital Finance Australia Ltd 
GPO Box 3660, 
Sydney NSW 2001 
Direct Line: 02 9210 1286 
Fax No: 02 9210 1280  [&lt;br&gt;]  
Yours faithfully,  
Loss Recoveries Department 
CAPITAL FINANCE AUSTRALIA LIMITED"  The reader will observe that each of these notices dated 2 September 2004 contains an agreement number the second-last digit of which differs from the agreement number of the agreement to which the Assignment of Rental Agreement entered on 23 October 2000 relates. As well, each of those notices is one given by Capital Finance. Further, it asserts that the rental agreement to which it relates is an agreement with Capital Finance.  The evidence also contains three forms of notice dated 13 September 2004.
One of them, addressed to White Holdings, contains text which differs from the
Notice of Termination dated 2 September 2004 only in the following respects.  the number of the Rental Agreement in the heading was altered so that it was exactly the same as the number of the Rental Agreement to which the assignment dated 23 October 2000 related. 
The amount demanded was $4,525.54, made up as follows:  
Arrears Balance$ 4062.32  
Overdue Interest$ 443.14  
Adj Govt Charges (Incl. GST less rebated Govt. charges)$ 20.08  
Total Payable$4525.54 
The time within which contact was requested with a view to payment of the account was altered from "within seven (7) days" to "within two (2) days".  The evidence also contains two documents addressed to Mr White, dated 13
September 2004 and headed "Notice of Termination and Demand-
Renter/Guarantor". They differ from the documents entitled "Notice of
Termination and Demand-Renter/Guarantor" dated 2 September 2004 in precisely the same three respects as the notice dated 13 September 2004 addressed to
White Holdings differs from the notice addressed to White Holdings and dated 2
September 2004.  The evidence also contains two forms of letter from Capital Finance dated September 2004. One of them is addressed to White Holdings at PO Box 1
Pendle Hill NSW. It says:  "NOTICE TO LIST WITH BAYCORP ADVANTAGE 
CONTRACT NUMBER: 62900764 
You are in default of your obligations under the Agreement in that you have failed to make payments of Rental instalments in accordance with the terms of the Agreement.  
We would like to advise that Capital Finance has now placed a default on the company file with Baycorp Advantage for the value of $4525.00. This listing will remain on your credit file for a period of 5 years and may affect any future credit application.  
Yours faithfully,  
Loss Recoveries Department 
Capital Finance Australia Limited"  The other is addressed to Mr White at PO Box 1, Pendle Hill NSW. Its text is identical to that of the letter addressed to White Holdings, save only that the words "the company file" in the second paragraph were deleted and replaced with the words "your personal file".  A Notice to Produce served on Baycorp produced a computer printout which records that the database file of each of White Holdings and Mr White was updated, a little before 9:11 am on 16 September 2004, to record a payment default concerning $4,525.00.  At some stage in September 2004 more likely prior to 13 September 2004, the leased equipment had been collected, at Mr White's request and without the need for any repossession action being taken, from the office of White
Holdings.  
A Separate Service Agreement?  Mr Ashhurst submitted that Mr White's letter to Konica dated 9 August 2004 (para [15] above) did not relate to the Rental Agreement, but to a separate service agreement.  In some fashion which the evidence does not make clear, Konica claimed an entitlement to have White Holdings pay it a fee for each page which was photocopied using the leased equipment. This fee per page was sometimes referred to as a "click fee". From a time in the early months of 2004, and possibly earlier, there was a dispute between Mr White and Konica about the basis on which those fees were charged. Mr White's contention was that Konica was charging the click fees on the basis of an estimate of the usage of the machine which White Holdings made, not on the basis of actual readings of the meter which recorded the number of copies made. Mr White contended he was being overcharged for the click fees.  The evidence includes a tax invoice dated 27 May 2004 from a company called
Konica Minolta Business Solutions Australia Pty Ltd relating to a fee for copies, charged at 2.145¢ per copy, concerning a photocopier bearing the same serial number as the leased photocopier, Konica Minolta Business Solutions
Australia Pty Ltd is shown, in some of its letterheads, as having the same ACN as Konica Australia had had in 2000. I infer that they are the same company.  The dispute between Konica and White Holdings about the correct copy costs was not resolved until 7 December 2005, when Konica agreed to write off some of the copy costs which it had charged.  In his affidavit of 20 April 2006, Mr White said:  "Apart from the agreement with Konica regarding the equipment owned by Konica and the linked service agreement as to click fees from 2000 to 2004 to the best of my knowledge and belief I had no other agreement or arrangement with
Konica during that period." (emphasis added)  I am satisfied that there was an agreement relating to Konica receiving a fee per page, but it did not, so far as the evidence goes, take a documentary form, and its terms cannot be stated with precision.  Mr White came to be aware that White Holdings was being chased for money in connection with the photocopier by people from Capital Finance. However, I accept his evidence that he thought that Capital Finance was in some way the finance arm of Konica. In light of the second paragraph of the letter of 9
August 2004, it is clear that at least part of what Mr White was intending to convey by this letter was that the agreement whereby the photocopier was rented would not be renewed. But Mr White did not draw in his mind any clear distinction between the agreement under which he paid rent, and the agreement under which the click fees became due. The preferable construction of the letter is that it was advice that both the Rental Agreement and the agreement under which the click fees became due would not be renewed.  Because of the terms of Clause 7 of the Rental Agreement, that agreement did not automatically expire by effluxion of time. Nor was the letter of 9
August 2004 an effective notice under Clause 7(a) of the Rental Agreement to terminate the Agreement, because it did not give 90 days prior notice of the termination.  In my view, however, the Rental Agreement came to an end in early September in consequence of Mr White requesting Konica to remove the machine, and
Konica doing so.  
The Two Database Entries  The Baycorp database entry which was made relating to White Holdings appears in a report generated from the database in the following form:  
Account No:62900764  
Account Type:Commercial Rental  
Association Code:Company/Business Acct.Co Borrower:  
Latest Subscriber:CAPITAL CONSUMER FINANCE NSW  
Latest Date:16/09/2004Latest Amount:4525  
Latest Reason:Payment Default  
Original Subscriber:CAPITAL CONSUMER FINANCE NSW  
Original Date:16/09/2004Original Amount:4525  
Original Reason:Payment Default  
Status:Status Date:  The database entry which was made concerning Mr White was in identical terms, save only that the third line of the entry read:  
Association Code:GuarantorCo Borrower:  The entry is intended to be read as though it were a two-column table, arranged as follows:  
Account No:62900764  
Account Type:Commercial Rental  
Association Code:Company/Business Acct.Co Borrower:  
Latest Subscriber:CAPITAL CONSUMER FINANCE NSW  
Latest Date:16/09/2004Latest Amount:4525  
Latest Reason:Payment Default  
Original Subscriber:CAPITAL CONSUMER FINANCE NSW  
Original Date:16/09/2004Original Amount:4525  
Original Reason:Payment Default  
Status:Status Date:  According to Mr White, in late 2004 he asked a finance broker to arrange some finance for his business, and was told by that finance broker that a credit search had shown there was an amount outstanding under the assigned
Rental Agreement with Konica. Mr White says that he had not received any notice, as a guarantor, that White Holdings had defaulted. Mr White arranged for the $4,525 to be paid. That amount was received by Capital Finance on 9
December 2004.  Promptly upon receipt of that money, Capital Finance caused the entry on the Baycorp database relating to White Holdings to be amended, so that its final line read:  
Status:PaidStatus Date:09/12/2004  A publication of Baycorp explains some of the terminology appearing in its reports. A default status of "Paid" means "A defaulted account, which has been paid in full and for which the account is now closed." I infer that the entry relating to "Status Date" concerns the date on which the account changed its status, to being a "Paid" account. I also infer that the blanks which had previously existed in the database entry concerning White Holdings alongside "Status" and "Status Date" would convey to a reader that the payment default had not been rectified.  Even though the Baycorp database entry relating to White Holdings was amended in this fashion on 9 December 2004, no amendment was made to the database entry which related to Mr White.  
Circumstances Leading to These Proceedings  In February 2006 Mr White obtained, on payment of a small fee, a copy of his credit information file from the Baycorp Public Access Division. He was, at the time, seeking other finance - some for the acquisition of other equipment connected with his business and some to repay a facility which White
Holdings had obtained from a company originally called H G & R Finance
Limited (but now called Balance Securities Limited). That company was, by
March 2006, claiming to be owed a little over $6.98m, on the security of three pieces of real estate. Balance Securities has commenced proceedings for possession of land in the Common Law Division of this Court. Mr White and
White Holdings gave instructions to a solicitor to defend those proceedings but, through an error on the part of that solicitor, a default judgment came to be entered. Mr White and White Holdings have filed a Notice of Motion seeking to set aside that default judgment. A stay has been granted pending the determination of that motion. I am informed that that motion has been stood over in the Common Law Division to the end of May.  The proceedings that I am now giving judgment in were begun on 4 April
Because of the plaintiffs' contention that the entries in the Baycorp database are stopping them from raising finance at anything other than prohibitive interest rates, to repay the debt they owe to Balance Securities these proceedings have been brought on for a very urgent hearing.  
Outline of the Plaintiffs' Case  While I will examine the plaintiffs' legal contentions in more detail later, the relief which the plaintiffs claim is, first, injunctions aimed at causing the entries to be removed from the database; an order restraining
Capital Finance from providing any credit information or personal information concerning either of the plaintiffs to any other credit provider; and damages.  The causes of action on which those claims for relief are based are that the making of the representations in the database entries are misleading or deceptive, or likely to mislead and deceive, and so contravene section 52 [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) and section 1041H [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).
As well, both plaintiffs assert that the making of the entries in the database, and their remaining there, amounts to the tort of injurious falsehood. They also say that the tort of injurious falsehood was committed by statements, detrimental to the credit worthiness of Mr White, alleged to have been made by an employee of the third defendant to a finance broker in March
Finally, Mr White (but not White Holdings) alleges that Baycorp and
Capital Finance "have breached their duty of privacy and/or confidence to him", resulting in him suffering loss.  While there are numerous respects in which the database entries are alleged to be misleading or deceptive, one respect is that neither Capital Finance, nor any entity called "Capital Consumer Finance NSW" (which, it will be recalled, is listed in the entries as the subscriber to the database) was owed any debt by either plaintiff. To follow that argument, it is necessary to state some facts relevant to the role which various entities with "Capital" in their name played concerning this transaction.  
The Relationship Between Capital Finance, Konica, and the Plaintiffs  On 25 February 1997 Capital Corporate (a company which, it will be recalled, is a subsidiary of Capital Finance) entered into a tripartite agreement with Konica and a finance broker, Operating Lease Pty Ltd. In it,
Capital Corporate was referred to as the "Principal", Konica was referred to as the "Agent", and Operating Lease Pty Ltd was referred to as the "Broker". The following provisions of that agreement are relevant.  "Definitions  
In this document:  "Approved Form" means, in relation to any document, a form approved in writing by the Principal from time to time.  ...  "Equipment" means equipment the subject of a Leasing Proposal or Leasing Agreement.  "Leasing Agreement" means:  a rental agreement ...  in each case in an Approved Form.  "Leasing Proposal" means a proposal in relation to a Leasing Agreement in an Approved Form.  ...  "Security" means any guarantee ... or other form of security given or to be given by any person in relation to a Leasing Agreement ...  "Security Provider" means any person who provides a Security.  .1 Appointment  
With effect on and from the date of this document the Principal appoints the
Agent as its agent on the terms of this document, and the Agent accepts that appointment.  ...  .5 Rights to be held for Principal  
The Agent must hold on behalf of and as trustee for the Principal all rights under or in relation to all Leasing Agreements, Securities, Equipment and
Insurances and all money received or receivable by the Agent under or in connection with any of them.  ...  .1 Submission of Leasing Proposals  
The Agent may deliver to the Principal a Leasing Proposal requesting the
Principal to purchase Equipment and to approve the execution by the Agent of a
Leasing Agreement in relation to it. A Leasing Proposal must be in Approved
Form and contain full particulars of the proposed leasing arrangement.  ...  .3 Further information  
Following receipt of a Leasing Proposal, the Principal may require the Agent to provide any documents and financial or other information in relation to the proposed Lessee, Equipment, Security or Security Provider as the Principal requires. The Agent must use its best endeavours to provide the required documents and information to the Principal.  .4 Approved by Principal  
The Principal may in its absolute discretion approve or reject a Leasing
Proposal ...  ...  .1 Authority of Agent  
If the Principal approves a Leasing Proposal then the Principal authorises the
Agent to sign as agent for the Principal the relevant Leasing Agreement and any Security specified in the Leasing Proposal.  .2 Things the Agent must deliver  
If the Principal approves a Leasing Proposal then the Agent must deliver to the Principal:  an invoice for the Equipment for an amount and in terms agreed to by the
Principal and the Agent.  the Leasing Agreement and any Security specified in the Leasing Proposal, each in an Approved Form and duly signed by all parties; ...  .3 Purchase of Equipment  
If the Principal is satisfied:  ...  then:  the Principal authorises the Agent to acquire the relevant Equipment on the Principal's behalf on terms approved by the Principal and agreed to by the
Agent; and  the Principal must pay the agreed purchase price to the Agent or, at the
Agent's option, to the supplier.  .4 Delivery of Equipment  
The Equipment is taken to be delivered to the Principal when the Principal pays the purchase price in accordance with clause 4.3(d)(ii).  ...  .2 Action the Agent must take  
The Agent must, at the Principal's cost, take any action which the Principal reasonably requires under or in relation to a Leasing Agreement or Security or to protect the Principal's interest in any Equipment. The actions which the
Principal may require the Agent to take include, but are not limited to:  giving notices and demands under Leasing Agreements, Securities and
Insurances;  ...  .3 Undisclosed agency  
If the Principal approves a Leasing Proposal on the basis that the agency of the Agent in relation to the subject transaction is to be undisclosed, then the Principal must not, except as allowed under paragraph (b), disclose to any person that the Agent is acting as Agent of the Principal.  
Despite paragraph (a) the Principal may disclose the agency arrangement:  ...  if an Event of Default occurs; or  for the purpose of enforcement under clause 6.  .2 Breach by Lessee or Security Provider  
If a Lessee or Security Provider fails to comply with any of its obligations under a Transaction Document the Principal, at its discretion, may either itself take, or require the Agent to take at the Principal's cost, any action which the Principal considers necessary or desirable in connection with the failure. Such action may include, without limitation, action:  ...  to terminate, or to accept the repudiation of, the Leasing Agreement; or  to recover money owing by the Lessee or Security Provider.  ...  .4 Attorney  
The Agent irrevocably appoints the Principal and each Authorised Officer of the Principal jointly and each of them severally as the Agent's attorneys with power, subject to clause 6.5:  to execute any documents, give any notices or take any other action under or in relation to any Transaction Document;  to commence, defend or compromise any legal action in relation to any
Transaction Document or Equipment; and  to do anything which in the Attorney's reasonable opinion is necessary or expedient to enable the exercise of any right of the Principal under any
Transaction Document.  
This power of attorney is granted for valuable consideration (receipt of which the Agent acknowledges). 
LIMITATIONS ON AGENT'S AUTHORITY  
The Agent must not, without the prior written consent of the Principal:  exercise any right or discretion, take any enforcement action or give any consent under a Leasing Agreement or a Security except as contemplated by this document;  accept the repudiation by a Lessee of a Leasing Agreement or agree to terminate a Leasing Agreement;  waive, or grant any time for, the performance of any obligation of a
Lessee or a Security Provider;  agree to any variation of the terms of a Leasing Agreement or a Security;  make any representation or warranty on behalf of the Principal; or  purport to bind the Principal except in accordance with clause 4.  ...  .6 Assignment  
The Agent may not assign, Encumber or otherwise dispose of or deal with its rights under this document, any Leasing Agreement or any Security without the prior written consent of the Principal."  Under Clause 11, that agreement continued until terminated by one party giving to the other one months written notice.  On 23 August 1999 Mike Hitchock (who I infer works for Konica) faxed to someone at one of the Capital companies (the evidence does not contain any fax coversheet or covering letter, so one cannot decide who) details of a finance application by Metronome relating to the Konica copier and accessories. An internal memorandum on the file maintained by one or other of the Capital companies records that it was approved on 23 August 1999. On 27 August 1999
Konica sent to an addressee referred to as "Konica Finance" an invoice for the goods. The original of that invoice appears in the file relating to this transaction maintained by one of the Capital companies, with an original stamp "paid" on it. I infer that Capital paid it. Only after all this was the leasing agreement entered, on 1 September 1999.  On 15 November 2000 Konica faxed to someone in the Capital group a document which was, I infer, a request for consent to the assignment of the Lease
Agreement which had been entered with Metronome. That document recommended that the assignment be approved, for reasons which included (as expressed in one place) that "Mr White has provided his personal guarantee" (and expressed in another) that "director has supplied personal g'tee & property details".  The application for assignment, though on a form which bore the corporate name "Konica Australia Pty Limited" had a fax header stating "Konica
Finance HO".  The facsimile which Konica sent to Capital on 15 November 2000 also included the printout of various searches, all of which had been conducted on a database maintained by an entity called Datalink PC Credit Reference
Limited.  The searches recorded the "member" (which, I infer, means the subscriber to the Datalink PC database who had conducted the search) as being "Konica
Finance".  One of those search results was a search conducted on 15 November 2000 against the business name "Cobb & Co Mail". It shows that the proprietor of that business name is White Holdings, and that the "appointment date" for that proprietorship was 30 October 2000. Summary information in the report had headings for "defaults", "mercantiles", "file notes", "judgments", "petitions", "extl admin", "court writs" and "securities". Alongside each of those headings a "nil" entry appeared. The search showed that there was one proprietor of the business name (namely, White Holdings), that there were two addresses (the address of Cobb & Co Mail at 162 Old Northern Road,
Baulkham Hills, and the address of White Holdings at 14 Fairway Drive,
Kellyville), and that there had been two enquiries about credit status. One of them was an enquiry made on 2 September 1999 by a member called "Canon Aust
NSW" concerning an amount of $1,000, the other was the enquiry which "Konica
Finance" itself had made on 15 November 2000. That search also included an extract from the New South Wales Register of Business Names.  The second search was one of White Holdings. It disclosed Mr White was a director, stated the date he had been appointed a director, stated his date of birth, stated that he was a male, and gave his residential address as being 14
Fairway Drive, Kellyville. There was only one credit enquiry reported, made by "Konica Finance" on 25 October 2000.  The third search was one which had been obtained on 14 November 2000 concerning Mr White personally.  The final search was a search which had been done on the ASIC database on October 2000, to obtain corporate details of White Holdings.  
The Deregistration of Capital Corporate  On 4 August 2003 the Board of Capital Corporate held a meeting, the Minutes of which record as follows:  "COMPANY DEREGISTRATION:  
IT WAS NOTED that Capital Finance Australia Limited directors had passed a resolution to deregister the Company as it was no longer operating.  
IT WAS FURTHER NOTED that:  all members of the company agree to the deregistration; and  the company is not carrying on business; and  the company's assets are worth less than $1,000; and  the company has paid all fees and penalties; and  the company has no outstanding liabilities; and  the company is not a party to any legal proceedings.  
NOTIFICATION TO ASIC:  
IT WAS RESOLVED that the company secretary of the Company be instructed to lodge a notice with ASIC advising of the deregistration."  An application for voluntary deregistration of Capital Corporate was lodged with ASIC on 8 September 2003. That application was approved by ASIC. The relevant notice was published in the Australian Government Gazette. On 18
January 2004, pursuant to [section
AA(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601aa.html) [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth),
Capital Corporate was deregistered.  On 29 November 2004 ASIC reinstated the registration of Capital Corporate.  
Onus of Proof  The structure of the plaintiffs' case concerning misleading and deceptive conduct is to allege that various representations were made by the entries in the Baycorp register, and those representations were misleading and deceptive.
The manner in which the representations are alleged to be misleading and deceptive is by being false, rather than by being, for example, accurate but misleadingly incomplete.  For a case with that structure, the onus of proving the inaccuracy of the various representations lies upon the person who asserts that they are inaccurate: Illawong Village Pty Ltd versus State Bank of NSW  <case> at <case> and cases there cited.  
Representations Made By the Baycorp Database Entries  There was no real argument that the Baycorp database entries made representations to the effect that:  - White Holdings had made default in payment of a debt  - The debt concerning which the default had been made related to a commercial rental agreement  - The default had occurred by 16 September 2004  - The amount concerning which the default had been made was $4525  - Mr White had given a guarantee  - The guarantee related to a commercial rental agreement  - Mr White was in default in payment of the guaranteed debt  - The default had occurred by 16 September 2004  - The amount in relation to which he had made default was $4525.  The plaintiffs contend that certain other representations are also made by the entries. One of those representations contended for is that the debt which was owed by each of White Holdings, and Mr White, was to an entity called "Capital Consumer Finance NSW".  To decide whether that representation was made, it is relevant to state some more facts about the Baycorp database. The Baycorp database is the largest single source of credit information in Australia. It contains more than 12 million consumer and 1.5 million commercial credit files. It includes records on the credit activity of Australian individuals, companies and businesses. A company can become a subscriber to Baycorp upon making application and being accepted. Once accepted, subscribers are obliged to report defaults to Baycorp. Over 800,000 reports of defaults were lodged in , and the number has increased since then. Subscribers are able to obtain, from the database, reports which collate information contained in the database, of a type which the subscriber has requested. As well, an individual can obtain a copy of their own file if they have been refused credit, or require their file to assist in the management of their consumer credit arrangements.  An entry on the Baycorp database is one which is made available to the class of people who are potential acquirers of information from that database.
In deciding whether a representation is misleading or deceptive, one considers the effect which the representation is likely to have on reasonable members of the class to which the representation is made: Campomar Sociedad, Limitada & Anor versus Nike International & Anor <case>; [(2000) 202 CLR 45], at 85, [103]. If a reasonable member of that class is likely to derive a particular message from a statement made, the substance of that message is a representation made by the statement, whether or not the person who made the statement intended to convey that message. I do not accept Mr
Ashhurst's submission that Wright versus TNT Management Pty Ltd [(1989) 15
NSWLR 679], McWilliams Wines Pty Ltd versus LS Booth Wine Transport Pty
Ltd [(1992) 25 NSWLR 723] at 729, and Concrete Constructions Group Ltd versus Litevale Pty Ltd <case>; [(2002) 170 FLR 290] establish any general proposition that an implied representation will be treated as being misleading and deceptive only if the person making that representation knew that it was incorrect at the time it was made.  An examination of the Baycorp reports in evidence shows that sometimes the subscriber listed in a data entry is a legal entity, as is indicated by the suffix "P/L" or "Ltd". However, there are also many subscriber names appearing which are not the name of a legal entity. Examples are "Esanda
Dealership NSW", "Westpac Credit Centre NSW", "American EXP New Accts
NSW", and "Nationwide News". Such examples appear with sufficient frequency to alert even the reasonable reader without prior experience of such searches to the fact that the "subscriber" shown in an entry may well not be a legal entity. The evidence of Mr Malafouris, a finance broker and supplier, was to the effect that he understood the subscriber name "Capital Consumer Finance
NSW:" appearing in the database entry as being a subscriber name, which referred to some entity in the Capital Finance group, but that it would be necessary to contact Capital if one wanted to find out what company was involved in the reported default. Similarly, he understood that the reference to "Nationwide News" was a reference to the company called News Limited. Mr
Rodd, a Senior Executive of Capital Finance who has extensive experience in the finance industry, said that he would not assume that a subscriber name was the name of any existing business, or any registered business name, but merely a name used to describe a business being carried on. I accept the evidence in chief of Mr Cusack, another finance broker, that the Baycorp entry in question "draws attention to a default to a company or business in the Capital
Group."  I am not satisfied that the Baycorp entries in question would be taken, by a reasonable member of the class to which they were directed, to involve a representation that the debt concerning which a default had been made was one owed to an entity named "Capital Consumer Finance NSW". I am satisfied, however, that the reasonable member of that class would regard the entries as representing that a default had been made concerning a debt owed to a company which was part of the Capital group.  
Is a Company in the Capital Group a Party to the Rental Agreement  Capital Finance contends that when Konica entered into both the Rental
Agreement, and the Assignment Agreement, it did so as the agent for its undisclosed principal, Capital Corporate. Furthermore, in making the various demands in September 2004, Capital Finance was also an agent acting for an undisclosed principal, namely Capital Corporate. The plaintiffs assert that each of those propositions is incorrect. To the extent to which the plaintiffs bear an onus of proving facts to establish the incorrectness of each of those propositions, it is the plaintiffs who have the onus of proof.  
Approval of Rental Agreement Given by Wrong Company?  Mr King's first argument is that Capital Corporate was not the principal in relation to the original contract of hire, because the approval to it was given by Capital Finance.  One limitation on the operation of the doctrine of undisclosed principal is stated by Hope JA in Maynegrain Pty Ltd versus Compafina Bank [[1982] 2 NSWLR ]
at 150:  "This position of the undisclosed principal arises only where the agent was in truth his agent at the time of the transaction; a person claiming as principal cannot purport to ratify as the act of his agent a transaction entered into without his authority by one who purports at the time to be a principal, and does not disclose that he is an agent: Keighley, Maxsted & Co versus Durant [[1901] AC 240.]"  To similar effect is Trident General Insurance Co Ltd versus McNiece Bros Pty
Ltd [(1987) 8 NSWLR 270] at 276 per McHugh JA, Bowstead and Reynolds on
Agency (17th edition 2001) para 8-072, p 344-345, Dalpont, Law of Agency para 19.45-19.46, p 512-514.  Mr King's argument is that Konica had authority to enter a rental agreement on behalf of Capital Corporate only with the prior approval of Capital
Corporate. Hence if the approval of the Rental Agreement was given by Capital
Finance, Konica could not have entered the Rental Agreement as agent for
Capital Corporate as an undisclosed principal.  In response to a Notice to Produce, Capital Finance has produced a file "relating to the Third Defendant's Account Number 62900764". It is a file of hard copy documents relating to this transaction which includes documents dating from 1999. One of those documents is the document by which approval was granted by a Capital company to the original entering into of the Rental
Agreement. As well, Mr Duxbury a Senior Loss Recovery Officer of Capital
Finance, has, in an affidavit of 11 April 2006, identified one document from that file as one "which records the internal approval of the third defendant." I conclude that it was the third defendant which granted approval to the entering of the original contract of hire.  Mr Simon Oosterom is the Company Secretary of both Capital Finance and
Capital Corporate. He refers to Capital Corporate as "CCFL". He gives evidence, which I accept, that:  "The third defendant has managed and administered the business of CCFL including the relationship between, CCFL, Konica and Operating Lease and the rental agreements entered by CCFL. For example, I have observed that either myself or other officers of CCFL, have instructed employees of the third defendant to do the following on behalf of CCFL, among other things:  review and, if applicable, approve applications for finance made to CCFL by customers of CCFL;  deposit moneys which are payable to CCFL in accounts operated by the third defendant;  engage agents to repossess equipment owned by CCFL;  contact customers who are in default and request urgent payment of arrears;  commence proceedings against customers who have failed to make payments that were due and payable under agreements to which CCFL and, not the third defendant, was a party; and  list customers who have defaulted with CCFL with an appropriate credit reporting agency."  On the basis of that evidence I would conclude, if it were necessary to do so, that when Capital Finance approved the entering into of the Rental
Agreement it did so on behalf of Capital Corporate. Given where the onus of proof lies, it suffices to find that the plaintiffs have not proved that, when
Capital Finance gave approval to the original contract of hire, it was not acting as the agent of Capital Corporate.  
Rental Agreement Incapable of Being Entered for an Undisclosed Principal?  Another argument of Mr King's is that the Rental Agreement is inherently incapable of being one which Konica could enter on behalf of an undisclosed principal. Mr King points to particular provisions of the Agreement as follows:  - The express provision in Clause 1 that "The Equipment is and will remain the sole property of Konica", and  - The contractual powers which are conferred by Clause 8(b) and (c) on
Konica.  Each of those provisions is, he submits, inconsistent with the agreement being one which Konica could enter as agent for an undisclosed principal.  In Humble versus Hunter ((1848) <case>; 12 QB ; [116 ER 885)] the Court of Queen's Bench (Lord Denman CJ, Patteson and Whightman JJ) considered a charterparty which said it was made between X, "owner of the good ship or vessel called The Ann", and Y. X's mother sued Y for a breach of the charterparty. X gave evidence that his mother was the real owner of the vessel, and that he had signed the charterparty as her agent. The Court held that that evidence should not have been received. Lord Denman CJ put it on the basis that the doctrine of undisclosed principal  "cannot be applied where the agent contracts as principal; and he has done so here by describing himself as "owner" of the ship."  
Patteson J said:  "If the contract had been made in the son's name merely, without more, it might have been shown that he was agent only, and that the plaintiff was the principal. But, as the document itself represents that the son contracted as "owner", Lucas versus De La Cour <case>; 1 M & S 249; [ [105]
ER 93]](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s105.html) applies."  In Lucas versus De La Cour Lord Ellenborough CJ had said:  "If one partner makes a contract in his individual capacity, and the other partners are willing to take the benefit of it, they must be content to do so according to the mode on which the contract was made."  I do not regard Humble versus Hunter as leading to a conclusion that prevents Capital Corporate from being an undisclosed principal concerning the
Rental Agreement in the present case. The principle which it exemplifies is, in my respectful view, accurately stated by Jordan CJ in Perpetual Trustee
Co (Ltd) versus Bligh <case>; [(1940) 41 SR 33] at 40:  "... if the written terms are such as to hold out the actual parties as the real and only principals, evidence is not admissible to show that there are other persons who are also liable as principals: Humble versus Hunter (12 QB ); Formby Bros versus Formby [(102 LT 116)]; Fred Drughorn Ltd v
Rederiaktiebolaget Transatlantic [[1919] AC 203.]"  
To similar effect is the statement of Lord Parmoor in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre
Company Ltd versus Selfridge & Company Limited <case>; [[1915] AC ] at 864, that:  "... parol evidence is admissible to prove that the plaintiff in an action is the real principal to a contract; but it is also well established law that a person cannot claim to be a principal to a contract, if this would be inconsistent with the terms of the contract itself."  Similarly, Lord Lloyd of Berwick, delivering the advice of the Privy
Council in Siu Yin Kwan (Administratrix of the Estate of Chan Ying Lung,
Decd) & Another versus Eastern Insurance Co Ltd [1994] 2 AC 1999 at 207 said:  "The terms of the contract may, expressly or by implication, exclude the principal's right to sue, and his liability to be sued. The contract itself, or the circumstances surrounding the contract, may show that the agent is the true and only principal."  Other discussion of authority relating to Humble versus Hunter in Davis v Capel [[1959] NZLR 825] at 832-3, Bowstead and Reynolds on Agency, 17th edition (2001) para 8-080 and 8-081 (pp 351-354) and Dalpont, Law of Agency para [19.32] - [19.36] (pp 504-508) does not lead me to conclude the statements of principle of Jordan CJ, Lord Parmoor and Lord Lloyd are in any way incorrect.  The contract as a whole needs to be construed to decide whether it is inconsistent with its terms for one of the parties entering it to do so as agent for an undisclosed principal. That question is not determined by the fact that the agreement contains a term that someone is the "owner" of the goods to which it relates. It depends on who that "someone" is.  I say nothing about what the situation would be if the agreement contained a term that the very entity which was a contracting party was the owner of the goods to which it related. In Maynegrain Pty Ltd versus Compafina Bank [[1982] 2 NSWLR 141] at 150-151 Hope JA was of the view that an attornment was an act in the law to which the doctrine of undisclosed principal could apply, notwithstanding the problems of legal theory which would arise through there thereby being two concurrent and alternative rights to possession arising out of the one transaction. Hutley JA, at 155, reached the same conclusion. The reversal of that case in the Privy Council on other grounds (Maynegrain Pty
Ltd versus Compafina Bank (1984) 1 NSWLR 258) means that the decision of Hope and Hutley JJ is not an authority which binds me. However, I will not decide whether I agree with the views their Honours expressed when the question does not arise directly for consideration.  In the Rental Agreement, the contracting party was Konica Australia Pty
Ltd. However, the extended definition of the term "Konica" in Clause 9 meant that Clause 1 contained an agreement that the Equipment was and would remain the sole property of Konica Australia Pty Ltd, its successors and assigns, and any person entitled to the benefit of the Agreement. In my view that leaves open the possibility that Konica Australia Pty Ltd entered the Agreement as agent for an undisclosed principal.  There are certain agreements which, either from their inherent nature, or from the surrounding circumstances, are ones which can be availed of only by the people named as parties to them. For example, a contract to paint a portrait could not be entered into by an artist as agent for an undisclosed principal. There was evidence from Mr White to the effect that he regarded it as important that he was dealing with Konica Australia, rather than with a finance company, because he did not like dealing with finance companies. He said he regarded finance companies as out to get money from you, and that he trusted a photocopy company more than a finance company. While I accept that he held those views, any views which he held could not affect whether the
Rental Agreement - to which White Holdings was not a party, and had been entered well before White Holdings took over Metronome's business - could be entered into by Konica Australia as agent for an undisclosed principal. In my view the powers contained in Clause 8(b) and (c) are usual provisions to find in commercial agreements relating to the leasing of property. I see nothing in them which, from their inherent nature, makes them the type of provision which would objectively be regarded as the type of provision where it was likely that the powers would have been agreed to only because it was Konica Australia
Pty Limited, rather than someone else, who would have the opportunity to exercise them.  In all these circumstances, I conclude that the Agreement was one which was inherently capable of being entered into by Konica as agent for an undisclosed principal.  From the fact that the tripartite agency agreement existed with Capital
Corporate, that there was no such agreement with Capital Finance, and that
Konica made application to a Capital company for approval to enter the agreement before it was entered, I conclude that it was in fact entered by
Konica as agent for Capital Corporate.  
Is Capital Corporate a Party to the Assignment of Rental Agreement?  Mr King's next argument was that the Assignment of Rental Agreement was not one to which Capital Corporate was a party. He submitted that there were three separate ways of reaching that conclusion.  
Assignment of Rental Agreement Inherently Incapable of Being Entered for an
Undisclosed Principal?  The first way to the conclusion arose from the terms of the agreement itself. He points out that, unlike the Rental Agreement, the Assignment
Agreement does not contain any extended definition of the term "owner".
Further, he points to the attestation clause whereby it was "signed on behalf of the Owner". In those circumstances, he submits, the Assignment Agreement was one inherently incapable of being entered into on behalf of an undisclosed principal. Considering that argument requires closer attention to the terms of the Assignment Agreement itself.  Clause 1 of the Assignment of Rental Agreement was an assignment by
Metronome to White Holdings of all its "right title and interest" under the
Rental Agreement. That "right title and interest" would include the benefit of any covenants which Konica gave to Metronome under the agreement. At the least, that would include a right to peaceable possession of the Equipment during the term.  That assignment was "subject to the observance and performance by the
Assignee as if he were the "Renter" under the Principal Agreement."
Performing in the same manner as if it were the "Renter" would involve White
Holdings carrying out any obligations which might be owed, under the Principal
Agreement, to any entity which was an undisclosed principal of Konica in connection with that agreement. However, the phrase beginning "subject to" in Clause 1 of the Assignment of Rental Agreement does not involve any covenant on the part of White Holdings to carry out those obligations. Rather, it is a condition subsequent to the assignment effected by the earlier part of
Clause 1. In other words, if White Holdings were to stop acting as if it were the "Renter" under the Principal Agreement, Konica would be entitled to treat the assignment by Metronome to White Holdings of Metronome's right title and interest under the Rental Agreement as no longer operative. The condition subsequent does not involve any promise by White Holdings that it will actually do everything as if it were the "Renter" under the Principal
Agreement. Rather, it is an agreement by White Holdings that if it were not to act in that way, it would no longer be entitled to the right title and interest of Metronome under the Rental Agreement.  The positive covenants which are given by White Holdings in the Assignment of Rental Agreement are those contained in Clause 2. So far as the document goes, those covenants are only obligations which White Holdings owes to
Konica.  However, in the Assignment Agreement the expression "Owner" is simply a defined term, referring to Konica Australia Pty Ltd. The Assignment Agreement does not contain any covenant that it is only Konica Australia Pty Ltd who is the owner of the goods in question. Indeed, there is no covenant in the
Assignment Agreement that Konica Australia Pty Ltd is the owner of the goods.  Further Clause 2(b) involves a covenant on the part of the Assignee to observe all the other terms of the Rental Agreement which are binding on "the
Renter". That involves a covenant by the Assignee to recognise the ownership of the goods of the entity described as "Konica" in the principal agreement - ie, in the extended sense which Clause 9 of the Rental Agreement permits.  I see no inconsistency between the terms of the Assignment Agreement and the possibility that Konica might hold the benefit of the Assignment Agreement as agent for an undisclosed principal.  The second way in which Mr King submits that the Assignment Agreement is not one which Konica entered as undisclosed principal for Capital Corporate arises from Mr White's views about the undesirability of contracting with finance companies. I have already held that there is nothing in the terms of the Rental Agreement itself which makes it inherently incapable of being held for an undisclosed principal. Nor is there anything in the actual terms of the
Assignment Agreement which make it incapable of being held for an undisclosed principal.  Construction of a contract, including deciding who are, or can be, the parties to it, can sometimes be influenced by surrounding circumstances.
However, before surrounding circumstances can enter into construction of a contract, they need to be surrounding circumstances which are known to all contracting parties. There is no evidence that Mr White made his views about the undesirability of contracting with finance companies known to anyone from
Konica Australia. In those circumstances, they do not affect whether the benefit of the assignment agreement is inherently capable of being held for an undisclosed principal.  If Mr White had been right in thinking that the Rental Agreement and the click agreement were both with the same company, and he was right in thinking that White Holdings had overpaid fees due under the click agreement, it would still not have been possible for there to have been a set-off between the amount of the overpaid fees, and the unpaid rental, because Clause 2(e) of the
Rental Agreement required rental to be paid without deduction. It might sometimes happen that the fact that a contracting party had reason to believe it was entering into two agreements with the same company could be relevant to deciding whether one, but not the other, of those agreements could be entered as agent for an undisclosed principal. However, in the present case, the facts about the click agreement are so inadequately proved that I cannot conclude that there is anything in the circumstances in which White Holdings entered the Assignment Agreement and the click agreement, both apparently with Konica, that has a bearing on whether the Assignment Agreement is inherently incapable of being held for an undisclosed principal.  
No Authority of Konica to Enter Assignment Agreement at the Time Konica
Entered It?  The third way in which Mr King submits the Assignment Agreement is not one which Konica entered as undisclosed principal for Capital Corporate relates to the circumstances in which the Assignment Agreement was entered.  The actual authority of Konica to act on behalf of Capital Corporate was severely limited. In accordance with Clause 7 of the Agency Agreement, it had actual authority to enter an agreement like the Assignment Agreement only if it had the prior written consent of Capital Corporate. And, in accordance with the principle that someone who enters an agreement as agent for an undisclosed principal must have actual authority to enter that agreement at the time it was entered (paras [70]-[71] above) if Konica lacked actual authority to enter the Assignment of Rental Agreement, at the time it actually entered it, then it could not do so as agent for an undisclosed principal.  I find that Konica did not have the prior written consent of Capital
Corporate at the time it entered the Assignment Agreement. The agreement itself states that it was made on 23 October 2000. Mr White signed the guarantee on 31 October 2000. Konica's recommendation for Capital to approve the assignment, made on 15 November 2000 confirmed that by that time Mr White had already provided the guarantee (para [49] above). The business name "Cobb & Co Mail" was transferred into the name of White Holdings on 30 October (para [53] above), and it is at least consistent with that fact that the assignment of the Rental Agreement for one of the items of equipment of that business should occur at or around the time of transfer of the business. It was within the power of Capital Finance to either call evidence explaining that the date written on the agreement was mistaken, but it did not do so.  In these circumstances, the Assignment Agreement was not entered by Konica as agent for Capital Corporate. It follows, as well, that neither was the guarantee entered by Konica as agent for Capital Corporate. It also follows that neither White Holdings, nor Mr White, owed any debt to any company in the
Capital group in 2004. Hence neither of them defaulted in payment of any debt to a company in the Capital group in 2004. Thus, insofar as the Baycorp entries represented that White Holdings and Mr White had made default in payment of a debt to a company in the Capital Group by 16 September 2004 (concerning a commercial rental agreement, so far as White Holdings was concerned, and concerning a guarantee related to a commercial rental agreement so far as Mr White was concerned) those entries are false.  Not every false statement is misleading and deceptive. Whether a false statement is misleading and deceptive depends on the context in which it is made, and the purpose for which the statement in question is made to the person or class of people to which it is made. In the present case, if the database entries had stated the amount of a default as being a figure which was inaccurate by one dollar, but the database entries were otherwise accurate, I doubt that they would be misleading and deceptive. In consequence of no debt being owed by either White Holdings or Mr White to a company in the
Capital group, however, the two particular database entries in question depart from accuracy in many ways, and those departures are significant. Each of the entries is misleading and deceptive.  
In Trade or Commerce  There is no doubt that the action of Baycorp in publishing the entries to its subscribers, and of Capital Finance in placing the entries there, were acts done in trade or commerce. Nor is there any doubt that each of Baycorp and Capital Finance is a corporation within the meaning of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth).
Thus, the allegation of contravention of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) is made out.  
Are the September 2004 Notices Ineffective?  Another argument of Mr King, independent of the one on which he has just succeeded, is that the various notices issued by Capital Finance in September to White Holdings and Mr White are ineffective. He puts that argument several ways.  
Notices Ineffective Because No Authority From Capital Corporate - As a Matter of Fact  The first is that, if the notices were to have any contractual efficacy at all, they would need to have been issued by Capital Finance as agent for its undisclosed principal Capital Corporate. If Capital Corporate were in existence at the time the notices were issued, I would have little difficulty in inferring, from the evidence of general practice which Mr Oosterom gave (para [74] above), that those notices were issued by Capital Finance as agent for Capital Corporate.  However, at that time Capital Corporate had been deregistered.  The effect of deregistration of a company is set out in section 601AD [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth):  "(1) A company ceases to exist on deregistration.  
Note: Despite the deregistration, officers of the company may still be liable for things done before the company was deregistered. 
Company's property vests in ASIC  
On deregistration, all the company's property vests in ASIC. If company property is vested in a liquidator immediately before deregistration, that property vests in ASIC. This subsection extends to property situated outside this jurisdiction.  
Under subsection (2), ASIC takes only the same property rights that the company itself held. If the company held particular property subject to a security or other interest or claim, ASIC takes the property subject to that interest or claim.  
Note: See also [subsection
AE(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ae.html)--which deals with liabilities that a law imposes on the property (particularly liabilities such as rates, taxes and other charges).  
ASIC has all the powers of an owner over property vested in it under subsection (2).  
Note: [Section
AF](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601af.html) confers additional powers on ASIC to fulfil outstanding obligations of the deregistered company."  [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s9.html) [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) defines "property" in an extremely broad fashion, and expressly states that the word "includes a thing in action". Insofar as Capital Corporate had property, in the form of any contractual rights against White Holdings or Mr
White, those rights would be vested in ASIC from the time of the deregistration.  The understanding of the Board of both Capital Corporate (at the time of passing the resolution for deregistration) and of Capital Finance was that
Capital Corporate had no business to carry on. That fact undermines, in my view, any inference which would otherwise arise from the general practice of which Mr Oosterom gave evidence. When Capital Finance did not have actual authority from Capital Corporate to issue those notices, it could not have done so as agent for Capital Corporate as an undisclosed principal. This reason for the invalidity of the notices is one which applies quite independently of the argument for invalidity of the notices arising from the effect of reinstatement, to which I now turn.  
Notices Ineffective because No Authority from Capital Corporate - As a Matter of Law of Corporate Reinstatement  A separate argument is that Capital Finance could not have had authority from Capital Corporate to exercise any contractual powers to give the notices when Capital Corporate did not itself exist, and the contractual powers had become vested in ASIC. Thus, Capital Finance could not have had authority, if one were deciding it at the time Capital Finance issued the various notices in
September 2004, to issue them on behalf of Capital Corporate: cf United
Service Insurance Co Ltd (in liq) versus Lang <case>; [(1935) 35 SR 487];
Sweeney & Vandeleur Pty Ltd versus BNY Australia Pty Ltd [(1993) 11 ACSR .]
Further, the law concerning the effect of reinstatement of a corporation does not lead to any different conclusion if one is deciding, now, at a time when
Capital Corporate has been reinstated, whether it had that authority.  The effect of reinstatement of a corporation is stated in [section
AH](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html) [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).  "Reinstatement by ASIC  
ASIC may reinstate the registration of a company if ASIC is satisfied that the company should not have been deregistered.  
Reinstatement by Court  
The Court may make an order that ASIC reinstate the registration of a company if:  an application for reinstatement is made to the Court by:  a person aggrieved by the deregistration; or  a former liquidator of the company; and  the Court is satisfied that it is just that the company's registration be reinstated.  
If the Court makes an order under subsection (2), it may:  validate anything done between the deregistration of the company and its reinstatement; and  make any other order it considers appropriate.  
Note: For example, the Court may direct ASIC to transfer to another person property vested in ASIC under [subsection
AD(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ad.html)  
ASIC to give notice of reinstatement  
ASIC must give notice of a reinstatement in the Gazette. If ASIC exercises its power under subsection (1) in response to an application by a person, ASIC must also give notice of the reinstatement to the applicant.  
Effect of reinstatement  
If a company is reinstated, the company is taken to have continued in existence as if it had not been deregistered. A person who was a director of the company immediately before deregistration becomes a director again as from the time when ASIC or the Court reinstates the company. Any property of the company that is still vested in ASIC revests in the company. If the company held particular property subject to a security or other interest or claim, the company takes the property subject to that interest or claim."  Capital Corporate was reinstated by ASIC, under [section
AH(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html), rather than through an application to the Court.  Approaching the matter purely as one of statutory construction, the effect of [section
AH(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html) is that, now, the statute requires everyone to treat Capital Corporate as though it had never been deregistered. However, that does not mean that anything which purported to be done on behalf of Capital Corporate during the period of its deregistration is thereby regarded as valid. If a director had purported to act on behalf of a deregistered company during the period of deregistration, mere reinstatement would not validate his action, because [section
AH(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html) provides only a limited measure of retrospectivity, so that the director regains his office only from the time of reinstatement. Similarly, [section
AH(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html) provides only a limited measure of retrospectivity concerning title to the property of the company, so that the property revests in it only from the time of reinstatement. Thus, notwithstanding the reinstatement, any contractual power which Capital Corporate had prior to the deregistration is still regarded, even after the deregistration, as having been vested in ASIC during the period of deregistration. If the contractual power was vested in ASIC,
Capital Finance could not have had authority to exercise that contractual power.  Consideration of the legislative history leading to [section
AH](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html) does not lead to any different conclusion. [Section
AH](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html) was one of the measures introduced by the [Company Law Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/clra1998210/) , which came into force on 1 July 1998. Before the provisions of which section 601AH are part were enacted, a company ceased to exist either because the Court ordered it be dissolved, or through administrative action by ASIC in deregistering the company: See generally Keay "Deregistration: the New End of the Road for Companies in Liquidation [(1999) 7 Insolvency Law Journal ]. The regime introduced as a result of the 1998
Act provided for just one way of a corporation ceasing to exist, namely deregistration.  Under the regime before the 1998 amending legislation, there were two separate ways by which a company's having gone out of existence could be reversed. One was by seeking an order declaring void the dissolution of a company after winding up (considered in Morris versus Harris [[1927] AC ]; Re
Kenneth Wright Distributors Pty Ltd (in liquidation); WJ Vine Pty Ltd versus Hall <case>; [[1973] VR 161] and Solla versus Scott & Ors [1982] 2 NSWLR 832).
Another way was by the Court ordering reinstatement of the registration of a company whose registration had been cancelled. The provisions governing the latter procedure were contained in section 574 Corporations Law, as follows:  "(3) If a person is aggrieved by the cancellation of the registration of a company, the Court, on an application made by the person at any time within 15 years after the cancellation, may, if satisfied that the company was, at the time of the cancellation, carrying on business or in operation or otherwise satisfied that it is just that the registration of the company be reinstated, order the reinstatement of the registration of the company.  
On the lodging of an office copy of an order under subsection (3), the company shall be deemed to have continued in existence as if its registration had not been cancelled.  
The Court may, in an order under subsection (3), give such directions and make such provisions (including directions and provisions relating to the retransfer of property vested in the Commission under section 576) as seem just for placing the company and all persons in the same position, so far as possible, as if the company's registration had not been cancelled."  In DFC of T versus Action Workwear Pty Ltd [(1996) 14 ACLC 1335] Senior
Master Mahony applied the decision of the majority of the English Court of
Appeal in Tyman's Ltd versus Craven [[1952] 2 QB 100] in concluding that the effect of section 574(4) is [at 1,346]:  "... to validate 'acts ... done and ... engagements entered into by individuals purporting to act as directors or officers of the company and in its name' during the period of dissolution; and that the power of the Court conferred by <case> expressly to 'give ... directions and make ...
provisions' is exercisable with respect to matters affecting or intended to affect the company but not involving acts done and engagements entered into in its name by persons purporting to act on its behalf."  In Ash Street Properties Pty Limited & Ors versus Pollnow (NSWCA,
Handley JA, 1 September 1995, unreported) Handley JA considered a situation where:  a costs order was made in favour of seven entities on 18 July 1987;  two of those entities were corporations, which were dissolved under section 574 Corporations Law in February and July 1992 respectively;  solicitors purporting to act for all seven entities filed bills of costs in November 1992. The taxation of the bills took place on 20 September 1994.  
Burchett J made orders later in September 1994 reinstating the companies, and those orders were also lodged with the ASC in September 1994.  
The certificates of taxation issued on 12 October 1994.  
Handley JA considered an argument that as a result of the dissolution of the two companies and the absence of instructions from the ASC the solicitors did not have instructions from all joint creditors, and hence the filing of the bills were nullities. His Honour rejected that argument. An essential step in his Honour's reasoning was (at page 3):  "... the filing of the bills involved procedural steps in existing proceedings which the solicitors would normally be authorised to take by virtue of their general retainers in those proceedings without instructions or special authority."  His Honour, at page 6, quoted with approval, in relation to section 574(4)
Corporations Law, the statement of Evershed MR in Tyman's Ltd v
Craven at 110, that:  "... I have found it impossible to formulate the qualification that would have to be read into the general words of the subsection, or to find any satisfactory basis for holding that those general words were ... retroactive to a limited extent only."  That decision was upheld by the New South Wales Court of Appeal:
Pollnow versus Ash Street Properties Pty Ltd [(1996) 130 FLR 235.] The judgment is brief, as their Honours approved the reasoning of Handley JA.
Priestley JA (with whom Clarke and Powell JJA agreed) at 235-236 characterised the argument which had been put to Handley JA as one,  "... that <case> of the Corporations Law had the effect, once Burchett
J had made orders reinstating the two companies, of validating all procedural steps taken in their name while they had been de-registered, including the lodgement and taxation of the three bills."  Similarly, in Jekos Holdings Pty Ltd versus Australian Horticultural Finance
Pty Ltd (No 2) [[1995] 1 QdR 612] Mackenzie J held that, where interlocutory orders in Supreme Court proceedings had purportedly been obtained by a company during a period when it was dissolved under section 574, the reinstatement of the registration cured any lack of capacity that the company had had to seek and obtain the orders, without the need for any separate order to cure that lack of capacity.  In my view, the case now before me differs from those cases in three respects. Any one of those respects is sufficient to conclude that Capital
Finance was not acting on behalf of Capital Corporate in issuing the September notices. First, section 601AH(5) imposes limits on the retrospectivity of the resuscitation of the corporation, to which I have earlier referred, which section 574(4) Corporations Law did not have. Second, the issuing of the notices was not an act which purported to be done in the name of Capital
Corporate and so is not within the ratio of Tyman's or the Pollnow cases. The third is a consequence of the requirement for a person who enters a contract as agent for an undisclosed principal to have actual authority, at the time of entering the contract, to do so on behalf of the undisclosed principal. That requirement will prevent any contract, which someone claims to have entered as agent for an undisclosed principal, in circumstances where that supposed undisclosed principal is a deregistered corporation at the time the contract is entered, from ever being binding on the corporation, even if the registration of the corporation is reinstated.  In Diamond Hill International Pty Ltd versus Xu [(2001) 19 ACLC ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%282001%29%2019%20ACLC%201139 "View LawCiteRecord" ); <case> Stone J considered an application to set aside certain orders to pay particular sums of money to particular people. Those orders had been made after there had been a costs order, which had been taxed and resulted in certificates of taxation. The applicant claimed that the orders should be set aside because at the time of the taxation it was deregistered, and only after entry of the orders was its registration reinstated.  The company alleged that in consequence of being deregistered at the relevant time there was no one who could make objections in relation to the bills of costs, and that in consequence, the quantum which had been ordered was grossly excessive. The applicant sought to have the orders set aside, under the court rule which empowered the Court to set aside orders which had been made in the absence of a party.  Her Honour was referred to the decision in DFC of T versus Action Workwear
Pty Ltd, and noted at [7] that the legislative provisions applicable in
Action Workwear were not identical to those which presently apply. Her
Honour said, at [8]:  "While <case> deems the company, once reregistered, to have had a continuous existence, it clearly cannot in any sensible way deem the company to have had the opportunity to make submissions in a proceeding that concluded before reregistration."  Her Honour then went on to consider whether it was appropriate to set aside the orders, and concluded that it was not. Thus, it was necessarily part of her Honour's decision that the retrospective effect of section 601AH(5) was not enough to stop the orders which had been made from being ones which were made in the absence of a party. While the decisions of Handley JA and the
Court of Appeal in the Pollnow cases were not cited to her Honour, the different conclusions reached in the Pollnow cases and the Diamond
Hill case concerning a similar fact situation reflects, in my view, a real difference between the mode of operation of section 574(4) Corporations Law and section 601AH(5) [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).
That difference is a consequence of [section (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s574.html) resulting in there being, upon reinstatement, a restoration of the company's property to it which is retrospective to the moment the company lost that property upon deregistration, while the retrospectivity which [section
AH(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html) gives is retrospective only to the date of reinstatement.  In the present case, if, upon reinstatement, someone had wanted to have the issuing of the notices during the period when Capital Corporate was deregistered treated as though such notices were valid, it would have been necessary to apply to the Court for the reinstatement, rather than to ASIC, and on that application to the Court for reinstatement to make application under [section
AH(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s601ah.html) for a specific order for the validation of that Act. That course was not followed.  The conclusion at which I have arrived is consistent with the legislative intent in introducing the new regime for reinstatement of deregistered corporations. The Explanatory Memorandum for the [Company Law Review Bill ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/bill/clrb1997220/) said:  "It is envisaged that the ASC will only exercise its reinstatement power where no dealings with the property of a deregistered company which give rise to third party rights have been carried out during the intervening period. If third parties have become involved, it is expected that reinstatement will generally need to proceed through the Court."  For these reasons, none of the notices issued in September 2004 is contractually valid.  
Effect of Invalidity of September Notices  The arguments considered under this heading are ones which arise only if I am wrong in having concluded that no contractual relations exist between Mr
White and White Holdings, on the one hand, and Capital Corporate on the other.
For the purpose of considering these arguments, I shall proceed on the assumption that contractual relations existed between the plaintiffs and
Capital Corporate.  Mr Ashhurst submits that no notice was needed before White Holdings owed
Capital Corporate the rental which was overdue, and interest on it. I accept that Clause 2(a) of the Rental Agreement required the rental to be paid when due, without any demand. I do not accept that Clause 2(b) required White
Holdings to pay, unprompted, interest on overdue money from time to time. The rate at which the interest is payable under Clause 2(b) is 2% per year above
Konica's cost of funding the overdue amount. As a matter of necessary implication, White Holdings could not be required to pay interest until it was, at the least, informed what was Konica's cost of funding the overdue amount. It was never so informed, apart from by being informed of the sum of interest payable by service of a notice in September.  The notices in question also demanded payment of some government charges.
Under Clause 2(d) of the Rental Agreement, such sums were only payable upon demand. Thus, the only amount which White Holdings could have owed, independently of a valid demand, was the amount of outstanding instalments of rent. At the time the Baycorp entries were made, the amount of instalments of rent unpaid was $4062.32. For that reason, each of the Baycorp entries would be inaccurate in stating that the amount owing was $4,525. In the circumstances of the other findings I have made, I will not go on to decide whether an entry stating that a particular sum of money is due, when only about 90% of that sum of money is actually due, amounts to conduct which is misleading and deceptive, or whether an inaccuracy of that kind calls for a remedy.  
No Debt Owed at Date Entries Said It Was Owed?  As mentioned earlier, it was on 18 January 2004 that Capital Corporate was deregistered. It was from March 2004 that White Holdings failed to pay any rental connected with the equipment. Even if Capital Corporate was a party to the Assignment Agreement, following its deregistration the right to receive the instalments of rental which were accruing was vested, not in it, but in
ASIC. There can hardly be a default in paying a sum of money to a particular corporation, when that corporation does not exist, and has no power to receive the money: cf Joro Pty Ltd versus State Bank of NSW (1992) 5 BPR 11,709.
Thus, another respect in which the Baycorp entries were misleading and deceptive was in representing that, on 16 September 2004, White Holdings had made default in payment of any debt that it owed to a company in the Capital group.  The guarantee is one whereby Mr White undertakes to pay all rentals which were payable to Capital Corporate. It was incorrect, and hence misleading and deceptive, to say that, on 16 September 2004 he had failed to pay any sum of money which he owed to a company in the Capital group, because the only candidate for being owed such money was Capital Corporate, it did not exist, and any right it might previously have had to be paid any sum of money by Mr
White was now vested in ASIC.  
No Default by Mr White because No Demand?  There is a further reason, in my view, why Mr White did not owe any money to Capital Corporate. As a matter of construction of the guarantee, it seems to me that the making of demand is a precondition to the obligation of Mr
White to make any payment under it. It says so expressly, in the second-last sentence. The final sentence, read in context, means that the guarantee is a primary obligation in the sense that Konica need not take action against the
Hirer or any other person before enforcing the guarantee - but that is still consistent with the guaranteed money being payable only on demand.  On that construction, an effective demand to pay is needed. For the reasons already given, any notice sent by Capital Finance in September 2004 was not an effective demand given by Capital Corporate.  
Whether September Notices Not Served  The findings I have made so far are sufficient to establish that the entries are misleading and deceptive. Against the possibility of there being an appeal, there are some other factual findings I should make.  The file maintained by Capital Finance relating to this transaction contains an unsigned copy, not on any letterhead, of each of the September notices.  That file also contains a signed original, on Capital Finance letterhead, of the 2 September 2004 notice addressed to White Holdings. Attached to it is an opened envelope, with a "Return to Sender" sticker on it, indicating that the addressee had left the address.  On 5 August 2004 Michael Jones, a mercantile agent engaged by Capital, had attended at 162 Old Northern Road Castle Hill. He found that the building which had formerly existed on that site had been demolished, and the site had been turned into a carpark. Enquires by the mercantile agent gave the current address of the business as being 5 Chicago Avenue, Blacktown, and identified its telephone number. Mr Jones reported all this to Capital Finance in an email on 25 August 2004.  Mr White's personal assistant at the time was Ms Wendy Orton. Ms Orton's duties included dealing with creditors. Mr Jones' report to Capital Finance, made on 25 August 2004, records the following events.  "8/8/04 Spoke to Wendy who advised that agent could collect full account arrears and copier on 14/8/04.  /8/04 Phoned and spoke to John White who advised that he does not have the required funds for payment however advised that the equipment could be collected anytime. He advised that he would have half the settlement figure within a week.  
Numerous messages for John White to phone agent have not been returned, agent advised Wendy that as John is avoiding contact CFAL would commence legal action to recover funds. She said she would ask him to call again however doubted that he would."  Capital Finance maintains a record, in a continuous computer file, of contacts between its staff members and other people relating to this particular contract. It shows numerous contacts between Capital staff and people at White Holdings from 24 April 2002, in which White Holdings is being pressed to pay arrears. Ms Orton was one of the people at White Holdings who was contacted in this way.  Ms Orton came to have in her possession a signed original, on Capital
Finance letterhead, of the notice dated 2 September 2004 addressed to Mr White at 14 Fairway Drive, Kellyville. She made a note on it that the Rental
Agreement number in the heading was incorrect. She also made a note on it dated 13 September 2004 saying "will re-issue letter - 2 days only to respond will be given." I infer that this note was made following a conversation in which she told someone from Capital Finance about the incorrect Rental
Agreement number, and in which she was given a message from someone at Capital
Finance to the effect that the letter would be re-issued, and two days only would be given to respond to it. The conduct of Capital Finance in producing another set of notices on 13 September 2004, and which gave two days in which to pay, is consistent with that inference.  The computer file notes of Capital Finance contain an entry on 2 September relating to the demands being sent to the company and Mr White, but no corresponding entry relating to the sending of any demands on 13 September.  Mr White was separated from his wife by September 2004. They had formerly lived together in a house at 14 Fairway Drive, Kellyville, but in September he was living elsewhere. She had formerly worked in the office of White
Holdings, but had ceased doing so by that time. She still opened any mail for the company which she came across, but usually it was Mr White who opened mail at the company office. The letterhead of the company in August 2004 showed its address as being 5 Chicago Avenue, Blacktown, and its postal address as being
PO Box 1 Pendle Hill.  Mr White's account of himself in evidence was to the effect that he was a hands-on businessman, who left dealing with paperwork to other people as far as he could. I see no reason to doubt that evidence. Even so, he was consulted from time to time by Ms Orton about what to do concerning debts.  He did not strike me as a witness who was particularly reliable concerning recollection of documentary matters. I do not regard his denial as having received any notice of demand addressed to himself as a guarantor as sufficient to discharge his onus of proof that no such notice was received.  The notice of 2 September 2004 addressed to White Holdings manifestly did not reach that company, because it was returned to Capital Finance, and was addressed to White Holdings at an address that Capital Finance did not occupy, and (as Capital Finance already knew) which had been turned into a carpark.
The notice of 13 September 2004 addressed to White Holdings was addressed to the same address as the notice of 2 September 2004. In my view, the plaintiffs have established that neither of the September 2004 notices addressed to White
Holdings was actually received by it. Whether the notice clause in Clause 9 of the Rental Agreement suffices to reach a conclusion that, even so, one or both of those notices is deemed to have been served on White Holdings is a question of law which, in light of the conclusions I have already come to, I need not consider.  I am not satisfied that Mr White has established that he did not receive one or both of the notices addressed to him dated 13 September 2004.  
Whether Mr White Gave No Consent to Disclosure or Use of Personal Information  One element in Mr White's claim based upon the [Privacy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) is a contention that he gave no consent to any personal information relating to him being disclosed to any person or included in any database.  Mr David Langley is the Managing Director of Operating Lease Pty Ltd. He had overall supervision, in 1999 and 2000, of the activities of Operating
Lease in connection with Capital Corporate providing finance to customers of
Konica.  When Metronome made a proposal to lease equipment from Konica, that proposal was made on a standard form of Konica, which contained acknowledgments of the practice of Konica of giving a credit reporting agency certain personal information, and an authorisation for those disclosures to be made. As well, it contained a consent for Konica to receive certain types of personal information, related to the applicant for credit, from other people.
Mr Langley gave evidence that at the time the Assignment of Rental Agreement was organised,  "... it was the practice of Operating Lease when organising the finance for assignment of a rental agreement to do the following:  give the prospective assignee and prospective guarantor of the assignee's obligations ("the Prospective Customers") a document which provides information in relation to the disclosure of the Prospective Customers' personal credit information to credit reporting agencies under the [Privacy
Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) ("Information Sheet");  ask the Prospective Customers to review the Information Sheet; and  if satisfied with the contents of the Information Sheet, request that the
Prospective Customers sign the Information Sheet.  
After an Information Sheet was signed by the Prospective Customers, an
Operating Lease employee would obtain a consumer credit report about the
Prospective Customers from a credit reporting agency."  He identified a printed form of consent, as being the type which Operating
Lease obtained from prospective assignees and prospective guarantors. That form became Exhibit 5.  The agreement whereby Operating Lease acted as broker between Konica and
Capital Corporate came to an end, according to Mr Langley, in March 2004.
(Whether it had actually come to an end any earlier, by virtue of Capital
Corporate's deregistration in January 2004, is a matter I need not decide.)
Once the agreement came to an end, Operating Lease destroyed its files relating to the agreement. In my view this provides an adequate explanation why a copy of any privacy consent signed by Mr White is not now obtainable from Operating Lease.  In the ordinary course of things, according to Mr Langley, the original of that privacy consent would be sent to Capital. No such consent signed by Mr
White is to be found in Capital's files at the moment.  Mr White denies that he ever signed any such consent. However, given his unreliability concerning what dealings he has had with documents, I do not place great weight on that evidence.  The information which Konica sent to Capital Finance on 15 November 2000 included a credit reference bureau search relating to Mr White. In the ordinary course of things, according to Mr Langley, that document would be obtained only after Mr White had signed a consent document.  In all these circumstances, I am not satisfied that Mr White has discharged the onus of proving that he signed no consent to the disclosure of his personal information, or to Konica obtaining personal information concerning him from other people.  
The Claim for Injurious Falsehood  Mr King submits that the conduct of Capital Finance in making the entries on the Baycorp database amounts to the tort of injurious falsehood. Malice is an essential element of that tort: Palmer Bruyn & Parker Pty Ltd v
Parsons <case>; <case>, 393 per
Gleeson CJ, [57]-[58], 405-406 per Gummow J, [108], 423 per Kirby J, [192], per Callinan J. In this context "malice" might mean having some indirect, dishonest or improper motive, or might mean intending to injure another without just cause or excuse. Kirby J in Palmer Bruyn & Parker at [108], 423 regards malice in either of those senses as sufficient to establish the tort. Callinan J at [193]-[194], 448 preferred the test whereby malice required some indirect, dishonest or improper motive. The majority in the High Court in that case express no view about which of these two versions of malice is the appropriate one for the tort of injurious falsehood to have been committed. I respectfully agree with Callinan J that the "intent to injure without just cause or excuse" test imposes a higher standard than the "indirect, dishonest or improper motive" test. I shall assume without deciding that the lower standard of malice is the appropriate one.  In seeking to recover money from White Holdings and Mr White, Capital
Finance was, in my view, doing no more than seeking to enforce what it believed were its legal rights. Mr Duxbury, the officer of Capital Finance with supervision of the particular file, denied emphatically having an improper motive for making the listings with Baycorp. I accept that evidence.  I take into account that the computer file of Capital Finance relating to this transaction contains an entry on 16 September 2004, immediately following the entry on 2 September 2004 recording the sending of demands to White
Holdings and Mr White. The 16 September entry says (expanding abbreviations):  "No response, letter to company and guarantor advising of listing with CRAA.
If no response will write off & dead loss as balance outstanding under $5,000."  From that I infer that the writer saw the listing as being a last possible step in seeking to obtain payment of the money which was believed to be owing.  As well, however, as a subscriber to the Baycorp database, Capital Finance had an obligation to report defaults to it. Quite apart from having a legitimate interest in collecting an individual debt, a financier has a legitimate interest in obtaining accurate information about financial activities of applicants for credit. For a financier to itself contribute information to a database of such information advances that interest. Of course, the activity must be carried on within limits which legislation and the general law impose on it - but in the present case the plaintiffs have not established that anyone acting for Capital Finance in connection with the matter was aware that there had been any inaccuracy or breach of the law, or was recklessly indifferent to whether there had been any inaccuracy or breach of the law. I am not satisfied that the plaintiffs have established malice.
That is a sufficient reason why the claim in injurious falsehood fails.  Insofar as the claim of injurious falsehood depended on a statement made by an employee of Capital Finance to a finance broker in March 2006, there is no admissible evidence of any such statement having been made.  
Damages  Mr White requested Mr Cusack, in early 2006, to seek finance for a large printing and mail sorting machine from Germany for White Holdings, costing $240,000. Mr Cusack approached Mr Malafouris, who refused to provide finance at the usual market rate of 7% for such contracts, but only at 15%. Mr White in consequence paid cash for the transaction.  After Mr Malafouris received the request for finance, he did a Baycorp credit search. It showed the two entries which Capital Finance had placed there. It was after seeing that search that Mr Malafouris offered finance only at 15%.  The search which Mr Malafouris carried out showed not only the two entries which Capital Finance had placed there, but also, against Mr White, a default posted by "Nationwide News" on 12 November 2004 described as "bad debt written off". The search made on 16 March 2006 showed that bad debt as still unpaid. Mr Cusack told Mr Malafouris that that listing had been placed there in error. There is some hearsay evidence that the listing arose from a person to whom Mr White had sold a newsagency not paying a debt which that purchaser owed. That hearsay would not ordinarily suffice to discharge an onus of proof that the entry was a mistaken one. However, I infer that, for some reason or other, the entry had been placed in error - a further search against Mr White conducted on 13 April 2006 shows that any record of a default to Nationwide
News has been completely removed from Mr White's file. If there really was a debt which Mr White owed to Nationwide News, and that debt had been paid after March 2006, the entry would remain, but the "status" entry would be changed to show that it had been paid, and that entry would remain on the database for five years from the date of reporting.  I do not doubt that having an inaccurate and unfavourable entry on one's file at a credit reference bureau has a tendency to dissuade lenders. I am not satisfied, however, that Mr White or White Holdings have established that these inaccurate entries have caused them damage. When a financier considering providing credit comes across an unfavourable entry it is not uncommon for them to seek further information from either the applicant for finance, or the entity who posted the listing. The results of those enquiries are likely to be taken into account, as well as the listing itself.  It is not as though the entries made by Capital Finance are the only unfavourable information which a financier could discover concerning Mr White.
The Baycorp search made on 16 March 2006 shows a judgment having been obtained against Mr White on 20 August 2003 by Hallmark Cards Australia Ltd for an amount of $1,873, and still remaining unpaid. The search dated 13 April 2006 showed that that judgment remained unpaid, and as well there was a new entry relating to a District Court judgment which had been given on 24 January 2005 for $54,544 in favour of the owners of a particular strata plan. An ASIC search conducted on 10 April 2006 showed that there had been two applications to wind up White Holdings, each of which had been dismissed (one in September , the other in September 2004). All of these entries might have an innocent explanation, but the evidence does not include any such explanation.  As well, a financier approached to provide finance will usually require financial information to be provided by the applicant. For financial accommodation of any size, a lender often requires evidence of the assets and liabilities, income and expenditure of the applicant for finance and any proposed guarantors. In the present case, the plaintiffs present no evidence that their financial position is such that, but for the existence of the entries on the Baycorp database, it is likely that they would be able to obtain finance on commercially acceptable terms. While the "but for" test is not a satisfactory statement of the legal view of causation (March versus E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd & Anor <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506], it can, as Mason CJ acknowledged in March & Stramare at 515-16, play an important role in the resolution of causal questions as a negative criterion. See also Deane J at 522. To the same effect is the statement of McHugh J at 530, that:  "If the damage would have occurred notwithstanding the negligent act or omission, the act or omission is not a cause of the damage and there is no legal liability for it."  Recognising that the "but for" test, even used as a negative criterion of causation is an aid to deciding whether a causal connection exists, and not itself the legal test, I turn to apply the actual legal test, which requires the applying of common sense to the facts in each particular case (per Mason J at 515). I am not satisfied that the plaintiffs have established the incorrect entries on the database have caused them any loss.  Mr King submitted that, once it had been shown that Mr Malafouris' refusal of finance on ordinary terms followed his sighting of the Baycorp searches, that was sufficient to establish a causal link, and an onus of adducing evidence would shift to the defendants to establish that something other than the Baycorp search was the cause. I do not accept that is so. The correct proposition is that if one party has established sufficient evidence from which causation may be inferred, the other party comes under an evidential burden or an onus of adducing evidence: Hampton Court Ltd versus Crooks <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 367] at 371-372 per Dixon CJ; Apollo Shower Screens Pty Ltd & Anor versus Building and
Construction Industry Long Service Payments Corporation [(1985) 1 NSWLR ]
at 564-5; Baiada & Ors versus Waste Recycling & Processing Service of
NSW  <case>; <case>.
Particularly given that it was well within the capacity of the plaintiffs to establish what information had been given to Mr Malafouris, and their own assets and liabilities, income and expenditure, I would not regard the mere temporal sequence of Mr Malafouris first seeing the Baycorp search results, and later refusing to offer finance on usual market terms, as presenting sufficient evidence from which it may be inferred, in the circumstances of this case, that it was the entries which were the cause of finance at usual market rates being unavailable.  
Injunctive Relief  I have already said that an inaccurate entry on someone's credit file has a tendency to discourage providers of finance from providing that finance. How important a discouragement it is depends in part upon the internal processes of the financier. This means that there is an inherent difficulty in an applicant proving that, because of the incorrect entry, a particular financier has failed to provide finance. Any assessment of damages in relation to a legal wrong consisting of making an inaccurate entry on a credit reference bureau database almost inevitably needs to be assessed by reference to the chances of that entry having caused damage. While assessing damages on that basis is often the best that the common law can do, and is better than providing no remedy at all, it is still an approximate remedy. Most importantly, it is a remedy which falls short of bringing about the situation which there would have been if the inaccurate entry had not been there in the first place, or did not continue to be a potential source of error in the future. For these reasons, in relation to the breach which the plaintiffs have established, damages are, in my view, an inadequate remedy. The appropriate remedy is an injunction requiring Baycorp to remove the offending entries, and requiring Capital Finance to take all steps within its power to cause the entries to be removed.  Another order which the plaintiffs sought was an order restraining Capital
Finance from communicating any credit information or personal information regarding either plaintiff to any credit provider, lender or financier concerning the credit worthiness of the plaintiffs or either of them. I am satisfied that when there is an entry on a credit reference file it sometimes happens that a financier contacts the company which has placed the entry there, seeking to find out more about that entry. Even after the offending entries are removed from the database, Capital Finance might still be contacted by financiers who have seen those entries in the past. In my view, the appropriate way of providing a remedy for that situation is to order a mandatory injunction, requiring that, if Capital Finance is contacted by any person concerning either of the offending entries, it is to inform the enquirer that the entries were made in error, and no debt was owed by either
White Holdings or Mr White to any company in the Capital group. I am not satisfied that there is any sufficiently proved threat that Capital Finance might disclose any credit information or personal information to a credit provider to warrant any wider injunction. Even if it were the case that the plaintiffs had established that the making of the entries on the database involved a breach by Capital Finance of a duty not to infringe the privacy of the plaintiffs, or a breach of a duty of confidence owed to the plaintiffs, the absence of threat would mean that the injunction which the plaintiffs seek would not be granted.  
Matters Not Decided  In light of the other conclusion to which I have come, there are various questions which have arisen, but which it is not necessary for me to decide.  
Is the Exhibit 5 Consent One Capital Finance Can Rely On?  The form of consent contained in Exhibit 5 (para [154] above) is one which is addressed to Konica. It does not contain any extended definition of "Konica", whether of the type found in Clause 9 of the Rental Agreement, or of any other kind. The time at which Mr White would, in the ordinary course of things have signed that consent was at the time the application for assignment was being considered - ie, in the present case at a time when no contractual relations would have existed between White Holdings and Mr White on the one hand, and either Konica, or Capital Corporate, on the other. Given that the identity of the person to whom personal information is made available might possibly be a matter of importance to someone giving such a consent, there might be room for argument about whether it was possible for such a consent to be obtained by Konica as agent for an undisclosed principal.  
Implied Representation of Compliance with Baycorp Default Information Guide?  Mr King submitted that there was an implied representation in the Baycorp database entries that the person placing the entries had done so in accordance with the Baycorp Default Information Guide. That guide is a publication which
Baycorp makes available to its subscribers. It contains information about how its services operate, and some recommendations.  Relevant portions include:  "Reporting Overdue Accounts as Defaults  
The [Privacy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) places an obligation on subscribers to ensure that default information reported to
Business Information Services is correct. You must ensure that the amount of the account reported is correct, and the identity details you supply are complete and accurate.  
The Act sets out clear guidelines for credit providers (ie those who are
Business Information Services subscribers) wishing to report overdue consumer credit accounts to Business Information Services. The account must be 60 days or more in arrears, and collection action must have commenced prior to the debt being reported to Business Information Services.  ..  
Guarantors  
Before listing the overdue account with Business Information Services, the credit provider must first give all guarantors written notice that a default has been incurred by the principal borrower(s).  ...  
Commercial Default Reporting  
Whilst the [Privacy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) does not regulate commercial credit, Business Information Services asks its subscribers to adopt a uniform approach to all its default reporting procedures. That is, that the same guideline are adhered to for listing both consumer and commercial defaults.  
One of the most important procedures to adopt is to ensure that all overdue accounts are reported. Business Information Services also recommends that you allow 60 days to elapse before reporting overdue commercial accounts. Whilst this is not a [Privacy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) requirement, it is a widely accepted Business Information Services standard."  Under the heading "Individual Commercial & Corporate Default Report
Types" is listed a series of definitions of different types of default reports. The definition of a "payment default" is:  "The account must be 60 days or more overdue and the debtor or debtors must have been sent a written notice advising of the overdue payment, and requesting payment of the amount outstanding."  Whether these standards have been complied with in relation to the default listings concerning White Holdings and Mr White can be ascertained from the factual findings I have made so far. In light of my other conclusions, and the need for this judgment to be produced with urgency, I will not spell them out.  If the Court of Appeal ever needs to consider whether the Baycorp database entries conveyed a representation that the Default Guide had been complied with, and it is relevant to take into consideration whether the evidence of Mr
Malafouris, Mr Cusack and Mr Rodd bears on that question, I found nothing in the demeanour of any of those men which leads me to doubt their testimony.  
Implied Representation that [Privacy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) Complied
With?  Mr King also submits that the Baycorp entries contain an implicit representation that the requirements of the [Privacy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) have been complied with. In the circumstances it is not necessary for me to decide that question.  
Breach of General Law Duty to Respect Privacy or Breach of Confidence?  In light of the findings I have made so far, the plaintiffs could not obtain a more extensive remedy than I have already decided to grant if they were to establish that there had been a breach of a duty to respect privacy, or a breach of confidence. In those circumstances, it is not necessary to decide those questions.  
Breach of the [Privacy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/)?  The plaintiffs contend that the posting of the two entries on the Baycorp database involve an infringement of various rights they are accorded by the [Privacy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) (Cth).
They assert that these breaches give them an entitlement to damages, through operation of the tort of breach of statutory duty.  Questions have been argued about whether this Court has jurisdiction to grant any such remedy, and about whether the terms of the [Privacy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) (Cth) were inconsistent with the existence of a private right of action for damages.
In light of the conclusions to which I have come, it is not necessary to decide those questions.  The plaintiffs also sought the injunction against disclosure of credit information or personal information on the bases of alleged breaches of the [Privacy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) (Cth).
The reason why I have declined that injunction concerning the established breaches of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) and the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) would also prevent any such injunction being granted for any breach of the [Privacy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1988108/) (Cth) that there might be, and concerning which this Court might have jurisdiction to grant an injunction.  
Contravention of Section 1041H?  Section 1041H(1) provides:  "A person must not, in this jurisdiction, engage in conduct, in relation to a financial product or a financial service, this is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive."  No attention was paid in argument to the construction of this provision.
What counts as a "financial product" is the subject of definitions extending over five pages of close print in the Butterworths print of section 763A-765A [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).
What counts as a "financial service" depends upon a definition which occupies a mere four pages of close print, from [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s766a.html) to [section
E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s766e.html) [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).
The meaning of "in relation to" in [section
H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s1041h.html), as in any other linguistic context, depends upon the precise context. No attention has been paid to any of these matters in argument. If there were to be a breach of [section
H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s1041h.html),
I do not see that it could result in any different remedy to that which I have already held is available. I will therefore not decide whether there has been a breach of [section
H.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s1041h.html)  
Orders 
Order that the first defendant forthwith remove from its database the entries relating to the plaintiffs set out in the Schedule to the Originating
Process in these proceedings. 
Order the third defendant to take all steps within its power to cause the said entries to be removed. 
Order that, if the third defendant by itself, its servants or agents, is contacted by any person concerning either of the said entries, it inform the enquirer that the entries were made in error, and that no debt was owed by either plaintiff to any company in the Capital Group. 
Order third defendant to pay costs of the plaintiffs of these proceedings. 
Direct that, if the plaintiffs wish to seek an order for costs against the first defendant, the plaintiffs cause this matter to be re-listed before me prior to 30 June 2006 for the purpose of obtaining directions for the further hearing of any such application. In the event that the matter is not re-listed pursuant to that direction on or prior to 30 June 2006, the proceedings are, apart from the orders already made, dismissed. 
These orders may be entered forthwith.  
LAST UPDATED: 12/04/2007 * * * 
