

Chilcotin P/L versus Cenelage P/L [1996] NSWSC 229 (25 June 1996) 
CHILCOTIN PTY LTD and another versus CENELAGE PTY LTD and others /92 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This litigation arises out of the sale of a business called Hospitality Training Group. In general terms, the business consisted of providing training courses for people wanting to enter the hospitality industry. Three courses were provided, one titled Cocktail Mixing and Bar Service, another called Food and Wine Waiting, and the third a course that combined the other two. The courses were provided in various country centres throughout Eastern Australia, and each course took a week to complete. Appropriate premises were hired for the week, as needed, and during that week a person called an instructor taught the courses from those premises. Courses were taught where, and as often as was judged commercially appropriate, but the business was much busier during the "summer months" of the year, than in the "winter months". It had its administrative centre in the Lismore district, but could have been conducted from any other convenient place in Eastern Australia.

From 1986 until 1991 the first defendant, Cenelage Pty Ltd (CENELAGE) conducted the business. The shareholders and directors of Cenelage were two persons (collectively called the second defendant), MR GANZ and his wife,
MISS LAKAEV. In 1991 Mr Ganz was in ill health, and they decided to sell the business.

By a contract dated 5 August 1991 Cenelage contracted to sell the business to the first plaintiff, Chilcotin Pty Ltd (CHILCOTIN) or its nominee, for a sum that was subject to adjustment by reference to a contractual formula related to the net earnings of the business in the year ending 30 June 1992.
The contract provided for completion to occur by 1 October 1991, but at the request of Chilcotin this contract was rescinded and replaced by two other contracts. By one of these contracts, Cenelage contracted to sell part of the business to Chilcotin for $100,000; and by the other contract Cenelage contracted to sell the balance of the business to the second plaintiff,
Gemeden Pty Ltd (GEMEDEN), for $35,000. Both of these contracts were dated September 1991, and they provided for adjustment of the purchase price in similar terms to the terms of the contract of 5 August 1991, and for completion to take place by 1 October 1991. Gemeden is a subsidiary of
Chilcotin, and both Chilcotin and Gemeden were effectively controlled by MR
HOEFL.

Mr Ganz and Miss Lakaev were parties to all three contracts, where they were collectively called "The Covenantors". Each contract contained a Clause 20 and a Special Condition 7 in these terms: "20 The Purchasers acknowledge that, in entering into this agreement, they have not relied upon any statement, representation, warranty or condition made or given by the Vendors or anyone on their behalf in respect of the subject matter of this agreement, other than those that are expressly herein contained.
 Notwithstanding the provisions of Clause 20 hereof the Vendor and the
Covenantors hereby expressly acknowledge that the Purchasers have been induced to enter into this Agreement on the basis of the information contained in
Annexures "A" through "F" hereof and the Vendor and the Covenantors hereby warrant the reliability, accuracy, completeness and truthfulness of the information provided in those annexures.

The Vendor further agrees, if requested by the Purchasers, to permit the
Purchasers or their Accountants, at the Purchasers' expense, to undertake an audit prior to completion of the records of the business for the period 1 July to the date of completion. The Vendor will, upon request, provide all such books of account and other financial statements as may be required by the
Purchasers or their Accountants to undertake the audit provided that the
Purchasers shall not be obliged to produce their tax returns that relate not only to the business but also to other unrelated business ventures conducted by the Vendor." 
Each of the three contracts comprised, in part, a sheet of paper identifying the documents described as the Annexures mentioned in Special Condition 7; and these documents are now Exhibit C. The document called Annexure "D" consisted of a summary of Cenelage's Trading and Profit and Loss Statements for the years ending 30 June 1988 to 1991; and Annexure "E" consisted of copies of two faxes setting out the Income earned by the business for training course fees for the years ending 30 June 1989 to 1991.

The information provided by these two annexures was different. Annexure "D" provided, in respect of each year, a gross figure for course fees received by
Cenelage, and a figure for refunds allowed, so as to throw up these net figures:  $619,896.65   $793,476.58   $711,746.99  
Annexure "E" provided figures for "Income from Course fees", month by month for these three years, in each case in figures in round dollars, totalled for these three years as follows:  $638,991   $812,649   $711,014  
No totals appeared in the fax containing the figures for 1990 and 1991, but someone wrote in purported totals at some unidentified stage, of $639,000 and $812,000 respectively. For 1991, the fax gives a total, of $712,572, which is incorrect - the monthly figures given add up to the figure set out above.
Nobody seems to have noticed these errors in additions at the time.

The defendants concede that they were in breach of Special Condition 7 of the contracts dated 27 September 1991, in that the figures quoted in Annexures "D" and "E" were incorrect, as to the income received from course fees, and as to the net profits of Cenelage. The seasonality of the business, that is, the time at which its income was received, was regarded as important when it came to valuing the goodwill of the business.

The plaintiffs sued in contract, negligence, and fraud, and for misleading or deceptive conduct; and they sought to rescind the contracts of 27 September
However, by the end of the hearing, they sought only damages, for breach of contract, and for misleading or deceptive conduct, abandoning (rightly, on the evidence) the other claims pleaded.

The meaning of the contract 
The defendants submitted that the meaning of the expression "income from course fees" in Annexure "E" to the contracts had to determined by reference to the factual matrix in which the expression had been used: Codelfa
Constructions Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority of NSW <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337.] 
Cenelage retained a business agent, H P Le May & Associates Pty Ltd to sell the business. The principal of that company, Mr Le May, introduced Mr
Ganz to Mr Hoefl, who worked for the agent on a commission basis. Mr Hoefl had various dealings with Mr Ganz, and then he asked Mr Ganz for a breakdown of the monthly turnover for the years ending 30 June 1989 and 1990, so as to have an idea of how the business flowed throughout the year. Mr Ganz said that
Cenelage did not have records that enabled him to do that, but agreed to add up Cenelage's bank deposits, month by month, and to provide that information.
Later, Mr Ganz sent two faxes, dated 21 June and 2 July 1991, containing these figures: see now Annexure "E" to the contracts.

During June 1991 Mr Hoefl introduced a potential buyer of the business, MR
MAYMAN. Mr Hoefl and Mr Mayman went to Lismore in this connection, and then
Mr Hoefl told Mr Ganz that Mr Mayman wanted figures for the year ending 30
June 1991. Mr Ganz did not have those figures, but he prepared a document showing monthly figures for bank deposits for the period July 1990 to March , and for the period 1 to 11 April 1991. Each of these figures was rounded off to the nearest $1,000. Shortly afterwards, he received bank statements for the period 11 April to 30 June 1991, and on 5 July he sent Mr Hoefl a fax updating the figures, to 30 June.

A little later, Mr Hoefl asked Mr Ganz for final figures for the year ending June 1991. On 9 July Cenelage's accountant provided some draft accounts, and Mr Ganz sent a copy to Mr Hoefl; and so far as is now relevant, this is summarised in Annexure "D" to the contracts of sale. Mr Hoefl also asked for the monthly figures to be updated, and made more accurate; and on 15 July Mr
Ganz sent to Mr Hoefl a fax providing monthly figures for the year ending 30
June 1991, a copy of which is in Annexure "E" to the contracts, recording a total of $712,572.

In the meantime Mr Hoefl had sent a fax to Mr Ganz on about 9 July, asking why the figure of $700,000 shown for course fees in the monthly break down was different from the figure for income shown in the draft Profit and Loss
Statement, $742,986. Just where the figure of $700,000 came from is not clear, but a manuscript note, perhaps in Mr Hoefl's writing, appears on a copy of Mr
Ganz's fax of 5 July appearing to add the figures up to $700,000. It is not easy to know just what happened here, because the copies of this fax in evidence are largely illegible. However, the figure of $742,986 was the gross income from fees shown in the draft accounts, without making any deduction for fees refunded, $31,239.

According to Mr Hoefl, when Mr Hoefl asked Mr Ganz about this discrepancy, Mr
Ganz said that some of the money banked represented the proceeds of sale of vehicles and equipment, and that refunds of fees also had to be taken into account. Mr Hoefl asked for the figures to be rechecked. By then Mr Ganz was flustered and he asked Miss Lakaev to carry out this task. She did so, and by fax dated 17 July the defendants provided monthly figures headed "Income from course fees" totalling $726,171.

The negotiations with Mr Mayman progressed to the point where draft forms of contract were exchanged, but at the end of July Mr Mayman withdrew from the negotiations, and Mr Hoefl expressed an interest in buying the business himself; and then on 5 August the first contract, to sell the business to
Chilcotin, was executed.

In this context, I accept that the expression "Income from course fees" in
Annexure "E" of the contracts of sale represents gross monthly deposits of revenue earned as fees for courses, and banked; and, contrary to the defendants' submissions, that in order to determine what the net income from this source was, one had to deduct the amount of refunded fees, recorded in
Annexure "D" as $31,239.61.

As the defendants concede, both the revenue figures and the figures for net profit were incorrect.

The actual revenue and profit of Cenelage 
The plaintiffs relied upon the evidence of MR GRAHAM, an accountant, who swore four affidavits, and who was not cross-examined. In accordance with his instructions, he expressed opinions based upon some only of Cenelage's records.

In respect of each course taught, Cenelage kept the enrolment form completed by each student, and two copies of a document called a summary sheet, prepared in respect of each week for each course taught. As enrolments were received, the summary sheet was completed (relevantly) by filling in the name of each student, the amount paid, and the date of payment. One copy was sent out to the instructor, who made further entries, including details of fees paid by students to the instructor. At the end of the course, that copy of the summary sheet was returned to the Cenelage office, and filed together with the other copy, that had been kept there.

Students were given a discount for their fees if they paid seven days before the course commenced. Most students took advantage of this, but others paid their fees to the Cenelage office, or by banker's transfer, just before the course commenced; and others paid the instructor at the commencement of the course. In some circumstances fees paid were refunded.

The two copies of the summary sheets were usually different, and, it seems, they were not reconciled: presumably there was no advantage in doing this, because those concerned could readily identify which copy had been completed by the instructor.

The summary sheets threw up total figures for revenue that are different to the figures taken from the deposits recorded in Cenelage's bank statements; and, in accordance with his instructions, Mr Graham relied upon the figures taken from the summary sheets, and not the bank records. In contrast, MR
FINNEY, an accountant retained by the defendants for the purposes of the litigation, worked off the bank statements. I consider that the bank statements should be regarded as the best record of what money was banked, and therefore received. To this extent, I think that Mr Finney's starting point should be preferred to that of Mr Graham; and it follows that Mr Finney's conclusion as to the revenue earned by Cenelage from course fees should be accepted. (Both accountants proceeded on the basis that although Cenelage kept its records on a cash basis, it was better to work on an accruals basis; and each of them made calculations on this basis. Mr Finney made various other adjustments, and there was no dispute as to these.) 
Mr Finney concluded that the total revenue earned from fees for the years ending 30 June 1989, 1990 and 1991, appropriately adjusted, was $633,463, $818,812 and $686,855 respectively. (At this point, nothing turns on the circumstance that the figures mentioned in Annexures "D" and "E" were prepared on a cash basis, and that Mr Finney's calculations were on an accruals basis: there was, admittedly, a breach of contract.) 
However, the more significant dispute was not as to the fees earned, but as to the profit made, and when it was made, for when it came to valuing the business, its seasonality was regarded as important.

Mr Graham's methodology was to accept Mr Hoefl's assumption that the cost of teaching each course was approximately the same. Therefore, in the year ending June 1991, since there were 157 courses taught, the cost of teaching each course represented about 1/157 of Cenelage's annual outgoings. On this basis, he then prepared a table showing the profit or loss made by Cenelage, month by month: the revenue earned in a given month was reduced by the cost of teaching the number of courses taught that month, estimated in the way just described.

Mr Finney adopted a generally similar methodology, but took the view that at the end of each month, Cenelage had a liability arising from the fact that it had received some fees for courses yet to be taught; and he therefore deferred one quarter of each month's income received, treating this as being earned in the following month. During the hearing Mr Ganz carried out some investigations (see Exhibit 6 and the evidence about it) that generally confirmed the accuracy of this approach. On the whole, whilst remembering that
Mr Graham was not cross-examined, I accept the evidence of Mr Finney, who concluded that the net profits of Cenelage for the years ending 30 June 1989, and 1991 had been $147,391, $128,967 and $53,495 respectively. These figures are to be compared with the net profit figures shown in Annexure "D" to the contracts, of $191,483.86, $183,606.80 and $187,921.43 respectively.
(Again, at this point, nothing turns on the circumstance that the calculations were made on different bases.) 
The value of the business 
There were two witnesses who expressed opinions as to this, Mr Le May for the plaintiffs, and Mr Finney for the defendants. Mr Le May's starting point was that the business had made a loss in the six months period before the sale, and therefore that it had no goodwill value at all. I do not accept that the business had made a loss during the six months period in question, and I do not accept his conclusion that if it had made that loss, the goodwill value would have been nil.

As to the first of these matters, it is necessary to go back to the accounting evidence. Mr Graham concluded that the business made losses of $6,845, $2,240 and $15,310 for the months of April, May and June 1991 respectively. Mr Hoefl extrapolated from that conclusion and Mr Le May took Mr Hoefl's figures, and concluded that the business made a loss for the six months period to 30
September 1991, making adjustments for interest, tax, and owners' drawings.
His view was that since the business, so regarded, was losing money for as long as six months, and since there was no explanation he could see, no buyer would or should pay anything for goodwill. (Gemeden paid $15,000 for plant, fittings and chattels. There was no claim made in respect of this part of the total purchase price.) 
In contrast, Mr Finney concluded that the business produced losses of $14,495, $11,286 and $17,961 for the months of April, June, and July 1991, but profits of $2,926, $384 and $20,090 for the months of May, August and September 1991; and that since these were historically months when profitability was low, it was appropriate to view the business on a continuing basis and to average the results out. He thought that the appropriate period for this exercise was 3 /4 years, to 30 September 1991, and that viewed on this basis, the business was a profitable one.

I prefer Mr Finney's figures to those assumed by Mr Le May; and I prefer Mr
Finney's method of valuation to that of Mr Le May. Mr Le May's opinion struck me as wholly unattractive, and his explanations made things worse. Further, he presented as a particularly unattractive expert witness. I note that his company was formerly Mr Hoefl's employer, and that he was at one stage Mr
Hoefl's creditor, but independently of those matters, he seemed to me to enthusiastically adopt the role of advocate, and to change course from time to time in the course of cross-examination.

In contrast, so far as the evidence goes, Mr Finney's method of valuation was conventional, and seemed to reflect a common sense view of the matter. If a business is seasonal, as this one was, averaging the profits out over a period appears to reflect a reasonable approach to the question of valuation.

Much was made of the fact that the business lost more in the winter months of than in the previous two years, and no witness essayed a precise opinion as to why this was so, perhaps because nobody was qualified to give such an opinion. On the other hand, a number of witnesses, including Mr Hoefl himself, referred to the recession and its effects, and to the youth unemployment situation, and the business moved premises at that time; and in all the circumstances I do not think that the increased loss for the winter months of is a sufficient reason for not accepting the opinion of Mr Finney.

Mr Finney was also criticised for including in his figures sums received in respect of a franchisee of Cenelage. I do not think this criticism is warranted. For a time, Cenelage granted a franchise in respect of an area of
Queensland. During that period, Cenelage had a contractual entitlement to part of the fees received by the franchisee: this was part of Cenelage's income.
After the franchise agreement ended, Cenelage was entitled to the whole of the net profit from teaching in the area in question.

On Mr Finney's figures, the value of the business was $187,149; and had the turnover and profit figures been as promised, the value would have been $209,871, a difference of $22,722. The defendants acknowledge a liability in contract for that sum, and interest, subject to a submission dealt with below that only Gemeden is entitled to damages.

The plaintiffs submitted that they were entitled to elect whether to claim expectation damages or reliance damages; and they purported to elect to claim reliance damages. In other parts of the world, this may well be possible, but it is not in Australia: The Commonwealth of Australia versus Amman Aviation Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64.] 
Misleading or deceptive conduct 
I accept that if a contracting party promises that either the turnover or the profit of a business is a particular sum, and it is some lesser sum, then the giving of that promise amounts to conduct that might mislead or deceive the other contracting party or parties. Here, the plaintiffs start with that advantage, with the advantage of Special Condition 7 of the contracts, and with the evidence of Mr Hoefl that he relied upon the figures in the contracts. However, the defendants deny that their conduct did mislead or deceive the plaintiffs.

The admission in the Special Condition is not really of any weight: it is some evidence, but on the totality of the evidence it is plain that the defendants did not know whether or not the plaintiffs had been induced to act in the manner set out.

In December 1991 Mr Hoefl made a statutory declaration, for stamp duty purposes, in which he said that Chilcotin had purchased the world wide right to use the intellectual property that came with the sale of the business; that it was intended that Gemeden operate the business in Australia, and anticipated that Gemeden would be sold once the business had been rebuilt and restored to profitability (by then, he was asserting that the plaintiffs had been defrauded by the defendants); and that it was intended that Chilcotin provide the necessary intellectual property to, and establish joint ventures with others in other parts of the world, probably after the sale of Gemeden.

At about the same time, he prepared and signed another document, to much the same effect, in which he spoke of probably selling the Australian operation much sooner than developing a joint venture proposal in North America.

It is clear that, from an early stage, he had some such plan in mind. Before he signed the original contract, on 5 August 1991, he had a trip to the USA and other places in mind. He left Australia on 10 August, and whilst away, investigated this plan. Upon his return, he was still enthusiastic, and this led to his persuading the defendants to rescind the existing contract, and replace it with the two new contracts. He spoke to Mr Ganz and Miss Lakaev of his plans, both before and after his trip. The statutory declaration was, of course, drawn with stamp duty considerations in mind, and not the issues now litigated, but I think that I should take it as being accurate, and not just something said to avoid or minimise stamp duty.

At times in cross-examination, he conceded the accuracy of the contents of the statutory declaration, but later he retreated, apparently when he saw the danger involved, and at one stage he denied having intended to sell the business. At another stage, he said that the only motivation for entering into the agreements of 29 September was the opportunity to earn money overseas, but then he retreated from that proposition also, saying that Gemeden had to earn money in Australia, before Chilcotin could function overseas.

I regard Mr Hoefl as a witness without credibility. He called into existence some purported records dealing with topics of importance in the litigation (tax returns, and a minute of a meeting) just before the trial, for the purpose of the trial, and did not disclose this until cross-examined about them. He in effect raised a claim for reimbursement for his work, at a rate of $94,000 per year, that seems to have been wholly disproportionate to what he did. His attitude to records seemed to be that if they enabled him to deal advantageously with the taxation authorities, or others, that was all that was relevant. He said that Mr Ganz and Miss Lakaev had not been to the office premises in or after October 1991, but that was contradicted by them and by Ms
Philip, a witness called for the plaintiffs. His evidence as to the hours he worked was also contradicted by the evidence of Ms Philip. He agreed in cross- examination that he had lied to Mr Ganz, telling Mr Ganz that he intended to conduct an audit about the affairs of Cenelage when he had no intention of doing so, and excusing or justifying this by saying that as a business agent he warned all his clients that they would or might be subjected to an audit.
Although his attitude to some of some matters was one of insouciance, in the course of his cross-examination he progressed from a passionate advocacy of the righteousness of the plaintiffs' cause to looking more and more uncomfortable.

In any event, his evidence as to his mental state in deciding to buy the business through Chilcotin, and later Chilcotin and Gemeden, is undermined by a good deal of other evidence. I accept that he knew that the monthly figures provided to him were taken from deposits recorded in Cenelage's bank statements, and that they were "rough"; and on the face of the documents he had, some of the monthly figures looked like rounded off figures. On behalf of
Mr Mayman, he from time to time asked for more information, but did not do so on his own behalf, or on behalf of the plaintiffs, and he made no effort, or no real effort to check the information provided, or to update it. He helped
Mr Mayman to write a letter dated 12 July 1991, noting that the turnover of the business had dropped some 15%, and that there was little room for economising.

Further, his claim that he though the plaintiffs were buying a business with a profit before interest and tax of $120,000 a year seems incredible in the circumstances, including the price paid for the business; and his defence of this claim was unpersuasive.

He said in his affidavit of 7 February 1996 that he would not have caused the plaintiffs to enter into the various contracts without their containing
Special Condition 7, and in cross-examination he made it plain that what he wanted was the security of a contractual promise upon which the plaintiffs could sue, as distinct from relying upon the accuracy of the figures in question. After he had decided that the plaintiffs had been defrauded, he acted in a way that is consistent with this view of his attitude: he tried to bludgeon the defendants into submission by reference to litigation, and its stresses.

I do not accept his evidence, unless and to the extent that it is corroborated by other acceptable evidence; and, in particular, I do not accept that the plaintiffs, through him, relied upon the accuracy of any particular figure or figures mentioned in Annexure "D" or "E" to the contracts of sale. So far as I can tell, and as counsel put it in address, a difference of $1 between any given figure mentioned in these annexures, and what was later established, would have been sufficient for his purposes, in that in his view at the time, it would have enabled him to sue the defendants, and/or to threaten them, as he did. That is, he did not rely upon the accuracy of the figures as showing what the plaintiffs were buying, but rather he relied upon the existence of the contractual promises, as entitling the plaintiffs to sue for breach of contract, if he thought this advantageous.

There is an additional difficulty: the figures represented by the defendants were historical figures, rather than promissory of the future. On any view of the matter, the business declined before the sale, and continued to decline after it. One problem facing the plaintiffs, with which their evidence did not grapple, relates to the relationship between the breach, as to the accuracy of past figures, and this decline: that is, except for the evidence of Mr Finney, there is nothing that would enable one to say that the decline in the business was the product of or caused by the breach of contract, or to measure an entitlement to damages flowing from this breach.

The defendants also referred to the conduct of the plaintiffs after discovery of the breach of contract, as breaking the chain of causation. Gemeden traded on for over a year, without any great experience in how to run the business, and then sold it; the plaintiffs refused an offer from Mr Ganz and Miss
Lakaev, which in the light of my findings was a reasonable offer; and it does look as if the recession and the youth unemployment situation were substantial contributory factors to the increasing decline in the business.

This claim therefore fails.

Apportionment of damages between the plaintiffs 
The defendants submitted that since, as between the plaintiffs, on the evidence of Mr Hoefl, Chilcotin paid $100,000 for the right to exploit the business overseas, and Gemeden paid $20,000 for the goodwill of the business in Australia, it was inappropriate to award any damages to Chilcotin. I do not accept this. It seems that the apportionment of the total sum paid for goodwill was made arbitrarily by Mr Hoefl for his own purposes; and in these circumstances I do not see why there should not be a judgment for the plaintiffs for the sum of $22,722, and interest, leaving it to the plaintiffs to apportion this amongst themselves.

The result 
I give judgment for the plaintiffs against each of the defendants for $35,390.45 being $22,722 together with interest under Section 94 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) from 28 September 1991 to date. I grant liberty to apply if any question as to the calculation of interest arises.
 * * * 
