

Sportsvision Australia Pty Ltd versus Tallglen Pty Ltd and Anor Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 221 (22 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
SPORTSVISION AUSTRALIA PTY LTD versus TALLGLEN PTY LTD & ANOR /97 May 1998 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
PARTIES: SPORTSVISION AUSTRALIA P/L -v- TALLGLEN P/L & ANOR 
FILE NO: 2816/97 
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT  
JURISDICTION: EQUITY DIVISION 
DELIVERED: FRIDAY 22 MAY 1998 
HEARING DATES: 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 November; 17, 18 December 1997 
JUDGMENT OF: JUSTICE JOHN BRYSON 
CATCHWORDS: 
BROADCASTING and TELEVISION - Anti-siphoning legislation and Condition 10(e) of broadcasting licences - application to the facts of "right to televise the event" - narrowcasting - Sports AFL found to be narrowcast as targeted to special interest group and promoting programs of limited appeal. 
CONTRACT - Construction - The Tallglen Agreement granted a licence to transmit AFL matches granted by Tallglen, a Seven Network subsidiary to SportsVision which distributed sports programs to Optus Vision. Decision on construction of provisions of the Agreement relating to whether the transmissions were to be exclusive of contemporaneous free-to-air broadcasts - special to the terms and factual matrix of this agreement. Consideration of availability of evidence of subsequent conduct of parties in aid of construction of a written agreement - Hide & Skin authorities - admissions (by conduct) in aid of construction - implied terms relating to nominating manner of intended performance and time of making nomination - uncertainty. 
PRACTICE and PROCEDURE - joinder of additional defendants - defendants' application under Pt.8 r.8(1)(b) for joinder as additional defendants of Seven Network subsidiaries which are Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees in five States was refused. 
Referred to: 
News Limited v. Australian Rugby Football League Limited & Ors <case>; <case>; [(1992) 38 FCR 382] 
Pitcher versus Langford [(1991) 23 NSWLR 142] 
Gray versus Australian Motorists and General Insurance Co. Pty Limited [(1976) 1
NSWLR 669] 
Jones versus Sutherland Shire Council [[1979] 2 NSWLR 206] 
Eslea Holdings Limited v. Butts [(1986) 6 NSWLR 175] 
Foxtel Cable Television Pty Ltd versus Nine Network Australia Pty Ltd & Anor [(1997) 143 ALR 516] 
York Air Conditioning and Refrigeration (A/sia) Pty Ltd versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1949) 80 CLR 11] 
James Miller & Partners Limited versus Whitworth Street Estates (Manchester)
Limited <case>; [(1974) AC ]

Shore versus Wilson (1842) 9 Clark and Finnelly 355 
Hide & Skin Trading Pty Limited versus Oceanic Meat Traders Limited [(1990) 20
NSWLR 310] 
Administration of the Territory of Papua and New Guinea and Anor versus Daera Guba CLR 353 
White versus Australian & New Zealand Theatres Limited <case>; <case>; [[1993] 2 VR 343] 
Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Limited & Hycraft Carpets Pty Limited <case>; [(1996) 14 ACLC 555] 
Spunwill Pty Ltd versus Bab Pty Limited [(1994) 36 NSWLR 290] 
Grant versus Grant (1870) LR5CP 727 
Charrington & Co. Limited versus Wooder [[1914] AC 71] at 82 
Biotechnology Australia versus Pace [(1988) 15 NSWLR 130] 
Nine Network Australia Pty Limited versus Australian Broadcasting Authority &
Anor [(1997) 143 ALR 8] 
REPRESENTATION: 
Counsel: * Plaintiff: P Hely QC, J Lockhart * Defendant: R V Gyles QC, S G Finch S C, A G Grant 
Solicitors: * Plaintiff: Gilbert & Tobin (Ms Platford) * Defendant: Freehill Hollingdale & Page (GAM) 
Judgment category classification: A 
Number of pages: 72 
JUDGMENT 
The Chain of Agreements 1 
Terms of the Tallglen Agreement 5 
Joinder of additional defendants 9 
Events and disputes 15 
General observations on the Tallglen Agreement 17 
The first construction question - exclusivity against FTA 24 
Evidence on the construction of the Tallglen Agreement 34 
Excursus on Blackburn J in Grant versus Grant 39 
The evidence of subsequent conduct 43 
Admission by conduct 45 
Rectification 46 
Estoppel 47 
The second construction question - nomination of matches 48 
No grant 53 
Anti-siphoning legislation and Condition 10(e) of broadcasting licences 54 
Anti-siphoning legislation and narrowcasting 64 
What relief is appropriate 69 
The chain of Agreements 
HIS HONOUR: These complex proceedings relate to the construction and operation of the Tallglen Agreement, an agreement in writing signed on behalf of the first defendant Tallglen Pty Ltd and the plaintiff SportsVision Australia Pty Ltd (then named SportsCo Australia Pty Limited) on 19 May 1995 and entitled "Sports Programming Licensing Agreement". The Agreement is part of a complex scheme of commercial arrangements under which television programs comprising Australian Rules Football matches conducted by the Australian Football League (AFL) are broadcast (or, it may be, narrowcast: this is in issue) on Sports AFL, a dedicated cable subscription channel conducted by Optus Vision Media Pty Ltd which only transmits programs relating to AFL Football. Sports AFL began transmitting programs in March 1996, 24 hours a day during the football season and 16 hours a day at other times; it so continues. At some time or other it transmits every match played in the AFL Premiership Competition; there are 22 Rounds and 8 games in each round. The matches in each round are played in the same weekend, on Friday nights and on Saturday and Sunday afternoons. 
Tallglen is a company controlled, it would seem wholly owned by Seven Network
Ltd, the second defendant (Seven). Tallglen has no employees or recognisable separate business of its own, and is used as an integer in transactions by
Seven when thought expedient. Its only other relevant activity referred to in evidence is its ownership of 30 per cent of the shareholding in SportsVision.
Tallglen itself does not own and has no standing to confer the rights purportedly conferred on SportsVision by the Tallglen Agreement, and the prospects of performance arise from Tallglen's place in the Seven Network organisation and from related arrangements including a guarantee of performance given by Seven. On 19 May 1995, contemporaneously with the
Tallglen Agreement, Seven guaranteed to the co-venturers who formed
SportsVision and to SportsVision observance and performance by Tallglen of agreements which were to be designated; and the Tallglen Agreement was among those later designated.

The Program Distribution Joint Venture Agreement, dated 14 July 1995, later than the Tallglen Agreement, establishes the original arrangements among the shareholders in SportsVision and, as its title shows, it set up SportsVision as the vehicle for a joint venture in distributing sports programs.
Participants apart from SportsVision itself are Optus Vision Pty Ltd, ESPN
Inc., which has a large business dealing in sports programming in the United
States, Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd representing the Nine Network and Tallglen representing the Seven Network. The Nine Network could bring in a relationship with Australian Rugby League and the opportunity to broadcast its matches, the
Seven Network could bring in its relationship with the AFL and ESPN could bring in availability of much sports programming in the United States and elsewhere; while SportsVision was to have and now has facilities to produce sports programs itself.

Seven's relationship with the AFL takes the form of an agreement made in
November 1993 with the AFL by the Commercial Television Broadcasting
Licensees, five companies related to Seven which conduct free-to-air (FTA) television stations in five Australian States. That Agreement gave the
Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees and hence the Seven Network the exclusive right to provide live and delayed free-to-air television coverage including news coverage and also Pay Television coverage throughout Australia of all AFL matches and events conducted in Australia under the auspices of the
AFL. The AFL Agreement or arrangements made under it provide essential resources for photographing matches and producing programs, including access to grounds with personnel and equipment. The AFL Agreement was supplemented by the AFL Licence Extension Agreement dated 15 November 1996. These agreements provided for the AFL to receive large revenues, which were apportioned between
Free-to-Air television rights and Pay Television rights.

By the guarantee Seven committed itself to the performance by Tallglen of obligations under the Tallglen Agreement, even though Tallglen was not, on the face of the agreements, in a position to licence the transmission of AFL coverage in any effectual way.

By Sports Programming Affiliation Agreements between SportsVision and Optus
Vision Pty Ltd (and the documents in evidence do not bear dates but are said to have been made on 21 April 1995 and 29 May 1995) SportsVision granted Pay
Television rights to Optus Vision, and by the Optus Vision Joint Venture
Vision Media Distribution Agreement of 20 September 1995 Optus Vision granted
Optus Vision Media Pty Ltd a licence of program rights under which Optus
Vision Media was authorised to transmit, among many other things, AFL programs which could only be available through the chain of arrangements I have referred to. Optus Vision Media holds statutory licences to broadcast and narrowcast Pay Television.

Sports AFL is one of the Pay Television stations conducted by Optus Vision
Media. Sports AFL is available only to subscribers who agree to obtain a basic or first tier of Optus Vision transmissions, a second tier of Sports transmissions and Sports AFL as a third tier; a further sum to the basic subscription is charged to the subscriber for each tier, so that Sports AFL is available to subscribers who pay $37.95 per month for the first two tiers and an additional $6 per month to subscribe to AFL Sports (although discounts or special offers may affect the exact sum payable).

The most important issues relate to the transmission of AFL matches live and exclusively. Live broadcasting is completely contemporaneous with the event depicted. Exclusivity must be dealt with elaborately. Exclusivity relates to
SportsVision's claimed entitlements that no Pay Television operator other than itself (or its licensee) should transmit an AFL match, and also that no television broadcaster should broadcast an AFL match FTA, that is by ordinary television broadcasting without charge to the public at large.

Terms of the Tallglen Agreement.

Construction of the Tallglen Agreement must be based on the whole terms of the agreement; 40 pages. I will set out the passages which had most attention. The document is very difficult to understand, and those who consider its meaning should not deprive themselves of the opportunity to consider the whole of it.

Clause 3 is headed: "Licence of Pay Television Rights". Clause 3.1 is in these words: "3.1 First Term 
Seven agrees to grant to SportsCo exclusively and SportsCo agrees to acquire from Seven exclusively for the First Term a licence for: the Pay Television Rights for the Sports Events listed in paragraphs 1.1 1.3 and 1.4 of Schedule 1; and subject to the negotiation referred to in clause 3.8 such live and delayed rights as are agreed for the Pay 
Television Rights for the other Sports Events listed in 
Schedule 1 (other than the Pay Television Rights for the 
Olympics).

If a Triggering Event occurs Seven may, in its discretion, terminate the exclusive licence in clause 3.1(a) by notice in writing to SportsCo.

If Seven terminates the exclusive licence under clause 3.1(a), then the First Term ends and the Second Term begins.

Seven agrees to make available to SportsCo the AFL Events substantially as described in paragraph 1.2 of Schedule 1." 
Clause 3.6 is in these words: "3.6 Free Television Rights 
Nothing in this Agreement confers on SportsCo the Free 
Television Rights for the Sports Events.

Nothing in this Agreement is to be construed to preclude the exercise by Seven of Free Television Rights. For the avoidance of doubt this provision is not intended to derogate from the rights granted by Seven to SportsCo under this Agreement.

SportsCo acknowledges and agrees that Seven and any 
Related Corporation of Seven may broadcast the Sports Events for which Seven has granted SportsCo live and/or exclusive Pay 
Television Rights: as a delayed broadcast; as a replay; and in news programs as highlights or as excerpts in sports programs.

Seven agrees that it will not and will ensure that its Related 
Bodies Corporate do not commence their delayed or replay rights for 1 week after the live broadcast by SportsCo or its 
Affiliates of the AFL Events referred to in Schedule 1, paragraphs 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3." 
Definitions in cl.1.1 include the following: "`AFL Events' means the AFL events described in Schedule 1; `Free Television Rights' means the rights to broadcast the Sports Events as part of a Free Television Service and includes the rights to use the Sports
Events in whole or in part, or to refer to the Sports Events in promotions of a Free Television Service; `Pay Television Rights' means such rights in the Territory to, and to sub- license the rights to, broadcast the Sports Events to persons as part of a Pay
Television Service which are held by Seven or a Related Body Corporate, whether the persons receive the service at residential, hotel, commercial or institutional premises or elsewhere, using any means of delivery, and includes, without limitation, the rights: to make copies of a recording of the Sports Event and Programs in whole or in part on film, or videotape for the purpose of allowing a delayed broadcast or replay of the Sports Event; to edit and restructure recordings of a Sports Event and the Programs for the purpose of including the resulting programs in SportsCo Services which may contain other programs; to provide excerpts of the Sports Events and the Programs in other
SportsCo programs and for promotion of the SportsCo Services; and comprised in the Live Events, such rights being subject to such limitations as are from time to time imposed on Seven or any Related Body Corporate by the Rights Holder; `Live Event' means an AFL Event referred to in paragraph 1.1 of Schedule 1; `Sports Events' means the events listed in Schedule 1 and such further events as are agreed pursuant to clause 6.2 or otherwise;".

Clause 4 is entitled "Programming" and is in these terms: " 1 Seven and SportsCo agree that Seven will supply Programs for Sports Events which Seven currently produces for the price set out in Schedule 2.
 .2 SportsCo may request Seven to supply Programs for Sports Events which
Seven does not currently produce. If SportsCo and Seven agree that Seven will supply those Programs Seven agrees to do so on such terms and conditions as are agreed. Seven agrees that the price of carrying out any production pursuant to an agreement referred to in clause 4.2 will be Seven's cost. Seven agrees to supply such Programs to SportsCo in priority to providing production services to any other person.
 .3 Seven acknowledges that SportsCo may do its own production of the AFL
Event.
 .4 For each match under clause 1.1 of Schedule 1 that SportsCo produces, the
Fees will be reduced by $35,000.
 .5 For each match under clause 1.3 of Schedule 1 that SportsCo produces, the
Fees will be reduced by $10,000." 
Fees for licences are payable under cl6. The provisions for calculating fees are elaborate, and large sums in millions of dollars are payable.

Schedule 1 is headed "Indicative Availability of Sports Events". It contains eight paragraphs. I set out par.1: "1. AFL .1 Live all Australia Saturday night games + (1996 - to increase in subsequent years) Sunday afternoon games + .2 Live Sydney and Brisbane Friday night games + Sunday "double-headers" + (second match) (may be subject to 1 hour Turn-around) Saturday night matches + (except where Swans or Bears playing - Turn-around replay in affected city) Saturday night matches + (Sydney only) Saturday night matches + (Brisbane only) .3 Turn-around Melbourne Saturday afternoon `C' matches + (indicative start .30pm) .4 Replay rights
All AFL matches including State of Origin (approximately 203 matches or 609 hours) .5 Replay rights - other
Footy show (`Four Quarters')
Brownlow Medal
AFL Draft
Team of the Year" 
The remaining paragraphs relate to broadcasting Olympic and other sporting events, and not specifically to AFL. In Sch.1 par.1.3 "Turn-around" refers to a broadcast on the day of a match but after the match has finished. "C Match" is a term used in the television industry for the third match played at a ground on a Saturday afternoon.

The last line of Schedule 1 is as follows: "+= exclusive to pay TV in nominated markets." 
This is the Plus Footnote. The plus signs operate as asterisks and refer back to the plus signs appearing in subpars 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3; there are no plus signs anywhere else in Schedule 1. The intended expression was as if all words in the footnote had appeared at each place in the text where there is an asterisk.

Construction of the Tallglen's Agreement and the concepts of exclusivity.

Implied term - nomination of matches and time of nomination. This involves some contentions by defendants on uncertainty.

Rectification.

Estoppel.

The defendants raised: 
No grant.

Anti-siphoning legislation and Condition 10(e) of broadcasting licences.

Anti-siphoning legislation and narrowcasting.

I should also consider what relief is appropriate.

Joinder of additional defendants.

The defendants applied under Pt.8 r.8(1)(b) for an order joining as defendants five subsidiaries of Seven which are television broadcasters in each of five
States and contracted with AFL for the rights to broadcast its games. These are the Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees. The application was made orally on the afternoon of 12 November the third day of hearing and the Notice of Motion was filed in court on the morning of the fourth day. The proposed additional defendants were not applicants. Exhibit 22 included five Minutes of directors' meetings of these companies held on the afternoon of 12 November which included resolutions which consented to references in the Amended
Defence to them and ratified the Tallglen Agreement. I do not attribute any force to these resolutions except that they supported counsel's assurances that these companies consented to be joined, would be represented by the defendants' solicitors and would take no part which would extend the hearing.
A consent to a passage in a pleading by another person in litigation to which one is not a party does not appear to me to have any force, and the ratification of an agreement which does not purport to be made on behalf of the ratifier of which the plaintiff does not allege that it was so made does not appear to me to have any force either. The defendants in their Amended
Defence alleged that it was so made, but they have not joined these companies in any cross-claims.

Part 8 r.8(1)(b) has the effect, stated shortly, of conferring on the court a discretionary power to require the joinder of a defendant, even though the plaintiff does not wish for such joiner, where the joinder is necessary for the effectual and complete determination of issues. The plaintiff does not seek any relief against these companies and opposes their joinder. The plaintiff has alleged no ground of suit which could support any relief against these companies. Defendants' counsel submitted that the companies would be involved in the injunctions sought if granted particularly in claims 5 and 6 (and there are four claims so numbered). The need for their joinder was said to arise out of the circumstance that the rights directly and indirectly dealt with by the claims for relief are rights to make television broadcast of games owned by these companies and obtained by contract from AFL. It was contended that the claims directly concerned the manner in which and the terms on which rights owned by these companies are to be dealt with. It was said that the restraints of the injunctions claimed were intended to extend as far as the owners of the property to which the proceedings relate, and that if it was not so intended the efficacy of the restraints claimed would be doubtful.

Programming is obtained from AFL pursuant to an agreement which AFL has with each licensee company, and counsel contended that this has the effects that property of licensee companies is being used for the benefit of the Seven group and that the Tallglen Agreement deals with a disposition of rights which were obtained from the licensee companies and in turn created a right owned by
Tallglen. On the assumption that an injunction is made against Tallglen its servants and agents, it will be necessary to prevent the licensee companies from dealing with the programs in a manner inconsistent with the injunction and the best way of ensuring that is by joining them as parties. Counsel also contended that there is no reason not to join them, it is not proposed that any of them file affidavits, and they are to have the same representation as the existing defendants. Counsel contended that their presence as parties is necessary to ensure complete adjudication of the issues as in Pt.8 r.8. He contended that it is not necessary that the plaintiff should seek any order against them. The joinder would give them the opportunity to be present and deprive them of the opportunity to assert ability to use their rights inconsistently with the Court's determination. He referred to passages in the judgment of the Full Court of the Federal Court in News Limited v. Australian
Rugby Football League Limited & Ors <case>; [(1996) 64 FCR 410] at 523 and following, particularly at 525 and 526. Counsel observed that the Federal Court did not treat it as necessary that there should be a cause of action against the persons to be joined.

The terms of the resolutions of the directors of those companies of 12
November appear in a way to show support for the present application.

Counsel contended that their rights would be affected directly in that if an injunction is claimed rights owned by them could only be dealt with in accordance with the injunction, and if they dealt with their rights inconsistently with the injunction the plaintiff could apply to enforce the orders against it. He contended that it is implied from the relief sought in the Amended Statement of Claim that the plaintiff adopts the position that they are agents of one or other defendant.

In my opinion the Federal Court applied a closely similar rule of court to facts which do not have close analogies with this case, and the involvement of the Rugby League players and their interest in the relief sought was much more close and direct than any involvement of the licensee companies in the relief sought here. It was claimed that there had been inducements of breaches of the employment contracts of the players, and that there were trusts of their employment contracts, and the effect of the relief sought on their employment and the pursuit of their own occupations was direct and immediate. I should judge the necessity of the proposed joinder on the facts before me, and the view taken on another and different set of facts is not of any real assistance.

In support of the contention that it is not necessary that the plaintiff seek any relief against the party proposed to be joined counsel referred to observations in Trade Practices Commission v. Santos Ltd <case>; [(1992) 38 FCR 382] at p391 (Davies J) and 398 (Hill J). In that case Sagasco was a respondent to the application at first instance and was held to have a right to apply for leave to appeal notwithstanding that the statutory remedy in issue was not available to it and that another respondent had applied unsuccessfully for Sagasco to be removed from the proceedings. Sagasco's right to appear at first instance was established by its being a party, and it was held to have standing to apply for leave to appeal, but as it did not obtain leave to appeal what the Court said about its standing to apply was obiter.
There was no application of any rule of court analogous to Pt.8 r.8.

The plaintiff's counsel resisted the joinder and contended that the joinder had not been shown to be necessary. Counsel pointed out that the plaintiffs do not allege any relationship of control between defendants and the licensee companies and do not allege an agency relationship; the plaintiffs are not seeking to enforce rights against subsidiaries or making any other claim against them. Counsel observed that subsidiaries would not be affected by any order unless defendants choose to disobey any injunction which is made, and in that event they would only be affected if it could be shown that they were involved in the disobedience, as servants or agents of a defendant or for some other reason.

In my opinion there is no necessity that a party who could, in some state of facts which has not yet happened but can be foreseen, be involved in breach of an injunction which has not yet been made, should be joined as a party now. In my opinion there is no close involvement of the licensee companies in the relief claimed. The circumstance that, through a chain of licensing the rights which Tallglen conferred or purported to confer on the plaintiff are derived from the licensee companies does not give them any close involvement. The AFL is in a generally similar position as the rights of the licensee companies are derived from the AFL.

In my finding their joinder is not a necessity within Pt.8 r.8. If it were, I would turn to discretionary considerations. An application such as this ought to be made before the trial of proceedings, and in the present proceedings there were several opportunities during directions hearings for such an application to be made as the proceedings were pending for over four months before the trial began. There was ample time for the defendants to apply by
Notice of Motion. The defendants prefigured the application in a letter to the plaintiff's solicitors on 28 October 1997, to which there was no written response, but the application was first made to the Court orally on the afternoon of 12 November, on the third day of the hearing. The application was made at a markedly inconvenient time as it was extraneous to the trial of the proceedings for which the time used for the application had been set aside.
This consideration would have been a factor against the application had it turned on discretionary considerations.

For these reasons I dismissed the application on 13 November 1997.

Events and disputes.

For the 1996 Football season Seven nominated the SportsVision live matches for , meaning the 18 matches referred to in Sch.1 par.1.1, in a fax message on December 1995, which listed as Pay TV matches 18 matches on 6 different
Saturdays, 10 different Sundays and 2 Friday evenings. The substitution of 2
Fridays for Sundays was a departure from Sch.1 par.1.1 but does not seem to have been disputed. Seven nominated games to be broadcast live to Sydney and
Brisbane, falling within Sch.1 par.1.2, by two fax messages. The first message on 22 March 1996 referred only to four games in rounds 1, 2, 3 and 4, to take place on Friday 29 March, Sunday 31 March, Friday 12 April and Saturday 20
April 1996. That is to say, the earliest was seven days ahead. The message of April 1996 gave a definitive list, including the four previously nominated, from 29 March to 1 September. This did not conform exactly to Sch.1 par.1.2, which would require 45 games for Sydney and Brisbane and also 2 for Sydney only and 2 for Brisbane only, whereas 35 were nominated for Sydney and
Brisbane, 11 for Sydney only and 2 for Brisbane only. There were negotiations and variations and a result satisfactory to both sides was reached co- operatively. I have not seen what arrangements were made under Sch.1 par.1.3 for 1996, but there was no complaint.

For the 1997 Football season the AFL announced the draw on 28 November 1996, and from December 1996 to February 1997 SportsVision repeatedly asked Seven to nominate the live matches. On 21 February 1997 Seven by fax message from Mr
Weil, Head of Network Sport, nominated 11 matches for the first 10 rounds. Mr
Weil said that these were provided on a live exclusive all Australia basis, which seems to echo Sch.1 par.1.1. Seven also nominated six matches in rounds up to Round 11 on the week-end of 7 and 8 June for the purpose of par.1.3, that is Turn-around Melbourne. Mr Weil made statements in this message about the effect of cl.3.6. Mr Weil said "I will provide you with matches for Rounds -22 later in the year following further discussions with the AFL." 
Communications continued over nominations for Rounds 12 to 22. While this happened the Federal Court gave decisions in the Foxtel case establishing aspects of the working of the anti-siphoning legislation; Lockhart J at first instance on 21 February 1997: Nine Network Australia Pty Ltd versus Australian
Broadcasting Authority & Anor [(1997) 143 ALR 8] and the Full
Court on appeal on 26 March 1997: Foxtel Cable Television Pty Ltd versus Nine
Network Australia Pty Ltd & Anor [(1997) 143 ALR 516.]
Communications continued about nominating games. On 5 May 1997 the Managing
Director of Seven, Mr Alan Bateman, stated in a letter to Optus Communications
Pty Ltd that he understood that an effect of the Foxtel decision was that "Optus Vision Media is in breach of the Broadcasting Services Act if it acquires Australia Football League matches on a live and exclusive basis." Mr
Bateman expressed concern that Seven and SportsVision did not become involved in breach of the Act, and called for discussion and resolution of the issue and new arrangements.

There were discussions and correspondence in which Seven put the view that
Seven could not continue to supply if SportsVision contended that Seven did not have the right to broadcast the matches live, and solicitors representing
SportsVision rejected this. After some combative exchanges Seven, by a fax message on Tuesday 10 June, nominated matches for Pay TV broadcast in Round 12 the following weekend, 14 and 15 June 1997. After some further communications in which SportsVision sought an undertaking that Seven licensees would not broadcast the Melbourne v. Brisbane match in Round 12 live on FTA,
SportsVision commenced these proceedings on 13 June and sought an immediate injunction, which was refused.

For the rest of the 1997 Football season the parties continued to act as if there were some such arrangement as the Tallglen Agreement in effect, but of course with different views about whether and in what terms the Agreement was binding. The flows of programming and of revenue continued, but Seven behaved as if it were not bound by the exclusivity obligations which SportsVision contends apply. Since my judgment was reserved the 1998 Football season has opened and I suppose, from what I heard of the parties' behaviour in the evidence, that they are still acting in that way. The dispute is about the workings of the relationship and not about its existence. The correspondence seems to show that there was no nomination of live Sydney and Brisbane matches under Sch.1 par.1.2 for 1997 and that, surprising as it is, this did not lead to any dispute.

General observations on the Tallglen Agreement.

There are some general observations to be made when approaching construction of the Tallglen Agreement. First, and I think of very high importance, is that it is a commercial arrangement relating to large sums and valuable interests, and the Court should be reluctant to accept that the parties' contractual intentions are not to be found in it, or that it is void for uncertainty. Yet finally that may have to be accepted.

I was referred to authorities which show that courts are reluctant to conclude that a commercial agreement on which parties have acted is void for uncertainty. I share this reluctance fully. I was taken to a passage in the judgment of Latham CJ in York Air Conditioning and Refrigeration (A/sia) Pty
Ltd versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1949) 80 CLR 11] at 53: "When the parties have shown by their conduct that they understand and can apply the terms of a contract without difficulty, a court should be very reluctant indeed to pay no attention to such conduct by holding that the terms of the contract are unintelligible by reason of uncertainty." This statement does not support the admission of evidence of the later conduct of the party for the purpose of resolution of apparent uncertainty; this is clear from the immediately following sentences in which
Latham CJ illustrates, in an orthodox way, the use which may be made of the evidence.

Another initial observation is that construction of the document as a whole may reveal ambiguity and require that inconsistencies be reconciled or that a choice should be made between two provisions which are inconsistent; the choice should be based on a view of the whole document.

Another is that although the Tallglen Agreement shows many signs of legal professional drafting, it also shows that skill was not uniformly brought to bear on its preparation, especially in the incorporation of the Schedules, and at several places documents prepared for other purposes appear to have been pressed into service. Schedule 1 is a particularly strong illustration of this, as it is incorporated as a list of events in the definition of "AFL events" in cl.1.1, and also similarly referred to elsewhere. Its heading "Indicative Availability of Sports Event" suggests that it may have originally been prepared for some other purpose. In its terms it drifts away from being a list of sports events into stating characteristics of the broadcasts, for example the parentheses in par.1.2 "(may be subject to 1 hour Turn-around)" and "(except where Swans or Bears playing - Turn-around replay in affected city)". It also contains some expressions that indicate pre-finality or contemplation of further definition, for example the parenthesis in par.1.1 "(1996 - to increase in subsequent years)" and in par.1.4 "(approximately 203 matches or 609 hours)". More importantly, its references to AFL events do not contain enough material to identify any events, and cannot be integrated with the main body unless some choice is made identifying particular events within the description. In some other paragraphs a process of selection is obviously necessary or actually mentioned - pars.2 and 3 mentioned "Selected
Events/Heat/Sports". Schedule 1, with its heading apparently produced at some pre-contractual stage and incorporated without revising the heading, and with the compacted expression in the Plus Footnote, shows a lack of polish and caution, and indicates that logical analysis may not be a sure guide.

Schedule 2 is about fees but it is headed "Costs" and appears as if it may have been pressed into service from some document used at an earlier negotiating stage. Schedule 3 contains pages that have obviously been taken out of some version of the Optus Vision Shareholders Agreement, and so does
Sch.4.

This context of irregularity has some bearing on whether the Plus Footnote should be regarded as having contractual effect.

Subclause 3.1(a) and its references to exclusivity relate to a licence for events in Sch.1 par.1.1 (Live all Australia), par.1.3 (Turn-around Melbourne) and par.1.4 (Replay rights), but there is no promise in cl.3.1 of any exclusivity for the events in par.1.2 - Live Sydney and Brisbane; see subcl.3.1(d). Seven agrees to make them available "substantially as described in par.1.2." In this respect they are quite different both to the events in pars.1.1, 1.3 and 1.4, and also to any other Schedule 1 events which later agreement may bring under the Tallglen Agreement by subcl.3.1(a)(1). The pattern of references to exclusivity in cl.3.1 is not the pattern which underlies subcll.3.6(c) and (d). I will attempt to express the two concepts of exclusivity by saying that only SportsVision is to have Pay Television rights under subcl.3.1(a) exclusivity, but only Pay Television is to transmit events protected by the other exclusivity claimed.

Subclause 3.6(c) refers to "Live and/or exclusive Pay Television Rights." Of these I would observe - events in Sch.1 par.1.1 are live under the description in par.1.1 and exclusive under cl.3.1(a).
 - events in Sch.1 par.1.2 are live under the description in par.1.2 but are not made exclusive by subcl.3.1(d).
 - events in par.1.3 are Turn-around, not live, as they are described as Turn- around in par.1.3; but they are exclusive under subcl.3.1(a).
 - events in par.1.4 are not live as the Schedule description shows that they are replays, but they are exclusive under subcl.3.1(a).

So subcl.3.6(c) applies to events in pars.1.1, 1.3 and 1.4 because they are all exclusive; par.1.1 is live and exclusive, pars.1.3 and 1.4 are exclusive but not live. Subclause 3.6(c) applies to par.1.2 because it is live, but it is not made exclusive by cl.3.1.

It is very unlikely that subcl.3.6(c) is just expressing or qualifying some result or perceived result of the workings of cl.3.1, because it is formed on a different pattern. Subclause 3.6(d) fixes a one week free-to-air black-out for events in Sch.1, pars.1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. However it does not deal with events in par.1.4, whereas subcl.3.6(c) does. No pattern corresponding with subcl.3.1(a) exclusivity is formed. Both subcll.3.6(c) and (d) apply to broadcasts which do not have subcl.3.1(a) exclusivity, and also to others which do. This is consistent with the parties' having adopted subcll.3.6(c) and (d) on the understanding that there was another exclusivity arrangement in their agreement which would otherwise prevent Seven from broadcasting par.1.2 material either FTA or on Pay Television.

So subcll.3.6(c) and (d) are consistent with and tend to give some support to reading the Plus Footnote as creating exclusivity in some sense, and to that being a different concept of exclusivity to that in subcl.3.1(a), and one which could operate in cases where subcl.3.1(a) exclusivity did not.

Subclause 3.6(c), which secures or perhaps only records an entitlement of
Seven to make delayed broadcasts replays and news highlights, has to do something which subcl.3.6(a) does not do, although according to the terms of subcl.3.6(a) the free television rights are not conferred on SportsVision, which seems to mean that they are all left with Seven. It is inconsistent with subcl.3.6(a) that subcl.3.6.(c) secures or records Seven's right to make delayed broadcasts, replays and news highlights; if subcl.3.6(a) had full literal effect Seven could broadcast FTA anything at any time. Subclause .6(c) does not in terms relate to broadcast FTA or Pay TV by Seven, and in its own terms could apply to either; but the heading of cl.3.6 "Free
Television Rights" suggests that the reference is not to delayed broadcast replays and news highlights on Pay TV. Then too subcl.3.6(b) in its first sentence would do everything for Seven which subcl.3.6(c) does for Free-to-Air (but not for Pay TV) if there had not been rights granted by Seven to
SportsVision under the Tallglen Agreement in some way which affected exercise by Seven of free television rights.

It appears from their terms that subcll.3.6(c) and (d) are closely related, as the delayed and replay rights referred to have no apparent origin except in subcl.3.6(c). Subclause 3.6(d) is a qualification to the delayed and replay rights conferred by subcl.3.6(c), and gives a week's protection against delayed or replay rights to events in Sch.1 par.1.2, a live broadcast of which is not affected by subcl.3.1(a) exclusivity, as well as to events referred to in pars.1.1 and 1.3 which are live events and are so affected. This seems to carry the implication that SportsVision is protected against live FTA broadcast of events in par.1.2 contemporaneous with SportsVision's Pay TV live broadcasts. At least in respect of par.1.2 events, the protection against contemporaneous live FTA broadcast to which subcl3.6(d) is an exception cannot be found in cl.3.1, and the only possible sources in the text of the Tallglen
Agreement are subcl.3.6(c) and the Plus Footnote.

Clause 3.6 appears to shift and waver in the directions it takes. Subclause .6(a) restates the obvious, on anything which had appeared in the Agreement up to that point: it is the mere truth that nothing in the Agreement confers the FTA rights on SportsVision, which was only given Pay TV rights; those are defined expressions and the definitions are mutually exclusive. Subcl.3.6(b) goes in two directions. Its first sentence restates another implication of the same obvious matter as subcl.3.6(a), but subcl.3.6(b) goes on to contemplate conflict with the rights granted to SportsVision under the Agreement. In subcl.3.6(c) SportsVision's acknowledging rights of Seven and related corporations to broadcast suggests that otherwise Seven would not have the rights acknowledged. That is the suggestion; it is not a necessary implication, but the implication is quite strongly supported. Subcl.3.6(d) takes up and regulates Seven's delayed and replay rights, which are assumed to exist, and the source of which seems to be in subcl.(c); no other source is stated.

The Amended Defence par.8(a) seems to say that subcl.3.6(d) applies only to delayed and replayed broadcast and does not say anything about live broadcast.
This would involve (but does not say in terms) that subcl.3.6(c) also says and implies nothing about live broadcasts. That would be a possible reading, but another possible reading is that subcl.3.6(c) means or assumes that Seven may not broadcast live material, as well as that Seven may not broadcast delayed or replay material without a one-week interval.

The introductory words to subcll.3.6(c) and (d) are superfluous; the document is an agreement overall, and references to agreement by one party or the other and to express acknowledgment are unnecessary. These introductory words indicate that the respective parties to whom agreement was attributed were conceding something which they were not otherwise obliged to accept, as it would have derogated from some right.

The Plus Footnote is not expressed in terms of a contractual promise. It purports to be a statement of a characteristic of each of the events to which it is footnoted. In a professionally drafted agreement of 25 clauses and 15 pages one would not ordinarily expect to find an important operative promise located in a Schedule and expressed obliquely by a description of part of the subject matter. Yet it is usual enough for a description of the subject matter in an agreement to express a contractual obligation about its characteristics.
Indeed, I see the informal expression of some apparently quite important subject in the less polished parts of the document as having, if anything, an enhanced claim for consideration as an expression of the parties' contractual intention, in a similar way as a handwritten addition is sometimes accorded an enhanced importance over printed or typewritten parts of a contract.

A close line of reasoning and attribution of a complete logical scheme to the terms of an Agreement are not always a sure guide to construction, as there can be lacunae for which nothing is provided, and there can be repetition, superfluity, overstatement, inconsistent provisions on the same subject and ambiguity. Still it is useful to see where logic and the attribution to the parties of a logical scheme of intentions would lead the reader.

The first construction question - exclusivity against FTA.

The first construction question is whether Tallglen will be in breach of the
Agreement if the Seven Network broadcasts live AFL matches which have been nominated as SportsVision's live matches within Sch.1 pars.1.1 and 1.2.

SportsVision's contention is to the effect that the Tallglen Agreement confers on it both kinds of exclusivity. Exclusivity of the first kind is expressly created by subcl.3.1(a) and applies to the matches in pars.1.1, 1.3 and 1.4, not to those in par.1.2. Exclusivity in the second sense is said to appear on the construction of the whole document, most particularly from statements in the headings of Sch.1 pars.1.1 and 1.2 - "Live all Australia" and "Live Sydney and Brisbane", and from the Plus Footnote; and to be supported by the terms of subcll.3.6(c) and (d).

Although there are clearly recognisable contractual promises and provisions in cll.1 to 25 of the Agreement, Sch.1 is not expressed as a contractual promise and is incorporated in the clauses by the definition of "AFL events", which gives it the function of a list of events, and it is not consistent with the general scheme of cll.1 to 25 that a contractual obligation should be undertaken by some expression in the Schedule or by implication from its terms.

Each party claimed some advantage from consideration of the factual matrix, which is to this effect. In 1995 when the Tallglen Agreement was made and there were no Pay TV transmissions, accepted wisdom in the industry was that sport was one of the most significant "subscription drivers," meaning factors motivating persons to subscribe to a particular Pay TV network. AFL and Rugby
League were the two sports which dominated public attention in the winter season, and they were significant at other times. The Channel Nine Network controlled rights relating to Rugby League but this was contested by the intervention of News Limited. The Seven Network had arrangements with the AFL which meant that it effectively controlled all broadcasting of AFL Premiership matches, FTA and Pay Television, but subject to the AFL's rights under its agreements with the licensee companies. For SportsVision when proposing to transmit sports on Pay Television it was of great strategic importance for its marketing to obtain the right to televise AFL matches, and also to obtain the right to transmit them exclusively of any other Pay Television operator, and further exclusively of FTA.

Another matter in the matrix of facts and circumstances is the existence of legal controls, the anti-siphoning law, which impose conditions on television broadcasting licences to discourage and penalise arrangements which prevent
ARL matches from being broadcast live FTA. This would give the parties motivations to frame their agreements so that they would not breach the anti- siphoning provisions or encounter interventions from administrative authorities.

The factual matrix has been useful to me for its assistance in understanding the Agreement, but it does not furnish any sound reason for preferring one of the contentions claimed over another.

In support of SportsVision's construction it was pointed out that in its own terms Sch.1 is more than a list of events. It includes headings which appear to affect the rights of the parties. The Schedule is prominently headed "Indicative Availability of Sports Events" which does not seem to me to assist either argument. The heading "Live all Australia" to par.1.1 does more than furnish a list: it establishes some characteristics of the transmissions which are to take place, when they will happen and to where they will be transmitted. The same is true of the heading of par.1.2. Parenthetical statements in par.1.2 have similar effects and go further, and it is very difficult to suppose that the parenthetical statements were not intended to govern what the parties were to do. If the headings and the parenthetical statements have contractual force, and they obviously do, it is the easier to accept that the Plus Footnote also has contractual force.

The Plus Footnote goes much further than a list of events could go and makes a statement which is not simply a reflection of the exclusivity granted by subcl.3.1(a). If it were it would apply to Sch.1, par.1.4, to which it does not apply, it would not apply to par.1.2 to which it does apply and it would be superfluous for pars.1.1 and 1.3; yet it is applied to them. The Plus
Footnote does not refer back to or repeat the provision about exclusivity in subcl.3.1(a); that is not the ordinary or natural meaning of "exclusive to Pay
TV," which naturally means that the broadcast will not occur otherwise than on
Pay TV. It goes further than subcl.3.1(a) because what it speaks about is the events' being exclusive to Pay TV, not being exclusive to SportsVision. It does not apply to any other paragraph of the Schedule.

I have to ask myself what is the concept of exclusivity in the Plus Footnote, obviously not the same as the concept in subcl.3.1(a), and why it was in the
Schedule if it did not mean anything; if it was not binding no-one would bother to say it. Overall, the meaning which the Plus Footnote in its context conveys to me is that the parties agreed that the events in Sch.1 pars.1.1 and .2 would only be broadcast live on Pay TV and would not be broadcast live on
FTA, and the events in par.1.3 would only be broadcast Turn-around Melbourne on Pay TV and would not be broadcast Turn-around Melbourne on FTA. The parties shared understanding that they were agreeing to that effect is the most probable explanation of the presence of cll.3.6(c) and 3.6(d); not the only possible explanation but the most probable one, protecting SportsVision by instituting a delay barrier between its live transmissions and delayed and replay broadcasts, and protecting Seven by making it explicit that there could be delayed and replayed broadcast and news highlights.

It is in my opinion necessary to give contractual force to some statements in the Schedule and to regard it as more than simply listing events. Absurd results would be produced by giving effect only to the parts of the Schedule which list events and ignoring the other parts. The greatest absurdity would be that under par.1.4 and subcl.5.1(a) SportsVision would have the right to broadcast all 203 AFL matches or 609 hours on Pay Television, at any time, live or otherwise, and in any market; but this would make everything else in par.1 superfluous and would produce other absurdities.

If the headings in Sch.1 had no contractual force SportsVision would have no contractual right to broadcast the events at any particular time and would be wholly in Seven's hands as to when they would be broadcast. That would be a commercial absurdity.

In my view the headings and parentheses in Sch.1 should be understood as stating matters by which the parties agreed to be contractually bound. This is so even though the drafting is inelegant and the expression very awkward; and there is no apparent reason why the parties shifted the pitch of their expression from relative formality in cll.1 to 25 to a completely different manner of expression of the Schedule. Although there is no apparent reason for it, in my view it should be understood that that is what they did. The same should be understood of the Plus Footnote; that what it states is what the parties agreed should be the position, that the broadcasts mentioned should be exclusive to Pay TV in the markets nominated in the Schedule.

SportsVision claimed that the construction it puts forward is assisted and confirmed by the terms of subcll.3.6.(c) and (d). In my opinion some expressions found in cl.3.6 are altogether inconsistent with the construction put forward by SportsVision. Subclause 3.6(a) is inconsistent with any provision in the Agreement conferring live and exclusive rights on
SportsVision. "Free television Rights" is a defined expression. It could be said that subcl.3.6(a) refers to all the free television rights, and to anything within the defined expression "Free Television Rights".

The first sentence of subcl.3.6(b) is also quite inconsistent with the construction put forward by SportsVision, but it is qualified by the second sentence in subcl.3.6(b) which suggests that rights were granted under the
Agreement to SportsVision which had something to do with the free television rights. (This sentence says it is "for the avoidance of doubt" but this aim was not achieved.) 
Subclauses 3.6(c) and (d) regulate delayed broadcasts, replays and news and sports highlights and excerpts, and give the initial strong impression that it is assumed by the parties that but for these two paragraphs Seven may not broadcast free-to-air the sports events for which Seven has granted Pay
Television rights to SportsVision. Strong though this impression is, it is not borne out by anything which literally appears in subcll.3.6(c) and (d), which do not mention live broadcast by Seven. When I take together what I find in the Plus Footnote in Sch.1 about the events in pars.1.1 and 1.2 being exclusive to Pay TV, meaning exclusive of FTA, and what I find in cl.3.6, which seems to say that Seven's free television rights are unqualified but goes on to make provisions which seem to recognise that they may be qualified and that Seven needs to establish an entitlement to broadcast FTA, and establishes it in relation to delayed broadcasts and limited classes, I am of the view that the Tallglen Agreement is ambiguous. At different places and in different ways it says (in the Schedule) that broadcasts are to be exclusive to Pay TV and FTA broadcast is to be excluded and, with less clarity (in cl.3.6), that the free television rights are not qualified except for a qualification relating to delayed broadcast replays and use in sports highlights and excerpts. Neither of the two readings can be conclusively shown to be wrong for reasons based on expressions in the document or in its factual matrix.

In my opinion the terms of subcl.3.6(c) confirm that the parties understood that there was to be a grant of live rights, and that understanding was probably based on the headings in the Schedule, although subcl.3.6(c) is also consistent with there being a reference back to the other exclusivity created by subcl.3.1(a).

It has to be said that subcll.3.6(c) and (d) when read literally only establish when delayed broadcasts replays and news highlights may take place; and say nothing in literal words to the effect that Seven is not to broadcast any event FTA live. Seven's counsel submitted to that effect, that subcll.3.6(c) and (d) simply make no provision about live broadcasts by Seven.
The reading contended for by SportsVision appears to me to have greater support, as the contrary indications in cl.3.6 are wavering and uncertain; but ambiguity is there. Construction presents a choice, and in my opinion subcll.3.6(c) and (d) give stronger support to the implication than to the literal reading. The firm terms of the declaration in subcl.3.6(a) and the first sentence of subcl.3.6(b) are neutralised by the second sentence which appears to show an understanding on the part of the parties that rights granted to SportsVision under the Agreement have some restricting effect on the exercise by Seven of the free television rights.

A reading in which FTA broadcasting by Seven of anything in Sch.1 par.1 is not restricted by the Tallglen Agreement, and in which the Plus Footnote creates no rights which have a bearing on the operation of cl.3.6, while available as a matter of logic, seems to me to be very unlikely to be what the parties intended. If the qualifications in subcll.3.6(c) and (d) related only to the
Pay TV rights and not at all to the FTA rights there would be a strange shift of subject matter in the midst of cl.3.6. One reading is a trivial side issue, the other is something of substance, more likely to be the object of attention and exposition in the parties' agreement. It seems more likely that the FTA rights, with which cl.3.6 opens, continue to be the main subject of cl.3.6 and that the qualifications established by subcll.3.6(c) and (d) relate to the free-to-air rights, as well as to Pay TV rights.

Overall, the reading in which Seven is being restricted in what Seven can broadcast FTA, as well as in whatever it may do on Pay TV seems to be what is pointed to.

In my opinion the Tallglen Agreement means that the parties agreed that the games nominated for purposes of par.1.1 could be transmitted live to all
Australian markets by SportsVision and that live broadcasts FTA throughout
Australia would not take place; with a corresponding meaning for the broadcasts referred to in pars.1.2 and 1.3. In this agreement there can be no certainty, and the construction I give it seems considerably more likely to be that intended that any other. I believe I have identified the right conclusion, but this falls somewhat short of complete conviction.

My view is based on an impression of what the Tallglen Agreement conveys overall as well as on what it says in detail, and a complete articulation of all the bases of this view is not possible. One matter is that it appears to me that, while both readings could be thought of as commercially sensible, it fits better into the pattern of a working commercial arrangement that while
SportsVision transmits its small proportion of the total number of games live on Pay TV, the Seven network does not broadcast them FTA. Another is that, while it should be said of both sides of the argument that if the parties really intended what is contended for it was easy for them to say so much more clearly, it seems particularly hard to suppose that, in the contorted expressions of cl.3.6, the parties would not have excluded the available implications that free-to-air broadcasts of live Pay TV events could only be broadcast under subcll.3.6(c) and (d) if that was what they had intended.
Another element is that putting contractual provisions in an inappropriate place in a Schedule seems, once it is accepted that they are contractual, to enhance their significance a little, in the same way as handwritten material is sometimes preferred to printed material. Another element is that
SportsVision was clearly intended to be the grantee of rights, and as a rule of last resort ambiguities are resolved in favour of the amplitude and effectiveness of a grant.

Before deciding which six Saturday night games and which 12 Sunday afternoon games fall within par.1.1, Tallglen can make its own choice among such of the eight games in each of the 22 rounds as are played on Saturday nights and
Sunday afternoons, and can nominate for SportsVision whichever ones it does not wish to broadcast live itself. Its choice is narrowed slightly by the need to fit in rights under par.1.2 and find another seven Saturday night matches for Sydney and Brisbane, another two for Sydney and another two for Brisbane.
Its choice is not narrowed very much at all, although it is further narrowed by the need to find 20 Friday night games; even in that case Tallglen has ample choices. The 18 Sunday double-headers are not necessarily live. The construction SportsVision contends for does not place much restriction on
Tallglen's opportunity to retain and broadcast live the matches which it regards as suitable.

In a commercial setting there is nothing absurd, and nothing strange at all in an agreement that not only should SportsVision be the only Pay TV operator to transmit certain events but also that another group of events, including some of those, should not be broadcast FTA live while SportsVision was transmitting them. Remembering that Tallglen had the nomination of the events within wide classes, this is a quite comprehensible commercial arrangement.

On this reading events in Sch.1, par.1.2 only have the second exclusivity; they cannot be broadcast FTA, but SportsVision does not have the exclusive right to transmit them on Pay Television so Seven can arrange for some other
Pay TV transmission.

Unless this reading is correct Seven would not stand in need of an exception such as is created by subcl.3.6(c). The provision would be more likely to take the form of an advantage conferred on SportsVision and not a concession to
Seven.

SportsVision contended that its proposed construction was assisted by industry usage of the expression "exclusive to Pay TV," but in my view the evidence did not establish anything which could be regarded as usage throughout the relevant industry or any special meaning. The submission was superfluous as
SportsVision puts forward the ordinary and natural meaning of those words.

Evidence on the construction of the Tallglen Agreement.

SportsVision also sought to support its case by reference to conduct of and communications on behalf of Seven in relation to the broadcast of AFL games during 1996 and in 1997 until early in the controversy. This material is in evidence because it is relevant to claims which the plaintiff made based on rectification and estoppel, but in my view that evidence cannot be brought into consideration on construction.

The English law on this subject is very clear: the later conduct and statements of parties are not admissible even to resolve an ambiguity in the meaning of the contract. It is admissible to identify the things with which the contract deals, and that is a different subject. The law was stated clearly and shortly in speeches in the House of Lords in James Miller &
Partners Limited versus Whitworth Street Estates (Manchester) Limited [[1970] AC .] Lord
Reid stated the basis of the doctrine at 603: "I must say that I had thought that it is now well settled that it is not legitimate to use as an aid in the construction of the contract anything which the parties said or did after it was made. Otherwise one might have the result that a contract meant one thing the day it was signed, but by reason of subsequent events meant something different a month or a year later." 
In L Schuler AG versus Wickman Machine Tool Sales Limited <case>; [(1974) AC ] views to a similar effect were expressed in the House of Lords. An exception relating to land titles based on Watcham versus Attorney General of East Africa
Protectorate [[1919] AC 533] was considered. In most of the speeches treatment was brief:
Lord Reid at 252, Lord Morris of Borth-Y-Gest at 260, Lord Kilbrandon at 272.
Lord Wilberforce spoke at greater length at 261-262 and Lord Simon of
Glaisdale at 265 to 270.

It is significant that Lord Simon at 269 referred to the opinion of Baron
Parke in Shore versus Wilson (1842) 9 Clark and Finnelly 355 at 555-556, 8ER 450 at 528-529 which referred to the admissibility of evidence of the meaning of foreign and technical language and for the identification of the subject matter and went on, as quoted by Lord Simon, to say: "From the context of the instrument, and from these two descriptions of evidence, with such circumstances as by law the Court, without evidence, may of itself notice, it is its duty to construe and apply the words of that instrument; and no extrinsic evidence of the intention of the party to the Deed, from his declarations, whether at the time of his executing the instrument, or before or after that time, is admissible; the duty of the Court being to declare the meaning of what is written in the instrument, not of what was intended to have been written." 
In Australia the authorities up to 1990 were referred to in the judgment of
Kirby P in Hide & Skin Trading Pty Limited versus Oceanic Meat Traders
Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR 310] at 315-6, with references to the position in New Zealand, Canada and the United States and to the dangers of expanding the field of inquiry. Priestley JA (with whom
Meagher JA agreed: 331) made a lengthier examination of Australian and English authority. Statements in judgments in the High Court in Administration of the
Territory of Papua and New Guinea and Anor versus Daera Guba (1973) 130 CLR 353 treat the House of Lords decisions as establishing the general principle that "... it is not legitimate to use as an aid in the construction of the contract anything which the party said or did after it was made" (Gibbs J at 446).
However Priestley JA regarded expressions in judgments in White versus Australian & New Zealand Theatres Limited <case>; [(1943) 67 CLR 266] as being to a different effect, including an enumeration by
Williams J at 281 of matters admissible to identify the meaning of words in a written contract.

It was Priestley JA's view (328) that as there seemed to be conflicting authority in the High Court it was prudent to consider the effect of the evidence. When considered the evidence did not affect construction of the contract.

In White Williams J at 281 set out eight surrounding circumstances admissible in evidence to identify the meaning of the words "sole professional services" including two which were later conduct relating to the subject of the agreement. In my respectful view, the inclusion by Williams J of those circumstances among the material considered for the purpose of identifying the "sole professional services" referred to in the letter of agreement was entirely orthodox and furnishes no support for any view in which resort may be had to parties' later conduct and behaviour for resolving ambiguities in the text of an agreement or for construction of what the written agreement said.

In FAI Traders Insurance Co. Limited versus Savoy Plaza Pty Limited <case>; [[1993] 2 VR 343] and in re Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Limited &
Hycraft Carpets Pty Limited <case>; [(1996) 14 ACLC 555] the Court of Appeal of Victoria has adhered firmly with the position as established in England. In Spunwill Pty Ltd versus Bab Pty Limited [(1994) 36 NSWLR 290] at 304 to 312 Santow J in this Division expressed a different view.

I see the treatment of this subject in the judgments in the Hide & Skin
Trading case in a different way to Santow J. To my reading the judgments do not support any different view to that of Gibbs J in Daera Guba. With respect I do not understand Priestley JA as endorsing the views expressed in
White by observing that those views were entirely rational. In the case of an oral agreement, later statements and conduct of the party could well be admissible as admissions or constructive admissions of the meaning of terms on which parties had agreed, and there is no rule of exclusion of evidence extrinsic to oral statements constituting agreement. It could not be said that it is not rational to adopt a rule admitting such evidence where the agreement was in writing; nor could that be said of adopting the contrary rule.
Priestley JA was directing himself to the state of authority, and the incontestable observation that the broad view is entirely rational did not express adherence to that view. Notwithstanding the force which would ordinarily be attributed to a later considered statement in High Court judgments, Priestley JA's conclusion was that the earlier statements made it prudent to consider what conclusion would be reached on the broader basis. In my opinion it cannot be said that Kirby P came to a conclusion supporting the broader basis.

In my view the opinions expressed in Administration of the Territory of Papua
New Guinea versus Daera Guba, coming as they did after the High Court had given attention to the subject a number of times earlier in the Century and after a very firm conclusion had been reached for the law in England, have great force for courts in New South Wales, including primary judges like myself. A rule in which later declarations and conduct could be looked to where admissible to resolve ambiguities would have advantages as well as inconveniences; but there is no such rule.

In my respectful opinion the consideration stated by Lord Reid is of overwhelming and unanswerable importance. The contract cannot mean one thing if it is never acted on, and something else if it is. The meaning of the words used in a written agreement is the same, in my opinion, whether the parties did not ever do anything under it, or acted on it every day for many years, and cannot change if evidence of what they did under it becomes unavailable because the contract has been forgotten, or because everyone concerned is now dead. There are also policy considerations which weigh strongly against acting on such evidence; it is an invitation to engage in contrived behaviour, and it would lead to the admission of large bodies of evidence which in their nature require interpretation and are more difficult to interpret than the original agreement; to be picked over for assertions that they show something about the original agreement: an expanded inquiry on an inherently less reliable body of material than what the parties recorded at the time they came to agreement. It would be necessary to infer their earlier intentions from their later actions and intentions, using some form of the presumption of continuance. Litigants would be tempted to prove every event in relation to performance and to assert that they all contained grains of confirmation. The parties' later declarations and conduct do not bear directly on the matter in issue, which is what their intentions were at the time when they entered into the Agreement.

Excursus on Blackburn J in Grant versus Grant.

In White Williams J noticed, among other authorities, citations of observations during argument by Blackburn J in Grant versus Grant (1870) LR5CP at 728 and 729 referring to Blackburn J's own text "Contract of Sale" published in 1845, and in the Hide and Skin Trading case Priestley JA traced the source of those observations. In my opinion the observations of Blackburn
J referred to by Williams J and Priestley JA are directed to the identification of subject matter and not to larger problems of construction.
As Blackburn J observed, no authority for the statements in his text were there referred to, and this seems unfortunate as the subject had been dealt with in a distinct way by the judges' opinions in the House of Lords in Shore v Wilson in 1842 three years earlier. It was a quirk of memory that his own text came to his Lordship's mind a quarter of a century later, yet the contemporaneous House of Lords decision did not.

When attention is given to White versus Australian and New Zealand Theatres
Limited <case>; [(1943) 67 CLR 266] and to what should be taken to have been treated as law by Williams J, it is in my opinion useful to have in view all the terms of the observations in the course of argument made by Blackburn J in Grant versus Grant (1870) LR 5CP 727, and later references to those observations. Grant versus Grant was a will-construction case in the Exchequer Chamber. The difficulty with the will was that the testator had made a gift in the will to Joseph Grant referred to as "my nephew" and that name was borne by two persons, one who was strictly the testator's nephew and one who was his wife's nephew. Counsel for the plaintiff in error (or appellant) had submitted (at 728): "Where the language of the will is such that it may refer to either of two persons or two subject-matters, parol evidence is admissible to shew which person or thing the testator intended: but, where one of them completely answers to and completely fills up the description in the will, in its ordinary and strict meaning, parol evidence is not admissible to shew that the testator meant something else." The report sets out Blackburn J's observations, apparently prompted by the erroneous tailpiece in this submission, at 728 to 729: "Blackburn, J. referred to Blackburn's Contract of Sale, p.49, where the rule upon this subject is thus stated: - `The general rule seems to be, that all facts are admissible which tend to shew the sense the words bear with reference to the surrounding circumstances of and concerning which the words were used, but that such facts as only tend to shew that the writer intended to use words bearing a particular sense are to be rejected.' To this at p.50 is added the following note: - `The principles of the rules of law regulating the admissibility of extrinsic evidence to aid the construction of wills and of contracts required to be in writing, seem to be the same. But, in applying them, it seems necessary to bear in mind that there is a distinction between the two classes of instruments. The will is the language of the testator, soliloquizing, if one may use the phrase, and the Court in construing his language may properly take into account all that he knew at the time, in order to see in what sense the words were used. But the language used in a contract is the language used to another in the course of an isolated transaction, and the words must take their meaning from those things of and concerning which they are used, and those only. This does not affect the law, but it is of some consequence in the application of it, as it narrows the field of inquiry.' No authority is referred to for the proposition; but such was then my opinion, and I still think the same." 
The first sentence which Blackburn J read from his own text was referred to with apparent approval in the opinion of the Privy Council in Bank of New
Zealand versus Simpson [[1900] AC 182] at 188, but only the first part of that sentence was given in the speech of Lord Dunedin in Charrington & Co. Limited versus Wooder [[1914] AC 71] at 82, and it is that part of the sentence which was set out by Williams J in White at [67 CLR 281]; appropriately so as it was that part which Lord
Dunedin had adopted.

The distinction drawn in the sentence quoted from Blackburn J's text is clear when taken with the subject under argument which prompted the reference to it and with the note on p50 which Blackburn J also referred to - "... the words must take their meaning from those things of and concerning which they are used, and those only." The sentence does not support reference to evidence of later conduct to resolve ambiguity, or to do anything but to identify the subject matter referred to; but is to the contrary.

The title of Blackburn's work is "A Treatise on the effect of the Contract of
Sale on the Legal Rights of Property and Possession in Goods, Wares and
Merchandize." The chapter containing pages 49 and 50 relates to what is a memorandum in writing of an agreement for the purposes of s.17 (Goods, Wares or Merchandizes for the price of 10 or upwards) of the Statute of Frauds, and this led the author to the question how far external evidence is by common law admissible to aid the construction of the memorandum in writing, but not to deal with it fully. If he had dealt with it fully he could hardly have failed to have referred to Shore versus Wilson, then recent, full in its consideration and firm in what it says, yet his text did not refer to that decision.
Blackburn J's observations in argument are only a small part of this large subject, but for what part it has, the whole of his first sentence should be remembered, as it would be quite wrong to suppose that the first part of the sentence supports broad admissibility.

The evidence of subsequent conduct.

The matters relied on as subsequent conduct for supporting SportsVision's construction are as follows: 
Ex B, p46 - message Garry Fenton to Tom Barnett 18 December 1995. To my reading this is entirely neutral.

Ex B, p61 - fax message Tom Barnett to Shane Wood. This shows an understanding that SportsVision had "an exclusivity window" for a match which Seven had scheduled all Australia for SportsVision by mistake, and that the exclusivity window could be withdrawn by SportsVision. I regard this as almost neutral although it could have some faint colour in support of SportsVision's case.

Ex B, p64 - fax message Garry Fenton to Bob Kemp 20 May 1996. This is entirely neutral.

Ex B, p99 - message Geoff Weil, Head of Network Sport to Bob Kemp 21 February
This says: ". Table 1 matches are provided on a live exclusive all Australia basis.

A one week Australia-wide `black out' pursuant to clause 3.6(d) of the 
Agreement applies to Seven for these matches.
Table 2 matches are provided on a turnaround (broadcast to commence at 7.30pm or as otherwise agreed) exclusive in Melbourne basis. A one week Melbourne only `black-out' pursuant to clause 3.6(d) of the 
Agreement applies to Seven for these matches. Seven is therefore entitled to broadcast these games in cities other than Melbourne on a live (or turnaround/delayed) basis." 
This expresses an understanding by Mr Weil which supports SportsVision's case.

Ex B, p110 - fax message from Geoff Weil to Bob Kemp. There is some colour of support for SportsVision's case, but par.5 can be read as speaking only about delay rights.

Ex B, p112 - letter from Tom Barnett to Alan Bateman 11 April 1997. This appears to reflect the shared belief that the Seven Network was not entitled to broadcast live matches granted as SportsVision on a live and exclusive basis.

Ex B, p113 - letter Alan Batement to Tom Barnett 11 April 1997. This shows that the understanding in the previous document was not mutual.

Ex B, p148 - letter Garry Rice to Tom Barnett 26 June 1997. This contains the following: "As previously advised to Sportsvision, due to the effect of the anti- siphoning decision by the Full Federal Court on 26 March 1997, Channel Seven has received legal advice that we can no longer provide to Sportsvision matches `Live and Exclusive' as per clause 3.6 of the Sports Programming
Licence Agreement. On this basis Seven are nominating the Melbourne versus Hawthorn match as Sportsvision's live, but not exclusive match, with Seven replaying highlights on Sunday afternoon from 5 to 6pm." 
This means and acknowledges that under cl.3.6 the Seven Network had provided
SportsVision matches live and exclusive and asserts that that could no longer be done because of the state of the anti-siphoning law. On a fair view this acknowledges SportsVision's construction.

It is clear as a matter of fact that until the period in 1997 with which these exchanges deal the parties actually behaved in accordance with SportsVision's view of the meaning of their agreement.

The material tends to support the plaintiff's case, although that relating to performance under the contract shows the views of executive officers, not the directing minds of Tallglen or Seven and not the persons who negotiated the original agreement, and for those reasons, notwithstanding its clarity at two points, it is not a good basis for a conclusion about the parties' intentions on 19 May 1995. Exhibit B p148 is a considered assertion after controversy had arisen, and would have some force if the material could be looked at.

This recital shows, in my opinion, that nothing of value has been lost by applying the law. The matter opened up introduces its own array of obscurities and doubts, and what it could show is not directly the subject of inquiry.
Obscurities at the centre are not to be resolved by discovering the obscurities at the periphery.

Admission by conduct.

SportsVision's counsel contended that conduct of Seven Network subsequent to making the agreement is consistent only with SportsVision's construction, and can be treated as an admission of the state of the parties' rights. In support of this they cited Pitcher versus Langford [(1991) 23 NSWLR 142] at 160 and the cases there cited, Gray versus Australian Motorists and General Insurance
Co. Pty Limited [(1976) 1 NSWLR 669] at 684-685 and Jones versus Sutherland Shire Council [[1979] 2 NSWLR 206] at 231.
They also cited Eslea Holdings Limited v. Butts [(1986) 6 NSWLR 175] at 188E.
In my opinion the recognition of the admissibility of a statement about a subject in which facts and law are mixed, or which is the result of the application of a legal standard to facts, is a separate area of the law from the admissibility of evidence in aid of construction of a document.

Rectification.

A sorry train of shoeless hacks is frequently flogged to its feet to limp behind a construction-of-contract argument, and in this case they received no mercy, but could not earn their hay. SportsVision's claim for rectification of the Agreement need not be dealt with, having regard to my view on the construction of the document. In my opinion there was no basis for a case to the effect that the Tallglen Agreement was a mistaken expression of any common intention; there was a mass or maze of negotiations and drafts with many shifts and changes, and the evidence did not enable the evolution of the final form to be related in any clear way to shifts in common intentions. Lawyers representing the plaintiff and dealing with what must have been a very late draft of the Tallglen Agreement early on the day it was executed adverted to the difficulties of understanding the provisions about live events and exclusivity, and the lack of clarity about the standing of Schedule 1.
Consideration of the draft was minute, searching and critical: see Ex 23 pp283B to 283E, and also pp283G questions 2, 3 and 4 and replies on pp283I and
J. It is extremely improbable that the terms of the Agreement made later that day were not deliberately adopted after consideration of what effect they had.

Mr Barnett stood at an intermediate stage during the negotiations. He was not conducting the decision-making and was not attending to instructing lawyers in detail and approving the drafts and the final form, which he did not feel concerned to read. He is not in a position to give useful evidence of the central issues in a rectification case. There is no clear evidence of what led to decisions as to the form the final document took, and no clear evidence of any step which could be a mistake. On the contrary the agreement on my reading says what SportsVision contends it says and should have said. If I were required (and I am not) to come to a conclusion on a rectification case I would not think that it could succeed.

Estoppel 
It is also unnecessary to deal with the plaintiff's claim based on estoppel.
In my opinion there was no basis on which it could be found that the directing minds of the plaintiff formed any wrong view, or any view of the meaning and effect of the Tallglen Agreement which was created by or contributed to by representations or conduct on behalf of Tallglen. Nor was there any basis for a finding of reliance on any such matter. There was no "credo" passage in the evidence in which anyone representing SportsVision averred reliance and exposed himself to cross-examination on his reasons for reliance. The document was produced by long negotiations, with intense application by numerous people, executives and lawyers, and in that context reliance on anything but the text could not possibly be reasonable. The persons who were the relevant directing minds of SportsVision at the time did not give evidence, and Mr
Barnett, who gave evidence and was the executive in charge of SportsVision's practical affairs, did not make the significant decisions and did not inform himself at any significant time of the terms of the document.

Even if there had been an estoppel, the contractual position could be resumed on notice and, whatever notice might have been necessary there has now been about one year and that must be more than enough. No detriment is shown except the reliance itself.

These issues were raised pro forma and without any substance, and their claim on the court's time and attention was inappropriate.

The second construction question - nomination of matches.

SportsVision claims (Amended Statement of Claim pars.20 to 22 and claims 2, 3 and 7) that the Tallglen Agreement has an implied term that Tallglen will nominate SportsVision's exclusive matches and will advise SportsVision of its nomination at least six weeks before the commencement of the calendar month in which a match is to occur. Tallglen denies this and contends (Amended Defence par.57) that the agreement is void or unenforceable for uncertainty. One aspect of the uncertainty contention is the lack of definition of the rights granted, including the identification in the Schedule. Another aspect is the "grant of rights" argument.

SportsVision claimed a declaration establishing its position about nominations, and also (claim 7) a declaration that "Tallglen ... is obliged to either supply the plaintiff with live or Turn-around programming in respect of the SportsVision exclusive matches, or allow the plaintiff such access as is within the control of the first defendant to allow to sporting grounds which is necessary for the purpose of the plaintiff producing programming of the
SportsVision exclusive matches." 
The Tallglen Agreement and Sch.1 pars.1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 do not specify any particular matches to which the rights granted apply. The Agreement can have no practical effect unless Tallglen makes choices among all the available matches, fills up each category and informs SportsVision of the choices; that is to say, unless there is a process of selection and notification. Together I call these nomination. One of the grounds on which uncertainty was asserted was that "It is impossible in advance to know what event is covered, and it is impossible to know what the precise right is and how the right is to be exercised. In the absence of an agreed set of procedures, the agreement is illusory and depends upon future and ad hoc arrangements. The court cannot draft these arrangements for the parties: Biotechnology Australia versus Pace [(1988) 15 NSWLR 130."] 
The Agreement is quite unworkable without notice as well as selection.
Obviously SportsVision could not run its business if it did not know what it was to transmit until it started receiving signals itself; nobody would pay money for that. SportsVision's right (cl.4.3) to do its own production is ineffective without notice. There is no provision in the agreement by which
Tallglen promises to go through a process of nomination but the implication that Tallglen is to do so is obvious beyond debate. It is common enough for a contractual promise to be made in terms which leaves the party making the promise an area of choice, even a wide area of choice; this happens in every agreement to sell unascertained goods by description. In the present case there is a wide area of choice within which Tallglen may select and nominate events; there is ample room for it to have regard to its obligations to the
AFL and to the AFL's wishes, and to its own interests, when it makes its nominations. Unless it makes a choice Tallglen will be in breach. This resolves the uncertainty about which matches are referred to.

It remains open to consideration however what period of notice is required.
The implication that the period of notice will be reasonable is readily made.
SportsVision's counsel referred to several matters as bearing on the period of notice. One is SportsVision's needs, when it learns of a nomination, to consider what it will do with the opportunity it presents and whether it will transmit the match. SportsVision also has to consider whether it will transmit the match as produced by the Seven Network, or whether it will use its rights under cl.4.3 of the Tallglen Agreement to do its own production, for which it must engage commentators and other staff and make practical arrangements for attendance at the ground with equipment; these arrangements need some days at the least. SportsVision also needs to give publicity to what it will transmit, to notify its subscribers, and to seek to earn revenue from advertisers by telling them what it is to transmit. All this occurs in a context in which large sums of money are payable by SportsVision for the rights.

There have been many matches for which Seven has given plenty of notice, although subject to the opportunity for further communication and adjustment.
The nomination of 18 December 1995 was of 18 live matches. There were further discussions and a "definitive list" on Monday 1 April 1996 for the whole season. (Round 1 began on the previous Friday 29 March 1996). There were some further small adjustments by agreement. For the 1997 season, after pressure and repeated inquiries, Seven made nominations for the first half of the 1997 season on 21 February 1997; see Exhibit B, p99. Round 1 began in the weekend of Friday 28 March and Round 22 in the weekend of Friday 29 August. After being pressed for several months Seven nominated matches "provided on a live exclusive all Australia basis" and apparently referable to Sch.1, par.1.1; there were 11 such matches in Rounds 1 to 10, up to Saturday 31 May. There were also six nominations of Saturday afternoon Turn-around games apparently referable to par.1.3 from Round 2 to Saturday 7 June in Round 11. The letter said "I will provide you with matches for Rounds 12 to 22 later in the year following further discussion with the AFL." For the first game this gave 36 days or five weeks' notice.

Evidence shows that for SportsVision's commercial purposes programming information is required five weeks before the start of each month for Optus' programming including the production of a program guide for subscribers. The computer system from which the program guide is produced is also used to record information for prospective advertisers and SportsVision requires four weeks' notice to deal with advertising. That is to say, interests of
SportsVision would be well served by notice of six weeks.

It does not seem to me to be appropriate to look only to the commercial situation of SportsVision. By nominating a match Tallglen limits its own area of action and, to a degree, acts against Seven's interest in exploiting the commercial opportunities of broadcasting that match. Those opportunities are related to the interest of the viewing public in particular matches and to what emerges in the course of the season's competition, and the best view of which matches in a round the public will find interesting can be formed at the conclusion of the previous round. This consideration suggests that it would be appropriate to make a nomination about Monday before a round is to commence on
Friday. A nomination on or before Monday would give SportsVision some opportunity to make the practical arrangements it needed to use the opportunity, to decide whether to embark on production itself, and to engage staff and facilities or finalise its arrangements to do so.

Perhaps an overall better commercial arrangement would involve a preliminary nomination and a final nomination at a late stage. However the agreement does not provide that arrangement and what I am concerned to do is to establish and make a declaration dealing with the minimum which Tallglen must do to avoid being in breach of its obligations. Tallglen is entitled to do the least it is obliged to do and at the latest date if it wishes, even if by so doing it limits SportsVision's commercial opportunities.

The question of a period of nomination is not in my view assisted by evidence dealing with the practice in relation to other sports, or by the terms of agreements relating to television broadcast of other sports.

My finding is that Tallglen is obliged to make its nomination on or before the
Monday preceding the first match in each round.

Within the available period SportsVision may decide to exercise its right under cl.4.3 to "do its own production of the AFL event." Claim 7 appears to me to be a truism as cl.4 of the Tallglen Agreement overall obliges Seven to supply programs, and by acknowledging that SportsVision may do its own production, impliedly obliges Seven to provide access to grounds and facilities to do so. There was some debate about the exercise of this right in correspondence which is in evidence, but SportsVision's counsel did not put any submissions dealing with the subject and I would not think it was appropriate to make a declaration unless the declaration were to establish, after consideration of evidence, some particular matter about the facilities to be provided and the manner of providing them with which it is practicable for a declaration to deal.

No grant.

Another aspect of the uncertainty pleaded relates to the opening words of subcl.3.1(a) - "Seven agrees to grant to SportsVision exclusively and
SportsVision agrees to acquire from Seven exclusively for the first term a licence for etc." It was contended that this records an agreement for some event to happen at a later stage than the time of the agreement, an event in which Seven is to grant the licence and SportsVision is to acquire it. There were contentions to the effect that unless that next stage is carried out, and unless SportsVision seeks and obtains an order for specific performance requiring it to be carried out, SportsVision has no rights in a mature state, does not have a licence and has not acquired one, and is not in a position to obtain any relief. It was said that the precise right to be conferred cannot be identified, and that the Tallglen Agreement is essentially some form of agreement in principle which requires ad hoc further agreement and arrangements to give it content, and that the court cannot do that.

Apart from the form of words relating to agreement to grant and agreement to acquire a licence, there is no indication anywhere else in the Tallglen
Agreement that there is to be a further stage of a more formal or other dealing with a licence, and no indication of what that stage is to be or what is to happen in it. I can see no further stage except the nomination; and except for the nomination a licence to transmit television signals of sports events which the grantor of the licence controls is, it seems to me, fully granted by agreeing to grant it. To say that one agrees to grant a licence is just as clear and effective a form of words to use for the process as to say that one grants a licence, or that one licenses the transmission. The use of language elsewhere in the Agreement suggests that the parties understood that any process of licensing was completed; this appears from terms of subcl.3.6(c), and from subcl.3.8(b)(2) which uses the words "the licences granted in cl.3.1". It is also suggested by subcl.3.7(a) and cl.4.1. The situation is quite unlike an agreement to convey land or to sell goods, where there is a well known and recognisable further stage or stages which must take place before the agreement is carried out. In the present case there are some further things to do, but they are simple and obvious; the television signal has to be available and Tallglen has to make the nomination, but otherwise there is nothing which has to happen for the perfection of the process of conferring a licence.

In my opinion the parts of the Agreement which the plaintiff seeks to enforce are not unenforceable on any ground of uncertainty.

Anti-siphoning legislation and condition 10(e) of broadcasting licences.

The defendant contended that if the Tallglen Agreement operates to confer live and exclusive rights to transmit AFL matches, exclusive of live FTA broadcasting, the Agreement or conduct under it will involve Optus Vision
Media in breaches of a condition of its licence or licences under the [Broadcasting Services Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/). The alleged consequences appear from pars.23 to 56 inclusive of the Amended
Defence, and were developed elaborately in submissions, but they relate to asserted illegality of provisions of the Tallglen Agreement and to the unavailability of remedies which would involve parties or other persons in offences or other breaches of the [Broadcasting Services
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/).
Submissions in this area were developed with remarkable elaboration on both sides, and I do not find it necessary to deal comprehensively with everything which was put, or with more than a small part of it.

A subscription television broadcasting licence is made subject to standard conditions by [s.99(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s99.html) acting with Sch.2 Pt.6 of the [Broadcasting Services Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/). The condition relevant to these proceedings is Condition (e) in the form which it took by an amendment to cl.10(1) of Sch.2 Pt6 made by s.13 of the Broadcasting
Services Amendment Act [No.139 of 1995] with effect on 8 December 1995.
 "10(1) Each subscription television broadcasting licence is subject to the following conditions: ...
 a licensee will not acquire the right to televise, on a subscription broadcasting service, an event that is specified in a notice under subs.115(1) unless: a national broadcaster has the right to televise the event on its broadcasting service; or the television broadcasting services of commercial television broadcasting licensees who have the right to televise the event cover a total of more than 50% of the 
Australian population; ...".

A breach of condition by a licensee is an offence under subs.139(2).

In its earlier form, with effect at the relevant times until 8 December 1995
Condition (e) was: "(e) The licensee will not acquire the right to broadcast an event on the subscription television broadcasting service to which a notice in force under subs.115(1) of this Act applies unless a national broadcaster or a commercial television broadcasting licensee has acquired the right to broadcast that event." 
Section 115 is headed: "Minister may protect the free availability of certain types of programs." Subsection (1) provides: "115(1) The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, specify an event, or events of the kind, the televising of which, or the live televising of which, should, in the opinion of the Minister, be available free to the general public." 
There are some procedural subsections including subs.(1B), added by the same amending Act, under which an event is taken to be removed from the notice 168 hours after the end of the event, with a power of extension.

The Broadcasting Services (Events) Notice No.1 of 1994 gazetted on 6 July 1994 specified many sporting events, including "each match in the Australian
Football League Premiership Competition" and in the Finals series and each
State of Origin match. The notice extends to every match which could fall within Sch.1 Pt.1 of the Tallglen Agreement.

The working of these provisions in relation to FTA and Pay TV broadcasting were considered by the Federal Court of Australia, by Lockhart J (Nine
Network Australia Pty Limited versus Australian Broadcasting Authority & Anor [(1997) 143 ALR 8] and on appeal by Wilcox, Lee and RD Nicholson JJ in Foxtel
Cable Television Pty Limited versus Nine Network Australia Pty Limited & Anor [(1997) 143 ALR 516.] The facts of the litigation there took a fundamentally different form to the present in that the source of the rights of the Pay TV operator Foxtel Cable was not a Commercial Television Broadcast Licensee but was News Limited, which was able to make available exclusive television broadcasts of Test Cricket matches between Australia and South Africa played in South Africa, agreed to make them available to the Seven Network free-to- air with seven days' delay, and agreed to make them available to Foxtel live and exclusive against free-to-air and Pay TV for Australia. Lockhart J was of the view that if Condition (e) was to be satisfied the rights acquired by the
Pay TV operator must be rights not greater than the rights of the FTA broadcaster. The Full Court took a higher view of what was required. At 520 their judgment includes: "We accept that Condition 10(1)(e)(ii) is concerned with the commercial television licensee's right to televise a declared event, rather than whether or not it actually does so ... The effect of the condition was to deny Seven the right to televise the matches within three months (later one week).
Because of the condition, Seven never acquired the right to televise any of the matches during the period they were on the list of declared events. It was denied the right to televise, regardless of its wishes, just as effectively as if nothing had been said in its agreement with News about the televising of matches, as distinct from highlights.
 "Counsel for Foxtel Cable argued that the agreement gave Seven, `the right to televise' each match, notwithstanding that the right was only available for use after the expiration of 168 hours from completion of the match. However, like Lockhart J, we do not think that such a right can properly be described as a `right to televise the event'. It must be remembered that the anti- siphoning provisions are concerned with events of a national nature, events that the Minister has adjudged likely to attract widespread public interest.
They will not necessarily be sporting events; the provisions could be used to cover an historical event like a special commemoration or visit. But all the events listed in the notice of 6 July 1994 were sporting events and this may be the future pattern. Either way, events are selected because the Minister is of the opinion that many people will wish to feel part of them, by seeing them as they occur, not by later seeing a television record of them. In the present context, we do not think it can be said that a national broadcaster or television broadcasting licensee has the `right to televise the event' unless that broadcaster or licensee can televise it as it happens, or as soon thereafter as is technically feasible." 
In my respectful opinion their Honours' judgment is authority for these propositions: 
The "right to televise the event" referred to in Condition (e) is the right to broadcast these events live, that is contemporaneously with the event; 
The condition is satisfied if commercial television broadcasting licensees have the right to televise the event; they are not compelled by law to do so, and it is satisfied whether or not they do so.

The present facts are fundamentally different in that Optus Vision Media's broadcast signals and its rights are derived from the Commercial Television
Broadcasting Licensees; the scheme of the contracts cannot work and Optus
Vision Media cannot acquire the right to televise the event unless the
Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees confer that right on Optus Vision
Media or it is derived from them in some way. It is an illustration of the
Commercial Television Licensees' freedom to broadcast or not to broadcast the event that they should be involved in a commercial arrangement to bargain it away.

The time at which Optus Vision Media acquires the right to televise an event was much debated. Whenever that time is, the acquisition cannot be effective unless at the time of acquisition the Commercial Television Broadcasting
Licensees can confer that right and can behave conformably with the exclusivity conferred by the Plus Footnote by refraining from FTA broadcast.

Optus Vision Media holds a number of subscription television broadcasting licences including one, it is not clear which one, which applies to AFL
Sports. Some AFL matches are broadcast on SportsVision Sports Channel but not many, and these are not exclusive to FTA and they are not live; hence they raise no question of anti-siphoning. All Live transmissions of AFL matches on
Pay TV are transmitted on AFL Sports.

The five Commercial Television Broadcast Licensees which are parties to the AFL Agreement and the AFL Licence Extension Agreement cover, as is obvious and was not disputed, a total of more than 50% of the Australian population. They have no contractual relationship with Optus Vision Media and, so far as evidence shows, no relevant contractual relationship with Tallglen which could explain Tallglen's entering into contractual commitments to make available television signals which the Commercial Televisioin Broadcast
Licensees are in a position to make available because of their dealings with
AFL. The mechanism is not that the Licensees have any obligations in the matter; it is that Tallglen has incurred obligations and Seven has guaranteed that they will be performed. It is for Tallglen and Seven to find a way to see that they are performed, no doubt without difficulty having regard to control exercised by Seven over the Licensees, but not by exercise of any contract or proprietorial right affecting the rights which the Licensees have derived from the AFL.

SportsVision in its turn has conferred a licence of Pay Television rights on
Optus Vision under the Sports Programming Affiliation Agreement; under cl.3.1 of that Agreement SportsVision grants Optus Vision Pay TV rights for the
SportsCo services which, with the aid of definitions, mean the rights to provide to persons as part of a Subscription Broadcasting Service, and to sub- license to an affiliate those rights to provide sports programs produced by
SportsVision packaged as channels. In its turn Optus Vision has conferred rights on Optus Vision Media by the Optus Vision Joint Venture Vision Media
Distribution Agreement, which grants a licence of program rights, which with the aid of a chain of definitions is the right to supply the Program Content as Subscription Broadcasting Services to Vision Media Customers, and the program content is defined as "one or more programs and associated material parcelled together in package, which, once formatted by Vision as part of
Vision Pay TV Carriage Services, will comprise the sole content of the Vision
Media Customer Services, and which is supplied by Vision to Vision Media from time to time." The effect of this definition is that until it is actually supplied the subject matter which Optus Vision Media is licensed to supply to its customers is not identified and the right to supply it is not made specific to any particular subject matter. In the case of live transmission, the time of supply is the time of the event.

The rights of Commercial Television Broadcast Licensees to televise events, which they derive from the AFL, exist unqualified until the time when the signal is generated, either by them or by SportsVision in exercise of its own production rights, and transmitted to Optus Vision Media. Until then they have entered into no commitment which qualifies their right to televise the event live; indeed, in the workings of the arrangements as I see them, they never do qualify their right to televise the event live. The subject with which
Condition (e) deals is rights, not corporate influence. If one of the
Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees did broadcast an AFL event live it could not be said it was acting in breach of any contract; at the most its conduct would involve Tallglen and Seven Network in liability for breach of the Tallglen Agreement and the Guarantee.

Notwithstanding the contractual commitments given to Optus Vision Media by
Optus Vision and higher in the chain by SportsVision and thence by Tallglen and Seven, it cannot in my opinion be said that Optus Vision Media has acquired a right to televise an event until it actually receives the signal.
There are two different bases for this view. One is the form of Optus Vision
Media's agreement with Optus Vision in which the thing to which Optus Vision
Media is to have a right is not identified until it is received. The other is that Optus Vision, SportsVision, Tallglen and Seven Network do not have the rights which they have contracted to confer, and their purported conferral will only operate and come to life, for anything which in reality will be a right to televise an event subject to Condition (e), when and if the
Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees make the signal available.

My view about the time of acquisition does not accord exactly with the submissions or the primary submissions of either party, which relate to the time of acquisition to events at earlier stages in events under the contractual chain stretching between the AFL and Optus Vision Media. The contractual chain is not complete, as the Commercial Television Broadcasting
Licensees are not directly bound by any contract and the AFL is not indirectly bound to make program material available to Tallglen or to Tallglen's grantee, to SportsVision or to any person traced through SportsVision. Although the commercial reality is that the Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees could be compelled by Seven to make program material available, no right to broadcast the material is acquired by any person to whom they make it available until they actually make it available; and when they do, their making it available and the consent or licence necessarily involved in their doing so authorise Optus Vision Media to transmit it; that authorisation is, at the most, what can be recognised as a right of Optus Vision Media so to do.

A difficulty of considering the problem of acquisition of a right is the lack of correspondence in the definition of the rights obtained and transmitted at each stage; there is no common language or description, and in relation to live events it is difficult to regard the transmission of the television signal depicting the live event as subject to any copyright. What is being conferred is probably best described as the opportunity to transmit the television signal created by the permission granted by the AFL to get into the grounds with personnel and equipment and generate the signal; an opportunity not wholly different to the opportunity purchased by the ordinary member of the public who pays to get in the gate and watch what is going on on the field. It is the advantage of this opportunity which is derived by Optus
Vision Media through the chain of transactions, and used in transmitting programs. However the right is to be correctly defined or described, there can be no doubt that Optus Vision Media would not have it unless it derived it, mediately, from the Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees, and that those licensees could not conduct themselves so that Optus Vision Media had that opportunity unless they had acquired it for themselves.

Arguments directed to completing the chain at the point between the Commercial
Television Broadcasting Licensees and Tallglen were put forward in various forms. It was contended that Tallglen was their agent but in my view there is no evidence that Tallglen was their agent; on the contrary it is clear that
Tallglen was not their agent and it seems that any agency was studiously avoided. It was also contended, in an argument presented for the benefit of
Tallglen and Seven, that Tallglen and Seven are estopped from denying that the
Commercial Television Broadcasting Licensees had placed Tallglen in a position where it could confer the rights which it purported to confer by the Tallglen
Agreement; that the Tallglen Agreement is based on a convention adopted by the parties that, irrespective of whether it was true or not, they were dealing with each other on the basis that Tallglen had such a right. It may well be that such a convention underlies the Tallglen Agreement, but the fact that
Tallglen and Seven are estopped from denying some position does not make it true, and does not compel those who could rely on the estoppel to rely on it, or confer any right on Optus Vision Media, or operate to put Optus Vision
Media in breach of Condition (e) and subject it to penalties. It is simply the fact that the chain of authorisation is not completed in relation to any particular broadcast until the broadcast happens. Until then and unless it happens, any chain of enforcement proceedings started by Optus Vision Media could get no further than Tallglen and Seven's guarantee of Tallglen. The convention is not one into which the Commercial Television Broadcasting
Licensees entered.

Anti-siphoning legislation and narrowcasting.

It will be seen from the terms of Condition (e) that it relates to televising an event on a subscription television broadcasting service. In the language of the [Broadcasting Services
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/) a subscription broadcasting service is distinguished from a subscription narrowcasting service. [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/index.html#p2) - Categories of Broadcasting Services - establishes six categories: National
Broadcasting Services, Commercial Broadcasting Services, Community
Broadcasting Services, Subscription Broadcasting Services, Subscription
Narrowcasting Services and Open Narrowcasting Services: see [s.11.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s11.html)
Narrowcasting Services do not require individual licences but are to be provided under a class licence: see [s.12.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s12.html)
The assumption of the legislation is that each service can be allocated to one category and to one only. The characteristics of the categories are prescribed by [ss.13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s13.html) to [18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s18.html) and include: "Subscription broadcasting services
Subscription broadcasting services are broadcasting services that: provide programs that, when considered in the context of the service being provided, appear to be intended to appeal to the general public; and are made available to the general public but only on payment of subscription fees (whether periodical or otherwise); and comply with any determinations or clarifications under section in relation to subscription broadcasting services.

Subscription narrowcasting services
Subscription narrowcasting services are broadcasting services: 
Whose reception is limited: by being targeted to special interest groups; or by being intended only for limited locations, for example, arenas or business premises; or by being provided during a limited period or to cover a special event; or because they provide programs of limited appeal; or for some other reason; and that are made available only on payment of subscription fees (whether periodical or otherwise); and that comply with any determinations or clarifications under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s19.html) in relation to subscription narrowcasting services." 
Subparagraphs 17(a)(ii) and (iii) cannot apply, so it must be determined on the facts whether the Sports AFL service falls within the terms of par.16(a), or of one or more of subpars.17(a)(i)(iv) or (v). The relevant time is the time at which each event is broadcast, because for reasons I gave earlier that is the time of acquisition at which any breach of Condition 10(e) will occur, if one occurs.

In support of the broadcasting category defendants' counsel referred to these elements.

AFL is an extremely popular sport in Australia. The evidence very clearly shows that this is so.

The intended audience is a wide one, illustrated by the view of Sports AFL as a key subscription driver and a competitive advantage. This is clearly correct. In illustration the defendants' counsel pointed to evidence which shows that SportsVision expected the general public to embrace the availability of the Sports AFL channel with great enthusiasm, and planned to widen the appeal of Sports AFL, which was expected to be and mainly has been in Melbourne, to other places particularly in New South Wales and Queensland.

It was contended that these considerations show that Sports AFL was not a channel of limited appeal, was targeted at millions of supporters and the general public, and not to a special interest group falling within subpar.17(a)(i). It was contended that programs provided by AFL Sports are not programs of limited appeal within subpars.17(a)(iv). Counsel referred to material in evidence which shows recognition by SportsVision of the wide appeal of AFL Sports programs and the influence of this recognition on approaches taken to programming and marketing.

The plaintiff's counsel submitted that Sports AFL should be found to be subscription narrowcasting service within par.17(a)(i) or (iv); or (v). The first fact put forward to support this contention is, as the evidence shows, that Optus Vision programs are available to about 2 million homes in that the cables pass about that number, but there are only 42,000 Sports AFL subscribers. While there is an element of speculation I would think that availability to 42,000 homes implies about 100,000 or so and not possibly more than 200,000 regular viewers. The plaintiff's counsel drew a contrast with the large number of homes which can receive FTA broadcasts. The plaintiff's counsel also pointed to characteristics of the program content, in which
Sports AFL deals with AFL Football, either by transmitting the games or by transmitting other material dealing with AFL Football, 24 hours a day during the winter season and many hours a day at other times. Transmissions include live matches, delayed matches, repeat matches, highlights, classic matches, commentary, player interviews and factual information about performance of teams and positions in the Premiership competition. There is a high level of repeat material. They also pointed to the arrangement of subscriptions in tiers so that it is necessary to subscribe to a third tier to receive Sports
AFL. The representative charge (subject to discounting and special arrangements) is $37.95 per month for the first two tiers, and an additional $6 for the Sports AFL channel. It seems to me that readiness to pay subscriptions in the order of $520 per year is a very important aspect of the context of the service being provided when considering whether its programs appear to be intended to appeal to the general public. There is a considerable winnowing of the general public before the group ready to pay such a subscription is separated out.

The plaintiff's counsel contended that the service on its face is intended to be targeted to serve a specific niche market of people with a very strong or even fanatical interest in AFL Football, and that that is a special interest group, defined by their strong interest as their common factor, with a strength of that interest which is quite unusual among the general public.

In my view it is not to the point to show, as evidence to which defendants' counsel pointed does show, that a great proportion and perhaps a majority of the Australian population are sufficiently interested in AFL Football to watch
AFL Football matches on FTA television. That fact does not make it appear that
AFL Sports programs were intended to appeal to the general public and that they fall within par.16(a); the context of the service being provided makes it quite evident that AFL Sports programs are not so intended. No matter how determined and confident an address to the market Optus Vision made, Optus
Vision could not gain subscriptions from the general public for SportsVision, and several hundred thousand subscribers would be a spectacular success and is the most that could rationally be hoped for.

In my finding Sports AFL is a service whose reception is limited in the ways indicated by subpars.17(a)(i) and (iv). It is a narrowcasting service, and is not a subscription broadcasting service falling within par.16(a). For this additional reason there could have been no breach of Condition 10(e).

What relief is appropriate.

In the Amended Statement of Claim, Claim 1 claimed a declaration setting out at length the effect of the plaintiff's contentions on the first construction question as applied to everything in par.1 of Sch.1, and asked the Court to declare that Tallglen agreed to procure or ensure the plaintiff would acquire a licence for those things, and was entitled to sub-license those rights. The claim goes beyond what has been established by my decision. I am not prepared to make any declaration dealing with the right of SportsVision to sub-license broadcast material because there has not been any controversy or debate about that right. I am not prepared to make a declaration in the terms claimed relating to Tallglen's having agreed to procure or ensure that the plaintiff would acquire a licence because what Tallglen has done is grant a licence without giving any express contractual undertaking about obtaining a licence for SportsVision from any other person, so that if the grant were ineffective because Tallglen could not obtain some right from another person Tallglen would have incurred liability for damages, but not an obligation to compel any other person to do anything. On my views on the first construction question I propose to make a declaration establishing SportsVision's rights with respect to material referred to in pars. 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 of Sch.1 being exclusive to
Pay TV in the markets nominated. The declaration will be published in draft and parties will have an opportunity to debate its terms.

Claim 2 claimed a declaration establishing SportsVision's position on the second construction question relating to nomination. I will make a declaration in accordance with the views I have expressed.

Claim 3 claimed a mandatory injunction requiring Tallglen to make nominations, and do so at least six weeks before commencement of each calendar month. In my judgment a mandatory order specifically requiring the performance of this part of Tallglen's obligations should not be made as it would not be feasible for the court to undertake to compel and to supervise the specific performance of all the provisions of the agreement, having regard to their complexity and the length of time they will be in effect.

Claim 4 relates to rectification and will be dismissed.

Claim 5 claimed an injunction restraining Tallglen from making live FTA broadcasts in breach of SportsVision's rights to exclusivity. There is no threat and no prospect of Tallglen doing that and I am not prepared to make that injunction. Restraining live FTA broadcast of Pay TV exclusives would be enforcement of a stipulation negative in substance and suitable for an injunction if it were Tallglen or Seven which were broadcasting FTA: but they are not.

Claim 6 claimed a mandatory injunction that Tallglen and Seven do everything necessary to be done on their part to ensure that none of Seven's affiliated television stations broadcast live matches in breach of SportsVision's rights.
I do not think that a mandatory injunction is appropriate for the reasons I gave for claim 3.

Claim 5 (bis) claimed an injunction to restrain Seven from broadcasting in breach of SportsVision's rights of exclusivity without SportsVision's permission. In my opinion such an injunction is not appropriate as Seven does not conduct broadcasts.

Claim 6 (bis) appeared to repeat the subject of Claim 5 (bis) but made it specific to influence exercised by Seven over conduct of Tallglen. In my opinion such an injunction would not be appropriate because it would not be effective.

Claim 7 claimed a declaration relating to SportsVision's right of access to grounds for the purpose of producing its own programs. In my opinion no controversy relating to this subject has reached a point where it is sufficiently mature or ripe for resolution to make it appropriate to make a declaratory order. I am not prepared to make an order now, but I will reserve further consideration.

Claim 8 is a claim for damages and Claim 9 is a claim for an indemnity. I will reserve further consideration of these.

Draft Orders: 
The following are the Draft Orders:
Declare that the first defendant will be in breach of a term of the
Tallglen Agreement if there is any live free-to-air broadcast in the nominated market of any AFL match which is within par. 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3 of Sch.1 of the
Tallglen Agreement.
Declare that Tallglen is obliged by an implied term of the Tallglen
Agreement to nominate SportsVision's exclusive matches within Sch.1 of the
Tallglen Agreement and further obliged to advise SportsVision of each nomination on or before each Monday preceding the Friday, Saturday and Sunday in which a Round of the AFL Premiership Competition or any other of
SportsVision's exclusive matches is to be played.
Dismiss claims 3, 4, 5, 6, 5 bis and 6 bis in the Amended Statement of
Claim.
Reserve further consideration of claims 7, 8 and 9 in the Amended
Statement of Claim.

The parties should consider these reasons and attend by appointment to settle the Draft Orders and to make any applications relating to costs.
 * * * 
