

Katherine Wentworth versus Gordon Rogers No. 19228/82 [1995] NSWSC 108 (30
October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
SULLY J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 8 September 1995 #DATE 8:9:1995 #ADD 30:10:1995
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
SULLY J In a Judgment delivered ex tempore on Wednesday 30 August last I sketched, sufficiently for present purposes, the background to and the history of the contest between miss Katherine Wentworth and Mr. Gordon Rogers, one particular aspect of which is before me for decision. I need not repeat what I said on that earlier occasion, and it may be taken as incorporated by reference into the present judgment. In what follows I shall refer to miss
Wentworth either by name or as "the plaintiff"; and to Mr. Rogers either by name or as "the defendant".
By a notice of motion dated 24 August 1995, but filed in Court by leave on August 1995, the defendant seeks the following relief: "1. A declaration that the defendant is entitled to claim privilege with respect to: a the letter dated 14 February 1994 from Messrs. Khan and
McLean to the Legal Aid Commission of New South
Wales; and b. the letter dated 18 October 1993 from Duncan McLean to the Director, Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales.
A declaration that the plaintiff is not entitled to access to each of the letters referred to in paragraph 1 above.
A declaration that the defendant is not bound to produce the folder of documents received by Ms Gail Preston from the Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales entitled: "ROGERS
COPIES OF ACCOUNTS + SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS" (Hereafter referred to as "the "folder".)
Alternatively to paragraph 3 a declaration that the defendant is entitled to claim Privilege with respect to all the documents contained in the folder.
A declaration that the plaintiff is not entitled to have access to the folder and its contents.
Further or other orders as the Court deems appropriate.
That the plaitiff pay the defendant's costs of the Notice of Motion."
This notice of motion was supported by an affidavit sworn on 24 August , filed in Court by leave on 30 August 1995, the deponent being Mr.
Richard Licardy, the defendant's solicitor. The form of that affidavit has some significance for present purposes, and it is convenient to reproduce it in full. It reads, formal parts omitted, as follows: "1. I am the solicitor on the record for the defendant.
I am informed and verily believe that certain documents have been produced to the Court by the defendant or his representatives Pursuant to a Notice to Produce served by the plaintiff and pursuant to a direction of His Honour
Mr. Justice Sperling on 3 August 1995.
The defendant claims Privilege with respect to all the documents encompassed in the declarations sought in the defendant's Notice of Motion dated today.
I am informed and verily believe that Messrs. Khan and
McLean were the solicitors acting for the defendant in proceedings before His Honour Mr. Justice Sully in 1994.
I am informed and verily believe that.
a. Ms Gail Preston, counsel for the defendant, received from the Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales a file entitled: "ROGERS
COPIES OF ACCOUNTS + SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS" b. that file contains documents which have no relevance to the proceedings being heard by His Honour
Mr. Justice Sperling; c. annexed hereto and marked with the letter "A" is a true copy of the transcript of the judgment by
His Honour which defines the ambit of the proceedings presently before the
Court."
In order to understand what is said in paragraph 5c of Mr. Licardy's affidavit, it is necessary to understand that there are current before
Sperling J three related applications which his Honour has described, in a judgment delivered by him on 4 April 1995, as follows: "(a) Applications by
Mr Rogers and Mrs. Rogers to set aside ex parte orders made by his Honour Acting Justice Loveday, including an order that
Mr. Rogers' costs-claim for damages for malicious prosecution be struck out (the set-aside application).
Ms Wentworth's substantive application that the cross-claim be struck out if the above orders are set aside (the strike-out application).
A claim by Ms Wentworth made by summons that a transaction whereby Mr Rogers encumbered certain property in favour of
Mrs Rogers be set aside, and for injunctions to restrain Mr
Rogers and Mrs Rogers from any further alienation of the property (the property claim)."
The procedural directions which Sperling J gave in that particular judgment, and as relevant to the present notice of motion of the defendant, are as follows: "The set-aside application and the strike-out application will be determined first. At this stage, the evidence will be confined to evidence relevant to those matters. I will then give judgment in relation to those matters, for which purpose it is likely to be necessary for me to reserve my decision.
Following that, the balance of the proceedings presently before me will continue on a date to be fixed as may be necessary."
The immediate trigger for the defendant's present notice of motion is a call which the plaintiff has made upon a notice to produce issued by her and dated 25 January 1995. That notice to produce comprises 17 paragraphs, each one of which makes an extensive call for documentation of various kinds related, in large part although not entirely, to applications made by the defendant at various times and from time to time for financial assistance from the Legal Aid Commission. Immediately in point is paragraph 17 of that notice to produce. It reads as follows: "17. Copies of all correspondence, memos, records of telephone conversations in relation to applications for and grants of
Legal Aid to G. Rogers from 1983 to the date of this Notice to Produce." .
There has been, as I would understand, extensive argument already before both Hulme J and Sperling J concerning that Notice to Produce, the plaintiff's attempts to call upon it; and the responses made by the defendant to such attempts of the plaintiff. In an affidavit sworn by the plaintiff on, and filed in Court by leave on, 30 August last the plaintiff deposes to the following matters which are, as I understand the present stances of the parties, essentially uncontested: "8. It became clear during proceedings before his
Honour Mr.
Justice Sperling that there were further documents in existence which had not been produced by the Defendant in respect of the
Notice to Produce of the 25th January 1995 and in respect of the previous Notices to Produce seeking documents relating to legal aid.
His Honour Mr. Justice Sperling granted leave to the
Plaintiff to examine Mr. Rogers as to the matter of production in answer to the Notice to Produce and at the end of that examination said that he was satisfied that Mr. Rogers had attempted to find all of the relevant documents.
In that examination Mr. Rogers gave evidence that he had not attempted to find any documents which specifically answered the paragraphs of the Notices to Produce but had generally produced all of the documents which he thought related to the provision of legal aid to him.
On the day after Mr.
Rogers was examined Miss Preston,
Counsel for the Defendant advised the Plaintiff that she had a further bundle of material which answered the description of the documents sought under the Notice to Produce in her chambers and that she was seeking to make representations to his Honour Mr. Justice Sperling in relation to the production and access in respect of those documents.
Mr. Justice Sperling had as well required Mr. Duncan
MacLean, the previous solicitor for the First Defendant, to provide the Court with an Affidavit as to his files as to whether or not they contained further documents in relation to the documents sought under the Notice to Produce relating to legal aid.
Mr. MacLean has sworn an Affidavit in these proceedings provided to his Honour Mr Justice Sperling setting out a schedule of various documents which he had still in his possession and which have now been forwarded to Miss Preston,
Counsel for the First Defendant.
On the 1st August in producing various documents which answered the description of documents sought under the
Notice to Produce, Miss
Lydiard produced to the Court a bundle of documents including a letter dated 14th February 1995 from Mr. Rogers' previous solicitors, Kahn and MacLean to the Legal Aid Commission and sought privilege only for the last two pages of that letter."
Later in her affidavit, the plaintiff deposes as follows: "19. In his affidavit so noted, Mr. Licardy does not comply with the orders and directions of his Honour Mr. Justice
Sperling that he set out and identify each of the documents in the folder as to the type of document, date and from whom it was sent and to whom it was sent and the Plaintiff says that she is disadvantaged by that failure in the preparation of the conduct of these proceedings in that she is unable to identify the documents with any specificity."
Learned counsel appearing for the defendant on the hearing of the notice of motion filed in Court by leave a document purporting to index the documents contained in the folder to which reference is made in paragraph 3 of the notice of motion. I infer that this was done in order to meet the point made by the plaintiff in paragraph 19 of her affidavit.
For ease of reference, I reproduce as Appendix 1 to this judgment that index.
 
The Competing Submissions of the Plaintiff and of the Defendant
At the hearing of the notice of motion the defendant did not press paragraph 3. The defendant produced, by counsel, the folder of material to which paragraph 3 of the notice of motion refers, and I marked it 1 for identification. The defendant produced by counsel, as well, the letter to which reference is made in paragraph 1b of the notice of motion, and a photocopy of the letter to which reference is made in paragraph la of that notice of motion. I marked the former of those letters 3 for identification, and the latter was marked 4 for identification. The defendant, by counsel, produced to the Court Mr. MacLean's relevant documentation; and I marked the same 2 for identification. The defendant did not object to the plaintiffs being given access to this material, save and except for the letter to which reference is made in paragraph lb of the notice of motion. Copies of Mr.
MacLean's documents, with the exception of that letter, were made available accordingly to the plaintiff in Court.
In respect of the relief claimed in each of paragraphs 1, 4 and 5 in the notice of motion, it was submitted for the defendant that all of the material to which reference is made in those paragraphs was privileged from disclosure to and inspection by the plaintiff. In the event, it was not contended that the material did not have to be produced to the Court itself, and it was produced accordingly for any necessary or desired inspection by the Court.
The defendant framed his claim of privilege on three bases as follows: 
Common law legal professional privilege; 
Statutory legal professional privilege deriving from [sections 25(l)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s25.html), [25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s25.html)(2), [24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s24.html) and [26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s26.html) of the [Legal Aid Commission
Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/) , as amended ("The Act"); and 
Public interest immunity privilege from the perspective of the defendant himself as distinct from the perspective of the Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales, ("the Commission"), the statutory authority established pursuant to the Act and invested by the Act with statutory functions, powers and duties concerning the establishment and administration of a statutory scheme of publicly funded legal assistance for indigent litigants.
The plaintiff, for her part, contended that she had a number of legitimate forensic purposes which ought to be regarded as sufficient to defeat the claims for public interest immunity privilege. The plaintiff defined those legitimate forensic purposes as follows: "1.
To lay the foundations for a challenge to the propriety of the grant of legal aid to the defendant.
To lay the foundations for an argument that it would be an abuse of process to permit the defendant's cross-claim to proceed because the basis of that claim is fraudulent and can be seen to be fraudulent when the factual allegations advanced now by the defendant are contrasted with the factual allegations made by the defendant to the Legal Aid Commission.
To lay the foundations for an argument that things said to the Legal Aid Commission and/or the plaintiff or her solicitors are capable either of indicating an intention not to pursue the cross-claim or of indicating otherwise that the intended pursuit of the cross-claim is not in good faith.
To lay the foundation for demonstrating that the defendant has falsely sworn on two occasions that he has produced all documents relating to his applications for legal aid.
To lay the foundations for demonstrating that the defendant has made false statements to the Legal Aid Commission and to various other funding (the transcript reads "funded") bodies, for example the Bar Council and the Law Society, in connection with various applications for legal aid or for pro bono assistance."
As to the defendant's claim of statutory legal professional privilege, the plaintiff contended, as I follow her submissions, that the Act does not have in the circumstances of the present case, the operation for which the defendant contends. The plaintiff relies in particular upon what she contends to be the proper combined construction and effect of sub-sections , (2) and of [section 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s25.html) of the Act.
As to the defendant's claim of common law legal professional privilege, the plaintiff contends, as I have followed her submissions, that the circumstances of this case do not give rise to any such privilege; and that, if they do, then any such common law privilege has been defeated by, put simply, the fraud of the defendant.
In adjudicating these competing submissions,
I propose, first, to define what are, as I see them, the relevant principles of law by which I am to be guided; and then to apply those principles to the materials which I have marked 1, 2,3 and 4 for identification.
Before I turn to those tasks, I should take note of a folder of material put in by the plaintiff and marked 5 for identification. This is a formidable collection of material.
It embraces manuscript submissions of law and fact; a substantial collection of excerpts from various transcripts of various hearings involving the plaintiff and the defendant; and a mass of other and miscellaneous materials. I have not read it in fine and precise detail: first, because it has been impossible to do so within the time constraints that call for the delivery of the present judgment not later than Friday of this week, 8
September instant; and, secondly, because a general scanning of the material, which I have made, suggests to me that much of the material is not going to be of any real and practical assistance to the resolution of the very particular questions which I have now to decide.
 
The Defendant's Claim of Statutory Legal Professional Privilege
There are, so far as I have been able to ascertain, two reported cases capable of shedding light upon this topic. They are both decisions of the
Court of Appeal Division of this Court: Tectran Corporation Pty Ltd versus Legal
Aid Commission of New South Wales and Rajski [(1980) 7 NSWLR 340], ("Tectran "); and Wentworth versus Rogers and The Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales (No.12) [(1987) 9 NSWLR 400, (Wentworth] (No.12)).
The general scheme of the Act as to the provision of legal aid is canvassed succinctly in Wentworth (No. 12) at
E-408D. I respectfully adopt what is there said. I think, however, that for my present particular purpose it is expedient to reproduce the entirety of [section 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s25.html) of the Act. It is in the following terms: "25. (1) The relationship arising by virtue of this Act between a solicitor, whether the solicitor is the Director or a member of staff of the Commission or a private legal practitioner to whom work is assigned under this Act, and an applicant for legal aid or a person to whom legal aid is granted shall be the relationship as between a solicitor acting in his professional capacity and in the course of his professional employment and his own client.
 
The like privileges as those which arise from the relationship of a solicitor acting in his professional capacity mid in the course of his professional employment and his own client shall arise between the Commission or a committee established under this Act and an applicant for legal aid or a person to whom legal aid is granted.

Without affecting the generality of subsection (1) or (2), the Commission, a committee established under this Act, the
Director or a member of staff of the
Commission is not required to divulge to any person or court any information or document (including an application for legal aid) relating to the administration of legal aid.

Nothing 1n subsection (1), (2) or (3) applies in respect of: the conduct of any matter necessary for the proper administration of this Act (including an agreement or arrangement between the State and the Commonwealth under [section 72A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s72a.html); proceedings for an offence connected with the administration of legal aid; any disciplinary proceedings under the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/); any proceedings by which the Commission is seeking to recover money from a person in respect of whom legal aid has been granted, an investigation or inquiry under the [Ombudsman Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/); the exercise by the Auditor-General of his functions under this Act or any other law; or the carrying out by a person of any research approved by the Commission, being research carried out in a manner that ensures that the identity of an applicant for legal aid or a person to whom legal aid is granted is not disclosed to other persons."
It is important to understand that the decisions in Tectran and in
Wentworth (No. 12), although capable, as I think, of affording some assistance in the present particular case, both dealt with factual and procedural situations which are significantly different from those with which the present notice of motion is concerned. Very importantly, the Commission was actually a party in each of those two cases, whereas it is not a party at all to the present proceedings on the defendant's notice of motion. Not only is the
Commission not a party to the present proceedings, but I was informed that the
Commission had considered, and had decided positively against, intervening in some proper capacity in the present proceedings.
In Tectran, a party to the principal proceedings sought to challenge the entitlement of the other principal party to a grant of legal aid which that other party had successfully obtained from the Commission.
In aid of that challenge, the moving party issued a subpoena addressed to the Commission and requiring, broadly speaking, production of the Commission's documents relating to the challenged grant of legal aid. The primary Judge set aside the subpoena upon the basis that [section 25(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) of the Act entailed that, if the Commission objected to answer the subpoena, as it did in the particular case, then the objection must, by reason of the statutory provision, be sustained. The Court of Appeal Division affirmed that primary ruling.
Against such a factual and procedural background, it was not necessary for the Court of Appeal Division to consider, as I am now required to do in the present particular case, whether the party to whom legal aid has been granted, not being within the terms of [section 25(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) of the Act, is immune, by virtue of the operation of subsections (1) and (2) of [section 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html), from a call made by the moving party, and whether by subpoena or by notice to produce for; from production to the Court of, and from subsequent access of the opponent, to the party's own records concerning any application for a grant of legal aid pursuant to the Act.
The only thing that seems to me to have been said in Tectran relevantly to that different question is the following statement by Kirby P at [7 NSWLR
E:] "Unless paragraph (e) of [s.25(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) can be given the meaning urged by Tectran, the Court must approach its supervisory function not with an inhibition upon the receipt of information or documents by the Court but with an inhibition limited to the extent to which an officer of the
Commission can be required by the Court to divulge such information or documents.
THUS, IF THE DOCUMENT OR INFORMATION WERE
SECURED FROM SOURCES
OTHER THAN THE OFFICER OF THE COMMISSION, THERE IS ABSOLUTELY
NO RESTRICTION UPON THE COURT'S POWER
TO ADMIT AND CONSIDER
THEM. (emphasis added)
It seems to me, with respect, that these observations of the learned
President are obiter; but, even if that were not so, what is said does not resolve the question whether the relevant document or information can be secured, not from the Commission or one of its officers, but from the actual applicant for or grantee of legal aid.
 .
Wentworth (No.12) is different again. In that case, too, the Commission was a party, and it exercised its statutory entitlement pursuant to [section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) of the Act. The focus of the attack made in that case was an attack upon the decision of the Commission to grant legal aid, the essential foundation of the attack being a contention that the applicant for, and the eventual grantee of legal aid, had means which clearly exceeded the relevant means test which the Commission had established in accordance with its relevant statutory powers. The learned primary Judge held that the evidence before him did indeed establish that the means of the applicant/grantee exceeded what was prescribed in the relevant means test employed by the Commission; but his Honour held that the Commission had a discretion to approve a grant of legal aid notwithstanding a failure by the particular applicant to bring his case within the relevant means test; and his Honour held further that on the whole of the evidence which had been adduced before him, it had not been shown that the
Commission had erred in the way in which it had exercised its discretion in the particular case. The Court of Appeal Division affirmed both the reasoning and the conclusions of the primary Judge.
As is obvious from the title of the proceedings, the plaintiff and the defendant in Wentworth (No.12) were, respectively, the present plaintiff and defendant. At the primary hearing in Wentworth (No.12), the present plaintiff sought to call upon both a subpoena and a notice to produce, both of which were addressed to the present defendant. The subpoena is not of present relevance; but the notice to produce upon which the plaintiff then called is similar to, although not identical with, the notice to produce which is in issue in the present proceedings. The terms of the earlier notice to produce are set out at [9 NSWLR 413G-414B.] As appears from what follows immediately on page 414 of the report, the decision on the call made by the plaintiff on her then notice to produce was decided, both at first instance and on appeal, upon the basis that she had not made a call on particular parts of the notice to produce, and that such omission on her part created a lacuna which was fatal both to her contentions as to the call itself, and to her submissions based upon the outcome of her call.
Notwithstanding the foregoing matters, the joint judgment of the Court of
Appeal Division in Wentworth (No.12) does contain the following statements of principle which seem to me to have potential relevance for the present particular case: "The onus remains upon the person seeking to set aside a grant of legal aid to show that the grant was not made on valid grounds. In some cases, on the face of the decision in the circumstances proved, it may be manifest that a miscarriage of the administrative body's discretion has occurred.
Alternatively the exercise of discretion might be so apparently unacceptable that, without some evidence or explanation, the court will be driven to the conclusion that the statutory discretion conferred on the body must have miscarried and have been affected by irrelevant considerations. Unless this is shown to the satisfaction of the court, the discretionary grant of legal aid cannot be disturbed.
 
The privilege and protection of the Commission 
Although it is somewhat outside the matters with which we have just been dealing, in the light of submissions at the hearing something should be said about the privilege and protection given by [s 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) and [s 26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s26.html) [Section 25(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) and [s 25(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) deal with legal professional privilege. Legal professional privilege is normally restricted to communications made or received for the purposes of legal advice: Baker versus Campbell [(1983) 153 CLR .] The provisions of [s 25(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) and [s 25(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) would include this type of privilege. However, the question arises whether they extend further at any rate as between the
Commission or a committee and the applicant or a person to whom legal aid is granted. Although a solicitor employed by the
Commission may give legal advice, it is not the role of the Commission or of a committee to give legal advice. Their concern is to grant or refuse legal aid. It is possible that they may give legal advice, and of course they receive information and may receive documents which are relevant to the proceedings in respect of which legal aid is sought or granted. In the light of its context, the privilege given by both these subsections would appear to be extended beyond communications relating to the giving of legal advice. It extends, for example, to information and documents provided by at, applicant for or a grantee of legal aid relating to the issues to be determined or other questions which might arise in the proceedings the subject of the application or grant. There is no occasion to extend the protection to matters not so connected with the proceedings.
In particular, it does not extend to financial information or documents which relate, not to the proceedings, but to the ability of the applicant or grantee to pay legal costs. In a particular case information or documents may relate to both matters. Nice questions might arise if privilege is then claimed."
In addition, the joint judgment makes the following pertinent observations: "The Commission is not the Court to decide the substantive merits of the litigation. It must not set itself up as the
Court in determining the merits of an applicant for legal assistance. Primarily, the Commission must look at the claim made by the applicant for legal aid and determine whether, accepting the version of the facts advanced, the applicant appears to have a case which justifies the grant of legal assistance. ... The Commission, in determining applications for legal aid is not required to conduct, as it were, a preliminary trial of the matter. It may be that in some or indeed many cases it is appropriate for it to make inquiries beyond the version of the facts given by or for the applicant.
However, when it should do this and what it should do is a matter for the Commission so long as it is not shown to have had regard to irrelevant considerations or to have ignored relevant considerations. (The primary Judge) was therefore correct in refusing to investigate the merits of (the defendant's) case, and thus in rejecting evidence which was led only to suggest that the
Commission came to a wrong conclusion about the merits." 9 NSWLR at 416D-F.
From the whole of the foregoing matters, I deduce the following principles relevant to the present proceedings: 
An applicant for legal aid is required, to speak colloquially, to put his cards face-up on the table. That expectation is strengthened by [s.32](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s32.html) of the Act which makes it an offence punishable by a fine or imprisonment to make an application "... knowing that it is false in any material particular ". 
The Commission, in considering what is thus put before it by the applicant for legal aid, must exercise a principled discretion to grant or to refuse the application for legal aid. In the proper exercise of that discretion, the Commission is entitled, (I would myself say, bound), to consider whether the merits of the particular applicant's case, as distinct from the particular applicant's financial means, suggest a case which is prima facie sufficiently worthwhile to justify a grant of legal aid in accordance with the particular duties in that behalf which are prescribed by [section 12](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s12.html) of the Act. 
The factual material thus provided by an applicant for legal aid is in principle within the scope of the statutory protections for which provision is made in sub-sections (1) and (2) of [section 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) of the Act. 
The scope of those statutory protections is the scope of that legal professional privilege which, the Act apart, is recognised by the law as a fundamental incident of a normal, professional relationship of solicitor and client.
The scope of that analogous legal professional privilege will be considered in the following section of this judgment. The Defendant's Claim of
Common Law Legal Professional Privilege
The basis of the current law in Australia on this topic is the decision of the
High Court of Australia in Grant versus Downs <case>; [1976 135 CLR 674.]
The principal judgment, a joint judgment of Stephen, Mason and Murphy JJ defines as follows the underlying basis of common law legal professional privilege: "The rationale of this head of privilege, according to traditonal doctrine, is that it promotes the public interest because it assists and enhances the administration of justice by facilitating the representation of clients by legal advisers, the law being a complex and complicated discipline. This it does by keeping secret their communications, thereby inducing the client to retain the solicitor and seek his advice, and encouraging the client to make a full and frank disclosure of the relevant circumstances to the solicitor. The existence of the privilege reflects, to the extent to which it is accorded, the paramountcy ofthis public interest over a more general public interest, that which requires that in the interests of a fair trial litigation should be conducted on the fooling that all relevant documentary evidence is available.
As a head of privilege legal professional privilege is so firmly entrenched in the law that it is not to be exorcised by judicial decision. None the less there are powerful considerations which suggest that the privilege should be confined within strict limits." 135 CLR,685
After a deal of discussion about the terms in which such limits might be defined, Stephen,
Mason and Murphy JJ enunciate the following principles: "All that we have said so far indicates that unless the law confines legal professional privilege to those documents which are brought into existence for the sole purpose of submission to legal advisers for advice or for use in legal proceedings the privilege will travel beyond the underlying rationale to which it is intended to give expression and will confer an advantage and immunity on a corporation which is not enjoyed by the ordinary individual. It is not right that the privilege can attach to documents which, quite apart from the purpose of submission to a solicitor, would have been brought into existence for other purposes in any event, and then without attracting any attendant privilege. It is true that the requirement that documents be brought into existence in anticipation of litigation diminishes to some extent the risk that documents brought into existence for non-privileged purposes will attract the privilege but it certainly does not eliminate that risk For this and the reasons which have been expressed earlier we consider that the sole purpose test should now be adopted as the criterion of legal professional privilege."135 CLR, 688
In the present case, of course, none of the documents to which the plaintiff seeks access was written by Mr. Rogers himself. The two letters to which reference is made in paragraph 1 of the defendant's notice of motion were written by solicitors then acting for Mr. Rogers, and were so written to the Commission. The material contained in the folder to which reference is made in paragraph 3 of the notice of motion comprises, with the exception of the items numbered 10, 18 and 42 in the index to that material, communications from the
Commission to various legal advisers of the defendant.
In those circumstances, it becomes necessary to consider the effect of the decision in Grant versus Downs upon third party communications. In that regard, the submissions of the defendant point to the decision of Lockhart J in Trade
Practices Commission versus Sterling <case>; [(1979) 36 FLR 244.] It is submitted, correctly in my opinion, that Lockhart J's decision is authority for the proposition that the statements of principle in Grant versus Downs should not be taken to have abolished those aspects of legal professional privilege which did not arise for consideration on the particular facts of that case. It is submitted, correctly in my opinion, that the approach in that regard of Lockhart J has been subsequently followed in other Courts, and in particular by Wood J in this Court: see Nickmar Pty Limited versus Preservatrice Skandia
Insurance Ltd [(1985) 3 NSWLR 44] at 54. I respectfully adopt the reasoning of Lockhart J.
Lockhart J identifies seven categories of privileged communication traditionally recognised by the common law. Of these seven categories, two in particular are relied upon by the defendant. They are articulated by Lockhart
J as follows: "(c) Communications between the various legal advisers of the client, for example between the solicitor and his partner or his city agent with a view to the client obtaining legal advice or assistance.
 ...
Communications passing between the party and a third person (who is not the agent of the solicitor to receive the communication from the party) if they are made with reference to litigation either anticipated or commenced, and at the request or suggestion of the party's solicitor; or, even without any such request or suggestion, if they are made for the purpose of being put before the solicitor with the object of obtaining his advice or enabling him to prosecute or defend an action. ..."
It will be necessary to return later herein to the application of the foregoing principles to the particular documents in question in the present proceedings.
 
The Defendant's Claim of Public Interest Immunity Privilege
The basic principles applicable in Australia are those established by the decision of the High Court of Australia in Sankey versus Whitlam (1978)142 CLR 1.
I take those principles to be, essentially, as follows: "The general rule is that the Court will not order the production of a document, although relevant and otherwise admissible, if it would be injurious to the public interest to disclose it": per Gibbs
ACJ at [142 CLR, 38] 
A Court which is called upon to apply that general rule in a particular case: "... is required to consider two conflicting aspects of the public interest, namely whether harm would be done by the production of the documents, and whether the administration of justice would be frustrated or impaired if the documents were withheld, and to decide which of those aspects predominates. The final step in this process - the balancing exercise - can only be taken when it appears that both aspects of the public interest do require consideration - i.e., when it appears, on the one hand, that damage would be done to the public interest by producing the documents sought or documents of that class, and, on the other hand, that there are or are likely to be documents which contain material evidence. The Court can then consider the nature of the injury which the nation or the public service would be likely to suffer, and the evidentiary value and importance of the documents in the particular litigation.": Alister versus The Queen (1984) 154
CLR 404 per Gibbs
CJ at 412. 
It is possible to envisage documents of such a kind that it is instantly apparent that to disclose the contents of the documents would entail necessarily so grave a risk of injury to the national, or to some lesser public interest, that no countervailing consideration could be sufficient to prevail. 
Such cases apart, the basic rule, obtains even in the case of State papers of the highest standing. They will not be regarded as necessarily privileged from production by reason of prevailing public interest. Even such documents will be withheld from disclosure ....... only if, and to the extent, that the public interest renders it necessary" per Gibbs ACJ at [142 CLR, 41.] 
A claim of public interest immunity privilege must be made in proper form; that is to say, in a form sufficiently identifying and establishing the relevant public interest which is said to generate the entitlement to privilege. This will normally be done by an appropriate Minister of the Crown or other public official with the requisite standing and authority. It is not, however, essential in every case that such a person vouch for the public interest necessary to support the particular claim for privilege. A party to the particular litigation in the context of which production of the documents in question is sought, may resist an application for such production upon the grounds of public interest immunity privilege. In such a case, however, it is still necessary that some proper cause be shown for the upholding in the particular case of the privilege claimed. 
In the types of cases to which reference is made in (5), it will generally be insufficient to rely upon general and rhetorical propositions.
For example, in Alister versus The
Queen a proposition that it would be contrary to the public interest to require the production of certain records of the
Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation upon the ground that it was in the public interest to maintain an intelligence organisation, drew from Gibbs
CJ the rejoinder that such a proposition "does not mean that it would necessarily be contrary to the public interest to disclose whether that organisation had any records of a particular kind". 
In the nature of things, it must be more difficult for a party to establish successfully an entitlement to public interest immunity privilege in a case where there is a public authority with an obvious interest to make such a claim if it be thought proper to do so in the public interest; and that public authority, its attention having been drawn to the particular case, has elected not to intervene or otherwise to support a claim for public interest immunity privilege.
I shall return in succeeding sections of this judgment to the application of the foregoing principles to the facts of the present case.
 
The Letter dated 18 October 1993: Notice of Motion Para lb
In my opinion this letter is not protected by common law legal professional privilege. The letter is a communication, not between Mr. Rogers as an applicant for legal aid or as a grantee of legal aid, and the
Commission; but is a communication passing between a solicitor acting for Mr.
Rogers and the Commission. Adopting, as I do, the analysis and the reasoning of Lockhart J in Trade Practices Commission versus Sterling, it seems to me that, of the seven categories of privileged documents to which Lockhart J refers, only one is of possible relevance in the case of this particular letter. That category is defined as follows by Lockhart J: 
Communications and documents passing between the party's solicitor and a third party if they are made or prepared when litigation is anticipated or commenced, for the purposes of the litigation, with a view to obtaining advice as to it or evidence to be used in it or information which may result in the obtaining of such evidence. ..."
It seems to me on the evidence adduced at the hearing that the contents of the letter, read fairly as a whole, cannot be fitted within that definition.
Nor do I think that the letter is protected by some form of statutory legal professional privilege deriving from [section 25(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) and (2) of the Act.
As I have said, the letter is not written to the Commission by an applicant for or a grantee of legal aid . That being so, the pre-conditions for the coming into operation of [section 25(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) and (2) have not been, in my opinion, fulfilled.
As to public interest immunity privilege, it is expedient to begin by referring to the following written submission of learned counsel for the defendant: "29. It is submitted that there are two State interests which require, on public policy grounds, that private communications between solicitors and the Commission not be disclosed.
i. It is in the public interest that the integrity of Legal Aid
Commission be preserved and that confidence in its assurances that communications will not be disclosed be fostered and maintained ii. It is in the public interest that the judicial process affords persons of modest means the same protection to communicate with legal advisors (sic) as to persons who do not require the financial assistance of the State."
In my opinion the claim for public interest immunity privilege in respect of this particular letter has not been made good. The defendant has not led any evidence that, if accepted, would show cause why the claim should be upheld. The letter does refer, indeed, to litigation, which has been allegedly revived, between the plaintiff and the defendant ; but it makes clear that the writer of the letter is not acting for the defendant in respect of that litigation.
The purpose of the letter is to obtain information about a particular caveat entered by the Commission against the title of certain property. It is true that the letter suggests that the writer's purpose in obtaining the information is that of giving the defendant and his present wife not so much legal professional advice as information and reassurance about the basis upon which the caveat is said to be maintainable. I do not see, however, and as at present advised, where there is any public interest in suppressing disclosure of the fact that such a request for information was made. I am strengthened in that view by the failure of the Commission to support in any way the present application for protection upon the basis of public interest immunity privilege. I note in that regard the specific concession made in paragraph 14b of the written submission of the defendant dated 31 August last.
In my opinion the plaintiff is entitled to have access to this particular document.
 
Letter dated 14 February 1994: Notice of Motion Para 1a 
This letter is written to the Managing Director of the Commission by solicitors acting for the defendant. It is, essentially, an application for legal aid. The document comprises four pages. Page 1 is a general resume of events to date; page 2 sets out, broadly speaking, financial and the like matters relating to the means test applicable to an application for legal aid; and pages 3 and 4 relate, once again speaking very broadly, to the merits of the case put forward as appropriate to be granted legal aid.
In my opinion, no part of the letter is protected by common law legal professional privilege. Of the various categories of materials nominated by
Lockhart J in his decision earlier cited, the category (e) which I have earlier quoted is the only one which appears to me to be possibly relevant to the letter now being considered. In my opinion the contents of the letter cannot be fitted within that particular category. It is true that the letter has been brought into existence by the defendant's then solicitors following upon the re-commencement of the principal litigation between the plaintiff and the defendant; but, in my opinion, it cannot be said that the letter has come into existence "... with a view to such litigation, either for the purpose of obtaining advice as to such litigation, or of obtaining evidence to be used in such litigation, or of obtaining information which might lead to the obtaining of such evidence ...": Wheeler versus Le Marchant(1881) 17 CH.B 675 per Jessel MR at 681.
As to statutory legal professional privilege pursuant to [section 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) of the Act, I am of the opinion that the observations, to which I have earlier referred, of the Court of Appeal Division in Wentworth (No. 12) entail a conclusion that pages 1 and 2 of the letter are not in principle capable of being so protected, but that pages and 4 are so capable in principle
The question then arises whether pages 3 and 4, capable as they are in principle of attracting common law legal professional privilege because of the statutory relationship between an applicant for legal aid and the Commission, do in fact come within that common law legal professional privilege.
Plainly, as I think, the contents of pages 3 and 4 have nothing to do with the obtaining of evidence for use in the litigation to which MFI 4 is relevant; or with the obtaining of information which might lead to the obtaining of such evidence.
Do the contents of pages 3 and 4 go to the obtaining of advice as to that litigation? In my opinion they do not. They go, rather, to the obtaining of a grant of legal aid, an entirely different subject-matter.
In my view, therefore, pages 3 and 4, also, are not protected by statutory legal professional privilege.
As to the claim of public interest immunity privilege, I am of the opinion that such a claim has not been made good. No evidence has been adduced by the defendant such as is capable, if accepted, of showing cause for the upholding of such a claim in this particular case. The tenor of what is said by the defendant's then solicitor on pages 3 and 4 of the letter does not seem to me to warrant a conclusion that the relevant balancing exercise indicates that there is at issue so compelling a public interest as ought to prevail so as to exclude, on the ground of public interest immunity privilege, access by the plaintiff to the document.
Accordingly, I am of the opinion that the plaintiff should be granted access to this letter.
 
Folder of Documents MFI 1; Notice of Motion Para. 3 .
This collection of material is, almost entirely, made up of memoranda of fees submitted by counsel and solicitors acting for the defendant to the
Commission; and responsive letters covering payments by the Commission of various amounts thus claimed. There is nothing among the entirety of the material which is attributable directly to the defendant.
I am not satisfied that the material is protected by common law legal professional privilege. It does not seem to me to be material capable of being assigned either in whole or in part to any one or more of the various categories of privileged material to which Lockhart J refers in his decision earlier cited.
Nor do I think that the material is protected by statutory legal professional privilege deriving from [section 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/oa1974114/s25.html) of the Act. It does not seem to me that the material or any part of it relates in any way to true issues for trial arising in the proceedings in respect of which legal aid has been granted by the Commission to the defendant.
Nor do I think that the material has been shown to be such as ought to attract the protection of public interest immunity privilege. I advert, yet again, to the total absence of anything in the nature of affidavit or other proper evidence capable, if accepted, of showing cause in support of the claim for public interest immunity privilege; and also to the absence of any intervention on the part of the Commission in support of the appropriateness of any such claim. I do not see, as at present advised, why the integrity of the legal aid scheme as administered by the Commission pursuant to the Act would be in any real sense prejudiced or compromised by the disclosure of the material in the folder MFI 1.
I think, however, that notwithstanding that the material MFI 1 is not, in my opinion, privileged from production on any of the bases claimed by the defendant, it does not necessarily follow that access should be granted to the plaintiff. It seems to me that no part of the material is relevant to any issue truly arising in connection with any of the three matters now current before Sperling J. Nor can I see, as at present advised, that the whole or any part of the material is relevant to any of the legitimate forensic purposes which were outlined to me by the plaintiff in the course of her submissions.
In the light of those circumstances, it seems to me that it would be wrong to give access to the plaintiff to the material NM 1. To do so would have the effect of increasing costs, and quite possibly the hearing time of the proceedings current before Sperling J, for no obviously relevant purpose.
In my view, that would be, in every real sense, abusive of the process of the
Court, and I do not think that the Court can properly countenance such a state of affairs.
In all of those circumstances I will not grant access to the plaintiff to the whole or any part of the material MFI 1.
Orders 
I dismiss the claims for relief made in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the defendant's Notice of Motion dated 24 August 1995 and filed in Court, by leave, on 30 August 1995. 
I decline to make a declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of the said Notice of Motion, but I order, pursuant to paragraph 6 thereof, that the plaintiff's application for access to the documents described in paragraph 3 of the said Notice of Motion be refused. 
I grant to the plaintiff access to the letters marked for identification and 4. 
I reserve all questions of costs arising out of the proceedings on the said
Notice of Motion.
 
APPENDIX 1 
LIST OF DOCUMENTS CONTAINED IN THE FILE ENTITLED "ROGERS
COPIES
OF ACCOUNT AND SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS"   LAC    GAYLE PRESTON        9. 4.95   LAC    Schedule of payments   LAC    Counsel           8.11.83   LAC    H.D.Y.           16. 4.84   LAC  
H.D.Y.           31. 8.84   LAC    H.D.Y.           2. 1.85   LAC    H.D.Y.    .85   LAC    H.D.Y.           8. 7.85   LAC    H.D.Y.           2.
.85  Deafing Lodgment Form  LAC    H.D.Y           20.11.85  LAC    H.D.Y.      .86  LAC    H.D.Y.           9. 5.86  LAC    Counsel          16. 6.86  LAC    Counsel          16. 6.86  LAC    Counsel          16. 6.86  LAC  
Counsel           8. 8.86  Memorandum  LAC    Counsel           8. 9.86  LAC 
H.D.Y.           8. 9.86  LAC    Counsel           9. 9.86  LAC    Counsel  .10.86  LAC    Counsel          11.12.86  LAC    Counsel          11.12.86  LAC    Counsel          11.12.86  LAC    Counsel          11.12.86  LAC  
Counsel          11.12.86  LAC    H.D.Y.           18.12 86  LAC    Counsel    .12.86  LAC    Counsel          22.12.86  LAC    Counsel          22.12.86  LAC    Counsel          22.12.86  LAC    H.D.Y            2. 1.87  LAC  
Messrs Phillips Fox    11. 3.87  LAC    Counsel          16. 3.87  LAC    Counsel    .87  LAC    Counsel           7. 7.87  LAC    Counsel           7.
.87  LAC    Counsel          19. 8.87  LAC    Messrs Phillips Fox     9. 9.87  LAC
Messrs Phillips Fox    21. 1.88  Memo Fees Counsel          15. 6.87  LAC    Messrs Phillips
Fox     6. 3.89  LAC    Messrs Phillips Fox    15. 6.87 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/108.html  
