

Workcover Authority of New South Wales versus Billpat Holdings Pty Limited and
Ors Nos Ca 40263/94 and Cc 9274/93 Workers Compensation [1995] NSWSC 49 (25
September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY ACJ(1), PRIESTLEY JA(2) AND CLARKE JA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 18, 19 and 24 April 1995 #DATE 14:7:1995 #ADD 25:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant        J. Poulos QC and 
S. Campbell 
Solicitors for the Appellant      Nick Vrabac, Workcover 
Authority of NSW 
There was no appearance for the 1st Respondent Billpat Holdings 
Counsel for the 2nd Respondent
P. Webb QC and R. Stanton (National Grazing Service) 
Solicitors for the 2nd Respondent    Leigh Virtue and Associates 
Counsel for the 3rd Respondent     J.Hislop QC and (John Kennedy)              R. Harrington 
Solicitors for the 3rd Respondent    Carroll and O'Dea
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
KIRBY ACJ: This appeal from the Compensation
Court of New South Wales (O'Toole
CCJ) raises four issues: whether the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (the Act) applied in the circumstances of the case given (as it was put) that the worker's employment was for duties exclusively in Queensland and had no relevant connection with
New South Wales; whether the company identified as the employer of the worker was properly so designated or whether another company was the true employer; whether the worker's injuries arose out of or in the course of his employment, as that expression is now understood following Hatzimanolis versus ANI
Corporation Limited <case>; [(1992) 173 CLR 473]; and if the worker's injury did not arise in the course of his employment, did it nonetheless arise on a periodic journey from his place of employment to his place of abode in circumstances which did not disentitle him for recovery by reason of proof by the employer that the worker's injuries were caused "partly or wholly by the fault of the worker", in which event by [s 10(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s10.html) of the Act he is disentitled to compensation.
In the Compensation Court, O'Toole CCJ decided that the New South Wales
Act applied and that the worker was not confined to recovery under the
Queensland Workers Compensation Act 1990. She determined that Bi`lpat
Holdings
Pty Ltd (the first respondent) was the worker's employer at the relevant time.
That company was not insured for the purposes of the New South Wales Act. It was in this way that the Workcover Authority of New South Wales (the appellant) became liable in respect of the obligations owed to the worker by his uninsured employer. Although represented before the primary judge, Billpat took no part in the proceedings in this Court. It was aware of those proceedings. But it has no assets. O'Toole CCJ rejected the alternative case that the worker was employed by National Grazing Services Pty Ltd (the second respondent). That company was insured for the purposes of the New South Wales
Act.
Her Honour appears to have decided that the worker was in the course of his employment for Billpat at the time he received injury. She did so upon the basis that a person whom she found to have been an agent of Billpat "probably approved" of the worker's action in driving home, thus placing him in the course of his employment pursuant to the contract with
Billpat which he found had been concluded in New South Wales. Alternatively, she went on to decide that the worker's injuries occurred on a journey and that the defences alleging fault had not been established. Those defences rested in part, upon the objective fact that the worker's 1981 Toyota Landcruiser had left the road in circumstances allegedly giving rise to an inference of negligence to some degree. Alternatively, it had been alleged that the fault to some degree was proved by the evidence which preponderated to the conclusion that,at the relevant time, the worker had not attached his seat belt to restrain his movement in the event of an accident.
The primary judge declared herself to be "uncertain whether such an omission contributed materially to his injuries".
She therefore entered an award in his favour.
Mr John Kennedy (the third respondent) (the worker) was rendered paraplegic in the events which immediately followed his vehicle's leaving the road. The award in his favour was entered upon the basis that he was entitled to maximum weekly compensation and to the maximum amounts payable under ss 66 and 67 of the Act. It is against the foregoing findings, and the award which followed them, that the appellant has appealed to this Court. The appeal lies against errors of fact as well as law.
See [Compensation Court Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/), [s 32.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/s32.html) 
New South Wales shearer agrees to work in Queensland
The worker, aged twenty-nine years at the time of injury took his Higher
School Certificate in Queensland and completed a full time wool classing course in 1982. Whilst at college he was approached by the manager of Grazcos
Pty Ltd (Grazcos), a grazing and shearing company. He was offered work as a shed hand for Grazcos in Queensland.
The worker accepted this offer. Within a year he received promotion to the position of overseer wool classer. In this capacity he was involved in hiring and firing shearers, classing wool and organising teams of shearers. He had to keep shed books. He directed the team of workers in accordance with instructions received from Mr Noel Dawson, an employee of Grazcos.
In 1989, Dalgety
Farmers Ltd acquired Grazcos. The evidence suggested that
Dalgety Farmers Ltd did not wish to continue the shearing operations formerly carried on by Grazcos. Accordingly, those operations were acquired by National
Grazing Services Pty Ltd (second respondent) (NGS).
Mr Dawson was appointed a director of NGS in November 1991. He became the Northern Regional Manager in charge of the operations for that company which commenced business in November
The worker became aware at the end of 1991 or early in 1992 that the entity which was running the operations had changed from Grazcos to NGS. He was told by Mr Dawson that from this "we'd be doing sheds under different company names with smaller cheque books". He was thus aware of the change of company involvement. But he considered that his own employment had remained unaffected. "Q. You have always regarded yourself as employed by National
Grazing Service have you not? A. As far as I knew.

Q. You told us that you were told the main purpose of Billpat was a book entry, was it not? A. Well, I understood that the subcompanies to be for payroll tax purposes."
Mr Dawson indicated to the worker that the reason that they would be "doing the sheds" under different company names was to secure savings in payroll tax. The worker deposed that "after the change, he had carried out precisely the same duties as he had earlier done when employed by Grazcos".
The only real change was in the name of the cheque books by which he was paid.
As will appear, they were Billpat cheques drawn upon a bank in Dubbo,
New
South Wales.
In about November or December 1992, the worker agreed to work in a number of sheds in 1993. The work was the same as he had previously performed. It was to be exclusively carried out in the State of Queensland. It would require almost a full year to perform. The teams of shearers were unchanged. Mr Dawson organised the pricing of the job. He communicated instructions to the worker as to where he was to go. In this regard, the previous arrangements with
Grazcos continued. The system was that Mr Dawson would give instructions as to the date upon which the worker was to start at each shed. He was to identify the names of the men who would make up each team. He would specify which cheque was to be used for each shed. It would then be the worker's obligation to fill in the details on the cheques which were pre-signed by Mr Dawson. In accordance with the relevant award, food and accommodation were supplied by "whoever the employer was at the time". This was clarified as meaning "whichever company the cheque book was being used". Hours of work were fixed by the award as being from 7.30 am to 5.30 pm.
Billpat had its registered office in Dubbo at the same address as the registered office of NGS. At a meeting in Perth in January 1992, Mr and Mrs
William Chambers were appointed directors of Billpat. Mr Chambers and his wife had been associated successively with Grazcos and Dalgety. It was not Mr
Chambers' idea to form Billpat. This had been done on the instructions of Mr
Dawson, presumably acting on legal advice. Mr Chambers' wife (Ms
Patricia
Dwyer) was named as company secretary of Billpat.
The worker acknowledged that Mr Dawson (an employee at all times of NGS) had the power to tell him where to work and when to proceed to various sheds.
In this respect, Mr Dawson's control remained much as it had earlier been when both he and the worker were employed by Grazcos. On the other hand, the worker did not accept that
Mr Chambers of Billpat had a similar control over him. "Q. When you were given instructions by Mr Dawson about Billpat your understanding was that Billpat was something to do with - was a company that was in Queensland? A. Well, no, the cheque was drawn from New South Wales.

Q. But that was the only connection that it had, it came from somewhere in New South Wales?
A. Well, I assumed it was a company that was in both States.

Q. Just getting back to the 'Chambers and Dwyer', are they related to one another in some way ... Do you know them as Pat and Bill Chambers? A. Yes.

Q. Pat Chambers, as far as you are aware, works in the Dalgety office? A. As far as I know.

Q. Has she ever spoken with you about any jobs that you have to do? A. No, not for many years.

Q. Has Bill Chambers ever spoken to you about any jobs that you had to do? A.
Well, Bill and I used to work together about six years ago.

Q. Has he ever been on any job that you have been associated with? A. Yes.

Q. Which one? A. Jobs I used to do when I was working at
St George.

Q. Who was that for, Grazcos?
A. That was for Grazcos.

Q. Since National Grazing has taken over from Grazcos, have you ever worked with Bill Chambers anywhere? A. No.

Q. Is he an older or younger man than you? A. He's older.

Q. Did you ever consider he was in a position to give you orders about anything? A. Not really, no.

Q. Has that ever happened in the past that you have had instructions from Dawson and Chambers at the same time about the same subject matter? A. I never received instructions from
Bill Chambers."
The evidence demonstrated that Billpat was certainly conducting a business of shearing operations in Queensland. One of its "jobs" was at the property at Dynevor Downs near Thargomindah in Queensland. It was at that property that the worker was engaged immediately prior to setting out on the journey on which he was injured. Mr Chambers gave evidence that he canvassed potential clients and obtained work for Billpat. He stated that he would have been overseer of the job at Dynevor Downs but for other commitments.
The worker gave evidence that the owner of Dynevor Downs, whose sheep were being shorn, was paying Billpat for the shearing. A number of items of documentary evidence described the worker's employer at the relevant time as being
Billpat. These included a details of earnings form (Exhibit A), a member statement with Austsafe Superannuation Fund (Exhibit D), an Australian
Taxation Office triplicate group certificate (Exhibit E), an application for compensation under the Queensland Act (Exhibit 16) and an employer's return under that Act (Exhibit 17).
The worker was fully aware of the change in company arrangement. He participated in that change to the extent stated above. In part, the substance of his employment control, whilst shearing, remained unaltered. Mr Dawson effectively continued to give the orders, but NGS, whose employee he was, asserted that he did so as an agent for Billpat in order to give effect to the corporate restructuring which had followed the termination of Grazcos' shearing business. The worker did not work exclusively for Grazcos and
Billpat. He had other employment activities as he acknowledged in his evidence. These included on a property in Glen
Innes which he bought with his father in 1989, which he and his brother had operated in partnership, not far from a separate property which his father owned, also in Glen Innes. It was to this last mentioned property that the worker was proceeding when he was injured.
 
The worker's engagement and injury
In early 1993, the worker was working at a shed at "Greendale" at Tambo in Queensland.
At the conclusion of that work, there was a discussion between the worker and Mr Dawson. During that conversation, which took place in
Queensland, Mr Dawson told the worker that the next shed he would be working would be at Dynevor Downs at Thargomindah.
 .
The worker returned to his property in Glen Innes. Mr Dawson went to the head office of NGS, Queensland which was at Blackall, in
Queensland. It was from there that Mr Dawson telephoned the worker at Glen Innes, the weekend before the worker commenced his last period of work at Dynevor Downs. "Q. What was said in that conversation between you and Mr
Dawson? A. We organised the starting date and the men that we'd be employing for the shed.

Q. When you say 'We organised' what did that involve? A. Well, it was pre-organised by Noel (Dawson). He just informed me of who was on the team with me when we were starting.

Q. Where were you when you made the telephone call? A. At Glen
Innes.

Q. Then did you travel from Glen Innes to Thargomindah to work at that shed? A. Yes.

Q. Did you have the usual team of shearers and the like with you? A. Yes.

Q. Had Mr Dawson told you the cheque book to be used in relation to the shed? A. Yes.

Q. Which cheque book had he told you was to be used in relation to that shed? A. Billpat Holdings Pty Ltd.

Q. Was that a company that you had done work for on his instructions?
A. Yes."
The worker stated that, in accordance with the ordinary arrangement he remained in the accommodation at Dynevor Downs during the entire week prior to March 1993. Sometimes the whole team would remain at the property over the weekend. Sometimes the team would leave. It was, according to the worker, "your own decision". He said that he stayed at the property two weekends between
February and March 1993. He went home to the property one weekend. On
Friday, 12 March 1993 he decided to return to Glen Innes. He did so to "crutch some sheep that weekend". He explained how the decision was made. "Q. Did you receive any message from Mr
Dawson in relation to what you were preparing for the weekend? A. Yes, I did.

Q. What was that? A. I received a fax from him to tell me it had rained and we wouldn't be crutching and about a day after that I received a phone call that it was fine and we were proceeding.

Q. Who was that phone call from? A. Noel Dawson.

Q. Had you on previous occasion travelled from the properties on which you were working to your home? A. Yes.

Q. Was that done with the knowledge of Mr Dawson? A.
Yes.

Q. Were there any occasions when he had asked you to carry out jobs for him whilst you were travelling on the property to your home? A. Aside from just depositing the shed books at convenient locations, no."
The worker gave evidence that he was proceeding to his property in Glen
Innes to spend the night. He intended to return to Dynevor Downs on the Sunday afternoon.
He took with him Mr Gellie, one of the team who was working with him at Dynevor Downs. Mr Gellie was going to assist the worker helping his father with the crutching. Together, Mr Gellie and the worker left Dynevor
Downs at about 3 pm travelling in the worker's Landcruiser.
The journey proceeded directly towards Glen Innes.
At about 12.30 am on the morning of Saturday, 13 March 1993, thirty kilometres east of Inverell on the Gwydir Highway, the vehicle carrying the worker and Mr Gellie went off the road. It rolled twice. It returned on to its wheels. It then came to a stop. At the time the accident occurred, the vehicle had been travelling at about eighty to ninety kilometres an hour. The maximum permitted speed limit in the vicinity is 100 kilometres per hour. The worker gave evidence that the vehicle veered off the road for no apparent reason. He assumed that there had been a blow-out or a tie rod end had become disconnected.
Mr Gellie did not receive significant injuries. Sergeant K.R.
Delaforce of Inverell Police attended the accident. He described the weather conditions as fine and dry. There was no suggestion that the worker had been drinking. The roadway at the scene of the accident was straight. There was a slight downhill grade. Upon his arrival, Sergeant Delaforce found the worker lying face down within the vehicle in a "twisted, obscure kind of fashion on the driver's side door". The worker's torso appeared to be lying face down and the rest of him was somewhere else in the vehicle. It was "crunched up, twisted up".
An ambulance was summoned. The ambulance officer, Mr G.R. Baldwin, described the worker's position as being "slumped forward, inclined to the right, his right foot was under the clutch pedal and his buttock was on the seat of the vehicle. He was not in the position that he would occupy if he had been the driver of the vehicle".
Sergeant Delaforce gave evidence that he did not move Mr Kennedy. He observed the usual precaution and waited for the ambulance driver. When asked whether or not, when found, the worker had been restrained in any way by a seat belt,
Sergeant Delaforce said he did not believe that he was. Mr Baldwin removed the worker from the vehicle and did not need to disengage anything, such as a seat belt, in this manoeuvre. Mr Baldwin gave evidence that he had asked the worker, "Did you have a seat belt on?". The worker had replied, "No". When tested as to why he had made this inquiry, Mr Baldwin said that the worker appeared to be in an abnormal position in the vehicle. The worker was fully conscious during the whole time of the transport to the hospital.
According to Mr Baldwin, during the journey, he asked the worker, "Are you sure you did not have a seat belt on?". The worker replied, "No,
I don't remember or I didn't remember putting it back on from when we last stopped".
At the time of this conversation, Mr Gellie was sitting in the left passenger side of the ambulance.
He participated in a "three or four way conversation" between the worker and the two ambulance officers.
On the ambulance report is a diagram which contained Mr Baldwin's entry "seat belt not worn".
The ambulance conveyed the worker to the Inverell Hospital. He arrived there at 2.30 am on 13 March 1993. He was admitted by Sister Paulette Cook, a registered nursing sister of thirty years experience. She was relieving night supervisor in charge of the casualty department. Sister Cook asked the worker whether he had been wearing a seat belt. She did so as part of examination procedure because of the possibility that seat belts can sometimes occasion internal injuries. Sister Cook's handwritten record reads: "MVA car roll.
Patient driver not wearing seat belt, trapped under steering wheel". Sister
Cook gave oral evidence that she remembered that the worker had stated that he had "not put on his seat belt since they stopped at Ashford". Ashford is a town near Inverell.
According to Sister Cook, Mr Gellie was present at the time this evidence was given. He did not say anything, Mr Gellie was not called to give evidence at the trial.
Medical evidence was called that the worker suffered in the incident an anterior dislocation of the fifth cervical segment over the sixth segment.
This caused damage to the anterior three quarters of the cervical cord at the level of C5/6. It was this injury which resulted in quadriplegia. Dr A.
Gonski, a neurosurgeon, gave evidence that the injuries suffered by the worker were similar to those occasioned to a person diving into a swimming pool where there was a lack of water. He said that if the worker had been projected in the impact occasioned by the motor vehicle leaving the road against the roof of the motor vehicle that would have been sufficient to cause the anterior dislocation which he sustained. He said that the injury suffered was typically caused by a vertical force with a body inverted.
Although Mr Chambers was called to give evidence at the trial, Mr Dawson (who was in the vicinity of the court) was not called by any party. The only other oral evidence was that of two experts who were summoned to give opinions on the consequences of wearing or failing to wear a seat belt in the circumstances described. These witnesses were Mr H.K. Woodward, called by the worker and Mr Michael Griffiths, called by NGS. Reference to their evidence will be made below.
 
The primary judge's conclusion
O'Toole CCJ recounted the basic facts. She stated that, despite certain inconsistencies, the worker's credit "was not challenged squarely". She concluded that the telephone call in February 1993, when the worker was in
Glen
Innes, probably confirmed earlier arrangements which had been made in
Queensland and led to the worker's travelling from his home in New South Wales to Dynevor Downs in Queensland to perform his work. So far as the employment in Queensland was concerned she concluded: "On the whole of the evidence, it seems to me that the applicant's work in Queensland over a period of years is properly characterised as a series of discrete contracts which arose from a stable pattern of communication between
Dawson and the applicant. Terminology used by the parties to describe their relationships ... does not of course determine the issues per se. Dawson gave the applicant directions and there is not evidence from which one could properly infer that Chambers exercised control over the applicant's activities but as I understand the authorities control is one of the indicia I have to waive.
... Giving due weight to the parties' own assertions, it is probable that Dawson as an individual or an employee or a director of (NGS) was acting as the agent of (Billpat) when he retained the applicant to travel to
Dynevor Downs to work. The applicant's injury in New South
Wales probably arose in the course of his employment pursuant to that contract which was concluded in this State."
O'Toole CCJ then went on to consider the position if this primary conclusion were wrong. She considered whether the worker could recover under the journey provisions of the Act. Her actual finding is that "alternatively to the injury in the course of the worker's employment it arose on a journey arising out of or in the course of his employment" with Billpat. This finding was mad, pursuant to the provisions of <case> of the Act which states: "10(1) A personal injury received by a worker on any journey to which this section applies is, for the purposes of this Act, an injury arising out of or in the course of employment and compensation is payable accordingly."
However, s10(1A) contains certain exceptions. Relevantly s10(1A) provides: "10(1A) Subsection (1) does not apply if the personal injury was caused partly or wholly, by the fault of the worker.
 
The journeys to which this section applies are as follows: the daily or other periodic journeys between the worker's place of abode and place of employment; ...
a journey between any camp or place: where the worker is required by the terms of the worker's employment, or is expected by the worker's employer to reside temporarily; or where it is reasonably necessary or convenient that the worker reside temporarily for any purpose of the worker's employment, and the worker's place of abode when not so residing; ...

For the purposes of this section, a journey from a worker's place of abode commences at, and a journey to a worker's place of abode ends at, the boundary of the land on which the place of abode is situated.

Nothing in this section prevents the payment of compensation for any personal injury which, apart from this section, is an injury within the meaning of this Act.

In this section: ...
 "place of abode" includes: the place to which the worker is journeying with the intention of there spending the night following a journey."
O'Toole CCJ was not convinced by the evidence as to the wearing of the seat belt. Nor was she convinced by the evidence of the experts. At the end of her judgment she stated: "On the whole of the evidence it is probable that momentary inattention, particular in a vehicle of the age of the applicant's, caused the vehicle to leave the road and ultimately the applicant's injuries. Paying due regard to the onus in these proceedings, if the applicant were not wearing a seat-belt during the accident,
I am uncertain whether such an omission contributed materially to his injuries."
The appellant contests each of the four points raised at the commencement of these reasons. Billpat, being without assets, has taken no part in these proceedings. NGS sought to uphold her Honour's conclusion as to the designation of Billpat as the true employer and the rejection of the assertion of the appellant that NGS was the employer. Otherwise, NGS supported generally the submissions for the appellant. The worker supported O'Toole
CCJ's reasons and her award. To the extent that her Honour had left it to inference that the
New South Wales Act applied in the circumstances, the worker sought to uphold that decision as correct in law. He contested the attacks on the findings which alternatively gave rise to his entitlements under the Act. He professed indifference as to whether his award should be upheld against Billpat or NGS.
However, the worker had not sought, by a defensive appeal, to challenge
O'Toole CCJ's dismissal of his claim against NGS. He asked for leave, should it prove necessary, to bring such an appeal.
 
Entitlements under the Queensland Act
As will be inferred from the application to which reference has been made, lodged under the Queensland Act, a claim for worker's compensation against Billpat was brought in Queensland. That claim has not been prosecuted pending the outcome of these proceedings. It was common ground that the
Queensland
Act provides, if applicable, benefits substantially lower than those which may be recovered under the New South Wales Act. In particular, there is no equivalent under the Queensland Act to the Jump sums provided under ss 66 and 67 of the local Act. There are also various caps and limitations which make the amount recoverable significantly less.
At the commencement of the appeal, the appellant asserted, in support of its primary submission that the New South Wales Act had no application, the worker should be left to his entitlements under the Queensland Act. This was a statute having a more natural application to a case such as the present where the entire employment activities of the worker for Billpat were carried out in the State of Queensland. In support of its submission, the appellant suggested that the worker should be obliged to pursue his rights under the Queensland
Act and should not in effect, be entitled to choose between statutes with different benefits. He should be held to the statute having the most real and close connection to his employment, namely the Workers Compensation Act 1990 .
When, however, the Queensland Act is examined it is not at all clear that the worker has an entitlement in the circumstances proved to recover under that Act. By <case>.5 of the Act it is provided, relevantly: "1.5(1) This Act applies so as to confer an entitlement in respect of injuries suffered by a worker -
on the worker; ...
if the worker is in Queensland at the time the injury is suffered; or the worker is not in Queensland at the time the injury is suffered, if - the worker entered into a contract of service ... (in respect of the employment out of, or in the course of, which the injury arose) in Queensland with an employer who, at the time the contract was entered into, had a place of employment, or was present in Queensland; and the worker commenced employment under the contract in
Queensland; and employment under the contract is, or was, with the knowledge and consent of the employer, carried out partly in
Queensland and partly outside Queensland; unless, in the Board's opinion, the worker has been continuously employed out of Queensland for longer than two years."
For the worker it was pointed out that if the finding of O'Toole CCJ were accepted by the Queensland Board, and it were determined that the worker entered into the contract of service with Billpat outside Queensland, ie in
Glen Innes, then by <case>.5(1)(d)(i) the worker would fall to make one of the next necessary prerequisites to recovery in respect of an injury suffered outside Queensland.
When this possibility was pointed out, NGS withdrew its support for the argument of the appellant that the worker had a clear entitlement, and a natural claim, under the Queensland Act. It is neither necessary nor appropriate for this Court to determine the worker's entitlements (if any) under that Act. That is a jurisdiction which is assigned by law to the Board created by the Queensland Act. The worker's entitlement under the New South
Wales Act must be determined by the proper application of that Act. However, in considering the application of that latter Act, it is worth noting that the
Queensland Act might not apply to an injury occurring outside Queensland in the circumstances of this case.
 
Application of the New South Wales Act
The appellant and NGS asserted that in the circumstances described, the
New South Wales Act had no application at all. The employment in question was to be characterised as Queensland employment. All of the employment functions were carried out in Queensland. The employer's economic interests in the activities of the worker were entirely within Queensland. The journey upon which the worker was injured had nothing to do with the employer. The employer had no Interest in the object of that journey. It was a long journey over country highways which exposed the worker to risks. They were accepted exclusively for the worker's own interests to help his father with his crutching operations. The fact that this was a private activity, inferentially for some economic reward, could be seen by the fact that Mr Gellie accompanied the worker on the journey to Glen Innes.
When the worker finished his employment activities at Dynevor Downs and left that property be terminated the employment functions for Billpat. In these circumstances it was unsurprising that Billpat should not be insured for workers' compensation purposes under the New South Wales Act. It might just as well be required to be insured under the Fiji Act, were the worker to return to that jurisdiction.
It was unreasonable to expect Billpat to be indemnified under the New South
Wales Act. Its shearing operations were exclusively within
Queensland.
Although the injury took place in New South Wales there was no relevant connection with the employment of the worker by Billpat and New South Wales.
Thus, as a matter of law and of practicality, the New South Wales Act's provision would not be read as applicable to injuries suffered by the worker in New South Wales. He was not a "worker" to which the Act applied any more than were his "injuries" or was his "journey". The words of the New South
Wales Act would be read, conformably with authority, and out of recognition of the practicalities, as applicable to New South Wales. The "employment" to which the New South Wales Act referred would be construed as exclusively New
South Wales employment. This was no more than a recognition that the New South
Wales Parliament does not ordinarily purport to attach legal obligations to employment relationships in the State of Queensland.
In support of these submissions, attention was drawn to the fact that, when the New South Wales Parliament intended to provide for extra territorial operation of the New South Wales Act, it did so in explicit terms. Thus s (1) of the Act provides: "13.(1) If: an employer has a place of employment in New South Wales, or is for the time being present in New South Wales, and there employs a worker; and any such worker while outside New South Wales receives an injury under circumstances which, had the injury been received in New South Wales, would entitle the worker to compensation in accordance this Act, the injury is an injury to which this Act applies, and compensation is payable accordingly."
Clearly, the present is not a case to which <case> of the Act applies.
The worker's injury was received inside and not outside New South Wales.
Subject to what follows, the employer had no place of employment in New South
Wales and the engagement of the worker ("employs") took place in Queensland, being no more than confirmed by the telephone call to Glen Innes: cf Starr v
Douglas [(1994) 35 NSWLR 133 (CA)], 136, 139.
The worker conceded that <case> had no application. He also conceded that some nexus with the State of New South
Wales was required to bring into operation the New South Wales Act. However, he asserted that the only nexus required, the relationship of employment being established, was that the injury occurred within the State of New South Wales whose legislation would then attach to its consequences. For many years, there has been a state of uncertainty as to the connections that are required to bring into operation a local workers' compensation Act where the character of the employment or the place of the injury are properly assigned to a jurisdiction other than that in which the claim for compensation is brought. Part of the difficulty has arisen from the failure of the High Court of Australia in Mynott versus Barnard <case>;  <case>; [(1958) VR 504 (VFC)], 517. That it is appropriate to imply into a local some territorial limitation has long been accepted. See eg Tomalin versus S.
Pearson and Son Ltd [(1909) 2 KB 61] The problem has been one of defining, with precision, the prerequisites to this nexus.
The High Court ventured upon the problem in Mynott. Unfortunately, the judges divided. The result has been three possible tests. These were explained by Smith J in Dykes at 517: "One view taken (which I shall refer to as the first construction) has been that the expression 'personal injury by accident' ... should be read as meaning 'personal injury by accident occurring within the jurisdiction'. Upon this view the test of territorial jurisdiction ... would be the place where the injury occurred ... Mynott versus Barnard, supra, per Latham CJ at pp 73, 74, 81, 86 and per Starke J at p 89 and compare also per McTiernan J at p 94. ... Another view taken has been that the word 'employment' wherever appearing in such provisions, should be read as meaning 'employment within the jurisdiction' ... This I shall refer to as the second construction, but it will be observed that under this construction, as under the first construction, (the Act) could have no operation unless the injury occurred within the jurisdiction. ...
There is powerful authority, however, for a third construction: see Mynott versus Barnard, supra, per
Dixon J (as he then was) at pp 90-93 and the authorities there referred to. And this third construction is that what the requirement 'employment' must be 'within the jurisdiction' means is that the 'employment' in the sense of the relationship of master and servant existing between the parties must be one which, in the light of all the circumstances, is properly to be regarded as located within the jurisdiction."
Smith J clearly favoured the third construction. However, he accepted that he was bound by Mynott to apply the first construction. He went on to read down the journey provision in the then Victorian Act "confining their operation to journeys between places in Victoria". See ibid 519. Dykes, like the present case, was one involving a shearer proceeding from Victoria to employment in New South Wales. The worker was injured in Victoria but his contract of employment was exclusively for work in New
South Wales. The
Victorian Full Court held that as the worker was not engaged in performing his employment when he was injured in
Victoria he was not entitled to compensation under the Victorian Act.
The parties to this appeal pressed the Court with competing arguments concerning the effect of Mynott. The appellant urged that the tendency in this
State had been to accept a dual requirement for recovery under the New South
Wales Act. That requirement had two elements, namely: that the place of the injury was within
New South Wales; and that the employment was within the State. 
See Walkerden Bros versus Awdejew, [(1958) 76 WN 176 (FC)]; O'Connor versus Healey SR 111 (CA). The worker, on the other hand, contended that the language of the New South Wales
Act was wide enough to attach to the facts an did so upon the natural meaning of the words used. Mr Kennedy was a "worker".
He did receive "injuries". He did so within New South Wales. True, his employment activities were mainly in Queensland. But they envisaged his return from time to time to New South Wales. There were many other connectors with the State of New South Wales. In such circumstances, the words of the Act should be given their ordinary meaning and application. This would involve no assertion of extra territorial operation. It would merely attach the New South
Wales Act to events that had indubitably occurred within this State.
The point here in issue can be answered at two levels. Each of them supports the worker's argument and the decision which the primary judge, inferentially, made on this point.
On the legal arguments, a number of points can be made: 
Since Mynott was decided some of the notions which tended to treat
Australian States (and Territories) as, legally speaking, foreign jurisdictions in relation to each other have been modified. This has occurred as a result of the growing integration of the Australian economy and the maturation of its [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and nationhood. This process has been recognised by the High Court of Australia. See Union Steamship Company of
Australia Pty Ltd v King <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 1], 14. It has also been recognised by this Court. See Commissioner for Railways of the State of Queensland versus Peters [(1991) 24 NSWLR 407 (CA)] 437. To that extent, any narrow construction of State legislation founded upon notions of the State legislature's limited competence as successor to a colonial legislature must now be revised. The view that will be taken of what is sufficient "as a matter of practical substance" to connect facts having relationship with another State or Territory of Australia with local jurisdiction within Australia is no longer as narrow as formerly it was.
Cf Dodd versus Executive Air Services Pty Ltd [(1935) VR 668 (FCV)] 677; 
Under the New South Wales Act, journeys, covered by the provisions of the Act, are no longer free standing and dealt with as entirely separate from entitlement to compensation for injuries "arising out of or in the course of" the employment. As s (1) (above) shows, it is now provided in this State that, the preconditions of the journey provision being established, the injury on a journey is, "for the purposes of (the) Act, an injury arising out of or in the course of employment". Thus the point upon which the worker failed in
Dykes does not apply. So long as the worker is on a journey of the defined class, an injury received is, by force of the Act, "an injury arising out of or in the course of employment".
On the factual level, whatever may be the precise requirement in addition to the happening of the injury within the jurisdiction, there were very many connectors with this State which make the application of the New South Wales
Act to the injury within the State, neither surprising nor offensive to the
Mynott principle.
The connectors include: 1, Billpat's registered office was within New South Wales; 2, It conducted business in New South Wales, even if its actual shearing operations were exclusively within Queensland; 3, Its cheque account was on a bank at Dubbo, New South Wales; , Its meetings were held at Dubbo; 5, All papers, cheque statements etc were returned to its Dubbo office; 6, Accounts were sent from Dubbo to the grazierS for whom the shearers worked; 7, Group certificates, including for the worker, were prepared in
Dubbo; , The books of account of Billpat were sent to and kept in Dubbo; 9,
Billpat's letters gave as their address the office in Dubbo; , Billpat employed New South Wales residents, such as the worker, who lived in this
State; 11, Upon one view, the worker was actually engaged for the subject work by telephone to New South Wales.
This is not, therefore, a case of the purported extra territorial operation of a New South Wales Act to facts and circumstances having no real connection with this State. Nor is it the application of that Act to an employment relationship where it could not reasonably have been anticipated that the New South Wales Act could apply. I have full sympathy for the suggestion that, given their differential benefits and preconditions, different premiums and different risks, it could in some circumstances be unreasonable to expect that one jurisdiction's workers' compensation Act would attach to an employer in another jurisdiction. But that argument scarcely applies in this case. Both Billpat and NGS were in the business of shearing.
The movement of shearers across State borders has been an established phenomenon in Australia and is almost as old as the wool industry in this country. Dykes is itself a case about shearers crossing State borders. Both
Billpat and NGS were aware that the worker in this case lived in New South
Wales and travelled to and from Queensland to perform his work duties. Had they examined the Queensland Act, they would have realised that certain difficulties were presented to the recovery by the worker under that Act whilst on a journey to or from his home. With the growth of the Australian economy, it is inevitable that trans border liability of employers under workers compensation legislation will increase. Those employers at risk must secure covet-age against that risk. In the circumstances of this case, I see no reason to read down the New South Wales Act to render it inapplicable to the circumstances of the case. In my view, O'Toole CCJ was right to hold that the Act applied.
 
Determining the employer of the worker
Determination of which of competing organisations was the "employer" for the purposes of the Act is often a difficult and contentious task. Recent decisions of this Court show that determining which of two putative employers is to be taken as the worker's "employer" for the purpose of the Act or whether a person was a worker or an independent contractor involve judgment.
There are no hard and fast rules. See eg Commercial Union Workers'
Compensation Act Ltd versus Smith and Ors Court of Appeal , 19 May 1994; 
NSWJB 44; Connelly versus Wells, Court of Appeal , 5 August 1994;
NSWJB 75; Articulate Restorations and Development Pty Ltd v Crawford,
Court of Appeal , 6 December 1994; (1994) NSWJB The test to be applied by
Australian courts is stated in Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1986) CLR 16.] It represented something of a retreat from the previous reign of the "control test". That test was found to be insufficiently flexible for the variety of employment relationships in the "modern post industrial society".
There "technical developments have meant that a person so engaged often exercises a degree of skill and expertise inconsistent with the retention of effective control by the person who engages him". See Brodribb, 28n. In
Connelly, at 12, I mentioned a number of features of employment today which explain the way in which the law has changed in its attitude to the "control" criterion. They include the increase in social, economic and industrial egalitarianism; the increase in highly skilled employment activities stimulated by the advances of technology; the increase in part time work; the changing organisation of employment and the growth of legal provisions for industrial democracy.
As in the earlier cases, I regard the present case as being on the borderline. There is no doubt that the appellant has shown powerful evidence to favour its argument that, in effect, the worker remain under the "control" of NGS. It was, in a sense, the successor to Grazcos which had certainly been his employer. Mr Dawson, who gave the effective orders, was its undoubted employee and not an employee of
Billpat. The worker himself regarded himself as an employee of NGS. He was part of its "organisation". He did not regard himself as under the control of Mr Chambers or his wife, neither of whom had given him orders. At first I was inclined to uphold the appellant's challenge to the primary judge's conclusion that Billpat was the employer.
In the end, however, I have come to the view that it has not been demonstrated that her Honour erred in the conclusion which she reached. The worker acknowledged that he had been told that he would be working for different companies. He realised that he had ceased working for Grazcos or
Dalgety. He fully appreciated that there was a discrete agreement with each shed to which he was sent to work. He himself distributed the cheques drawn on particular companies - at Dynevor Downs on Billpat. He had control of the cheque book and therefore knew, better than any but Mr Dawson and
Mr Chambers, of the detail of the new arrangement. His group certificate showed differential employers of which Billpat was one.
He claimed compensation on
Billpat. He knew that the differential arrangement was important for payroll tax minimisation purposes.
He knew that with different sheds a different arrangement applied. His tax returns showed that he was conscious of the different arrangements. Whilst he continued to receive instructions from Mr
Dawson, within the framework of the differential corporate arrangement which he was in part instrumental in fulfilling, the holding that Mr Dawson was the agent of Billpat rings true. I do not overlook the fact that Mr Dawson, though present at the court, was not called. He was an employee of NGS. One might ordinarily expect that
NGS, rather than Billpat, would have called him. I have given consideration to whether this was a case where the arrangement involving the separate companies could be regarded as "mere paper". In such cases the
Court will look beyond the "mere paper" at the substance of the relationship of the parties. But there is nothing apparently irregular in the arrangements described by the evidence. Separate corporations were established and, at least so far as the worker was concerned, he was fully aware of them and participated in what followed. By that participation he must be taken to have accepted the arrangement made consecutively by the several employing companies.
At the relevant time he had accepted the arrangement put to him on behalf of Billpat. The objective records which were received into evidence spoke with a single voice. This was not a case of a worker who was ignorant of the arrangements made.
I would therefore conclude, with the primary judge, that the better view is that the worker was employed by Billpat. By reason of the failure of that company to secure insurance cover against its liability under the New South
Wales Act, in the event that liability is established, it is uninsured.
Pursuant to <case> of the Act, the appellant is liable to pay the award. It has an (empty) entitlement to recover from Billpat.
Because I would confirm her Honour's decision in this respect, no question arises as to the need to extend the time within which the worker may challenge the dismissal of the claim against NGS. That company was correctly dismissed from the proceedings. Scope of the "course of the employment"
The primary entitlement to compensation is found in <case> of the Act: "9.(1) A worker who has received an injury ... shall receive compensation from the worker's employer in accordance with this
Act.

Compensation is payable whether the injury was received by the worker at or away from the worker's place of employment."
The word "injury" in <case> is defined by <case> of the Act, relevantly to mean: "... personal injury arising out of or in the course of employment."
The first question which arise is whether, in the circumstances in which the worker received his injuries, it can be said that they arose "out of or in the course of employment". Formerly, it would have been unthinkable that a worker in the situation of Mr Kennedy could recover workers' compensation benefits in circumstances such as the present, save for reliance on specific coverage on a journey for which the Act provided. The worker had, after all, entirely finished his activities for Billpat. He was on his way to activities (possibly even employment activities) for his father, having nothing to do with Billpat.
In such circumstances, to hold that the worker was in some way within the primary provisions of the Act would have been regarded, in earlier times, as astonishing. Cf Sullivan versus The Graziers Co-op (1928) WCR 128;
Donnelly versus Hunt (1948) WCR 94; Hobson Ply Ltd v Thorn (1954) WCR 29. According to the appellant the proper construction of the fact of the worker's departure from Dynevor Downs to Glen Innes was that it was absence on leave and an interruption to the worker's employment. Cf Charles R. Davidson and Company
Ltd versus McRobb [(1918) AC 304 (HL).] Any entitlement of the worker under the Act had to be confined, in the premises, to entitlement under the journey provisions and not under the principal employment provisions for the employment was shearing in Queensland. Travelling on a road in New South Wales had nothing to do with that employment activity.
More lately, however, the scope of employment has been enlarged in a relevant way by a decision of the High Court of Australia dealing with the special problem which can arise when a worker is in a situation such as Mr
Kennedy - working in a remote place in Australia with incidents of employment quite different from those which arise in the ordinary worker to whom the Act applies. In such a case, the High Court had to consider the entitlement to compensation when a worker was injured during an interval or interlude, outside the actual employment activities. It was held that unless the employee was guilty of gross misconduct taking him outside the course of his employment, an injury sustained in such an interval or interlude would be within the course of the employment. See Hatzimanolis versus ANI Corporation Ltd <case>; [(1992) 173 CLR 473.] The worker there was sent by his employer from New South Wales to Mt Newman in
Western Australia. His employment contract for three months required him to work for about ten hours each day for six days a week. He was permitted to visit areas in the surrounding
Pilbara region. On a day off, a supervisor organised a trip to Wittenoom Gorge. A group of employees travelled in the employer's vehicles. The worker was injured when one of the vehicles crashed.
The High Court held that the injury was sustained "in the course of the worker's employment". The majority judgment (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and
McHugh JJ) rested the worker's entitlement to recover compensation under the
New South Wales Act upon the footing of the employer's interest in the activity in the course of which the injury occurred. The formulae used varied in the course of the majority's reasons.
Thus at 482, their Honours said: "A striking feature of the recent cases which have held that an injury occurring in an interval between periods of actual work was within the course of employment is that in almost all of them the employer has authorised, encouraged or permitted the employee to spend his time during that interval at a particular place or in a particular way. However, it would be an unacceptable extension of the course of employment to hold that an employee was within the course of employment whenever the employer has authorised, encouraged or permitted the employee to spend his time during an interval between periods of actual work at a particular place or in a particular way.
... Thus, an employee who is encouraged by his or her employee to see a doctor after working hours is not ordinarily within the course of employment if injured while visiting the doctor, although the case would come within such a formulation. The course of employment is ordinarily perceived as commencing when the employee starts work in accordance with his or her ordinary or overtime hours of work and as ending when the employee completes his or her ordinary or overtime hours of work.
Later, at 483, their Honours addressed the particular problem, relevant to Hatzimanolis and to the present case, of an employee required to go to a remote place to live in accommodation provided by the employer for a limited time: "An injury occurring during the interval between periods of actual work in such a case is more readily perceived as being within the current conception of the course of employment than an injury occurring after ordinary working hours to an employee who performs his or her work at a permanent location or in a permanent locality."
At 484, their Honours expressed the test: "Accordingly, it should now be accepted that an interval or interlude within an overall period or episode of work occurs within the course of employment if, expressly or impliedly, the employer has induced or encouraged the employee to spend that interval or interlude at a particular place or in a particular way." .
And at 485 their Honours addressed the complaint that their approach would put the employer at risk during the entire period of the service of the worker at a remote place: "... the appellant would not necessarily be in the course of his employment while engaged in an activity during an interval or interlude in his overall period or episode of work if ANI had not expressly or impliedly induced or encouraged him to engage in that activity during that interval ...

The evidence in this case, however, establishes that ANI encouraged the appellant to spend his work-free Sunday at
Wittenoom Gorge because ANI, through Mr Pope, its supervisor, organized the excursion, provided the vehicles and the food, and invited the appellant 'to come along'. It follows that, although the appellant's injury was sustained during an interval between carrying out his ordinary duties, it was sustained in the course of the employment."
Toohey J (at 486) adopted an even broader test. At 491, his Honour said: "An employer is more likely to be held to have required, expected or authorised a worker to do something relevant to the carrying out of his or her duties during an interval in an overall period of work than in an interval between discrete periods of work ... when regard is had to the terms of the appellant's employment, what was said at the time of his engagement, the location where he was working, the hours and days worked, the use made of the respondent's vehicles ...
and the role of the respondent's supervisor ... the conclusion is inevitable that the appellant was at the time of the accident doing something which he was 'reavonably ... authorised to do in order to carry out his duties', that is, an activity which the respondent saw as making the working conditions more attractive than they would otherwise be."
Although in Hatzimanolis, the majority also referred (at 482) to what the worker has been "authorised" or "permitted" to do, their Honours did not accept that that would be a permissible criterion for defining the "course of the employment". I therefore take Toohey J's opinion to be a statement of principle which goes beyond that established by the majority. However sympathetic I am to Toohey J's view, I hold myself bound to the views expressed by the majority. They limit the scope of employment to what the employer has "expressly or impliedly induced or encouraged". Such a criterion is fully in accord with the outcome in Hatzimanolis. It goes beyond previous authority. But mere authorisation is not enough to cast the protective net of the Workers Compensation Act. To give the very substantial protections which that Act affords, there needs, according to the majority opinion in
Hatzimanolis, to be a more direct connection with the employer's enterprise.
This involves encouragement and even inducement by the employer.
The primary judge felt that. the worker's injuries were within the course of his employment for Billpat. This is explained by reference to the fact that
Mr Dawson "probably approved of the applicant's travelling from Dynevor Downs to New South Wales". With every respect to her Honour, I do not consider that this is sufficient by the Hatzimanolis test or by any of the legal principles which preceded Hatzimanolis. If the ultimate criterion is what can be "fairly regarded as within the course of employment" (see ibid, 483) I do not consider that a journey for weekend work of crutching with the worker's father is within the "employment" by Billpat for shearing in Queensland. Making full allowance for the unusual nature, and remote place of service of the worker, I do not consider that this Court would be authorised to stretch his "course of employment" beyond the cessation of his duties as Dynevor Downs. The mere fact that Mr Dawson was informed and even, as found, "authorised" the journey to
Glen Innes (permitting the worker to finish earlier than the award hours) does not lift the case into one of the employer's expectation, inducement or encouragement.
If mere authorisation were to attract the protection of the Act, it would involve re-writing a great deal of law which has been established for a very long time. In the face of the apparent disinclination of the majority of the
High Court in Hatzimanolis to express itself in such terms, I consider that this Court should hold back. It should be remembered that defining the limits of workers' compensation protection, by way of court interpretations, has significance for risk definition, premium setting and possibly re-insurance.
If one simply looks at the present case in terms of the reasonable imposition on an employer of the duty to protect a worker "in the course of employment" with the employer, it is not immediately apparent that departure by the worker for a purely private activity during a free weekend should (by way of the journey provisions applied) be regarded as part of the "course of employment" of the employer. There is no direct economic benefit, as such, to the employer. The only benefit is that which Toohey J mentioned in his minority view in Hatzimanolis, namely making employment in a remote part of Australia more attractive by rendering it more flexible. But what the worker did in his own spare weekend time was his own business. Applying Hatzimanolis, I do not consider that the injury occurred in the course of the worker's employment by
Billpat.
For the worker it was put, alternatively, that the course of employment in this case was to be taken as extending to the worker's travel from time to time to his home in Glen Innes. It was argued that where an employer engages a worker to work in a remote location, that was sufficient to attract a finding that the injury occurred "in the course of the employment". Reference was made to the decision of this Court in Inverell Shire Council versus Lewis Court of
Appeal , unreported, 9 December 1992. That was an appeal limited to a point of law. The court held itself bound to apply Hatzimanolis even though
Handley JA considered that the result "may seem to some anomalous or even bizarre". But that was a case where the employer had induced or encouraged the worker to reside in a caravan park during a course which he was undertaking.
The nexus of inducement or encouragement was sufficient to attract the holding in Hatzimanolis. That is the element which is missing in the present case.
Here the facts suggest that there was mere acknowledgment. At the most, there was acceptance or authorisation. Other than that, the employer had no interest in what the worker did after he left Dynevor Downs. His activities in the weekend were as much his own affair as would be the activities of a worker calling on a doctor after work hours. See Hatzimanolis, 483.
No separate argument was mounted on the basis that the worker's injuries arose "out of" his employment as distinct from "in the course of" the employment. The statutory provision is disjunctive, but with so many other points argued, I will not delay to consider separately that possibility.
 
Periodic journey and fault
The former provisions of the Act governing recovery of workers' compensation benefits whilst on periodic journeys were replaced by the present provision in 1989. The history of the amendments and passages from the ministerial statement accompanying is reported in my reasons in Aardvark
Security Services Pty Ltd versus Ruszkowski, Court of Appeal , unreported, 19
March 1993; (1993)
NSWJB 38 . The provisions have been described as "Draconian". In Ruszkowskki, at 6, I said: "From the passages in the Parliamentary debates ... it is clear that the Minister, and Parliament, faced up to the possibility that the 'minutest' fault on the part of a worker would deprive him or her (and in the event of death, the dependants) of any compensation benefits whatsoever ... courts have no legitimacy to ignore the subsection or to frustrate its intended operation.
Unjust though it may seem in particular cases ... courts must as wholeheartedly fulfil the legislative purpose in respect of s 10(1A) of the Act as they would if the provision were beneficial to a worker ... Where the command of Parliament is plain, courts must give effect to it."
I recounted, at 7 what I saw as two responses to the apparent injustice of the deprivation provided for in the section.
 "The first is to give meaning to 'fault' in <case>(1A) in such a way as to ensure that mere momentary inadvertence on the part of a worker is not encompassed within 'fault' as there provided.
There is a long line of authority, developed by the courts of the common law at a time when contributory negligence was a complete bar to recovery, upon which workers, ... can rely to diminish what would otherwise be the most extreme cases of the application of the section ... This involves an entirely legitimate judicial function of statutory construction. ...

There is a second, but impermissible approach which a judge may take. It is to react so unfavourable to the perception of the gross unfairness to a worker... as to set about by (however unconsciously) approaching the evidence and submissions of the parties so antagonistically as to frustrate a fair trial of the issue."
This Court must be careful not to fall into the second approach to s (1A). Notwithstanding the gravity of the injuries received by the worker, the risk that he may not be covered under the Queensland legislation and the devastation of losing significant benefits, this Court must approach the case with scrupulous neutrality, otherwise the rule of law is denied to the appellant and a rule of sympathy is put in its place.
It was accepted that the decision of this Court in Aardvark established that the onus of proving the matters referred to in <case>(1A) rested upon those who asserted them. Accordingly, the appellant sought to establish, in defence of the claim based upon the journey provisions of the Act three grounds of resistance: 
That by their terms such provisions had no application to a journey originating in Queensland and terminating in New South Wales. I have already explained by, in my opinion, the New South Wales Act is not to be construed as if "journey" were confined to one beginning and ending in this State; 
That the journey was not a "periodic" one within the meaning of the Act but was a "one off" journey for a special and particular purpose. In my opinion, this argument fails because of the definition of "place of abode".
The uncontradicted evidence of the worker was that he was proceeding from his place of employment to his home, where he intended to spend the night. There was periodicity in the journey. The evidence showed that the worker did a great deal of travelling to and from his places of employment.
His home was undoubtedly in Glen Innes. He was on a direct journey to that home when injured. In every respect, therefore, the periodic journey of the kind contemplated by <case> of the Act was established; 
But was the "fault" which disqualifies the worker from recovery established by the appellant under <case>(1A)?
The appellant relied upon two considerations. The first was that the worker's manner of driving of the vehicle was such as to amount to "fault". It was pointed out that the roadway was in good condition; the weather was fine; the road was dry; there was no evidence of mechanical failure; proof of a blow-out was not established. In such circumstances there was an inevitable inference that fault on the part of the worker contributed, at least in some degree, to his vehicle going off the road. It is the common experience of life that vehicles do not normally go off a highway, at least in the conditions described, without fault on the part of a driver. The drawing of an inference of fault from such circumstances has been sanctioned by the High Court of
Australia. Thus Barwick CJ in Government Insurance Office of New, South Wales v Frederichberg <case>; [(1968) 118 CLR 403], at 413 said: "An inference of negligence may be drawn from the circumstances of the occurrence itself where in the ordinary affairs of mankind such an occurrence is not likely to occur without lack of care towards the plaintiff on the part of a person in the position of a defendant; ... the jury would be entitled to think that such an occurrence was not likely to occur in the ordinary experience of mankind without such a want of care on the part of such a person."
What are the hypotheses to explain the sudden passage of the worker's vehicle from the road surface to the side with overturning? One possibility is that the worker fell asleep as a result of a hard week's work followed by a long drive of many hours mostly on remote country roads. Another possibility is that the condition of the worker's vehicle, an old one subjected to much country driving, was defective.
Another possibility is that the worker's concentration lapsed for a time or simply that he failed to keep a proper lookout and to keep control of the vehicle. It has been said many times that the magnitude of the risk against which a person must take reasonable care must be considered as a factor in determining the standard that may be expected. Self-evidently, driving a vehicle at between eighty to ninety kilometres an hour along a country road with a passenger as well as the driver imposes on the driver an obligation of vigilance. See Paris versus Stepney Borough
Council [(1951) J AC 367 (HL)], 381. The greater the seriousness of injury which is risked and the greater the likelihood of injury being in fact caused, the greater is the responsibility of the person charged with fault to take care.
Section 10(6) provides that fault includes negligence or other tort and any failure to take reasonable care for the worker's own safety. O'Toole CCJ found in favour of the worker on this point: "It is probable that momentary inattention, particularly in a vehicle of the age of the applicant's, caused the vehicle to leave the road and ultimately the applicant's injuries."
There is no doubt that momentary inadvertence, of the kind that can occur without fault, will escape the prohibition on recovery which <case>(1A) sets up.
Cf Sungrave Pty Ltd versus Meani <case>; [(1964) 110 CLR 24], 493. It was equally clear that the onus of establishing fault beyond mere inadvertence rested upon, relevantly, the appellant. For the worker, it was urged that the evidence supported her Honour's conclusion. He was a young man experienced in country driving.
He did not feel tired and there was no suggestion that alcohol or speed was involved. He had broken the journey at sensible intervals, the last stop being only twenty minutes before the accident. Because of its age the vehicle had a tendency to "wander". Even if, as he denied, the worker had fallen asleep momentarily, this did not of itself constitute "fault". No police action was taken against him for want of sufficient evidence; but of course that could be explained by his profound injuries and is strictly irrelevant.
This Court is obliged to review the facts for itself. It is useful to test the suggested absence of "fault" by asking whether, had Mr Gellie been injured, in the way that struck the worker, the Court would seriously have denied him recovery on the basis that there was no evidence "minutest" fault on the part of the worker. Such a proposition has only to be stated to provide its own answer.
Honesty requires us to say that there could be no real doubt that in such circumstances Mr Gellie would have recovered. The fact of leaving the road alone would be sufficient to give rise to an inference adequate to establish the requisite degree of "fault".
I do not believe that the Court should indulge in double standards - presenting one for plaintiffs who claim recovery of damages for negligence and another to employers who defend a claim for workers compensation on the basis of proof of fault. The proper way to remove the clear injustice in <case>(1A) of the Act is to modify its terms, as was proposed during its passage through Parliament.
Whilst it stands in its present, clearly unjust state, it is the duty of this Court to give it full effect. Although the exact cause of the worker's loss of control of his vehicle is not clear my conclusion would be that the proper inference is that that measure of "fault of the worker" to which the statute is referring was established by the evidence in this case. Clearly, not much "fault" is necessary. In the absence of some clear material which gives rise to a countervailing acceptance of the absence of fault, the mere fact that the vehicle left the road would be sufficient to provide the foundation for the finding of "fault". When it is complained that this has a drastic and unreasonable consequence, the answer must be given: that is precisely what is intended by Parliament.
Absence of seat belt - fault and causation
If the foregoing conclusion is wrong, there remains the question whether "the fault of the worker" was established by proof of his failure to wear a seat belt at the time of the accident. O'Toole CCJ does not finally determine whether the worker was or was not wearing the seat belt. Her conclusion rested upon her stated uncertainty as to whether any such omission contributed materially to the worker's injuries.
With respect to her Honour, the first issue called for resolution. It was clearly tendered by the contest at the trial. Statements that the ambulance operative (Mr Baldwin) and Sister
Cook were "sincere" are beside the point. A statement that "neither remembers the precise words used by the (worker) at the scene of the accident in the ambulance or at the hospital" are contradicted by the explicit evidence of each of the witnesses. Each of them had specific reason to ask the question. Each of them made contemporaneous notes which record the answers. Each of them would have known the high significance of the answer to the worker.
Because O'Toole CCJ does not expressly reject the evidence of
Mr Baldwin or Sister Cook upon a foundation which cannot be challenged in this Court, it is open to the Court to look at the probabilities.
The objective evidence strongly supports the conclusion that at the relevant time, the seat belt was not attached. I refer to the ambulance record; the admission note of the hospital; and the constable's report on the position of the worker when discovered and the mode of his removal from his vehicle. Although the police
P4 record, later prepared, stated that the seat belt was worn, it cannot stand against documents prepared at the very moment that the worker was under the attention of Mr Baldwin and Sister Cook. With all respect, I consider that the clear evidence in the case warranted and required the conclusion that for whatever reason, the Worker had not attached his seat belt. His own original statement to the constable, to Mr Baldwin and to Sister Cook were that the seat belt was not being used. These statements were made in the presence of his friend, Mr Gellie. Significantly, the worker failed to call Mr Gellie who might have been expected to be called if he could contradict the statements of the three apparently objective witnesses.
This leaves the question whether the failure to wear the seat belt was material, in the sense that the personal injury was "caused partly or wholly" by such a fault on the part of the worker. Failure to wear a seat belt would ordinarily constitute "fault". The introduction of compulsory seat belts by law is only explained by the assumption that the wearing of seat belts will reduce the risk of injury generally to drivers and passengers in motor vehicles involved in accidents. Many cases have involved consideration of the relevance of the failure to wear a seat belt for contributory negligence. A clue as to the consideration of Parliament can be found by the requirement that contributory negligence be found for, amongst other things, breach of the regulations on wearing seat belts. See [Motor Accidents Act, 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), [s 74(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s74.html) Se
Nicholson versus Nicholson and Anor, Court of Appeal , unreported, 8 December ; (1994) NSWJB 137. It may be inferred that such legislation was enacted to overcome perceived Judicial reluctance to find contributory negligence on this basis. Nicholson demonstrates, however, that it is still necessary (as under <case>(1A) of the Act) to establish that the failure to wear the seat belt actually caused the subject personal injuries.
In this case, the worker urged that the proper inference was that neither partly nor wholly did any fault on his part as a result of failing to wear a seat belt cause the injury he suffered. By reference to medical and expert evidence, it was suggested that the grave injury suffered was just as likely to have been received had he been restrained by an attached seat as it was in circumstances where an absence of an attached seat belt was assumed. This argument convinced O'Toole CCJ. Regretfully,
I cannot come to the same conclusion.
First, I should dispose of one complaint of the appellant. In formulating her conclusion,
O'Toole CCJ stated: "Paying due regard to the onus in these proceedings if the applicant were not wearing a seat-belt during the accident, I am uncertain whether such an omission contributed materially to his injuries."
The appellant complained that her Honour's expression of lack of certainty imposed an unreasonable obligation on it. It was not the appellant's duty to establish certainty but merely, by the civil onus, to prove that the worker's injuries were caused "partly or wholly" by his fault. There is no merit in this complaint. The passage cited is simply another way of stating that her Honour was not convinced that the appellant had proved that any such omission had caused the injuries.
That proof does not depend upon any advantage which O'Toole CCJ enjoyed as the primary judge. This Court can equally read the evidence of the expert and the medical opinions to reach a conclusion on the same facts. I have done so. With every respect to her Honour (and to those of a different view) I consider that it is adequately demonstrated that the established failure of the worker to wear a seat belt caused, in part at least, the personal injuries which he suffered. It really stands to reason. Although proof of the exact mechanics of the movement of the worker within the cabin of his vehicle during the course of the impact when it left the road, turned over and was then righted cannot be fixed with certainty, common sense suggests some practical realities. A person who is restrained by a seat belt will not move about to the same extent as a person who is not. The whole point of a seat belt is to prevent such movement. It is out of the risks of such movement that the risk of injury of the kind which the worker suffered that occasioned the introduction,and then compulsion in the use, of motor vehicle seat belts. For the worker it was put that the evidence supported one of two hypotheses for the way in which the injury to his cervical spine occurred. It was either because he hit his head on part of the vehicle or because of a flexion extension injury occasioned when the vehicle struck a side post or in the course of its roll. The absence of any frank injury to the head was, it was submitted, suggestive of a flexion extension injury only. I concede the force of that submission.
Whilst it is possible that the worker could have slipped out of the sash restraint of the belt; that he could have hit his head on the roof or some other part of the vehicle although wearing a belt; or that he could have been injured whilst wearing a seat belt; the better inference (on the assumption that no seat belt was attached) was that, unrestrained, he was submitted to flexion and trauma which it is the very purpose of seat belts to prevent. An over-refined analysis of possibilities (which can only be informed speculation because the precise pressures can never be known with certainty) is no substitute for common sense. Seat belts prevent movement of the human body. It is in movement that there is risk of flexion and trauma that occasions spinal injuries. The probability, therefore, is that the absence of the seat belt contributed, at least partly, to the causation of the injury to the worker.
Part contribution is all that is needed by the statute.
This is the effect of the evidence of the neurosurgeon, Dr Gonski. In oral evidence he said: "Q. I think that you said in your evidence that seat belts did not stop people breaking their necks? A. That is so.
 
Q. What is the mechanism of that doctor? A. Well - I think that they may, in effect, restrain people. They certainly restrain people from being thrown out of the vehicle because in my mind it would, that is an obvious one to me. Secondly, I think that they do diminish the force that may be exerted by the actual impact but I don't believe that the seat belt itself would prevent some movement, certainly my seat belt wouldn't and now that I have an air bag in the car there must be a reason why
I have an air bag and that is because it has been found that injuries do occur with seat belts.

HER HONOUR: Q. Now with both hands you indicated, I thought, a vertical movement. Is that what you are indicating. When you spoke about force you used both hands to indicate something that looked to me like a vertical movement up and down? A. Yes.
That's a vertical movement
I believe. But I am certain that with seat belts vertical movements do occur.

Q. So that even if this man had been wearing a lap/sash seat belt at the time of the accident he could have suffered an injury to his cervical spine? A. I believe that, yes.

Q. Such is the type he did suffer? A. Yes."
In re-examination, by leave, Dr Gonski was brought back to the probabilities in this particular case. "Q. We assume the accident in the vehicle behaving in the mode that I described with the vehicle rolling, performing the inverted roll, coming back on its wheels. You assume the speed at the time the vehicle did that was somewhere around the region of forty kilometres per hour, described by the experts as a slow roll. Now, whether or not it is theoretically possible for something to happen, what are your views about the probabilities of a driver who was wearing a seat belt during such a manoeuvre suffering an anterior dislocation of this kind. Is it probable or improbable in your view? A. I would say improbable.
No questions were asked or contrary evidence called in response to this testimony as to the probabilities.
My own opinion coincides with that of Dr Gonski. Although various possibilities exist which would be consistent with an injury of the kind which the worker suffered even if he had been wearing a seat belt, the high probability is that the seat belt would have restrained and prevented the kind of pressures being exerted which led to spinal cord injury resulting in paraplegia. That finding has extremely serious consequences for the worker. It is appropriate that the issue should be determined with regard to such consequences. But it is necessary that the Court should not hold back from that conclusion simply because it seems unfair or harsh.
In my opinion, upon each of the bases argued by the appellant, the personal injury of the worker was caused, partly or wholly, by his fault. This is enough to disentitle the worker from recovery in a claim based upon the journey provisions of the Act. As, in my view, that is the only basis upon which the worker may recover, it is enough to deny the worker compensation benefits. This conclusion relieves me of the obligation to deal with other grounds of appeal which were raised by the appellant and with certain points raised in the notice of contention filed on behalf of NGS.
Necessarily, this conclusion is not determinative of any entitlement which Mr Kennedy may have under the Queensland Workers Compensation Act 1990.
His claim under that Act has remained in abeyance. The provisions under that
Act in respect of journey claims are materially different from those provided under the New
South Wales Act. Nothing which I have said is intended to decide the questions which would arise in an application under the Queensland statute. Those questions can safely be left for determination to the
Queensland tribunal and courts.
 
Orders
The orders which
I favour are: appeal allowed; set aside the award of the Compensation Court of New South Wales insofar as it entered an award in favour of the applicant (John Kennedy) against
Workcover Authority of New South Wales; in lieu thereof, order that an award be entered in favour of Workcover
Authority of New South Wales and Billpat Holdings Pty Ltd; confirm the award entered in the proceedings between John Kennedy and
National Grazing Services Pty Ltd in favour of National Grazing Services Pty
Ltd; order that the said John Kennedy pay the costs in this Court of the appellant but have, in respect thereof, a certificate under the [Suitors Fund
Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/); and reserve liberty to apply in respect of other orders for costs;
JUDGE2
PRIESTLEY JA I have had the benefit of reading in draft Kirby ACJ's opinion in this case. In it he has set out all the materials relevant to the decision of this appeal and has stated the issues which were argued. I agree generally with all he has written down to the paragraph on p 36 which commences with the sentence "This Court is obliged to review the facts for itself". From that point on my views are different. My agreement to that stage means that I agree with Kirby ACJ that it was competent for the worker to bring his claim for workers compensation in the New
South Wales Compensation Court under the New
South Wales [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (the Act); that the company identified as the employer of the worker was properly found by O'Toole CCJ to have been the employer of the worker; and that the worker's injuries did not arise out of or in the course of his employment, unless by reason of the periodical journey provisions of the Act.
My disagreement with Kirby ACJ begins with his statement that he thinks it necessary to test whether or not the employer had shown "fault" within the meaning of <case>(1A) of the Act by asking whether, if the worker's passenger, rather than the worker, had been seriously injured, he would have failed to obtain a judgment for damages for negligence against the worker. Although I can see that the idea behind his query has some force, I do not agree with the suggested approach.
The precise question in the present case is whether on the materials that were before the Compensation Court that court should have held, and now this court should hold, that the employer had discharged the onus of proof that the worker's accident was due to the "fault" of the worker. Had the worker's passenger been injured and subsequently sued the worker for damages for negligence, the question for the relevant tribunal would have been whether the passenger had discharged the onus of showing that his injuries were caused by the worker's negligence. The two questions involve a number of considerations which would be very close to identical, but they nevertheless remain different questions, each, in my opinion, quite a difficult one. It seems to me that the court should answer the question raised by the case, rather than look to a very similar question, not raised by the case, assume what the answer would be, and then say that for the sake of consistency the answer to the question in the present case should be the same.
It seems to me that the strictly proper approach is for the court to focus on the exact question in the present case.
Doing that, I note two aspects of the matter which the Acting Chief
Justice fairly set out and recognised as supporting the worker's position on appeal: first, it is well established that the happening of a motor vehicle accident does not of itself conclusively establish negligence by the driver of the motor vehicle. The words of Windeyer J in Sungravure Pty Ltd versus Meani <case>; [(1964) 110 CLR 24], at 37 are as applicable to motor vehicle accidents as to any other: "... some temporary inadvertence to danger, some lapse of attention, some taking of a risk or other departure from the highest degree of circumspection," (may in some circumstances be excusable) "because not incompatible with the conduct of a prudent and reasonable man." (at 37) 
This statement by Windeyer
J was approved and discussed in The Commissioner of
Railways versus Ruprecht <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 563] at 568, 570-572, 581, as well as in other cases. I think the same observations apply to "fault".
The other matter was that the worker was an experienced driver, did not feel tired, had broken his journey at sensible intervals, was not driving at an unsuitable speed, had stopped twenty minutes before the accident, denied he had fallen asleep momentarily and was not found by the trial judge to have fallen asleep.
A further matter, also recognised by the Acting Chief Justice, is that the onus of establishing relevant fault rested on the employer.
In the circumstances it is my opinion that O'Toole CCJ was entitled to find in the worker's favour, as she did, that the probability was that it was momentary inattention, not amounting to fault, which caused the worker's vehicle to leave the road.
On the materials before O'Toole CCJ and before this court my own opinion is the same as hers: I am not persuaded that "fault" rather than inadvertence caused the accident. As Kirby ACJ pointed out in his reasons, any one of a number of possibilities may have explained the accident. "Fault" was one. In my opinion, on the materials before the court the employer did not show that "fault" was more probable as the causative possibility than any of the others, including that of inadvertence.
In my opinion therefore the employer fails on this point.
There are two more points in the appeal. Was the worker wearing a seat belt at the time of the accident? If he was not, did the non wearing of the seat belt contribute to his injury? Stated more fully, on the totality of the evidence before the trial judge and keeping in mind that the employer bore the onus of proof, were the only conclusions reasonably open to the trial judge that the worker was not wearing a seat belt at the time of the accident and that his non wearing of it contributed to his injury.
As to the seat belt, there was strong evidence to support a conclusion that the worker had not been wearing it immediately before the accident.
Against this, cross-examination of the witness whose approximately contemporary record would appear to be the most telling single piece of evidence against the worker on this issue, a nursing sister named Cook, raised a doubt about the source of the information which was recorded, and crossexamination of the possible source, an ambulance officer named Baldwin, left his evidence looking a little shakier than it appeared in chief. Against this, there was circumstantial evidence, including the worker's statement of his habit of using seat belts, which supported an inference that he probably was wearing the seat belt at the relevant time. The result was, in my opinion, that although the evidence against the worker on this point was strong, it could not be said to be all one way, and I doubt whether, had the trial judge held she was not satisfied that the worker had not been wearing a seat belt, her finding could be described as unreasonable or as one to which she should not have come. In saying this I am bearing in mind in particular that the trial judge had the advantage of seeing the cross-examination of the two principal witnesses against the worker on this point. The trial judge accepted the sincerity of these two witnesses but concluded that neither of them remembered the precise words used by the worker at the scene of the accident, in the ambulance, or at the hospital.
However, although the trial judge thus indicated that she may not have been satisfied that the worker was not wearing the seat belt, she did not explicitly say so. Her operative finding, in which she incidentally made her only statement akin to an opinion about the wearing of the seat belt was a clear finding on the last, causative, point, viz: "if the applicant were not wearing a seat belt during the accident, I am uncertain whether such an omission contributed materially to his injuries". This uncertainty about causal connection between any non wearing of the seat belt and the worker's injuries was a conclusion following from her earlier discussion of witnesses who had given evidence on the basis they were expertly qualified to do so expressing opinions about the likely sequence of events inside the vehicle in the course of its rolling over, during which the worker suffered his injury.
My own opinion of this evidence is that it shows it was difficult to reconstruct with any degree of confidence what the actual sequence of events was inside the vehicle during its rolling over, that it was possible for the worker to have suffered the injury which he did had he been wearing the seat belt and that it was open to the trial judge to express, as she did, uncertainty about the relation between non wearing of the seat belt, if that was the case, and the injury. It seems quite clear in the context that by expressing uncertainty in the way she did she was holding that it had not been established against the worker, on the balance of probabilities, that the necessary causal connection existed.
I see no legal error in the way in which the trial judge approached the causality question and on my own view of all the evidence relating to what the possibilities were of the sequence of events inside the vehicle during the accident, I am no more certain than the trial judge was on the causal connection question. I therefore agree with her conclusion on that question and on the case as a whole.
In reaching my own opinion I have not found it necessary to state any conclusion about the purely factual question whether the worker was wearing his seat belt at the time of the accident. Had the trial judge found that the employer had not established its case against the worker on this issue, I would not have been inclined to interfere with such a conclusion, because for the reasons already indicated the question would have been in the class within which appellate courts do not usually alter trial judge's findings. However, I do not understand the trial judge to have gone so far as to make such a finding, although it may have been implicit in her remarks. I do not feel justified in taking this factual question any further than the trial judge did; nor however do I think I should make a finding in favour of the employer, since this would involve making a finding of fact seemingly inconsistent with what the trial judge said. Further, my view about the causality issue means that it is not necessary to make a factual finding on the seat belt question, so I reach no conclusion on that particular matter.
The overall result is that I would not interfere with the decision of
O'Toole CCJ and in my opinion therefore the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
I also record that the worker filed a notice of motion asking for an extension of time to institute an appeal against National Grazing Services Pty
Limited. However, this order was sought only in the event the court reached the conclusion that the Workcover Authority was entitled to succeed in its allegation that Billpat Holdings Pty Limited was not the employer of the worker at the time of the relevant injury. Since no member of the court is of this opinion, it is not necessary to do more than note that the worker filed the notice of motion.
JUDGE3
CLARKE JA I agree with the judgment of Priestley JA, including his Honour's adoption of the reasons and conclusions of the learned President on all issues except those concerning fault. I would, however, like to make some observations on that final issue.
The appellant submitted that it had established that the respondent
Kennedy was at fault in two respects. The first was his negligence in the control of the vehicle. The appellant's submission on this issue was based upon her Honour's finding that "it is probable that momentary inattention, particularly in a vehicle of the age of the applicant's, caused the vehicle to leave the road and, ultimately, the applicant's injuries".
This finding was said to represent, or to equate, a finding of negligence insofar as momentary inattention at the wheel of a vehicle travelling at 80-90 kms per hour was necessarily to be regarded as negligent conduct, having regard to the consequence of any inattention.
It is clear to me that her Honour did not regard her finding as one which established fault in the driver of the vehicle. If she had she would have found in favour of the appellant. In these circumstances it must be concluded that her Honour was expressing in concise terms a finding that the accident was caused by the driver's momentary inattention which in all the circumstances, particularly the age of the vehicle and, I think, the length of the journey, was not to be characterised as negligent.
This approach was, or would seem to be, based on authorities which establish that momentary inadvertence is not necessarily negligence. Kirby P referred to these authorities in Aardvark Security Services Pty Ltd v
Ruszkowski (Court of Appeal, 19 March 1993, unreported) when he said: "The first is to give meaning to 'fault' in <case>(1A) in such a way as to ensure that mere momentary inadvertence on the part of a worker is not encompassed within 'fault' as there provided.
There is a long line of authority, developed by the courts of the common law at a time when contributory negligence was a complete bar to recovery, upon which workers, ... can rely to diminish what would otherwise be the most extreme cases of the application of the section."
In this country the line of authority commenced with the judgment of
Windeyer J in Sungravure Pty Ltd versus Meani <case>; [(1964) 110 CLR 24] at 37. The principle expressed in that judgment has been applied in a number of cases including Vial versus Housing Commission of New
South Wales [(1976) 1 NSWLR 388] at
What is also of importance for the present case is that Windeyer J expressly said that the principle which he had articulated was not limited in its application to workers in factories but applied generally, and included activities upon a highway. In the later case of Commissioner of Railways v
Ruprecht <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 563] Mason J, who dissented on the facts, said, at p : "It is therefore settled law that this approach to contributory negligence is not limited to employees in factories ..." (See also Molloy versus Hobday (New South Wales Court of Appeal, 1 December 1994, unreported - per Handley JA at 10).
Mr Poulos QC, for the appellant, submitted that the evidence accepted by her Honour provided no explanation for the vehicle leaving the road. In his submission all that was established was that the vehicle left the road. In these circumstances he contended that the judge was bound to find negligence.
The submission, however, finds no support in the judgment to which Mr Poulos referred the court. That was Government Insurance Office of New South Wales v
Fredrichburg <case>; [118 CLR 403], at 413. I do not propose to cite the whole of the lengthy passage but will confine myself to that part which is of critical importance.
It reads: "I quite realise that it may be attractive to the mind to conclude that, because the jury is allowed to draw an inference of negligence from the occurrence for the reason that they are at liberty to think that it was not likely to occur without a want of care on the part of the defendant, the inference of negligence must be drawn by them if the ground upon which it may be drawn is not displaced by other evidence explaining the occurrence. That line of thought seems to me to have found favour with English Courts and to have resulted in the creation by the decisions of those Courts of a presumption of fact in favour of a plaintiff in such circumstances. But this Court has been unable to accept such reasoning and the law is otherwise in Australia. In my opinion, the jury are not bound either to conclude that such an occurrence was unlikely to occur without negligence on the part of a person in the defendant's position or to draw the inference that it did in fact occur in the case before them because of the negligence of the defendant. All that has happened, in my opinion, at the point in the hearing of a case at which the judge rules that there is evidence of negligence on the part of the defendant furnished by the occurrence itself is that the judge is satisfied that a jury would be entitled to conclude that such an occurrence in the ordinary affairs of mankind is not likely to occur without negligence on the part of a person in the situation of the defendant. For the rest, it is a question for the jury whether they think the occurrence unlikely in this sense and, if so, whether in the particular case they will be satisfied that there was in fact relevant negligence."
If it is open to a jury to decide whether or not the proven occurrence constituted negligence then, equally, it is open to a trial judge to decide whether in all the circumstances negligence is to be inferred. Her Honour was not prepared to draw that inference and concluded that the accident was caused by momentary inattention which was not negligent.
In the circumstances that the appellant has accepted the finding of momentary inattention I am unable to discern any basis upon which her judgment should be reversed. In my opinion the submission that momentary inattention predicates negligence is not supportable. I should add that I do not find it helpful to speculate on the prospects that the passenger would have had of recovering damages if he had been injured in the accident. Different legal issues would arise and the evidence would almost certainly be different.
For these reasons I reject this ground of appeal.
The other aspect of the fault submissions concerned the wearing of a seat belt. Her Honour made no finding on the question whether the respondent was wearing a seat belt at the time but said that the appellant had not discharged the onus of establishing that a failure to wear a seat belt materially contributed to the respondent's injuries. (Her Honour did not use those words but that was the clear intent of the words used by her.)
In the circumstances it is appropriate to assume, against the respondent, that a seat belt was not worn and to consider the causation issue.
On this issue the onus lay upon the appellant to establish that the third respondent received his injuries partly or wholly as a result of his failure to wear a seat belt.
This question can be more conveniently considered if it is transposed so that the inquiry becomes - "Would the wearing of a seat belt by the third respondent have saved him from the serious injuries which he suffered? In the circumstances of this case the appellant undertook a difficult task. It is known that the vehicle left the road and rolled over and it is known that the third respondent suffered cervical injuries. What is not known is how those injuries were suffered and whether the restraining effect of the seat belt would have prevented or minimised the force of any impact between part of the third respondent's body and the interior of the vehicle.
Expert evidence was called by the parties in an endeavour to establish how it was that the third respondent received his injuries in the accident and what effect the seat belt would have had.
The evidence of Dr Gonski, who was called by the second respondent, was relied upon to establish that the most likely cause of the third respondent's cervical injury was the compression of his neck while his head was slightly forward. The doctor seems to me to have thought that this probably occurred when the vehicle rolled over and the third respondent's head hit the roof or side of the vehicle. If that had occurred the descending weight of the third respondent's body would, according to the theory, have placed great stress on his neck when his head struck part of the vehicle. The analogy that the doctor drew was with a 'spear' tackle in Rugby League or an incident in which a person dived into a pool and the top of his head struck an obstacle such as the bottom of the pool or a rock. The doctor thought this type of incident was more likely to have caused the cervical injury than the third respondent's exposure to a lateral force. The theory is persuasive although, bearing in mind the complex dynamics involved in the accident, it did not, and could not, descend to the particular in the sense that it did not demonstrate how it was that the third respondent came to be in a situation where his cervical spine was subjected to compressive forces. Notwithstanding,
I am prepared to assume, again in the appellant's favour, that the third respondent's cervical spine became compressed when the top of his head hit part of the vehicle while it was turning over.
The point remains, however, that the precise manner in which the third respondent suffered his injury remains a mystery. In those circumstances the case is one where it is impossible to say that the restraining effect of a lap/sash 'intertia reel' seat belt would have prevented the injury or even lessened the effect of the probable impact involving the third respondent's head.
There was, for instance, evidence, which it was open to her Honour to accept, to the effect that in the type of incident with which the Court is concerned the sash section of the seat belt would have been of very limited help because it would not restrain the upper part of the third respondent's body from moving in a number of directions, including laterally. Where, as in this case, the third respondent was sitting in a confined space and his head was very close (approximately 1"-3") to the roof of the vehicle and was also close to the side of the vehicle it becomes impossible to speculate as to whether the restraining effect of the belt would have had any effect on the occurrence of the injury.
Furthermore, while the evidence established that the lap section of the belt would have exercised a restraining effect on the third respondent's lower body there was no evidence as to the distance a person's lower body may move vertically or laterally before the restraining effect of the seat belt became operative. There was no evidence on this issue in relation to seat belts generally but, more importantly, no one had ever tested this seat belt for the purpose of establishing its characteristics in this regard. At the end of the day, in my opinion, there was no evidence which was capable of establishing, on the balance of probabilities, that the wearing of the lap/sash seat belt in the vehicle would have prevented or minimised the injury suffered by the third respondent.
Her Honour was not satisfied that the onus had been discharged and I see no reason to differ from her Honour's conclusion. On the contrary in the circumstances and the evidence in this case I am of opinion that her conclusion was clearly correct.
The appellant sought to rely on evidence from experts that injuries are less likely to occur if a person is not wearing a seat belt. Dr Gonski, who was clearly qualified to give expert opinion on medical issues such as the possible cause of an injury but not qualified to express opinions on the dynamics of motor vehicle collisions, was asked this question and provided this answer: "Q. We assume the accident in the vehicle behaving in the mode that I described with the vehicle rolling, performing the inverted roll, coming back on its wheels. You assume the speed at the time the vehicle did that was somewhere around the region of forty kilometres per hour, described by the experts as a slow roll. Now, whether or not it is theoretically possible for something to happen, what are your views about the probabilities of a driver who was wearing a seat belt during such a manoeuvre suffering an anterior dislocation of this kind. Is it probable or impossible in your view?
A. I would say improbable."
This evidence probably put the appellant's case at its highest but it is insufficient to found a conclusion that the relevant causal nexus had been established in the circumstances of the present case. I say this for a number of reasons. In the first place the assumptions are so general as to deny the answer, in the circumstances of this case, of any meaningful effect. In the second place the assumptions do not extend to the retentive capacity of a seat belt generally, much less the seat belt in the relevant vehicle. In the third place, as I have pointed out, the doctor's expertise did not enable him to provide an expert opinion on the dynamics of the accident and the manner in which the third respondent's head came into contact with part of the vehicle.
It would, in my opinion, be quite wrong to determine the causation issue in this case by reliance upon broad generalisations such as that injuries are less likely to occur if a seat belt is worn. There was a clear issue in this case - whether the wearing the seat belt would have prevented or minimised the injury - which was not to be resolved upon anything other than the evidence in the case. In particular circumstances, such as where a driver is propelled through the windscreen of a vehicle, it may be relatively simple to discern a causal nexus between the failure to wear a seat belt and the injuries suffered by the driver. In other cases, for instance where the driver is confined within the vehicle but suffers a serious injury in some unexplained way, it may be very difficult to link the failure to wear a seat belt to the injury suffered.
In this case the appellant failed to establish the causal link by evidence accepted by the trial judge and there is no basis, in my opinion, for interfering with the trial judge's conclusion.
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/49.html  
