

Nodnara Pty Ltd versus Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (No 2) Matter No 3202/96 [1997] NSWSC 379 (5 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 `

Nodnara Pty Ltd versus Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (No 2)` `3202/96` `5 September 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `
 `
 `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a company to set aside a statutory demand served on it by the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation ("the Commissioner") in August 1996. 
The assessments were made by the Commissioner as a result of his investigatory activities rather than, in the normal course, after the submission of a return. The company objected to the assessments. The assessments were made in
March 1995. The objections were lodged in May 1995. They were determined by the Commissioner substantially unfavourably to the company in November 1996, and there has been an appeal lodged to the Commonwealth Administrative Appeals
Tribunal. That appeal had been set down for hearing for three weeks commencing October next. However, the dates were vacated by the AAT. The reason why the dates were vacated was a matter of some dispute. The defendant Commissioner would have that it was done at the request of the company or its controlling director, Mr Karageorge. Mr Karageorge said that the impetus for vacating the dates came from Deputy President McMahon of the AAT, who could see that there might very well be a problem in having a three week hearing vacated if certain problems occurred in other litigation involving Mr Karageorge. Mr Karageorge then agreed to the suggestion put forward by the Deputy President, though counsel for the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation violently opposed it. I do not know when the AAT will hear the objections, but the best guess is somewhere early in 1998.

The other facts that need to be considered are that on or about 17 September an amount of just under $700,000 was collected by the Commissioner from the St George Bank by means of a notice under s218 of the [Income Tax
Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/). The amount has not been allocated as against any particular liability by the
Commissioner, but counsel for the Commissioner pointed out that that garnering of funds took place some six months before the assessments that are in dispute in the present case were issued.

The other matter of fact is that the Commissioner wrote to the solicitors for the company on 20 July 1995 indicating that there would be a withholding of recovery action until the objections were dealt with. In later correspondence of April 1996, the Commissioner indicated that because of certain additional matters that had come to his notice, concessions granted to Mr Karageorge had been rescinded and action to recover tax and penalty would commence forthwith.
Mr Thorley of counsel for the company says that it is significant that it was only the concessions granted to Mr Karageorge, not the concessions that were granted to the company, that were withdrawn. Mr McMillan of counsel for the
Commissioner says that as there were not any concessions granted to Mr
Karageorge personally, that is a misreading of the correspondence. I will refer to this matter later in these reasons.

The significance of [Part .4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/index.html#p5.4) of the Corporations Law is that where it is sought to wind up a company in insolvency, a statutory demand may be issued by the creditor, which is to contain or be accompanied by certain details. There is then a strict time limit imposed on the company if it wants to challenge the statutory demand. If the company takes advantage of its ability to challenge then the time for complying with the statutory demand is extended until the court disposes of the challenge (s459F of the Corporations Law). Under s459S, the company that does not apply to set aside the demand is not able to rely at the hearing of the winding up summons on any matter which it did or could have relied on in the application to set aside the statutory demand. Under s459H the court may, where there is a genuine dispute as to the existence of the debt or the amount of the debt, set aside or adjust the demand. That section does not apply in the instant case for reasons that are apparent in my interim judgment on evidence in these proceedings given on 21 August 1997. The basis of the company seeking to set aside the statutory demand is the discretion given to the court under s459J(1)(b).

In my earlier judgment, I analysed that section. Mr McMillan has put that the
Harmer Report, upon which the Corporate Law Reform Act of 1992 was based, which inserted s459J in the Corporations Law, probably only intended that s459J applied where there was some mistake or impropriety as to service or errors in the demand itself. However, in my view, the decision of the Full
Federal Court in Hoare Bros Pty Ltd versus The Commissioner of Taxation [(1996) FCR 302] and the earlier judgment I gave in this matter show that the description is much wider. However, both Hoare's case and also cases before it, of which the best example is the one referred to by Mr McMillan,
Re Roma Industries Pty Ltd [(1976) 1 ACLR 296] (also reported sub nom Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation versus Roma Industries
Pty Ltd [(1976) 6 ATR 54)] show that the mere fact that an objection is made and is pending before the appropriate Board of Review or AAT is not ordinarily a reason for the court exercising its discretion to set aside a statutory demand or refuse a winding up order.

As Bowen CJ in Eq said in that case at 299 (57), the legislature has laid down a policy and even if taxpayers or even if judges think it might be "unjust or even baneful", to use the words of Higgins J in Hickman versus Federal
Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1922) 31 CLR 232], 245, the court must apply the policy in the [Income Tax
Assessment
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/). Indeed, the court must not only consider the matter from the point of view of the taxpayer but also from the point of view of the Revenue. Accordingly, without more, ordinarily the fact that there is a bona fide appeal pending against the assessment on which the statutory demand is based is not sufficient to set it aside.

Mr Thorley says that ordinarily that might be so, but where there is a clearly arguable appeal then the court might exercise its discretion. He says there is a clearly arguable point in the present case, at least the question of law involving stamp duty on sales at Liverpool. Without going into the details, it does not seem to me that even if the matter is clearly arguable, it is sufficient for the court to set aside the statutory demand or to decline to wind up.

However, it is abundantly clear from Hoare's case that the discretion is not to be circumscribed and each case is to be looked at as an individual affair and that, particularly where there are some elements of unconscionability or oppression or an abuse of process or other substantial injustice, the court may set aside the demand notwithstanding the public policy expressed in [sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/s175.html) and [177](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/s177.html) of the [Income Tax Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/).

At an earlier stage of this case, mala fides was to be alleged against the
Commissioner, but this was not proceeded with at the hearing and so I need say nothing more about it.

As I understand it, there were six basic points made by Mr Thorley as to why the court should exercise its discretion under s459J(1)(b) of the Corporations
Law, viz:
There were breaches of the undertaking of 20 July 1995 in issuing the statutory demand before the objections were dealt with.
It is public policy that people cannot take advantage of their own wrong and the breach of undertaking by the Commissioner was such an "own wrong".
The $700,000 collected under s218 of the [Income Tax Assessment
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) meant that the Commissioner was given a substantial payment. Had there not been such a seizure, ordinarily, the Commissioner would have been paid so much on account of his debt and it is common practice that if the Commissioner sees that a taxpayer is making a bona fide effort to pay, he does not pursue recovery action. The ability of the company to make a substantial payment was prevented by the seizure of its funds.
There were substantial delays in dealing with the taxpayer's objections.
There was the clearly arguable case set down for a three week hearing before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
As a matter of commercial reality, if the company is wound up, that will be the end of any objections.

Dealing with these in turn:
Mr McMillan says, as I have said, that the undertaking was withdrawn. I do not agree with him on this. I think the way the correspondence reads is that there was no actual withdrawal of the undertaking given to the company.
However, Mr McMillan then says that if that were so, the breach did not cause the company any actual detriment. The objections were disposed of in November and the difference between the statutory demand issuing in August 1996 and one issuing in November 1996 would be nil, especially as it is in
September 1997 that the court is considering the matter.

Although I agreed with this submission, I think one does need to find not only a breach of undertaking, but such real detriment. If there is such detriment, then equity will restrain a breach of a contractual undertaking up until the time when the party who relied on the undertaking can be put back into his or her original position. This is really just a manifestation of the High Trees principle. However, putting aside the point that there is very little evidence of reliance, the company would have been able to resume its previous position within a couple of months of November and as at today, would be in no different plight.
As I have said in a judgment that is shortly to be delivered [see
Drinkwater versus Caddyrack Pty Ltd 25 September 1997], there are eight different rules that make up the maxim a person cannot take advantage of his or her own wrong. The rule, however, only applies where the "own wrong" causes damage to the other litigant; see, for instance, Thornton versus Abbey Building
Society [[1993] TLR 111.] For the reasons I have given under heading 1, that does not apply in the instant case.
Although it is commonly known in the community or at least the community advised by competent accountants as to what the Commissioner's practice is where people pay something on account of tax, I think Mr McMillan is correct in his submission that I cannot take judicial notice of it. Certainly, had there not been a seizure, the company would have been more able to have made some deal with the Commissioner but, in view of the general tone of the correspondence, it is difficult to see how, as things have turned out, the company's position would have been any different.
It was conceded that there were substantial delays dealing with the objections. However, Mr McMillan pointed out that the taxpayer could have applied under s14ZYA of the Income Tax Administration Act 1953 to move things along. Doubtless, it could have done that, but one really gets back to the same point as before, that even if there were delays, they did not affect the position as it is at the moment.
So far as the hearing before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal is concerned, I am prepared to accept that a substantial point is clearly arguable before the Tribunal. On the evidence before me, I think it is more likely than not that Mr Deputy President McMahon was the moving party for the adjournment rather than the company, he having in mind his precious court time, which might have been wasted had the matter proceeded. However, really,
I am not too sure whether this makes much difference to the ultimate result because the mere fact that there is an appeal is not in itself sufficient.
What does concern me is the point Mr Thorley made that there must be great doubt as a matter of practical commercial reality as to whether, where a major creditor puts a company into liquidation, that that major creditor would supply the liquidator with funds to pursue an appeal against the major creditor's interest. Mr McMillan says that the law clearly is that the liquidator has power to continue with the AAT appeal. That is quite so. Mr
McMillan also puts I should not presume that the liquidator would not do his duty. I do not make that assumption but I do recognise that liquidators usually only are able to act if they are funded.

Mr McMillan also says that there is no evidence that the company is otherwise insolvent. This is a rather strange submission for a person who is trying to wind up the company in insolvency but I think one needs to take a good practical view of it, and I think Mr Thorley's point is correct and that is one matter that one must take into account when exercising the discretion.

Having considered the six points and given them the weight that I have indicated, I do not think that there is sufficient material to outweigh the general thrust of the taxation and companies legislation, thus the statutory demand in the instant case should stand.

As I have said, s459S provides that the company cannot raise, on the winding up application, a matter which it did or could have ventilated on this application. However, Mr McMillan very properly conceded that authorities such as David Grant & Co Pty Ltd versus Westpac Banking Corp <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 265], 279 and Commissioner of State Revenue of Victoria versus Roy
Morgan Research Centre Pty Ltd [(1997) 24 ACSR 73], 75 show that matters such as those which I have considered could still be relevant matters which the judge or master hearing the winding up summons could take into account as to why, in that judicial officer's discretion, a winding up order should not be made.

It follows that the current summons must be dismissed with costs.

Exhibits to be retained.
 * * * 
