

Podgoetsky versus Gardener and Ors [1996] NSWSC 591 (2 December 1996) 
Podgoetsky versus Gardener & Ors December 1996 /96 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 1 October 1996, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. The first prayer for relief was in the following terms:- "1. The Plaintiff be given leave to commence these proceedings out of time." 
The Notice of Motion came before the Court on 27 November 1996.

The solicitor for the plaintiff was invited to identify the source of power pursuant to which the Court was being asked to grant the relief sought in prayer 1. He was unable to identify any relevant source of power. Eventually, it was conceded that the relief claimed was not available to the plaintiff.

The Court was then informed that the dispute between the parties involved a relatively small sum (an amount which would fall within the jurisdiction of the Local Court). The Court was then informed that the question which the parties really wanted resolved was whether or not the limitation period for the plaintiff's claimed cause of action had expired prior to the commencement of proceedings. This question was said to turn on a consideration of the matter of when such cause of action had accrued. It was asked to determine it as a separate question and prior to other questions.

The parties then prepared Short Minutes of Consent Orders. The Short Minutes were in the following terms:- "1. Order that the question whether the Plaintiff's cause of action against the Third Defendant, as pleaded in his Statement of Claim, is statute barred be determined separately from and prior to all other questions in the proceedings.
Order that the said question be heard forthwith on 27 November 1996." 
Orders were made in terms of the Short Minutes.

The material placed before the Court was relatively sparse. I shall briefly refer to some of that material.

The plaintiff was a defendant in proceedings instituted in the District Court.
The proceedings went before an arbitrator for determination. The hearing took place on 19 January 1990. A copy of the award was sent by the Court to the parties on 9 March 1990. There was no application for a rehearing. The award came to be taken as a judgment of that Court.

The arbitrator's award required the plaintiff to pay a sum in an amount of $13,340. The third defendant in these proceedings is the solicitor that acted for the plaintiff in the District Court proceedings.

In June 1995, the plaintiff became aware of steps being taken to enforce the judgment obtained in the District Court. The plaintiff then contacted his present solicitor. It is said that until that time he had not been aware, inter alia, of any negligence on the part of his previous solicitor.

Subsequently, proceedings were brought against a number of defendants. The
Statement of Claim was filed on 19 August 1996. It pleads, inter alia, against the third defendant a cause of action founded on negligence. In substance, it is alleged that the third defendant was negligent in and about the conduct of the arbitration. It is claimed that the third defendant's breach of duty caused the suffering of economic loss (which includes the liability to satisfy the judgment).

The Statement of Claim contains the following allegations:- "7. The Third Defendant discharged his duties to the Plaintiff in a negligent manner.

PARTICULARS OF NEGLIGENCE 
Failure to advise the Plaintiff that Schmid and Gelfer should have been called to give evidence on his behalf 
Failure to confer with and obtain the evidence of Schmid and Gelfer with a view to properly preparing the Plaintiff's case for hearing 
Generally failing to conduct the case and act for and represent the
Plaintiff properly and with due care." 
The dispute involves a short question which was but briefly argued. The third defendant says that the cause of action accrued in about March 1990. The plaintiff says that it accrued in June 1995, when he became aware that his former solicitor had conducted the arbitration in a manner that was negligent.

The relevant law is well established. A cause of action founded on negligence is complete when damage that is not negligible caused by the breach of duty is first sustained (SRA versus Hammond [(1988) 15 NSWLR 395] at -399 and The Registrar General versus Cleaver & Ors (Court of Appeal, unreported, 8 November 1996)). Once loss has been suffered, the cause of action accrues and time starts to run. The Courts have rejected the notion that a cause of action is not complete until the plaintiff discovers the existence of an omission or that he has suffered a loss (Hawkins versus Clayton CLR 539 and Cleaver).

Where a claim is made for economic loss, there may be cases (including those involving contingent loss or liability) where the determination of the question of when damage was suffered has complexity. This is not one of those cases. It was not disputed that the plaintiff acquired a liability to pay the judgment sum in early 1990. This is a liability which is said to have flowed from the alleged breach of duty. It is a significant part of the claim for damages. There is no question of any contingency. It is not suggested that there has been any fraud or concealment on the part of the third defendant.

On any view, the alleged cause of action would have accrued at some time prior to August 1990. When these proceedings were commenced on 19 August 1996, the relevant six year limitation period had expired.

In the circumstances, a defence raised by the third defendant relying on section 63 of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969 (as amended) must succeed. By the time of the commencement of the proceedings, the plaintiff's claimed cause of action had been extinguished.

It is common ground that, if the Court reaches such a conclusion, the plaintiff's claim should be dismissed. Accordingly, I order that the claim made by the plaintiff against the third defendant be dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the third defendant's costs.
 * * * 
