

Acosta versus Chegwin Matter No Ca 40011/97 [1998] NSWSC 42 (3 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
HUGO JULIAN ACOSTA versus PATRICIA CHEGWIN 
CA 40011/97; DC 3954/95 March 1998 
Cole JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: District Court of New South Wales Civil Jurisdiction - Judge Delaney (Acting) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40011/97; DC 3954/95 
DELIVERED: Tuesday, 3 March 1998 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday, 3 March 1998 
PARTIES: Hugo Julian ACOSTA versus Patricia CHEGWIN 
JUDGMENT OF: COLE JA, BEAZLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: J S Coombs QC/G W McGrath 
Respondent: A Lidden 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: McCourt Charlton 
Respondent: Brydens 
CATCHWORDS: 
NEGLIGENCE - MVA - personal injury - no issue of principle 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: EXTEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 5 
Hugo Julian ACOSTA versus Patricia CHEGWIN 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: This appeal revolves very much around the principles in Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] 
In the latter case the joint judgment of Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ stated (at 479): 
More than once in recent years, this Court has pointed out that a finding of fact by a trial judge, based on the credibility of a witness, is not to be set aside because an appellate court thinks that the probabilities of the case are against - even strongly against - that finding of fact. If the trial judge's finding depends to any substantial degree on the credibility of the witness, the finding must stand unless it can be shown that the trial judge "has failed to use or has palpably misused his advantage" or has acted on evidence which was "inconsistent with facts incontrovertibly established by the evidence" or which was "glaringly improbable".

The appellant submits that the trial judge failed to use or palpably misused his advantage or acted on evidence `inconsistent with the facts incontrovertibly established by the evidence'.

The brief facts are that on 20 May 1994 the plaintiff (the respondent to the appeal) was driving her motor vehicle behind that driven by the first defendant (the appellant) in a generally north easterly direction along the
Hume Highway at the Lansdowne Bridge. The appellant was driving a small pantech truck owned by the second defendant.

The bridge had two lanes, one in each direction. At the north-eastern end of the bridge the roadway widened to four lanes, two of which were eastbound. As the road widened the plaintiff pulled to the right to overtake the small truck. At around the same time the defendant also moved to the right lane to attempt to make a right-hand turn. As a result, the plaintiff collided with the defendant with the passenger front corner of her vehicle striking the off- side portion of the truck in the vicinity of the driver's door. (AB 20) 
The defendant said that he put the right-hand indicator on about 2m before entering the bridge and it remained on as he left the bridge. The defendant's vehicle had no central rear vision mirror but had side wing mirrors. The defendant did not see the plaintiff's vehicle prior to the accident, he said because she was coming from behind and not from the side.

The plaintiff's version was that at no time did the defendant's vehicle (which she was following across the bridge) indicate any intention to move or turn to the right. It did not so indicate. As I have said, she moved to the new right lane after crossing the bridge with the intention of overtaking the truck and got about one-half to one-third of the way alongside it when the truck veered into her lane in order to make a turn in front of her. She could not avoid an accident.

There were no eye witnesses to the accident and the police did not attend the accident scene. Thus, contest as to what occurred was between the plaintiff and the defendant.

In assessing the evidence, Delaney AJ said: 
The defendant, who said he was intending to make a right hand turn at Quest
Street (the first street on his right after the bridge) moved his vehicle to the right and collided with the plaintiff's vehicle which I find was then overtaking him. The defendant admitted that he did not see the plaintiff before moving to his right, although he looked in his rear view mirrors. I find that his failure to see the plaintiff (who was clearly there) and then collide with her vehicle was negligent and a material cause of the accident. I find that the defendant was negligent. Mr Halligan argued that I should accept the evidence of the defendant that he had his right hand indicator on before the bridge (as stated by the defendant) and not seen by the plaintiff. I do not accept the evidence of the defendant on this point. I observed the defendant give his evidence, I think that he really believed that he had put on his indicator to turn right into Quest Street, before he reached the bridge, but his movements after crossing the bridge do not support his view.
If he had decided to make a right turn at Quest Street, and had made that decision before crossing the bridge, I am satisfied that he would have moved to a position immediately adjacent to the median strip as soon as he had crossed the bridge. This he clearly did not do. He remained in the same lane, and only at a point some distance after crossing the bridge did he attempt to move into a position on the roadway which would have enabled him to make a right hand turn into Quest Street. The defendant, I thought, was endeavouring to reconstruct the accident, rather than give the evidence from his own memory. The defendant had substantial difficulties with his understanding of
English but gave his evidence without benefit of an interpreter. Nevertheless
I thought he was endeavouring to reconstruct the version of the accident (even at the time of completing claim forms) to exculpate himself from his clear error of judgment and negligent driving. Where the evidence of the plaintiff differs from the evidence of the defendant, I prefer to accept the evidence of the plaintiff whom I found to be a thoroughly credible witness despite lapses of recollection about the appearance of the defendant's vehicle. (AB 207-208) 
I should add that the trial judge also found that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence to the extent of 20% (AB 209 G - N).

Mr Coombs QC on behalf of the appellant has endeavoured to persuade the court that the trial judge misused his advantage or that his finding that he accepted the plaintiff to the effect that the defendant did not use his indicator, was inconsistent with the facts incontrovertibly established by the evidence.

Mr Coombs has taken the court to a number of aspects of the evidence which he submits are inconsistent with the version of the accident given by the plaintiff. For my part, I am unpersuaded by the submission.

There is no doubt that the central finding in the trial (was the indicator on or not) was substantially made on the issue of credibility. I cannot see how it can be said that his Honour failed to use or palpably misused his advantage, nor that he acted on evidence which was inconsistent with the incontrovertible facts. Indeed, each of the illustrations which Mr Coombs has taken the court to are not necessarily inconsistent, notwithstanding that in none of the examples did the plaintiff specifically advert to the lack of use of the indicator, as she did in her evidence in-chief. In my opinion, it could not be said that the finding was `glaringly improbable'. Indeed, there was nothing glaringly improbable about it. The finding was based in part on his
Honour's observation of the defendant giving his evidence. The judge had the opportunity of appraising his evidence, as well as that of the plaintiff. He found the plaintiff to be a `thoroughly credible witness despite lapses of recollection about the appearance of the defendant's vehicle'.

I cannot appreciate how it can be said that his Honour breached the exceptions set out in Devries. Having found the facts as he did, the judge was correct in dismissing the evidence of Mr Foley, an expert, as of no assistance.

The appeal on damages is abandoned. Consequently, it is my opinion that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

COLE JA: I agree. 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree. 
COLE JA: The orders will be as proposed by Stein JA. * * * 
