

Regina versus Hakija Sinanovic No. 60174/94 Criminal Law - Evidence [1996]
NSWSC 49 (11 March 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(2), ALLEN(1) AND SULLY(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE :11:1995 #ADD 11:3:1996 
The Appellant appeared in person 
Counsel for the Respondent       A M Blackmore 
Solicitor for the Respondent      S E O'Connor
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
ALLEN J The appellant was indicted before Hosking DCJ and a jury in the
District Court in Sydney on two counts of dishonestly obtaining money, one count of dishonestly obtaining money and a valuable thing (a bank cheque) by deception and three counts of attempting to obtain money by deception. The deception in each case was the representation that a foreign bank note of a series which had been withdrawn was current legal tender.
He was found guilty on each count. He previously had stood trial and had been found guilty on the same counts but the convictions had been set aside on appeal to this Court on the ground that the deposition of a witness, Mr Tully, had wrongly been received in evidence pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). On the retrial Mr Tully gave evidence.
The appellant appeals against the convictions on the retrial and seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentences imposed by Hosking DCJ.
The appellant was represented at his trial but appears in person before this Court. The Court has written submissions from him which, although diffuse, make clear the substance of his complaints.
It is convenient to summarise them as being that his Honour erred in declining to order a separate trial in respect of each of the offences, or at least for each of the offences alleged to be committed on a different day from the others, and that the convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory. Included in the latter ground are complaints as to the reception of certain of the evidence and his
Honour's directions in his summing-up relating to that evidence.
The substance of the evidence and of the unsworn statement made by the appellant was as follows.
The appellant, who at the time of the offences was 30 years of age, stated that he had come to Australia in 1980, some nine years before the offences, and that since he was a young man he had had as a hobby the collection of bank notes.
He acknowledged that on 22 March 1989 he went to the City House branch of
Westpac and presented a number of
Greek bank notes for conversion. The Bank effected the conversion and the appellant received $10,000 in cash and a bank cheque in the sum of $22,512. Not long after the Bank realised that the 5 million drachma note and a 2,000 drachma note, which the appellant also presented, were not legal tender. They had been issued during the inflationary period in Greece during World War II and had been removed from circulation in
They had not been legal currency since then. The appellant had given his correct name and address and, on 12 April 1992, was spoken to by a bank investigator. The police were called and spoke to the appellant.
The appellant consistently maintained that he was unaware that the Greek notes were not legal tender and that all he had done was convert them at the request of an acquaintance named Ramadam Socrates, whom he had not seen for years, but whom he had come across by accident on the day of the bank transaction, and who gave him $2,000 to convert the notes into cash for him.
(Subsequent police inquiries failed to identify or locate such a man.) This conversion transaction was the subject of the first count.
The appellant was attended to at the bank by two bank officers, each of whom stated that the customer wore a beard and each of whom stated that the man depicted in the photographs (Exhibits 1 and 2) shown to them by counsel appearing for the appellant looked like the man. I shall refer later to those photographs.
On 23 March 1989 a man presented himself to the Westpac branch at 341
George Street where he was attended by a Ms Walmsley. He presented for conversion another 5 million drachma Greek note withdrawn from circulation in
If it had been legal tender it would have converted to approximately $32,000 Australian. Ms Walmsley checked with a supervisor,
Mr Shearman. Having done so she informed the customer that the note was no longer legal tender and could not be converted. The customer said that he had just returned from
Greece and had been using similar currency there without problem. This attempted conversion was the subject of the second count.
On 25 March 1989 the same man tried again, this time at the Rocks branch of the Bank. By coincidence he struck Ms Walmsley again. This time he tried to convert a German note of face value of half a million Deutschmarks.
If the note had been current legal tender it would have converted to approximately $20,000. It was not current legal tender. Again it was inflationary World War
II money withdrawn from circulation at the end of the War and had thereupon ceased to be legal tender.
Again Ms Walmsley spoke to her supervisor. Again she returned and informed the man that the currency was no longer legal tender and that the bank would not convert it. Again the man said that he had just got back from overseas. He said he had been using similar notes in Germany without trouble.
This attempted conversion was the subject of the third count.
When she gave her evidence in March 1994, five years after these events involving her, Ms Walmsley was adamant that the man was clean-shaven when he attempted the conversions at 341 George Street and at the Rocks. By contrast the evidence is clear and uncontradicted that the man had been wearing a beard when he committed the first offence at the City House branch of the bank.
The final series of events, prior to the appellant being interviewed by the bank investigator and subsequently by police on 12 April 1989, occurred on April 1989 at the Wynyard branch. There were three incidents in all. In each of them a bearded man was involved. The man approached a teller and, giving a false name and address, converted more of the Greek superseded notes into $166.48. Shortly after he returned and approached another teller and, again giving a false name and address, converted more of the same superseded notes into $1,896.25. A more senior bank officer, who had noticed both transactions, activated the bank security camera and photographs were taken of that customer.
Two of those photographs (Exhibits P and Q) are in evidence. They are very clear photographs showing a bearded man of small stature and having obvious close similarity, at least, in all respects to the appellant. The man depicted appears to be the same man as that depicted in the photographs (Exhibits 1 and 2) shown to the bank officers who had attended to the appellant on 22 March 1989 at the
City House branch.
The man returned a third time to a yet different teller. This time he sought to convert another 5 million drachma Greek note from the same superseded wartime series. This time he was unsuccessful. That teller was alert to the fact and informed the customer that the note was no longer legal tender and that it could not be converted.
Each of the four bank officers involved at the Wynyard branch of the bank filled in "bandit description forms" on the same day. There is no substantial difference between them - all placing the man as being fairly young, around about the 30 mark give or take a few years, ethnic or Greek appearance, having black hair with a beard. All but one noted that the man was of short stature being around about five foot five inches or five foot six inches in height.
There were minor variations of the type one would expect in descriptions of the same person given by different people. All of those four bank officers subsequently identified the appellant from a photograph series shown to them by the police about four months later. Three out of the four identified the appellant - notwithstanding that he was then clean shaven. one of the four picked the wrong person. Ms Walmsley at about the same time also identified the appellant in the series of photographs.
 .
Evidence was also given by two dealers in bank notes which were no longer current legal tender. They were Mr Tully and Mr Allen.
Mr Tully gave evidence that the appellant had been a client of his on 30 March 1989. He had sold to the appellant $100 worth of old
Greek notes from the inflationary period which were no longer legal tender. He said that the appellant asked him to seek out further notes from that series, and also any German inflationary notes, any quantity. That transaction on 30 March 1989 preceded the attempts, two of which were successful, one of which was not, to convert old Greek notes at the
Wynyard branch of the bank on the last occasion on 4 April 1989.
The other dealer, Mr Allen, gave evidence that the appellant also was a customer and that during the early months of 1989 he had been to his place of business quite frequently, being generally interested in buying inexpensive notes, costing $1 to $4 each, over a broad range but basically money that was no longer currency. His particular interest was wartime series, German series,
Greek notes and even Hungarian notes. Mr Allen was unable to say precisely when those transactions occurred, albeit that the sale of the Greek notes would have occurred before 14 July that year when police spoke to him about the appellant. He was uncertain whether he had sold him German notes prior to that date in July.
I turn to the complaint that his Honour should have ordered separate trials. It is abundantly clear that if evidence of each of the transactions was admissible in respect of other transactions because of its similarity to them, separate trials would have been inappropriate. I have no doubt that this was a proper case for a joint trial. The law has been stated recently by the
High Court in Pfennig versus The Queen (1994-95) Vol <case>; [69 ALJR 147.] At p 157 Mason
CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ said of Australian authority: "It was also accepted that, in order to be admissible, propensity evidence must possess 'a strong degree of probative force' or the probative force of the evidence must clearly transcend the prejudicial effect of mere criminality or propensity. Very often, propensity evidence is received when there is a striking similarity between different offences or between the evidence of different witnesses. In particular, it was recognised that the existence of such striking similarity is necessary in cases such as Sutton ((1984) [152 CLR 533)] where the prosecution seeks to lead the evidence on the basis that the similarity between different offences founds a conclusion that they must have been committed by the one person with the consequence that evidence which would be admissible to show that an accused committed one of the offences is admissible to prove that he or she committed another or the others of them." 
That test clearly is satisfied in the present case. The similarities are striking.
I turn to the second main thrust of the submissions put to us in writing by the appellant. It is that the convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory.
The first point which he makes in support of that submission is that the identification evidence was not satisfactory. It must be said at once that that submission has no weight whatsoever in respect of the first offence, which was the initial offence on 22 March 1989 at the City House branch, and the last three offences which were committed at the Wynyard branch on 4 April
The reason is that as to the offence at the City House branch the appellant admitted that he performed the transaction, albeit giving an excuse.
As to the offences committed at the Wynyard branch, he admitted that he was there and gave an explanation as to why he was photographed. In his statement to the jury, which was unsworn, he said this: "I have been alleged to have gone to the Wynyard Branch, I have gone to the Wynyard
Branch, I had a cheque from Narjee. I would see Mr Tully because I used to go and buy Ancient coins from there or bank notes but never in Greek or German currency - for a start because I don't speak neither Greek nor German and I would also go to
Allen because I did collect bank notes - that's what I liked to do. It is something that I have had as a hobby since I was young." 
He then said he had some confrontation at the Wynyard branch with the officials of the bank - because he was insistent that he be paid. He said that he has never gone back there, that he never did Greek drachma transactions there, and that the reason why he would have been photographed was because of the confrontation he had in trying to cash the cheque.
There can be no doubt he was at the Wynyard branch on 22 March 1989 and that he is the man who appeared in the photographs.
That leaves the problem of identification as to the transactions on 23
March 1989 and 25 March 1989, that is the transactions at the 341 George
Street branch on 23 March and the Rocks branch on 25 March. He was identified in respect of those only by Ms Walmsley.
I have looked at the series of photographs which was shown to the witness on that occasion. It is a very fair set of photographs. None of the photographs lacks a distinct similarity to the other ones in the set. Some pains were obviously taken to put together a set which was demonstrably fair.
There is the difficulty, undoubtedly, with which the Crown confronted that Ms Walmsley did not make those identifications from photographs until some four months after the event. There is the further difficulty that five years after the events Ms Walmsley's then recollection that the man she served had been clean shaven at that time.
Ms Walmsley, however, did more than identify the appellant out of the series of photographs shown to her those months later. On the day on which the attempt was made at the Rocks branch to convert the half million Deutschmark note she completed a "Bandit Identification Form" for bank purposes. The description which she gave in that "Bandit Identification Form" fully accords in substance with the description given by other bank officers at the other branches of the bearded man who they attended to or saw being attended to. She described him as five foot tall, with dark hair, having a beard and so on.
There is also another factor which is highly pertinent to the accuracy and reliability of her identification. It is that the striking similarity between all the offences makes it unlikely in the extreme that they would have been committed by any more than the one person. The evidence being overwhelmingly strong of identification at the City House branch and at the
Wynyard branch, the identification by Ms Walmsley is one which confidently could be relied upon.
The next matter complained of is that his Honour erred in receiving evidence that the German bank note and the Greek bank notes respectively were no longer legal tender. The point was taken that the evidence that they were not legal tender was given not by someone who was a lawyer in Germany or in
Greece but, in each case, by a bank officer.
A similar situation was dealt with by the Privy Council in Ajami v
Controller of Customs [(1954) 1 WN 98.] In that case it was held that a bank officer in Nigeria was competent to give evidence that Colonial French francs were legal tender in French West Africa. What the Board said was that what mattered was the practical knowledge which the banker had by reason of the practice of his business and that such knowledge was an integral part of the practice by him of it. It held that the banker in question was competent as he conducted a business which made it his interest to take cognisance of what was legal tender in French West Africa and he did so. That principle applies to the evidence of the bankers in the present case. It was complained that the half a million
Deutschmark note was not available for the banker to comment upon. However, the banker, an experienced banker in the German banking system, gave evidence at the time there was simply no note in that system of half a million deutschmarks that was legal tender. That made irrelevant the unavailability of the particular note tendered for conversion. The other banker was also very experienced. He was in the Greek banking system and was the representative of the Central Bank of Greece in Australia. There is no substance in the complaint as to the expert evidence of the bankers.
The appellant next complains that his record of interview should not have been admitted as his English was poor and his rights were not explained to him. As to his English, it is in point that he had lived in this country for some years. There was evidence, in any event, by Detective Clarke, Mr
Maitland, the bank investigator, and Mr
Collier, a private investigator who had been employed to locate the appellant, that he was easily understood in
English and there was no problem in conversing with him at all. As to his complaint that his rights were not explained to him, there was no objection to the records of interview taken at the trial on that ground. The records on the face of them contain the conventional warning.
There is no substance in his complaint as to the admission of the records.
Whilst other matters of detail are complained about, there is nothing of substance in any of them. They are all objections to detail not impinging upon the substantial merits of his conviction.
The convictions were not unsafe or unsatisfactory. There is no significant possibility that an innocent man was convicted (M versus The Queen [(1994) 69 ALJR 83).]
I am satisfied that the appeals against conviction should be dismissed.
The appellant seeks leave to appeal against sentence.
The history of the matter is that he spent approximately six months in custody by reason of the convictions following on the first trial. The sentences imposed which had been imposed by Viney DCJ following the convictions at the first trial had been far from severe. His Honour had imposed a sentence of imprisonment for two years on the first offence comprised of a minimum term of 18 months and an additional term of six months: and in respect of each of the ensuing five offences he had imposed a sentence of 12 months as a fixed term concurrent with the sentence first imposed.
Hosking DCJ in sentencing the appellant after the second trial took into account the period of approximately six months spent in custody and noted that it can be very stressful to go back to gaol after one has left it, whether for the purpose of an appeal or for whatever other reason it might be. Taking that into account he sentenced the appellant to a nominal rising of the Court in respect of the last five of the offences. For the first offence he did not impose any term of imprisonment but released the appellant on a good behaviour bond for three years. That was extraordinarily lenient. It was not as if the appellant was a first offender. He had previous offences for dishonesty and had little in his favour except character evidence that he was a good family man.
In the circumstances I would propose that leave to appeal be denied in respect of the sentences.
JUDGE2
GLEESON CJ I agree.
The order of the Court is the appeal against conviction is dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence is refused. We make an order that time served is to count.
JUDGE3
SULLY J I also agree.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/49.html  
