

Gourmet Pizza Kitchen Pty Ltd versus Sikes and Anor Matter No 1915/98 [1998]
NSWSC 117 (20 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 `

GOURMET PIZZA KITCHEN PTY LTD versus ERIC SIKES & ANOR` ` 1915/98` `20 April 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a suit between a tenant of commercial premises and its landlord to prevent the landlord registering a strata plan and associated documents, including a document imposing a positive covenant, which would affect its leased area. 
The plaintiff is a tenant under registered lease 3447645E of commercial premises at Kingsford. The premises can be conveniently described as commercial unit 1 and retail shop 1 Chancellor Plaza. The lease was for ten years commencing on 29 September 1997 with two five year options. The plaintiff operates a pizza restaurant on the premises.

The negotiations for the lease commenced in March 1996 before the building had been erected. During the negotiations the plaintiff and the defendants cooperated in submitting a development application to the Randwick City
Council, the appropriate local government authority. This process and the construction of the building took some time and the plaintiff was only able to commence fitting out retail shop 1 on the date the lease commenced, 29
September 1997. Commercial unit 1 was not available until about a fortnight later. The plaintiff commenced trading on 21 November 1997.

Between 29 September and 31 December 1997 the plaintiff fitted out the restaurant, including the installation of terracotta tiling, contiguous epoxy non slip flooring and also installed refrigeration cabinets and the associated electrical cabling, piping, et cetera.

There is no doubt that before the lease was signed the negotiators for each party had in mind that in the due course of time a strata plan or two strata plans, one for the commercial part of the development and one for the residential part, would be registered. There is also no doubt that plan P2, which is annexed to the lease, though only under clause 33.1 for the purpose of identifying parking, indicated that there was a considerable area in the shape of a pentagon, which was noted on the demised area as being the site of a retention tank. Thus, both parties entered into the lease with the knowledge that there was to be one or two strata plans and that there would be a tank, which was described in evidence as a detention tank, installed.

The evidence suggests that the detention tank is aimed at the problems that might be caused by a one in a hundred years flood. The aim is that excess water will run into the underground detention tank and be detained in that tank until it gradually seeps out of the tank into the underlying sand.

The lease was in more or less standard form, though there were some seventeen pages of amendments, one of the amendments being Item 24. In essence that provided that on registration of the commercial strata plan the tenant would surrender the lease and enter into a new lease for identical premises, but the tenant would not be obliged to do so if in its reasonable opinion the rights it would receive would in any way derogate from its rights under the current lease, including rights to car parking.

The evidence does not suggest that the tenant ever saw the strata plan or the associated documentation up until February this year. The plan and documentation was lodged with the Randwick City Council and the Registrar
General about December last year and after requisitions the form that the accompanying <case> instrument took is as set out in PX04, tab 24.

Under the proposed strata plan, the plaintiff's property will be designated /SP56624. Under the <case> instrument that lot will be affected by an easement for a detention tank and a positive covenant in favour of, inter alia, the
Randwick City Council. The terms of the easement are set out in the instrument and these include full free and unimpeded right to access to the detention tank by both the proprietor of the common property of the strata plan and also the Randwick City Council and the right of the council, should it consider that the "proprietor" has failed to comply with any notice, to itself enter and carry out work.

When the plaintiff was alerted to the fact that the documentation would confer these rights, it objected. The plaintiff lodged a caveat on or about 27
February 1998 against the title, which caveat became registered as 3824944S.
That caveat sought to retrain registration of: "Any plan or <case> instrument which purports to grant any proprietary right or restrict the Lessee's proprietor rights over the premises the subject of the lease (in particular any proposed easement) will derogate from the caveator's rights as Lessee under the Lease." 
I assume the word "which" has been omitted in error before the word "will".

The appropriate lapsing notice was lodged and the plaintiff sought to extend the caveat by summons filed on 1 April 1998. The caveat was extended by interim order up to tomorrow and these matters were heard on an urgent basis.

Today the plaintiff amended its summons to seek not only the extension of the caveat, but also declarations that it was entitled to refuse to execute the form of instrument under <case> of the Conveyancing Act which had been lodged with the Registrar General, and that the defendants were not entitled to cause that instrument to be registered without the plaintiff's consent. There is evidence to suggest that were it not for the caveat the Registrar General may well register the instrument without requiring the plaintiff's consent.

The plaintiff has given many reasons why it says its rights are affected and why it should not sign the consent. The defendants have suggested that many of these matters are really very minor indeed, and that the plaintiff is maintaining its position so as to exert pressure on the defendants commercially because the defendants have entered into some twenty-two contracts to sell the units in the building and that at least nine of these will be threatened if the result of these proceedings is delayed even for a week or so.

The plaintiff's evidence, on the other hand, is that it has legitimate complaints. It acknowledges that some of the matters would appear on the surface to be trifling, but it says that there are a number of loose ends which it would reasonably require to be attended to, apart from the problem that exists for it if a substantial floor area was able to be invaded by the proprietors of the common property or the Randwick City Council.

Dealing with this last matter first, the defendants say that the access to the detention tank is over an area of the floor which is part of the reception area of the plaintiff's premises and over which there are no structures and that it would be quite possible for the area to be tiled over with the appropriate mechanism for a sophisticated trap door which would cause the plaintiff no cosmetic or substantial problem. Further any maintenance or inspection could be done outside the hours when the plaintiff's business is open to the public.

The riposte to this is that the building may very well need to be completely recast every four or five years because of the fickleness of the public for having something new in a restaurant. Further, the remodelling will be affected if some floor area is quarantined from having structures put upon it.
Even if inspection were to take place outside business hours, there would still need to be expenses incurred in the provision of security whilst the inspection took place.

Furthermore, the plaintiff is able to assign its lease, subject to the usual consent which is not to be refused in the case of a reasonable and respectable assignee. An assignee may very well wish to redeploy the structures. Thus, it may be that the value and saleability of the leased premises will be diminished by the proposed easement and positive covenant.

Furthermore, the plaintiff says that there could easily be modifications made to the strata management plan and the <case> instrument, which would go a substantial way to alleviating the problems it has. It says that the defendants have not sought to negotiate these with either the plaintiff or the
Randwick City Council and that why should it have its rights affected against its consent when arrangements with the Randwick City Council for lateral access to the underground detention tank, rather than access through its premises, and some indemnity by the defendants should the Randwick City
Council exercise its default rights, might easily be provided.

Moreover, it points out that at present the provisions of clauses 10.1.4, .1.5 and 20.1 of the strata management plan clash with, in the first two cases, Item 29 of the lease and, in the third mentioned case, Item 33.4 of the lease. It says that had the defendants entered into proper negotiations these matters might have been ironed out, but instead they took the course of filing instruments with the local council and the Registrar General. Thus, if damage is caused to the defendants by delay and the possibility of losing contracts, they only have themselves to blame.

In rejoinder the defendants say that they are willing to put in place a bank guarantee for the term of the lease to secure any loss or damage which the plaintiff may suffer, including diminution of value by reason of the strata plan and the associated documents being registered in their present form. They have indicated, and I am told I can accept this from the bar table, that the defendants are the registered proprietors of the land beneficially, and that when the twenty-two contracts are completed the mortgages taken out to finance the development will be discharged and the defendants will be the proprietors of the reversion without diminution by way of mortgage. It is thus put that even if the plaintiff was right, that to maintain the caveat would be oppressive.

It is almost common ground that the defendants could apply under <case> of the
Conveyancing Act for the grant by the court of the appropriate easement. If such an application were made, and if the court considered that reasonable attempts had been made to obtain the easement by negotiation, and that it was in the public interest, the court could grant the appropriate easement, subject to just compensation.

Mr Pembroke SC, who appeared with Mr Powell for the plaintiff, put that I should not speculate as to the amount of damage, I should not possibly involve myself in an injustice by virtually ordering the plaintiff to accept the defendants' offer of a bank guarantee for $50,000, but that if the defendants want to make an application under <case> they could do so and that could be heard at an early date.

The defendants, through Mr Harrison SC, said that that submission showed that damages really were an adequate remedy, accordingly, there should be no injunction or its equivalent for the extension of the caveat, but that a $50,000 bank guarantee in the short term would be sufficient and that, if the course suggested by Mr Pembroke SC was adopted, nine contracts would be lost.

The legal decision that I have to make is not particularly difficult. Mr
Pembroke SC puts that the terms of the lease contain no reference to any proposed <case> instrument or making of a positive covenant in favour of the local authority, and that, indeed, apart from a passing reference in the plan
P2 there is no indication of a detention tank. He points out that the lease does not point to any easement for access or restriction as to user of any part of the premises, so that under the lease the tenant has full use of the entire premises. He says that there would be difficulty to the plaintiff, not only in the way that I have indicated, but should there be a fire or other damage or cause for rebuilding or repairing. He says that the Conveyancing
Act, <case> (3) (b) makes it clear that a positive covenant must be made by an instrument in which, inter alia, the lessee executes and there is nothing in the lease which takes away the lessee's statutory right.

In the ultimate Mr Harrison SC did not cavil with those propositions. There was some debate before me as to the significance of Item 24 of the lease, but as Mr Harrison SC points out, this only comes into play once a strata plan is actually registered. The case really can be decided without any reference to that item.

Mr Harrison SC sought to put that ss 42 and 43 of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) protect his clients' position because he says the lessee at all times knew that there was to be a strata plan and is now alleging that it has no obligation to concur in the registration and thus there is fraud.

There are many problems with that submission, but one which is fatal is that at the time when the lease was executed the plaintiff was not a registered proprietor of any interest in the land. Really the submission is one which uses the fraud provisions of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) as a sword not a shield, which goes beyond their proper application.

However, the same point can just as well be made by putting, as Mr Harrison SC did, that it would be unconscionable to permit the tenant to insist on its strict rights and prevent the strata plan and associated documentation being registered.

The assessment of this submission comes down to deciding questions of fact. It is quite true that the tenant did know that there would be a strata plan being lodged in respect of the commercial development, and that it may well have known that there was to be a detention tank, but it did not know of the conflict between the strata management plan and the lease, it did not know what rights the council would have to invade its property without its consent, and it did not know that the strata plan would require it to quarantine a considerable floor area from the building of fixtures and structures.

I consider that the submission that the plaintiff did not know of these details is correct on the evidence and that it would not be against the conscience of the plaintiff to maintain its statutory right to decline to consent to signing the instrument imposing the positive covenant in favour of the Randwick City Council.

That then brings me to the matter as to whether the caveat should be maintained or whether it is oppressive. The pronouncements of this Court and other courts, that it will not permit a caveat to be used as an instrument of oppression, is to a great extent judge-made law and equates the approach that the court takes when dealing with balance of convenience in an interlocutory injunction application. I dealt with these factors, inter alia, in
Australian Property & Management Pty Ltd versus Devefi Pty Ltd [(1998) 7 BPR ,255.] 
Is it then oppressive to extend the caveat? 
I have already set out the many contentions on each side. I should add that I do not consider, with respect, that Mr Harrison SC's assessment of the situation, that the plaintiff is suffering only technical inconvenience, to be adequate. It seems to me that the problems that have been referred to by the evidence and by Mr Pembroke SC in address are, or at least some of them are, matters of substance. I am also concerned about the problems that may exist with cables and piping which under the terms of the lease can legally pass into other property owned by the present lessor, but after a strata subdivision may become common property or may become in some other unitholder's title.

Accordingly, I do not consider that the problems are merely technical. On the other hand, there is quite a flavour in the evidence that the plaintiff is insisting on its legal rights to a degree which may be beyond what is warranted. There is some flavour that the plaintiff is insisting on its legal rights for commercial purposes. That is, of course, legitimate, but in the line of cases that I have referred to the court will only permit that up to a certain point.

Mr Pembroke SC reminds me that in Commonwealth Bank of Australia v
Baranyay <case>; [[1993] 1 VR 589] at 600 Hayne J, when a Justice of the Supreme Court of
Victoria, made it plain that the authorities show that there was an onus on a person seeking to remove a caveat, which was lodged with reasonable cause, to provide evidence as to why the caveat should go.

The only offer at the moment is that $50,000 be provided by way of bank guarantee. That $50,000 came from a figure that I pulled from the top of my head during debate, rather than being a figure that anyone has used as a bona fide estimate of damage or loss.

I believe that I should adopt some compromise position. It does seem to me that in the light of the rights that the defendants have to make an application under <case> the matter really does come down to one of dollars and cents, but on the other hand I accept Mr Pembroke SC's position that the dollars and cents really should be properly quantified and so there should be no speculation.

To do justice to this case requires that the parties negotiate in good faith in the near future and that if a solution can be found that way nothing more from the court will be required, save to make an order for costs in favour of the plaintiff for the proceedings to date.

I will stand the matter over to 12.15 pm on Friday 24 April 1998 for that to take place. I will expect at 12.15 pm on Friday to have some evidence that the contracts for sale of the units in the building are in a state where they could be terminated by the purchasers and (without necessarily being told of the details) that bona fide good faith negotiations have taken place.

If it is then left to the court to make orders I will decline to extend the caveat further upon the defendants' undertakings to secure payment into court or secure $50,000 in the short term and to pay the compensation that would have been payable had a <case> application been successfully made for the grant of an easement. That matter may perhaps be referred out.

I would hope that someone would check with the Registrar General at a high level as to whether there is a problem in registering the strata plan in view of the fact that the lease is in existence at the moment affecting the whole title.

However, all that I will do at the moment is to extend caveat 3824944S up to and including 24 April 1998 and stand the matter over to 12.15 pm on Friday 24
April 1998.
 * * * 
