

McFarlane versus Nominal Defendant Matter No 20288/94 [1998] NSWSC 210 (22
April 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
McFARLANE versus NOMINAL DEFENDANT & ORS /94 April 1998 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Some time after 3pm on 6 August 1992 the plaintiff, then aged 21, was riding an unregistered and uninsured Yamaha 250 XT motorcycle proceeding south on an unnamed road skirting the western bank of Pamamaroo Lake when he collided with a kangaroo. The road passed through a western lands holding known as Texas Downs but it was agreed by all parties who appeared at the hearing that it was a public street for the purpose of any issue in the litigation. 
On 17 February 1997 an order was made, by consent, that the issue of liability in the action and in the first, second and third cross-claims be separately determined. At the hearing there was no appearance for the Menindee Landcare
Group which was cross-defendant in the first and third cross-claims. The evidence shows that Menindee Landcare Group was incorporated on 1 September , that is after the plaintiff's accident. As constituted those cross- claims must fail in limine and there will be no need to make reference to the position of that non appearing cross-defendant in connection with the issues which remain as the subject of present contest. At the commencement of hearing all appearing parties joined in a request that it be further limited to determination of the issue of breach of duty of care and I will accede to that request.

On 10 May 1990 a meeting of people at Texas Downs promoted what was later incorporated as the Menindee Landcare Group. Present were the second and third defendants and the plaintiff's father Peter McFarlane senior. The focus was a problem of rabbit control. By 1992 an eradication program included using a bulldozer to destroy warrens in an area on that property between the Menindee and Pamamaroo lakes known as Copi Hollow. The process was for a "spotter" to locate and mark the warrens with white material after the fashion of a pathfinder, thus enabling the bulldozer to target individual warrens. The operation was colloquially known as rabbit warren ripping. The Menindee
Landcare Group paid hire for the bulldozer and driver. The spotters were volunteers sharing a common interest in the suppression of pest animals.

In about July 1992 there was a gathering of group members. Memories are vague about it and it does not seem to have been a formal meeting. There are no minutes in the "Secretary's Book", Ex. C, but this aspect is of no consequence. Intended ripping of rabbit warrens was discussed. I infer that it was common knowledge that some "spotters" might proceed on foot and others might use motorcycles. The second defendant, Mrs Symonds, offered to make a motorcycle available for use in the spotting activity. The cycle had been purchased by her husband, the third defendant, but I am satisfied that they considered and represented it as joint property. They were both present at the gathering when the offer to lend the cycle was made.

At that time the third defendant was employed by Tandou Station and he stayed near its cotton farm during the week, arriving either on Sunday evening or early Monday morning and returning home the following weekend. Apparently
Texas Downs belonged to the same interests as Tandou Station but that is not of relevance in these proceedings. The second defendant worked a shift each day at Maidens Hotel in Menindee. Her cousin, Joanna Pearce, lived with the
Symonds family and acted as a nanny for their two small children.

Before he left for Tandou, probably on Sunday 2 August, the third defendant fuelled the cycle and left a helmet and gloves on the saddle thus making these items available to anyone who was going to participate in the Landcare activity. I accept the evidence that on Wednesday of that week the second defendant telephoned the plaintiff's father and asked whether his son would be available to spot warrens on the next day. This was agreed as was the use of the cycle which was described to Peter McFarlane senior as fuelled up and ready to go, as indeed it was as a result of the third defendant's preparation on the previous weekend. The second defendant testified that she did not recall this conversation but I find it is likely to have occurred particularly because she herself went to Copi Hollow the next day by car and proceeded on foot to act as warren spotter but knew that she would have to leave early at about 3pm for her shift at the hotel.

On Thursday 6 August, while the second defendant was at Copi Hollow the plaintiff drove his sister's car to the Symonds property Eldamar. This was located to the east of the road between Menindee and Texas Downs and west of the Darling River. Witnesses referred to the road as either Texas Downs Road or the Racecourse Road. When the plaintiff arrived the children and Joanna
Pearce were on the property. She saw him get out of the car and shortly afterwards depart on the motorcycle. He was not wearing the helmet which she had seen on the saddle earlier in the day in the situation as it had been left by the third defendant.

There are discrepancies in the evidence about the time of the plaintiff's departure. I find it unlikely that he left in the morning as he and his father approximated. After his arrival at Copi Hollow the plaintiff took the second defendant as pillion passenger back to her car. No one suggested that there was any period during which both of them were spotting one on foot and one on the cycle. I conclude that the probability is that the plaintiff arrived and in effect took over the spotting tasks from the third defendant some time in the afternoon. She had left by the time that the plaintiff went to a shop to buy a soft drink and the operation terminated shortly after this because the bulldozer had broken down and required a part to be brought from Broken Hill.

The plaintiff's last recollection is of handing a can of soft drink to Andrew
Martin, the bulldozer driver. Mr Martin was not called as a witness but this is merely an observation and not the basis upon which I have drawn any inference. Undoubtedly the plaintiff later set off on the journey which ended with the ill fated encounter with the kangaroo.

It is convenient to deal first with the case sought to be mounted by the plaintiff against the second and third defendants. In final address senior counsel for the plaintiff stipulated that no argument was advanced against the proposition that a helmet was made available with the cycle by being left on the saddle. So, I find, were a pair of gloves. The initial question is whether there was a proximity of relationship between the second and third defendants on the one hand and the plaintiff on the other so as to give rise to a duty to care in the former towards the latter. I answer this question in favour of the plaintiff. I agree with the submission that reference to old cases attributing relevance to circumstances of gratuitous bailment are less than useful and I find that a duty to take reasonable care derived from the relationship of lenders and intended user of the cycle.

It was submitted that two further questions were whether a forseeable risk of injury existed if the use of a helmet was not required or compelled and whether a reasonable person in the position of the defendants would have required or compelled the use of a helmet. A relevant foreseeable risk of injury would be that arising out of a helmet not being worn and the consideration of compulsion or requirement to wear one would be germane to the issues of duty of and standard of care and more particularly to any perception of breach.

The essence of the plaintiff's case was the contention that, accepting a helmet was made available by the second and third defendant for the plaintiff, they breached a duty of care by failing to make it a condition of the loan that the plaintiff would wear it or by failing in some unspecified way to compel its use.

The plaintiff testified that if he had been told to wear a helmet he probably would have worn one. I do not accept this assertion. Prior to the accident he had been witnessed riding in and about the Menindee district but no one who gave evidence recalled seeing him ever wearing one. There is evidence that since the accident he has been seen again riding a motorcycle and again without a helmet. This is confirmed by photographs taken in recent weeks. I am not satisfied that the probability is that the plaintiff would comply with any communication from the defendants specifying a requirement to wear a helmet.

It is arguable that in a strict sense, the improbability of prudent response by a plaintiff to warning is severable from the concept of breach of duty of care by the defendant which is the exclusive agreed issue being tried. The matter was however dealt with in submissions and I treat it as for trial in accordance with the broader approach of the parties to the contested issues.

In the conduct of the case the plaintiff's counsel embraced the evidence of the pre-accident sightings of the plaintiff riding without a helmet in order to impute knowledge to the defendants that the plaintiff would be unlikely to use a helmet unless steps were taken to compel him. The proposition was also canvassed that it was not the practice of the motorcycle mounted spotters engaged in rabbit warren ripping to wear head protection. The plaintiff said it was easier to look around for warrens without a helmet. Even if that was so, it would not follow that there ought to be an anticipation that a helmet would not be worn if the cycle were ridden on a journey to and from the
Landcare operation.

However, the evidence does not support the plaintiff's assertion. Albert
O'Brien, known as "Rossy", was not challenged in cross-examination upon his statement that he himself to wore a helmet whilst spotting from a motorcycle.
I accept his evidence that on an occasion when he and the plaintiff were working together spotting rabbit warrens for ripping that he asked the plaintiff why he, the plaintiff, was not wearing a helmet and was told without elaboration that he could not wear one.

The conclusion I reach is that, despite the notorious safety benefit of wearing a helmet, the plaintiff for reasons of his own (except possibly when riding a very powerful bike which a Yamaha 250 is not) declined to take that precaution.

I am satisfied that the supply of the helmet and gloves with the cycle fulfilled any duty of care owed by the second and third defendants to the plaintiff in respect of the loan of it to him. The content of that duty obliged them to take reasonable care for the plaintiff but did not require them to undertake guardianship of him. There is considerable force in the analogy drawn by counsel for the defendants between leaving a cycle with appropriate safety equipment for example helmet and gloves and lending a motor car suitably fitted with safety equipment such as seat belts. Reasonable care, it was rhetorically stated, could surely not extend to attending to fastening the seat belts for the borrower nor would liability be imposed for mere failure to incant an express exhortation not to omit to use available seat belts.

Whilst a reasonable person should anticipate that not everyone acts prudently always, it would be entirely artificial for liability of a lender of a vehicle fitted with seatbelts to depend upon whether that lender said "use the seatbelts" or similar. In the present case such an exhortation would have been no more than ritual as it is improbable that the plaintiff would have complied with any advice to use a helmet.

An individual aspect relating to the second defendant, however, needs to be examined. At Copi Hollow she was taken by pillion on the cycle to her car by the plaintiff. Neither wore a helmet on that occasion. Did the knowledge that he had not then worn a helmet alter the situation so as to affix her with potential liability? I answer that query in the negative. Nothing that the third defendant did placed the plaintiff in peril. The circumstances of the incident of the ride to the car were only fleetingly explored. There is no indication in the evidence of the length of this journey or whether, given that no helmet was worn on that journey, the second defendant was aware whether the plaintiff had brought the helmet supplied with the cycle to Copi
Hollow or not.

It follows from my findings that the plaintiff's action against the second and third defendants must fail and consequently must also fail against the Nominal
Defendant.

It was also argued on behalf of the Nominal Defendant that as the exclusive assignment of negligence relied upon by the plaintiff was the failure to compel the wearing of the helmet then, even if that were sustained, the injury to the plaintiff was not caused by the fault of the owner in the use or operation of the vehicle within the meaning of those expressions in <case> (1) of the Motor Accident Act.

It is unnecessary to resolve this matter but I record that I would favour a broad construction of those expressions. Antecedent actions rendering a vehicle unroadworthy or otherwise unsafe would in my view be comprehended within' the notion of the fault in the later operation of the vehicle on a public street.

The determination of the separated issue contrary to the plaintiff's contentions inevitably leads to failure of his action. Apart from the matter already discussed concerning the first and third cross-claims, the cross- claims must also be dismissed.

I direct entry of judgment for the defendants in the action and for the cross- defendants on each of the cross-claims. Costs are to follow the events. The plaintiff to pay the defendants' costs of action and the respective cross- claimants to pay the cross defendants' costs of each of the cross-claims.
 * * * 
