

Lawcover Pty Ltd versus Commissioner of Police Matter No 1447/97 [1997] NSWSC (10 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
LAWCOVER PTY LIMITED versus COMMISSIONER OF POLICE /97 December 1997 
Hodgson CJ in Eq 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: When I gave reasons for judgment in this matter on 28th November 1997, I invited the parties to make further submissions, if they wished, on three matters. 
Firstly, in my judgment I expressed the view that the defendant should be granted access to certain documents that appeared to relate only to requests for payment of fees, and I invited the parties to make further submissions on that matter. No-one wishes to make further submissions on that matter, and accordingly the view that I expressed in my reasons will be reflected in the order of the Court.

Secondly, I expressed some views about s.131 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), and in particular, views to the effect that it seemed to have an unsatisfactory operation in certain respects. It has been put on behalf of the defendant that the problem that I identified may be met in circumstances like those of this case by s.131(5)(b) of the Act, which in effect excludes the section from application to attempts to negotiate a settlement of the criminal proceedings.
In this case, although the negotiations concerned the settlement of very substantial civil proceedings, it could be argued that, insofar as they were directed to settling contempt proceedings involved in the civil proceedings, and insofar as a suggestion was made that certain steps be taken towards having certain criminal proceedings terminated, the effect of s.131(5)(b) is to exclude the application of s.131 to this case.

My attention has also been drawn to suggestions in Odgers, Uniform Evidence
Law that it may be desirable for s.131 to be amended to give some judicial discretion to overcome the privilege in circumstances which do not fall within the listed exceptions.

I briefly heard a submission from Dr. Rajski on this matter, and he put that it could be arguable that s.131(2)(a) indicates that s.131 is only intended to apply in civil proceedings involving persons involved in the communication; but at present that does not seem to me to be a powerful argument.

The third matter on which I invited further submissions was the question of costs, and I will come back to that in a moment.

Dr. Rajski has appeared today and sought to make short submissions on a number of matters, and I permitted him to do that. He asked me to note that the last paragraph on page 2 of my judgment could give a misleading impression in that he did not make complaints directly to the Police, but rather wrote to a
Member of Parliament in March 1995, and that it was as a result of that that subsequently there was communication between him and the Police.

Dr. Rajski also drew my attention to a matter on page 19 of my judgment, where
I expressed an opinion that documents 240-242 were clearly protected by legal professional privilege. Dr. Rajski submitted that reference to other documents suggested that those documents were not prepared for the purpose of legal proceedings, but rather for the purpose of making submissions to the Director of Public Prosecutions. That was a matter which was not canvassed in submissions before me; and in circumstances where the view which I expressed is not necessary for the orders which I will make, I think it appropriate to withdraw that expression in my judgment and simply leave it open as to whether or not documents 240-242 are protected by legal professional privilege. I am finding, in any event, that they are outside the terms of the warrant, so this will not make any difference to the orders that I make.

Dr. Rajski also contended that to documents 78-79 and 81-82 in Category 2 should really have been in Category 1, and therefore subject to the waiver in respect of Category 1. Whether or not that would have been a more appropriate categorisation, it does not, in my opinion, make any difference to the circumstance that what was waived was privilege in relation to those documents which were in fact included in Category 1.

The other matter on which Dr. Rajski wished to make a submission was the question of costs. As a concerned member of the public, he contended that the greater part of the hearing was directed to the Category 1 documents in relation to which the Commissioner was successful, and he put that the plaintiff should be ordered to pay 75% of the defendant's costs.

Mr. Jacobson QC for the plaintiff submitted that the defendant should be ordered to pay some or all of the plaintiff's costs. All of the documents had been seized under a search warrant, and it was necessary for the plaintiff to commence proceedings in order to protect any of the documents from inspection.
The plaintiff was an entirely innocent party in the matter, and it claimed privilege in effect on behalf of other parties. As a result of the proceedings which it had to commence, it obtained orders that denied access to a substantial part of the documents that had been seized. The waiver in respect of Category 1 documents did no more than narrow the issues. The plaintiff was successful on the contested issue concerning legal professional privilege and common interest privilege, and successfully resisted a suggestion that the plaintiff itself could have been affected by some improper purpose.

There is some force in those submissions, but I think it has to be recognised that the defendant is carrying out a public office. Having regard to the protocol which has been arrived at to resolve questions of legal professional privilege in relation to documents seized under the search warrant, I think it is fair to say that the defendant was compelled to be involved in court proceedings if the defendant was to get access to any documents whatsoever; and the result of the proceedings is that the defendant has obtained access to the Category 1 documents, which might be considered the most significant for the purposes of the defendant. It is fair to say that a substantial part of the hearing was concerned with issues that related primarily to the Category 1 documents.

Mr. Johnson SC for the defendant submits that the tentative view I expressed in my judgment is the appropriate one, and having regard to the further considerations I have outlined, I adhere to that view.

The orders that I make are these.

I declare that the defendant is not entitled to access to any of the documents in Categories 2, 3, 4 and 5 and Schedule 3 of the plaintiff's Amended List of
Documents apart from documents 93, 112, 193, 195, 196 and 212-214.

I order that each party bear its own costs.

I reserve liberty to either party to apply on 7 days' notice.

The exhibits and the documents marked for identification may be returned.
 * * * 
