

The Law Society of NSW versus Bruce and Ors [1996] NSWSC 287 (19 July 1996) 
THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES versus BRUCE & ORS /96 
Friday, 19 July 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
GILES CJ Comm D 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Mr Jack Diamond, a former solicitor and partner in the firm of Diamond Peisah & Co, misappropriated money paid for investment on first mortgage security through the firm. The Law Society of New South Wales allowed claims by the investors against the Fidelity Fund established and maintained pursuant to to the [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) (the Act), and paid the claimants accordingly. Some of the claimants had dealt directly with Mr Jack Diamond in arranging their investments. Other of the claimants had dealt with Mr Ian Bruce, an accountant, and/or Hambros Equities Ltd (Now Baker Young Stockbrokers Ltd) (Hambros) and in particular Mr Andrew Murray, an investment advisor employed by Hambros, in arranging their investments. In these proceedings the Law Society seeks to recover from Mr Jack Diamond's then partners, from Mr Bruce, from Hambros, and from Mr Murray the money lost by the claimants, with the exception of one cause of action against Mr Bruce on the basis that it is subrogated to the claimants' rights and remedies against those persons and that company and entitled to exercise the rights and remedies in its own name.

On 26 April 1996 Rolfe J ordered that certain questions, in essence whether the Law Society is subrogated to the claimants' rights and remedies against
Hambros and Mr Murray, be decided separately from and before all other questions in the proceedings. For that purpose the parties agreed upon facts, and they also agreed that if the questions were answered in the negative then the proceedings would be dismissed not only as against Hambros and Mr Murray but also as against the former partners and, save for the excepted cause of action, as against Mr Bruce. All parties other than Mr Bruce presented submissions on the separate questions. The questions were - "1 Whether, as is alleged in paragraphs 73, 74, 82 and 83 of the Plaintiff's
Contentions: the Law Society is: subrogated to the rights of the Hambros claimants to maintain against
Hambros the claims of the Hambros claimants referred to in paragraphs 54 to 72 of the Contentions; and entitled to exercise all of those rights of Hambros claimants in its own name; and the Law Society is: subrogated to the rights of the Murray claimants to maintain against
Murray the claims of the Murray claimants referred to in paragraphs 75 to 81 of the Contentions, and; entitled to exercise all or any of those rights of the Murray claimants in its own name." 
The Hambros claimants and the Murray claimants are co-extensive: the division between them in the questions is probably explained by a cause of action against Hambros not alleged against Mr Murray. In paras 73, 74, 82 and of its contentions the Law Society alleged subrogation and entitlement to use its own name pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s90a.html) of the Act. It relied solely on [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s90a.html) and did not rely on any right of subrogation under the general law. No submissions were addressed to the exercise of the claimants' rights in the Law
Society's name, no doubt because it was accepted that if, as the Law Society contended, there were subrogation pursuant to [s
A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s90a.html), [s
A(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s90a.html) would entitle the Law Society to use its own name.

Subrogation under the Act 
The Fidelity Fund "is held, and is to be applied, by the Law Society for the purpose of compensating persons who suffer pecuniary loss because of a failure to account or a dishonest default": [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s80.html) of the Act. Content is given to the phrases "failure to account" and "dishonest default" by [ss
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s79a.html) and [79B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s79b.html) respectively - "79A (1) In this Division, a reference to a failure to account is a reference to a failure by a solicitor to account for, pay or deliver money or other valuable property received by, or entrusted to, the solicitor or an associate in the course of the solicitor's practice (in the case of an associate, being money or valuable property under the direct or indirect control of the solicitor).
 
This section applies only to a failure to account that arises from an act or omission of the solicitor or associate.
 for which the solicitor or associate has been convicted of a crime or an offence involving dishonesty; or which the Law Society Council has found to be dishonest.
 
A finding by the Law Society Council under subsection (2)(b) that an act or omission is, or is not, dishonest is final and conclusive.
 
This section applies whether the money or other property was received by the solicitor or associate as trustee, agent, bailee or stakeholder or in any other capacity.
 
This section applies whether the failure to account, or the act, omission, conviction or finding of dishonesty, took place before or after the commencement of this Act.
 
B (1) In this Division, a reference to a dishonest default is a reference to a dishonest act or omission (other than a failure to account) by the solicitor in the course of the solicitor's practice, but only if: a final judgment debt has been obtained against the solicitor as a result of the dishonest act or omission; and the judgment debt is not fully satisfied.
 
A dishonest act or omission is an act or omission: for which the solicitor has been convicted of a crime or an offence involving dishonesty; or which a State or Commonwealth Court has, in the course of delivering a final judgment, found to be dishonest; or which the Tribunal has found to be dishonest in connection with a final determination of the Tribunal.
 
A judgment debt is fully satisfied if the solicitor provides adequate security to cover the relevant judgment debt or pays the relevant judgment debt by agreed instalments.
 
This division does not apply to a dishonest default unless the relevant judgment debt remains unsatisfied for at least 3 months after it was obtained (or an agreed instalment remains unpaid for at least 3 months after it was due to be paid).
 
This Division does not apply to a dishonest default that occurred before the commencement of Schedule 4(10) to the Legal Profession Reform Act 1993." 
As will appear, in the present case the relevant concept is failure to account.

Upon the making of a claim against the Fidelity Fund the Law Society must investigate it, and determine it by wholly or partly allowing, compromising, settling or disallowing it: <case>. For present purposes, it is not necessary to go further into that process. The Law Society may fix a final date for claims, and thereafter pay successful claims from the Fidelity Fund: ss 87, .

Section 90A of the Act then provides - "90A (1) On payment of a successful claim against the Fidelity Fund, the Law
Society is subrogated to the rights and remedies of the claimant against any person in relation to the failure to account or dishonest default.
 
Subsection (1) extends, for example, to a right or remedy against any of the following: the solicitor or associate in respect of whom the claim was made; the person authorised to administer the estate of any such solicitor who is deceased, bankrupt or insolvent; the receiver, receiver and manager, official manager or liquidator of any such solicitor which is a solicitor corporation or a former solicitor corporation.
 
Subsection (1) does not extend to a right or remedy against a solicitor who is a partner of a claimant under section 81 and who, in the opinion of the
Law Society Council, acted honestly and reasonably in relation to the failure to account.
 
The Law Society may exercise its rights and remedies under this section in its own name or in the name of the claimant and must pay into the Fidelity
Fund any money paid to it as a result of doing so.
 
If the Law Society brings proceedings under this section in the name of a claimant, the Society must indemnify the claimant against any costs awarded against the claimant in the proceedings." 
Speaking of <case> of the Legal Practitioners Act 1898 (the 1898 Act), the predecessor to <case> and although in different terms doing the same work, it was said in The Registrar-General versus Gill (CA, 16 August 1994, unreported) that "[w]hat is effected is, in substance, a statutory assignment to the Law
Society of the rights and remedies which the client had at the time of payment out of the fund". That general description applies to <case>.

The submissions paid regard to also to <case> of the Act, which may be noted now -
 "86 (1) If a claimant: receives a payment from the Fidelity Fund in respect of the claim; and receives or recovers from another source a payment on account of the pecuniary loss; and there is a surplus after deducting the amount of the pecuniary loss from the total amount received or recovered by the claimant, the amount of the surplus is a debt payable by the claimant to the Law
Society.
 
If a claimant: receives or recovers a payment on account of the pecuniary loss from a source other than the Fidelity Fund; and recovers judgment against the Law Society; and there is a surplus after deducting the amount of the pecuniary loss from the total amount received or recovered by the claimant (including the amount of the judgment), the amount of the judgment is reduced by the amount of the surplus." 
The claims in contract against Hambros and Mr Murray 
The core allegations against Hambros, which were agreed as facts, are - "56 On the various dates between March 1992 and November 1993 specified in
Schedule 4 hereto the persons nominated (hereinafter called the 'Hambros claimants') entered into an agreement with Hambros whereby Hambros was retained for reward to arrange for a loan to be made by the Hambros claimant to the borrower stated in the sum stated on the security of a registered first mortgage over the real property stated.
 It was in each case a term of the agreement of retainer between Hambros and each of the Hambros claimants that Hambros would procure the registered first mortgage over the real property stated in Schedule 4 hereto to secure the loan made by the Hambros claimant.
 Each of the Hambros claimants was one of the Claimants referred to in paragraph 17 hereof.
 In breach of the term of the retainer agreement referred to in paragraph hereof Hambros wholly failed to procure for the Hambros claimants the registered first mortgages over real property that it agreed to procure.
 By reason of the breach of duty pleaded in paragraph 57, the Hambros claimants have suffered loss and damage.
 
Particulars 
The Hambros claimants have lost the whole of the moneys paid by them in relation to the purported mortgage transactions, together with interest thereon." 
Following through para 58 just set out takes one to other allegations, also agreed as facts, and additional agreed facts, the effect of which is that - the Hambros claimants paid money which was received by and/or entrusted to
Mr Jack Diamond (or his associate) in the course of Mr Diamond's practice as a solicitor, from or by the claimants; 
Mr Jack Diamond was from each receipt or entrustment obliged either to pay the money to the stated borrower upon procuring a registered first mortgage over the borrower's stated real property or to hold the money for the benefit of the claimant or repay it to him; 
Mr Jack Diamond did not do any of these things but misappropriated the money and thereby failed to account for it; and the Law Society had found each failure to account to be dishonest.

For good measure, it is also agreed that Mr Jack Diamond failed to account for the money within the meaning of <case> of the Act. As I have indicated, the Law
Society allowed claims by the Hambros claimants against the Fidelity Fund, and they were paid the money they lost with interest.

Like core allegations, save that the agreements are said to have been with Mr
Murray and the claimants are called the Murray claimants, are made against Mr
Murray, and agreed as facts. The position as to the Murray claimants is otherwise the same as that as to the Hambros claimants, and it is unnecessary separately to detail the claim against Mr Murray.

The claim under the Corporations Law against Hambros 
The additional cause of action against Hambros is founded on ss 851 and 852 of the Corporations Law, the effect of which is that a securities adviser who, without a reasonable basis for doing so, makes a securities recommendation to a person who may reasonably be expected to rely on it, is liable to pay damages to that person in respect of loss suffered from reasonable reliance on the recommendation. The core allegations against Hambros, again agreed as facts, are - "61 At or about the date of each of the retainer agreements in respect of each of the Hambros claimants specified in Schedule 4 hereto, Hambros by its employee, Murray, recommended to the Hambros claimants that they make the loan referred to in Schedule 4 on the security of the registered first mortgage over the property referred to (the 'recommendations').
 Each of the proposed mortgages purported to be offered to the persons named as mortgagees in Schedule 4 hereto, were prescribed interests or investments contracts, within S.92 of the Corporations Law, and so securities within the meaning of S.9 of the Corporations Law.
 Some of the proposed borrowers referred to in Schedule 4 hereto were corporations, being each of the borrowers named as proprietary companies, were bodies within the meaning of Section 92 of the Corporations Law (the corporate borrowers').
 Each of the proposed mortgages purported to be offered by the corporate borrowers were debentures within the meaning of Section 92 of the Corporations
Law, and so securities within the meaning of Section 9 of the Corporations
Law.
 ...
 Each of the recommendations was a recommendation made to a person, being the relevant Hambros claimant, who may reasonable have been expected to rely upon it.
 Hambros did not have a reasonable basis for making the recommendations.
 In reliance upon the recommendations the Hambros claimants who proposed to make loans to the corporate borrowers made the payments referred to in paragraph 17 hereof.
 It was reasonable, having regard to the recommendations, and all other relevant circumstances, for the relevant Hambros claimants to act as pleaded in paragraph 69 hereof.
 As a result of the matters pleaded in paragraph 72 hereof, the Hambros claimants who proposed to make loans to the corporate borrowers suffered loss and damage.
 
Particulars 
The Hambros claimants who purported to lend to the corporate borrowers have lost the whole of the moneys paid by them in relation to the purported mortgage transactions, together with interest thereon." 
The further agreed allegations and facts already mentioned concerning payment to Mr Jack Diamond and failure to account underly the suffering of loss and damage in para 71 just set out. The relevant claimants are a sub- class of the Hambros claimants with which the claim in contract against
Hambros was concerned, and so are amongst the Hambros claimants compensated from the Fidelity Fund.

The issue on the separate questions 
The Law Society paid successful claims of the Hambros claimants and the Murray claimants against the Fidelity Fund. The Hambros claimants and the Murray claimants had "rights and remedies" against Hambros and Mr Murray respectively, being the rights to proceed against them for damages for breach of contract and (in the case of the Hambros claimants) pursuant to the
Corporations Law and the remedies of damages if successful. Thus if those rights and remedies are, within the words in <case> of the Act, "against any person in relation to [Mr Jack Diamond's] failure to account", the Law
Society is subrogated to the rights and remedies and can exercise them in its own name.

In The Registrar-General versus Gill the claimant was entitled to recover damages from the Registrar-General pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s127.html) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), as a person who suffered loss by erroneous registration of another person as proprietor of land. She suffered loss when her solicitor forged a mortage of her property and caused it to be registered, the mortgagee (being a proprietor) gaining an indefeasible title. Section 61 of the 1898 Act relevantly provided that - "... on payment out of the fund of any moneys in settlement in whole or in part of any claim under this Part arising from the act or omission of a solicitor or of his partner, servant or agent, the Society shall be subrogated, to the extent of the payment, to all the rights and remedies of the claimant against the solicitor, or the partner, servant or agent, or any other person (including any person entitled to administer the estate of any such solicitor, partner, servant or agent who is insolvent or dies) in respect of the act or omission." 
One question was whether the Registrar-General was "any other person". It was held that he was. Before me it was accepted that, despite the difference between the terms of <case> and the terms of <case>, this decision binds me to hold that "any person" in <case> of the Act extends to Hambros and Mr Murray, although the formal submission was made that The Registrar-General versus Gill was incorrect in this respect.

The control upon the width of "any person", and upon the extent of the rights and remedies to which the Law Society is subrogated, is that the rights and remedies against the person must be "in relation to the failure to account or dishonest default". The issue on the separate questions, and the only issue on which substantive submissions were made, was whether the rights and remedies of the Hambros claimants and the Murray claimants against Hambros and Mr Murray respectively are in relation to Mr Jack Diamond's failure to account.

Discussion 
Where the Law Society has paid a successful claim there will have been a failure to account or a dishonest default. Although not expressly so stated, the "failure to account or dishonest default" in <case> is that failure to account or dishonest default, being the failure to account or dishonest default which caused the pecuniary loss for which the claimant was compensated (see <case>). In examining the control earlier mentioned, the failure to account or dishonest default must be identified, the rights and remedies against a person must be identified, and it must be asked whether the latter are "in relation to" the former.

The phrase "in relation to" is wide, satisfied by a connection or association between the two things in question (R versus Murphy <case>; <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 615] at 629). That it may be read down recognises that the context of the phrase or the purpose it serves may require that the relationship be of a particular kind, sometimes described as an appropriate or relevant relationship (Perlman versus Perlman <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 474] at 484; R versus Ross-Jones, ex parte Green <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 185] at 196-7, 210; O'Grady versus Northern Queensland Co Ltd <case>; [(1989) 169 CLR 356] at 367). This has been seen as a difference between a "mere", "remote and merely incidental", or "coincidental" connection and an appropriate or relevant relationship (R versus Ross-Jones, ex parte Green at ; O'Grady versus Northern Queensland Co Ltd at 365, 367). Other forms of words may be found intended to express what is ultimately a question of degree (O'Grady versus Northern Queensland Co Ltd at 364) which words can not readily express, and reference to an appropriate or relevant relationship may not be particularly helpful. However, a notion of directness will normally be illicit (O'Grady versus Northern Queensland Co Ltd at 364, 377; cf at 374 where the context of "arising" was considered to call for a direct connection).

There is a connection or association between the rights and remedies of the
Hambros claimants and the Murray claimants against Hambros and Mr Murray respectively, on the one hand, and Mr Jack Diamond's failure to account, on the other hand. The rights and remedies are concerned with recovery of the claimants' money repayment of which should have been secured by registered first mortgages procured by Hambros and Mr Murray. That money went to, and was misappropriated by, Mr Jack Diamond. Mr Jack Diamond should have procured what must have been intended as the same registered first mortgages. On the agreed facts, the loans recommended by Hambros and to be arranged by Hambros and Mr
Murray were to known borrowers on the security of known properties, and although the agreed facts do not reveal whether it was known by the claimants that the loans were to be through Mr Jack Diamond's firm it must have been known to Hambros and Mr Murray, and that was what happened. An agreed fact not previously noted is that Mr Jack Diamond acted as the solicitor for the claimants (see the combined operation of paras 58, 17 and 18 of the Law
Society's contentions, all agreed as facts). At a general level, there were transactions of investment of the claimants' money initiated through Hambros and Mr Murray and purportedly effected through Mr Jack Diamond, as part of which Hambros recommended the investments to the clients, Hambros and Mr
Murray promised to procure registered first mortgage security, and Mr Jack
Diamond should have procured the registered first mortgage security. The claimants lost their money because Mr Jack Diamond did not procure the registered first mortgage security which Hambros and Mr Murray promised would be procured, but misappropriated the money. They would not have lost their money but for Mr Jack Diamond's misappropriation: had Mr Jack Diamond retained the money for the benefit of the claimants or repaid it to them they would not have been out of pocket at all. They may not have lost their money had first mortgage security been provided, but failure to provide security and misappropriation went together so far as misappropriation meant no loan and no mortgage security. At a more particular level, that Mr Jack Diamond misappropriated the money is a necessary element in proof of the claimants' losses in the cases against Hambros and Mr Murray - if he had retained the money for the benefit of the claimants, or repaid it to them, it would not matter that a recommendation was made without a reasonable basis or that there was no first mortgage security.

If it then be asked whether this is an appropriate or relevant relationship, I consider that it is. I see nothing calling for the conclusion that, despite the relationship, the Law Society should not be subrogated to the rights and remedies of the Hambros claimants and the Murray claimants against Hambros and
Mr Murray respectively, but rather treating the relationship as sufficient to warrant the subrogation gives effect to the part played by <case> of the Act.

As was said of its precessor in The Registrar-General versus Gill, while it is a question of statutory construction it is desirable that the provision be construed to achieve the same end as the equitable principles relating to subrogation, namely, to adjust the interests of three parties such as a creditor, a debtor and an insurer or surety so as to avoid the unconscionable result of double recovery by the creditor or inequitable discharge of the liability of the debtor. A corollary to the Law Society's subrogation is that a claimant should not retain any recovery for which he has been compensated out of the Fidelity Fund, and that is addressed by <case> of the Act earlier set out. It is in wide terms, catching receipt or recovery from "another source" or "a source" of a payment "on account of the pecuniary loss". Together s and <case> demonstrate an intention that, in order to avoid double recovery by a successful claimant upon the Fidelity Fund and inequitable discharge of those who have wronged him, the claimant's rights, remedies and recoveries should be for the benefit of the Law Society. There is in this no reason to decline to recognise the relationship I have outlined as falling within s
A(1), but rather doing so is consistent with the purpose of both equitable principles of subrogation and the conduct of the Fidelity Fund pursuant to the
Act.

The argument in the submissions against subrogation was, in essence, that while the rights and remedies of the Hambros claimants and the Murray claimants against Hambros and Mr Murray respectively may have been in relation to the same pecuniary loss as flowed from Mr Jack Diamond's failure to account, they were not in relation to his failure to account. It went as follows. Compensation from the Fidelity Fund was for pecuniary loss, and <case> dealt with double compensation by reference to pecuniary loss. Section 90A(1) did not deal with subrogation by reference to pecuniary loss: the Law Society was not subrogated to rights and remedies in relation to a claimant's pecuniary loss, but to rights and remedies in relation to failure to account and dishonest default. In this respect it took a different approach from its predecessor, which dealt with subrogation by reference to the acts or omissions of a solicitor (see <case> of the 1898 Act earlier mentioned). The grounds for the cases against Hambros and Mr Murray did not stipulate Mr Jack
Diamond's failure to account as one of their elements, and did not depend on a failure to account: they could be made out by showing that the claimants did not get first mortgage security and, in proof of loss, that they did not get their money back. Why they did not get their money back did not matter. It was immaterial whether there had been a failure to account as defined in the Act, in particular with a finding of dishonesty, and the cases would be the same if (for example) the money had been lost through Mr Jack Diamond's negligence. It was necessary that the failure to account (as distinct from the pecuniary loss) be a material fact in the cases against Hambros and Mr Murray, or the subject of those cases, and it was not, and so the rights and remedies were not in relation to the failure to account.

The argument did acknowledge a connection between the rights and remedies and the failure to account, although describing it as incidental, and at one point asserted the need for a direct connection. I must concentrate on the words of s 90A(1), and the phrase "in relation to" is not so qualified. There can be a connection or association with a failure to account even if a finding of failure to account, as such, is not an element in the case to enforce a right and obtain a remedy or the subject of that case. The acts or omissions of Mr
Jack Diamond in fact constituted failure to account; if there be a connection or association between the rights and remedies of the Hambros claimants and the Murray claimants against Hambros and Mr Murray respectively and those acts or omissions, it is of no significance that on other facts there might have been rights and remedies involving different (non-failure to account) acts or omissions. Section 90A is given effect by regard to the acts or omissions in fact constituting failure to account: the fallacy in the argument is requiring that those acts or omissions be characterised as failure to account for the purposes of the claimant enforcing his rights and obtaining his remedies.

As earlier noted, in The Registrar-General versus Gill <case> of the 1898 Act referred to the rights and remedies of the claimant in respect of "the act or omission" of a solicitor or of his partner, servant or agent. It was submitted in that case that the claimant's rights and remedies under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s127.html) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) were not rights and remedies in respect of the act of her solicitor, but were rather rights and remedies in respect of the acts of the mortgagee and the Registrar-
General. After describing the claimant's entitlement to damages from the
Registrar-General, it was said (Gleeson CJ and Priestley JA) - "It was the fraudulent act of the solicitor which initiated the chain of events giving rise to that entitlement. Mrs Gill suffered her damages by reason of the solicitor's fraudulent act in forging a mortgage in registrable form. Her claim against the Registrar-General arose by reason of the registration of the forged instrument. Her right to sue under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s127.html) was a right which she had in respect of the act of her solicitor." 
On my approach to <case> of the Act set out above, the result would have been the same, assuming the act of the solicitor constituted a failure to account or a dishonest default, if <case> had referred to the rights and remedies of the claimant in respect of the failure to account or dishonest default of a solicitor. It would not have mattered that for the claimant's case against the
Registrar-General it was unnecessary so to characterise the solicitor's act.
If the argument in the submissions against subrogation were correct, on the same assumption the Law Society would not have been subrogated to the claimant's rights against the Registrar-General. It is unlikely that the new legislation was intended to operate in such a different way from the old, and there is nothing in the explanatory memorandum or second reading speech to suggest that it was. Further, although in the present case the acts or omissions of Mr Jack Diamond did not initiate events giving rise to entitlements to damages in the Hambros/Murray claimants, they were significant, indeed essential, for those entitlements - had he not misappropriated the claimants' money, the likelihood is that they would now have their money or registered first mortgage security for its repayment.
Reflection on The Registrar-General versus Gill supports the conclusion to which
I have come, that the rights and remedies of the Hambros claimants and the
Murray claimants against Hambros and Mr Murray respectively are in relation to
Mr Jack Diamond's failure to account.

The result 
It follows that the questions should be answered in the affirmative. I have some misgivings about the separate decision of the questions. Although the subject of agreement by the parties, there is some artificiality in the facts upon which that decision is based: it does not seem likely that both Hambros and Mr Murray agreed to procure registered first mortgages, the claimants' knowledge of Mr Jack Diamond's involvement is not clear, and how the dealings with Hambros and Mr Murray translated to investment on first mortgage security through Mr Diamond's firm is not spelt out. Further, while there was agreement upon substantial dismissal of the proceedings if the questions were answered in the negative, there was no agreement upon the position if the questions were answered in the affirmative. It is not clear to me whether the subrogation issue is finally disposed of at first instance so that the proceedings can continue on the remaining issue of the claimants' rights against the various defendants or whether the subrogation issue may be re- addressed when the facts necessary for that remaining issue have emerged. Lest the proceedings take a course which, on consideration additional to that at the time Rolfe J made the order for separate decision of the questions, might be undesirable, I will not answer the questions until that has been clarified.
 * * * 
