

Thomas Joseph Brookes and Anor versus Anz Banking Group Ltd and Ors [1997]
NSWSC 41 (18 February 1997) 
Thomas Joseph BROOKES & ANOR versus ANZ BANKING GROUP LIMITED & ORS /96 
Tuesday 18 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs in this matter have filed a statement of claim seeking that judgments of McInerney J given against them in December 1993 and July 1994 should be set aside on the basis that certain evidence led against them can now be shown to be fraudulent.

The plaintiffs have joined to this statement of claim the ANZ Bank, which is the bank which brought the proceedings against them before McInerney J, and Mr and Mrs Marshall who were also defendants to the original action and the subject of a cross-claim by the plaintiffs against them. The plaintiffs have added as a defendant in the current statement of claim Mr Bugg who was an officer of the ANZ Bank at the time of their dealings with the bank.

As against the bank and Mr Bugg the statement of claim alleges fraud of a nature which, on the material before me, does not appear to have any bearing on the judgment originally obtained by the bank against the plaintiff.

McInerney J in the original proceedings decided the matter on a basis which was unaffected by the impugned evidence, even if the fraud could be established; at least it so appears to me at the moment. The impugned evidence might have had a bearing, or some bearing, on the cross-claim between the plaintiffs and the Marshalls.

However, the approach of the Court of Appeal to that matter was one upon which the impugned evidence would have had no bearing. The Court of Appeal upheld
McInerney J's judgment on the cross-claim on a different basis; on a basis to which the impugned evidence simply was not relevant.

The later judgment of McInerney J of July 1994 related to another matter between the plaintiffs and the Marshalls. Again the plaintiffs claimed that fraudulent evidence was given in relation to that matter. However, despite directions given in December of last year by McInerney J there appears to be no evidence filed in support of that assertion.

The whole proceedings have had a very sorry and protracted history and it is to be said that the plaintiffs' conduct of the present claim for the setting aside of the judgment against them has not been pursued with the diligence deserved. All the directions given thus far have in some respect not been complied with.

The plaintiffs are at present unrepresented. I have been urged by counsel for the bank and counsel for the Marshalls to strike the statement of claim out.
Their being unrepresented I am unwilling to bring the proceedings to a final conclusion, as it were.

Certainly it does seem to me the present statement of claim cannot stand on the material before me. Nevertheless I believe the plaintiffs should have the opportunity to re-plead and seek leave to file an amended statement of claim.

For these brief reasons I order that the statement of claim filed 19 December be struck out; that the plaintiff may re-plead against all the named parties, and should have the opportunity to seek leave to file an amended statement of claim.

I direct that any fresh statement of claim together with affidavit evidence in support and a notice of motion is to be filed and served on or before Friday March 1997.

The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of the motions before me.
 * * * 
