

Chebli versus Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance Limited [2013]
NSWSC 261 (28 March 2013) 
Last Updated: 2 April 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Chebli versus Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance Limited  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): /03/2013  
Decision Date: March 2013  
Jurisdiction: 
Common Law  
Before: 
Harrison AsJ  
Decision: 
The Court orders that:  
An extension of the time to appeal is granted.  
The decision of Magistrate Still dated 16 March 2012 is affirmed.  
The appeal is dismissed.  
The summons filed 10 August 2012 is dismissed.  
The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs as agreed or assessed.  
Catchwords: 
APPEAL FROM LOCAL COURT - adverse findings as to credit of plaintiff and witnesses - whether Magistrate erred in law by failing to consider a relevant piece of evidence - whether evidence not taken into account and therefore plaintiff not subject to credit findings - appeal dismissed  
JUDGMENT
HER HONOUR: This is an appeal of the whole of the decision of his Honour Magistrate Still dated 16 March 2012. The appeal is brought pursuant to [s 39](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lca2007131/s39.html) of the [Local Court Act 2007](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lca2007131/). 
By summons filed 10 August 2012, the plaintiff seeks firstly, that leave be granted to file out of time; secondly, that the whole of the decision below and the judgment of the court below be set aside; and thirdly, that the matter be remitted to the Local Court in accordance with any orders made by this Court.
This plaintiff in this Court is Patricia Chebli who was the plaintiff in the Local Court proceedings. The defendant in this Court is Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance Limited who was the defendant in the Local Court proceedings. The plaintiff relied on the affidavit of her solicitor Sam Abbas sworn 9 August 2012.

The appeal [Section 39](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lca2007131/s39.html) of the [Local Court Act 2007](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lca2007131/) provides that a party who is dissatisfied with a judgment or order of the Local Court may appeal to the Supreme Court, but only on a question of law.
[Section 40(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lca2007131/s40.html) provides that a party who is dissatisfied with an order as to costs of the Local Court may appeal to the Supreme Court, but only by leave of the Supreme Court.
[Section 41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lca2007131/s41.html) of the [Local Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lca2007131/) provides that this Court may determine an appeal either (a) by varying the terms of the judgment or order, or (b) by setting aside the judgment or order, or (c) by setting aside the judgment or order and remitting the matter to the Local Court for determination in accordance with the Supreme Court's directions, or (d) by dismissing the appeal. 
In Swain versus Waverley Municipal Council <case>; [(2005) 220 CLR 517], Gleeson CJ at [2] reiterated that: "[I]n the common law system of civil justice, the trial process determines the issues between the parties. The system does not regard the trial as merely the first round in a contest destined to work its way through the judicial hierarchy until the litigants have exhausted either their resources or their possibilities of further appeal." 
Grounds of appeal
The ground raised on appeal is a discrete one. It is whether the magistrate erred in law by failing to consider a relevant piece of evidence given by the defendant's expert, Les Fuller, relating to the missing factory keys at paragraphs 3.3 and 3.4 of his evidence, in circumstances where such evidence (i) was unchallenged; (ii) was relied on by the plaintiff in support of her claim; and (iii) provided an available inference to be drawn in favour of the plaintiff's claim; and secondly, the evidence was not taken into account and therefore could not be subject to any of the credit findings made by the magistrate. 
Extension of time to appeal
Before I deal with the appeal, the first issue that has to be addressed is whether an extension of time to appeal should be granted. The defendant opposes the order sought.
Pursuant to the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) (UCPR), r 50.12, a summons seeking leave to appeal must be filed within 28 days after the magistrate's decision. On 16 March 2012, the magistrate's decision was handed down. An appeal should have been lodged by 13 April 2011. On 10 August 2012, plaintiff's original summons was filed which was five months out of time.
The plaintiff submitted that an extension of time to appeal should be granted because of the multiple delays in receiving the complete transcript of the Local Court proceedings which prevented her from being able to receive advice from counsel regarding an appeal. On 10 April 2012, the plaintiff's solicitor ordered the transcript. After several enquiries as to its progress, a full copy of the transcript was received by the plaintiff's solicitor on 19 June 2012. On 29 June 2012, the plaintiff received counsel's advice in relation to the appeal. On 29 June 2012, after obtaining advice from counsel, the plaintiff's husband indicated he would need some additional time in order to obtain funds for the matter to proceed. On 18 July 2012, the funds were provided to the plaintiff's legal representative. 
The defendant submitted that the plaintiff should not be given an extension of time for filing the appeal due to what it says is a less-than-slight prospect of the appeal proceeding. In support of this proposition, counsel referred to Gallo versus Dawson <case>; [[1990] 93 ALR 479] per McHugh J. In that case, his Honour said at [2]: "When the application is for an extension of time in which to file an appeal, it is always necessary to consider the prospects of the applicant succeeding in the appeal: see Burns versus Grigg <case>; [(1967) VR 871], at p 872; Hughes, at pp 263-264; Mitchelson versus Mitchelson [(1979) 24 ALR 522], at p 524. It is also necessary to bear in mind in such an application that, upon the expiry of the time for appealing, the respondent has 'a vested right to retain the judgment' unless the application is granted:
Vilenius versus Heinegar [(1962) 36 ALJR 200], at p 201.
It follows that, before the applicant can succeed in this application, there must be material upon which I can be satisfied that to refuse the application would constitute an injustice. As the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council pointed out in Ratnam versus Cumarasamy [(1965) 1 WLR 8], at p 12; [(1964) 3 All ER 933], at p 935: 'The rules of court must prima facie be obeyed, and in order to justify a court in extending the time during which some step in procedure requires to be taken there must be some material upon which the court can exercise its discretion.'"
In so far as this submission is concerned, the plaintiff raises an arguable question of law on appeal. 
The defendant also submitted that the part of the explanation for the delay provided by the plaintiff's solicitor, that time was needed to obtain the funds for an appeal, was at odds with the evidence of the plaintiff in her affidavit dated 18 July 2011 of her thriftiness and as of February 2011 having $230,000 in the bank. 
While I accept that a small part of the delay was caused by the plaintiff obtaining funds to pay her solicitor, the main reason for delay was caused by the wait for a copy of the transcript to be supplied. The defendant has not referred to any prejudice it has suffered that has been caused by this delay. In these circumstances, in the exercise of my discretion, I grant an extension of time to lodge the appeal.

Background
The plaintiff alleged that either on 15 February 2010 or early 16 February 2010, her 2003 Mercedes BCLK 320 was stolen. She lodged a claim with the defendant ("NRMA Insurance") under a comprehensive motor vehicle policy. NRMA Insurance rejected the claim on the basis that the claim was fraudulent. 
On 21 January 2011, the plaintiff filed her statement of claim against NRMA Insurance in the Local Court pleading breach of contract. On 12 September 2011, the hearing took place before his Honour Magistrate Still at Bankstown Local Court. The plaintiff bore the onus of proving that her car was stolen, she having alleged the vehicle was stolen from premises near where she lived on 15 February 2010 or early 16 February 2010. The vehicle has never been recovered.
NRMA Insurance, by way of defence, admitted that it denied Ms Chebli's claim but said that the denial was not a breach of contract where the claim was made in circumstances where the plaintiff had not been truthful and frank. The defence was pursuant to its policy of insurance with Ms Chebli or alternatively, under the provisions of [s 54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s54.html) and [s 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s56.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth).

The magistrate's decision
Magistrate Still entered judgment in favour of NRMA Insurance on the basis that the plaintiff was unable to demonstrate to the Court's satisfaction, on the balance of probabilities, that the vehicle was in fact stolen from the place and in the timeframe alleged. Ms Chebli bore the onus of proving that her car was taken without her consent: Vidal versus NRMA Insurance Ltd <case>; Hammond Brothers Pty Ltd versus Insurance Australia Ltd <case>
Magistrate Still made various adverse credit findings of the plaintiff and the witnesses called on her behalf, his Honour stated: "In my view the Plaintiff's evidence was short on detail, confused, and general, with significant omissions and conflicts such that I can understand the defendants decision to decline the claim based on those conflicts and errors. Her evidence does not hang together with that of her husband, or in fact that of Krystle Chebli until corrected. In relation to the plaintiff's evidence I got the strong impression she was attempting to recount, or invent, or remember events as they should have been rather than as than they actually were and therefore she stumbled with detail and timelines, or alternatively she was attempting to tell a story she did not believe in or understand herself.

Her husband's evidence was given in an almost combative manner, was again general and imprecise and with significant unresolved conflicts with the evidence of his wife and Krystle. While the husband's evidence was given in a cocky manner it was not particularly convincing and it seemed to me that he was prepared to answer questions in a convenient manner as it occurred to him.
On detailed examination their evidence is contradictory and strains credibility.

It further seems to me that the plaintiff and her husband's account is less than truthful and permits speculation about the exact location and circumstances of the car's removal or disappearance. There were 2 keys to the
Mercedes owned by the plaintiff, one on a hook at number 42, and one kept by the husband in a bedside drawer. They were produced to the insurers investigator and subsequently examined by the expert who gave evidence. There is no suggestion the keys were otherwise than in the control of the plaintiff or her husband.

My analysis of the evidence leaves me with some disquiet regarding the truthfulness of the plaintiff and her husband such that they are unable to demonstrate to the Court's satisfaction on the balance of probabilities that the vehicle was in fact stolen from the place and in the timeframe alleged.

As I have already observed whilst there is conflict between the accounts given by herself, her husband and sister-in-law none of the other persons referred to in any of the testimony or evidence namely her father, her brother Martin, her brother Pasquale, or the neighbours were called to give evidence to corroborate any part of the evidence given.

THE PLAINTIFFS' CLAIM MUST FAIL BECAUSE HER AND HER HUSBAND'S LACK OF
TRUTHFULNESS AND CANDOUR MEANS THAT THE COURT CANNOT ACCEPT THEIR ACCOUNT OF
WHAT OCCURRED AND THEY CANNOT DISCHARGE THE ONUS CAST UPON THEM TO DEMONSTRATE
ON THE BALANCE OF PROBABILITIES THAT THE VEHICLE WAS STOLEN OTHERWISE THAN
WITH HER INVOLVEMENT OR CONSENT." 
Did the magistrate err in law?
Ms Chebli submitted that the Magistrate erred in law by failing to consider a relevant piece of evidence. Mr Les Fuller, a forensic locksmith, referred to three alternative ways that the car may have been taken from the property. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the magistrate only made reference in his judgment to the first two methods set out as to how the vehicle might have been stolen but did not refer to the third method. Counsel for Ms Chebli submitted that the third method was uncontested, it was from the same report upon which the magistrate relied, it could have led to an available inference in Ms Chebli's favour and it did not appear to have been considered by the magistrate. Accordingly, it was asserted that the Magistrate, by not considering alternative 3, erred in law
In Mifsud versus Campbell [(1991) 21 NSWLR 725], Samuels JA at [728] said: "... it is an incident of judicial duty for the judge to consider all the evidence in the case. It is plainly unnecessary for a judge to refer to all the evidence led in the proceedings or to indicate which of it is accepted or rejected. The extent of the duty to record evidence given and findings made depend, as the duty to give reasons does, upon the circumstances of the individual case.

Accordingly, a failure to refer to some of the evidence does not necessarily, whenever it occurs, indicate that the judge had failed to discharge the duty which rests upon him or her. However, for a judge to ignore evidence critical to an issue in a case and contrary to an assertion of fact made by one party and accepted by the judge - as the defendant's denial of having consumed alcohol - may promote a sense of grievance in the adversary and create a litigant who is not only 'disappointed' but 'disturbed' - to use the words which appear in the New Zealand case of Connell versus Auckland City Council [[1977] 1 NZLR 630] at 634. It tends to deny both the facts and the appearance of justice having been done. If it does, as in my opinion is the case here, then it will have worked a miscarriage of justice and have produced a mis- trial and resulted in what I would take to be an error of law which is reviewable on appeal. Whether it is an error of law or an error of fact, it seems to me a failure by the judge to do what the nature of the office requires."
Mr Fuller was of the opinion that a Mercedes-Benz car of the type allegedly stolen can only be taken by: 
Neutralising the steering lock and by-passing the engine immobiliser system by using a "donor replacement" control module; 
Neutralising the steering lock by force so as to allow a flat-bed tow truck to drag the vehicle and load it on the truck; 
Using a correctly coded electronic key to start the vehicle and drive it away.
The evidence of Mr Fuller was that original keys may still be effective if they had not been electronically deactivated. 
Ms Chebli submitted that the magistrate heavily relied on the first two methods in coming to the decision that the car could not have been stolen by those methods due to the noise that would have been generated. The use of a set of keys would not have created the same amount of noise. 
Both the plaintiff and her husband Bradley Norman's evidence, if believed, was to the effect that the car was taken by it being placed on a tow truck (method (2)). On this topic, the plaintiff made the following statements in her record of interview: 
Q.261 Okay. Now you mentioned something about some tyre marks? 
A. Some what? 
Q.262 Tyre marks? 
A. Tyre marks yeah, on my brother's front, in their driveway they've got grass next to it and we saw marks leading towards - it goes towards next doors driveway. So it looks like the car was taken.

Q.263 So it looked like someone had dragged it across.

A. That's what Brad reckons.

Q.262 So what, they dragged it across the grass? 
A. Yeah, okay so this is the driveway so they would have probably taken it out. Yep, probably dragged it out, yeah.

Q.265 So they didn't drag it straight out. Has he got a concrete driveway? 
A. He's got a concrete driveway.

Q.266 Alright, so were there any marks on the concrete? 
A. I don't think so. Hang on, the car was parked sorry, in front. I can't remember. Yeah, no it was in the driveway and then it was dragged out. I remember the tyre marks.
 ...

Q.269 So did it have - was there just like one mark? 
A. I don't know, it just looked like tyre marks. You can tell it was dragged - you can tell it was dragged out.

Q.270 So someone would have had to get a tow truck to drag it out? 
A. Something like that.
Mr Bradley Norman (the plaintiff's husband) made the following statements in his record of interview: 
Q.240 Alright. Now you mentioned that it was up on the front lawn. Did you go backup and have a look to see if there was any glass or anything on the ground where they may have.

A. There was no glass there.

Q.241 Right.

A. But it did look like that someone has driven up onto the grass. You can see like track marks of a car and you can see my track marks of my car.

Q.242 Right.

A. And it looks like you would have seen - so I don't know. I am not a thief you know but what it seems like is that they have kind of pushed it back and then they have pulled it. It is like it has been pulled by another car because you see in the dirt the wheels just turned like that. And common sense is you wheels on the ground can't turn like that, you know what I mean. If you are driving out, you are reversing out. You are not going in that direction, you are going outwards. And the rims were - the mark of the tyre was like that you know.

Q.243 Alright. Where were those marks - where were they on the lawn? 
A. They were pulling right where the car was parked. A bit further back and they were facing like towards that direction. And you can see because I think it was raining before then so the grass was high and when you drive on the grass you can see the line. So I seen the two lines of a car and my car kind of thing going out.

Q.244 Alright.

A. So I went and knocked on the neighbour's doors to see if they heard anything. The Asians never heard nothing. They were telling me about their incident. They had their car stolen there too and the neighbour where my brother-in-law used to live had their car stolen too. I got a bit worried. I went and knocked on the door again and the son goes yeah I heard something about 1.30 in the morning. A bang or something. He goes I popped my head out.
I was half asleep, I popped my head out, I looked out couldn't see nothing so
I went back to bed.
Ms Chebli's sister-in-law also gave evidence of tyre or track marks on the driveway and the grass in the front yard. 
On the alternatives postulated by the expert, the magistrate stated: "In relation to the expert evidence given by Les Fuller in summary his bottom line is that it was almost impossible to steal the Mercedes without the key and that any other technique to either enter the vehicle or render it driveable or capable of being moved would have been noisy and time consuming and alternatively removal by tow truck or tilt tray would have made undue noise."
His Honour continued: "[T]he plaintiff postulates a manner in which the theft could've occurred by reference to drag marks found at the location ...With the exception of her sister in law Krystle and husband Bradley, no one else gave evidence of any such marks, and they did not appear to have been observed by anyone before the car was actually found to be missing, presumed stolen.

Those marks apparently were only noticed thereafter, which is strange, particularly on her account where the vehicle would have had to have been dragged partially off a concrete driveway adjacent to where she parked it and where there was no evidence of marks on that drive way. Based on the evidence of the expert Les Fuller it would seem that the process of non-keyed entry and preparation of the vehicle for removal or actual removal of the vehicle by way of tilt try or tow truck would have created a lot of noise. It is hard to accept considering the location of the vehicle, that the vehicle could have been dragged or loaded onto a tilt tray truck or by any other tow truck without someone hearing something, even it is was just the noise of the truck itself."
In 3.3 of his report, Mr Fuller expanded on alternative (3) where he stated: "3.3 Additional Keys Ordered 
I contacted Mercedes-Benz Australia and found that Mercedes records regarding a vehicle with the same VIN as per my instructions had had 2 additional keys ordered - 1 key was ordered on the 17th March 2008 and a second key was ordered on the 5th of March 2008.

I noted that the Marshalls Mercedes invoices for the 2 additional keys was different to the above dates - 1 invoice with a key order was dated the 13th
March 2008 and the 2nd invoice with a second key order was dated the 25th
March 2008.

As there are 2 OEM keys supplied with this vehicle from new and I examined 2 additional keys, and as Mercedes-Benz Australia confirmed only 2 additional keys had been ordered for this VIN, it was clear the 2 factory original keys were unaccounted for.
 .4 Original Keys May Still Be Effective 
It is Mercedes-Benz practice when supplying new keys to de-activate any lost/stolen keys so that they cannot be used to steal the vehicle. This requires the vehicle to be taken to a dealership where a diagnostic tool is attached and the lost/stolen keys are electronically de-activated. Such keys can be re-activated should the keys be found.

It is my understanding that the vehicle was not taken to a dealership when the new keys were ordered and therefore the 2 factory original keys are most likely still activated."
On the topic of keys, the plaintiff was asked in the record of interview as follows: 
Q.276. How many keys are there to the vehicle? 
A. Two.
 ...

Q.279 Since you've had the car have you ever had any keys lost or stolen? 
A. No.

Q.280 Have you ever had any keys copied or duplicated? 
A. No.

Q.281 So there was no keys left in or attached to your vehicle at all? 
A. No. We actually handed both keys to NRMA. They said to return it so we already handed those in.
Mr Norman also made the statements in his record of interview on the topic of keys: 
Q.261 Now when you have bought the car how many keys did you get? 
A. One.

Q.262 One key? 
A. Yep.

Q.263 Now have you had any keys copies or duplicated at all? 
A. Just the other one. Two. One key.

Q.264 Yeah.

A. Went missing when we first bought the car.

Q.265 Hang on start again. When you bought the car you got one key? 
A. Yep.

Q.266 Okay.

A. And then when I purchased it and it came home it went missing.

Q.267 Okay.

A. So then I had to go and ring up Mercedes and had to give them my chassis number, VIN number, the chassis number and then I had to pay them so much money and they ordered me a key. So I ordered it, that was fine. And then when the car was finished I ordered another key.

Q.268 Alright, 
A. Two keys yeah through Mercedes.
It appears that there could have been four keys in existence, two currently accounted for, one previously lost by Mr Norman and one of the original keys not accounted for.
NRMA Insurance submitted that Magistrate Still was not obliged, for the reasons identified in Mifsud, to consider the third method described by Mr Fuller, that the vehicle was driven away using a correctly coded key, as it was inconsistent with the evidence of Ms Chebli, her husband and her sister-in-law, that the vehicle had been dragged from the yard rather than being driven away. In circumstances where Ms Chebli had given evidence about the existence of drag marks, which had been repeated by two witnesses, his Honour was entitled to proceed on the assumption that the third method of theft identified by Mr Fuller did not apply in the circumstances of Ms Chebli's evidence. 
It is submitted by Ms Chebli that the credit findings of the magistrate did not affect the available inferences that could have been drawn from the evidence about the third method in para 3.3 and 3.4 of Mr Fuller's report. It was submitted that those paragraphs provide evidence upon which a reasonable inference could be drawn in support of the plaintiff's claims. 
Magistrate Still made adverse findings as to the credit of Ms Chebli, describing her and her husband's account as "less than truthful" and that their lack of truthfulness and candour meant the Court could not accept their account as to what occurred. In Xu versus Jinhong Design & Constructions Pty Ltd <case> at <case>, Macfarlan JA (with whom Basten JA agreed) discussed the circumstances in which an appellate court should intervene in relation to credit-based findings: "The circumstances in which a court exercising appellate jurisdiction by way of rehearing, but in circumstances where witnesses are not recalled, can intervene has been the subject of too much anxious analysis to warrant repetition: see, eg, Costa versus The Public Trustee of New South Wales <case> At least once in every decade, there has been a reassessment by the
High Court: see, eg, Warren versus Coombes <case>; [142
CLR 531]; Abalos v Australian Postal Commission <case>; [171 CLR 167];
State Rail Authority versus Earthline Constructions Pty Ltd (In liq) <case>; <case>; <case>; 214
CLR 188. Some cases emphasise a deferential, non-interventionist approach based on judicial restraint and emphasising the primacy of the trial. Other judgments emphasise the entitlement of a dissatisfied party to a full review on the merits in accordance with the terms of the relevant statute, without the imposition of implied constraints. Since Fox versus Percy, there has been a tendency to distinguish between errors which are described as credit-based and those where the demeanour of the witness does not constitute a substantial element in the fact-finding. In relation to the former category the test commonly applied, as identified by Macfarlan JA at [66] below, is to require, as a precondition to intervention, 'incontrovertible facts', uncontested testimony, compelling inferences to the contrary or a conclusion that the finding is 'glaringly improbable'."
Basten JA continued: "15 However, while such guidelines are helpful, the supposed categories are so porous that no definitive test is possible. In most trials, the material facts do not depend upon the assessment of a witness, based upon demeanour alone, but on the complex interaction of documentary material, elements of testimony from different witnesses and matters of emphasis, none of which readily appear from reading a transcript. This fact, sometimes referred to as the 'disadvantage' suffered by the appellate court, is, of course, widely appreciated and is articulated by reference to the oft-cited passage in the speech of Lord Hoffmann in Biogen Inc versus Medeva plc <case>; [[1997]
RPC 1] at 45.
As explained by Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ in Fox versus Percy at [41]: 'No judicial reasons can ever state all of the pertinent factors; nor can they express every feature of the evidence that causes a decision-maker to prefer one factual conclusion over another.' It is clear that a nuanced approach is often required: see, eg, Shimokawa v Lewis <case> at <case>- [188] (Giles JA) and the authorities there referred to. The present case was one in which his Honour did make findings based on the oral testimony of three key witnesses. Nevertheless, in careful and clearly articulated reasons, the primary judge explained the limited role that demeanour had played in his assessment and further explained his reasons by reference to the oral testimony and other considerations."
In the same case, Macfarlan JA said at [66]: "Whilst in these circumstances it can be inferred that his Honour's reliance upon his views of the witnesses' demeanour was limited, it is apparent that that factor was not entirely excluded and that his Honour's conclusions must be regarded as at least in part credit based, attracting the need for the appellants to surmount the hurdle identified in Fox versus Percy <case>; [(2003) 214 CLR 118] in order to challenge his Honour's conclusions successfully.
In substance it is thus necessary for the appellants to satisfy this Court that his Honour's findings were contrary to 'incontrovertible facts or uncontested testimony', 'glaringly improbable' or 'contrary to compelling inferences' (ibid at [28] - <case> at <case> and Davis versus Veigel <case> at <case>)."
In Percy versus Fox  <case>, Beazley and Handley JJA (Fitzgerald AJA dissenting) overturned a decision of Herron DCJ whose acceptance of the evidence of Ms Fox was inconsistent with the other evidence. In Fox versus Percy <case>; [(2003) 214 CLR 118], the High Court unanimously upheld the decision of the NSW Court of Appeal. McHugh J said at [94] to [96]: "94 The judgment of Beazley JA shows that her Honour was well aware that findings of fact, based on credibility or demeanour, can only be reversed by an appellate court in exceptional cases. As her Honour recognised, findings based, expressly or inferentially, on the credibility of Ms Fox and Mr Murdoch could not be overturned merely because the evidence of Ms Percy seemed more persuasive than their evidence.
 ...
 No matter how unimpressive a witness Ms Percy appeared to be, these incontrovertible facts powerfully confirmed her testimony that she was on her correct side of the road. Conversely, no matter how impressive as witnesses Ms
Fox and Mr Murdoch appeared to be, their testimony could not be accepted unless there was a rational explanation of these incontrovertible facts that was consistent with their testimony. The presence of the skid marks and the resting place of the van, in particular, pointed irresistibly to Ms Fox being on her incorrect side of the road."
Ms Chebli submitted that the uncontested paragraphs of Mr Fuller's report provide evidence from which a reasonable inference can be drawn and thus Ms Chebli is not faced with the issues identified in Fox versus Percy as to credit. I do not agree. If the third method was to be considered as a likely method by which the car was stolen (and this was not the case run by the plaintiff at trial), the magistrate would have had to accept the witnesses' evidence as being truthful. 
The magistrate would have had to make findings that neither the plaintiff nor her husband used their keys to start the car. Because of their lack of truthfulness and candour, he did not accept their account of what occurred and he could not make those findings. Without those positive findings that the plaintiff and her husband did not use their keys to start the car, they cannot be excluded as persons who may have used a key. Therefore, the factual basis for the expert's assumption of an unknown person using a key to take the car could not be made out. It follows that the factual matrix that underpinned method (3) was not made out. Hence method (3) did not need to be considered. There is no error of law. The decision of the magistrate dated 16 March 2012 is affirmed. The appeal is dismissed.
Costs are discretionary. Normally costs follow the event. The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs as agreed or assessed.

The Court orders that: 
An extension of the time to appeal is granted.

The decision of Magistrate Still dated 16 March 2012 is affirmed.

The appeal is dismissed.

The summons filed 10 August 2012 is dismissed.

The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs as agreed or assessed.
 * * * 
