

Sellers Fabrics Pty Limited and Anor versus Hapag-Lloyd Ag Matter No 12/96 [1998] NSWSC 642 (14 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG /96 October 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Admiralty List 
Name of Case: SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
Proceedings: 12/1996 
Dates of Hearing: 12, 13, 14 October 1998 
Date of Interlocutory Judgment: 14 October 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr P E King 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Withnell & Hetherington 
Counsel for Defendant: Dr M White QC/Ms A J Silink 
Solicitors for Defendant: Norton Smith & Co 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
RE - THE SHIP "ENCOUNTER BAY" 
JUDGMENT - On tender of material placed before Giles J on 29/8/97 (See p 151 of the transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: Mr King seeks to tender the transcript of the evidence before Giles J on 29 August 1997. In effect, he is seeking to introduce evidence. As I understand, no prior notice has been given to the defendant and in my view, and consistently with the reasons I gave earlier this week, the tender is too late and I reject it. 
The submission of the defendant made to Giles J that P & O and Hapag-Lloyd
AG had a common interest. Mr King seeks to tender a document headed: "Defendant and P & O Containers Limited Outline of Submission on Notice of
Motion as to Common Interest Privilege".

These submissions were made to Giles J in proceedings in which his Honour gave judgment on 11 September 1997, in the course of considering an application by the plaintiffs for leave to inspect documents produced by P & O Containers
Limited pursuant to a subpoena issued by the plaintiffs. His Honour said: "The plaintiffs served on P & O a subpoena requiring the production of, inter alia, all survey reports prepared for it or its Australian agents reporting on the chance of damage of three tiers of containers in certain bays of the vessel during its voyage from Melbourne to Sydney." 
His Honour then noted that the reports of Captain Bozier, which I have now admitted as Exhibit J, were produced and that client legal privilege was sought in respect thereof.

The plaintiffs, his Honour recorded, moved for an order that they have access to the reports and the application was opposed by P & O and the defendant "appearing by the same solicitors and counsel." 
Conformably, with the practice in this Court, counsel then appearing for P & O and the defendant, who are not counsel presently appearing for the defendant, provided his Honour with the outline of submission to which I have referred.

In seeking to meet the claim that legal professional privilege had not been lost, counsel then appearing asserted that: - "The ship owner and the defendant have the same solicitor, have the same P I Club, have the same potential interest arising out of the incident on board the vessel allegedly damaging containers for which the ship owner or the defendant might face litigation. The common interest is further reinforced by the terms of the contract of carriage of the defendant which seeks to provide benefits of exclusion and limitation to the owner..." 
In my opinion, that constitutes the basis of a submission which does not amount to a concession or admission and which, although strictly I do not think this is relevant, was not accepted.

Mr King has submitted that there is no prejudice to the defendant because the document comes from its records. However, it seems to me that if the matters referred to in the document were intended to be proved, or in some other way relied upon, the appropriate course was to raise these issues at an earlier point of time.

There may be all sorts of reasons why the submissions were made by counsel then appearing. I would add that I would have expected that, in view of my rulings on Monday, any party in these proceedings seeking to rely upon evidence, which has not been produced conformably with the directions of the
Court, would have been acutely aware of the need to give immediate notice to the other party thereof. There was no attempt to tender any such material in the case in chief, and insofar as it may be said that the issue as to whether the act and omissions of the master, chief officer and crew of the Encounter
Bay were those of Hapag-Lloyd only became an issue because I sought some clarification of the issues today for my own purposes, that can only mean that the plaintiff, if it has not tendered evidence previously, did not take the trouble to seek some further particularisation of the defendant's case.

I reject the tender. The document will be marked for identification 12.
 * * * 
