

Regina versus Murat Matter No Cca 60421/97 [1998] NSWSC 506 (30 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 November 1998 
REGINA versus MURAT A Y 
CCA 60421/97 October 1998 
Smart J, Ireland J, Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60421/97 
DELIVERED: Friday, 30 October 1998 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday, 24 June 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Murat AY 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART, IRELAND, DUNFORD JJ 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: M F Adams Q.C. 
Respondent: LMB Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Arden Associates 
Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: ELEMENTS OF SOLICIT TO MURDER - CHANGE OF TACK ON APPEAL - SEVERITY OF SENTENCE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Conviction dismissed/Sentence allowed 
NO. OF PAGES: 29 
REGINA versus Murat AY 
HEADNOTE 
Solicit to murder - elements of offence - jury adequately directed on case as conducted at the trial - change of emphasis on appeal - summing up still adequate - severity of sentence - appellant in disturbed mental condition, pressed by person solicited to proceed - appellant not supplying final details or attending final meeting.

ORDERS
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence granted. Appeal against sentence allowed.
In lieu of the sentence imposed, the appellant is sentenced to 7 years penal servitude comprising a minimum term of 5 years 3 months starting on 26 May and ending on 25 August 2002 and an additional term of 1 year 9 months starting on 26 August 2002.

REGINA versus Murat AY 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Murat Ay appeals against his conviction of between 26 October 1995 and 7 November 1995 between Seven Hills and Blacktown soliciting Darren Mancey to murder Inaget Ay. She was the ex-wife of Murat Ay. 
The appellant also seeks leave to appeal against the severity of his sentence which comprised a minimum term of 7 years 4 months and an additional term of 2 years 5 months.

About 1990 the appellant and his wife and some friends leased a shop from
State Rail near Blacktown Railway station. It was in a good position. They conducted a 24 hour kebab business. His wife also worked in the business which appears to have been profitable. He and his wife subsequently bought out the interests of the other proprietors and owned the business. The appellant was the leading figure.

Mancey was employed by Websters Security Service as a security officer at the
Blacktown Railway yards between the end of 1991 and about November 1993.
During that period the appellant and Mancey became acquaintances. In the early hours of Saturday and Sunday mornings the shop attracted patrons who had been at a nearby Club and there were often problems and boisterous and argumentative incidents associated with inebriated patrons. On occasions
Mancey assisted the security officer employed by the business.

After November 1993 Mancey patronised the shop occasionally. After he finished working for Websters in about December 1994 he visited the shop on one or two occasions.

In about November 1992 the appellant moved out of the matrimonial home. He was divorced on 2 March 1994 with his wife being given the care and control of their daughter born on 2 April 1986. From April 1995 onwards he encountered access problems. As at October 1995 there had been a partial settlement in relation to property with the ex-wife retaining the former matrimonial home and the appellant the business. There remained outstanding some additional matrimonial property being a block of land near the former matrimonial home.
As at October/November 1995 there was in existence an order of the Family
Court restraining the appellant from approaching his ex-wife.

In about August 1995 the appellant had to close the shop. Blacktown Railway
Station had been remodelled, the bus stops and taxi rank moved and the pedestrian traffic redirected to a different area. Ninety five per cent of the business of the shop went elsewhere. This had a drastic effect on the appellant's financial position.

In about December 1993 the appellant went to the Philippines and left Ozean
Bozkurt known as Scott (or Scottie) in charge of the shop. The appellant intended to be away for six weeks. While there he decided to get married. He did not return to Australia until June 1994. In the meantime Scottie did not wish to continue running the shop. He arranged for Hersit Iaiden ("Harry") to take over. It is unnecessary to recount the details of all that happened. The appellant believed that Scottie and Harry owed him money. He instituted court proceedings against Harry. He had a rather more direct method in mind to encourage Scottie and Harry to repay the moneys allegedly outstanding.

By October 1995 the appellant had pressing financial and personal problems. He also had to care for his second wife and their young child.

According to Mancey, the appellant telephoned his home on Friday, 27 October and told him that he needed to meet with him urgently. They met near
Mancey's home a short time later. Mancey stated that the appellant told him that he had troubles. Harry, who had been running the shop while the appellant was overseas, had taken $20,000 out of the shop during the two weeks immediately before the appellant returned. Harry also tried to sell the shop.
The appellant wanted the $20,000 back. He offered to give Mancey $5000 if he broke both of Harry's legs and got the $20,000 back. The appellant said that there was "a big one". Upon being asked what he meant, the appellant replied "I'd like you to kill someone. Name the price, I'll give you half the money now and half when the job's done ... and the job must be done while I am overseas." Mancey stated that he would think about it. The appellant supplied his telephone number and said "If I don't call you Sunday, you call me
Monday." 
On arriving home Mancey spoke to Detective Samuel and told him what had happened. As a result of that conversation Mancey telephoned the appellant on
Monday, 30 October 1995 and told him that he was interested. The appellant wanted to meet Mancey later that day but he put him off until Wednesday. In response to a question from the appellant Mancey said he was going to do the job with "a mate". On Wednesday Mancey attended at Blacktown Police Station and spoke with Detective Sgt Stone. Mancey telephoned the appellant and arranged to meet him at a park at Seven Hills and did so on 2 November 1995.
Mancey had been fitted with a listening device.

The appellant and Mancey conversed. The conversation was discursive and a little disjointed on the appellant's part. In response to questions from the appellant, Mancey said that he had decided to do the first job and that he could do everything that the appellant wanted. At that meeting, the appellant stated that he wanted to recover $20,000 from Scottie, not Harry. The appellant emphasised that they had to get $20,000 from Scottie and that he would pay Mancey $5000. Mancey indicated that as Scottie knew him, it would be better to arrange for someone else to attend to Scottie. Mancey told the appellant that he thought that he knew someone who was interested in doing that job.

Mancey told the appellant that he was more interested in the big job and how much he would be paid. The appellant said " ... Big one's somebody - if somebody walk away and not come back and I'd be happier." The appellant said that he wanted the person finished.

After the appellant had canvassed obtaining $20,000 from Scottie and the way to do so at length, Mancey said to the appellant "Do you want the big one you were talking about or not." The appellant replied that he did and that for this person he was offering $20,000. The appellant discussed being at a function with reputable people while the job was done. At that stage the person to be killed was unidentified and that conversation proceeded on the basis that he was a male. The appellant wanted to know how Mancey was going to carry out the killing and he kept on returning to that point although he had not supplied any details of the person or their movements. Eventually, the appellant told Mancey that the person to be killed lived in his house at
Blacktown and that he would supply the address, a picture of the person and his car number plate. The appellant said that the person lived on his own.

Mancey insisted that there had to be an "upfront" payment. The appellant did not want to make such a payment. The conversation dragged on with the appellant raising various ways in which the person could be killed. The appellant told Mancey to take his time. It may take a month or a couple of weeks. The appellant said that he would give all the details when he got a new idea and Mancey's plan was okay. The appellant rambled and mentioned ways in which the killing could be effected. He seemed attracted to a car accident as a suitable way. He regarded the killing as the first of a number of jobs. Much of the appellant's conversation is disjointed and peculiar. He was obviously not well. They were to meet again on the following Sunday or Monday.

After a period, when the appellant dealt with other matters, it was Mancey by his remarks who caused the appellant to speak about the "big one" and sought details of that job. When the appellant wandered away from that topic it was
Mancey who brought him back to it and caused it to be discussed.

Mancey said that at the meeting the appellant handed him a photograph of three men and pointed out the man whose legs the appellant wanted broken and from whom the money owed to the appellant was to be extracted.

After several telephone conversations the appellant and Mancey met at the same park on Monday 6 November 1995. Mancey got into the car which the appellant was driving. He said that they ended up in Bungarribee Road and the appellant pointed to a street in which the person in question lived. They made their way to Tallawong Park at the end of that street. They got out of the car and the appellant pointed in a general way to the area containing the house where this person lived and said that the person living in the house was the person he would like Mancey to kill. The house was some distance away. Mancey said that at some stage the appellant stated that the person to be killed was his ex- wife. An examination of the tape recording and the transcript for 6 November confirms that (see pp 20-21 of that transcript). The appellant described her as his enemy. He said that she lived there on her own in his house.

The appellant remarked that they had been separated for three years and that he did not see his child. From his remarks he was angry with his ex-wife but keen to ensure that their child was not hurt. The appellant suggested how she might be killed. He then delivered an extensive denunciation of her conduct.
He told Mancey that he was not worried about getting his money back from her.
He wanted to "just kill off her to get the baby, alright. I just wanna get my daughter" (transcript, p 33). He complained that she had got $13,000 from his account. He had told her that one day she would be finished. The appellant recounted to Mancey many of his matrimonial problems and the shortcomings of his ex-wife. Mancey enquired when he wanted the killing done. He required a photo to be sure that he had the exact house. A house (or more accurately an area) had been pointed out from a distance. The appellant said that he was prepared to pay $25,000. Mancey was to advise when he was ready so the appellant could be with his witnesses away from the scene of the offence.
(Transcript of Recording - P. 53) 
Mancey insisted that the appellant provide $2000 in advance and the balance of $23,000 when the job was complete. Mancey said "Either give me two grand up front or forget it." (Transcript of Recording - P. 58) Mancey also wanted a clear photograph with her name and address written on the back. Mancey wanted the appellant to drive down the street in which his ex-wife lived and point out the house in which she lived. He also sought the street number of the house. The appellant did not supply it but said "you will get it". They were to meet on "Thursday, five o'clock at the park" with the appellant bringing the photograph and the money. Mancey was to telephone about 4 pm on Thursday 9
November 1995. The appellant had driven him back to the park at Seven Hills (Columbia Street). This was the last time Mr Mancey saw the appellant.

The appellant did not attend the further meeting. At the committal proceedings
Mr Mancey said that in the second message his brother received, the appellant said that he was not going to turn up. Mancey stated that the house which the appellant pointed out ot him was that shown in a photograph which was admitted into evidence. The police had taken him back to the area after the meeting with the appellant on 6 November 1995. Mancey was only able to tell the police of the general area in which the house was situated. He could not indicate a specific house. The appellant had never pointed out the house at close quarters to Mancey.

By the time the trial was held in August 1997 Mr Mancey was not able to recall some of the details of the conversations. He believed that what he said at the committal proceedings was true. There he said that he telephoned the appellant on Friday 10 November 1995 but could not recall the terms of the conversation.
He denied that the appellant said that he did not want to go through with it and asserted that one of the last things that the appellant had said was "I need to see you urgently, I still want to go ahead with it, not just at the moment." Mr Mancey telephoned Blacktown detectives immediately afterwards.

Mr Mancey stated that he continued to be nervous until he had heard that the police had arrested the appellant.

The appellant gave evidence and was cross examined at length. Most of his evidence was given in Turkish through an interpreter but some of his evidence was given in English. On a number of occasions the interpreter asked counsel to shorten and simplify their questions. Sometimes the appellant became upset and at other times he had difficulty following what he was being asked. The judge intervened on a number of occasions in an effort to clarify the position and help the appellant understand counsel's questions. In a large number of instances the appellant did not answer the question "yes" or "no" when such an answer would be expected and natural but replied "Possible". It is not easy to assess whether this was a cultural feature or evasive or a reflection of the position that he was not sure but the event could well have happened. It was apparent from his evidence that he had a number of serious financial problems and that he was in a state of emotional turmoil and confusion in
October/November 1995. During 1995 he was prepared to unburden himself to anyone who would listen. He was like a babbling brook. He was very upset about his lack of access to his daughter and the restraining order made against him at the instance of his ex wife. He insisted that it was not a serious thought that he wanted to get his wife killed so that he could get his daughter.

The appellant said that he never intended that Scottie should have his legs broken or be injured. The appellant insisted that Mr Mancey was demanding bigger jobs and wanted him to supply names. Mr Mancey pressed for money and a photograph of his wife. The transcripts bear this assertion out. The appellant stated that he never intended to give Mr Mancey money and the photograph. At the end of the meeting on 6 November 1995 he never intended to meet Mancey again. The appellant said that on Thursday 9 November 1998 he made a telephone call to Mancey's house and left a message with a male for Mancey to this effect "I am not going any further with the job, it is finished. I am not serious." Ay said that Mancey telephoned him the next day and that he (Ay) told Mancey that he was not continuing with the job.

Ay said that he never intended at any stage that Mancey should kill his wife.

Ay said that he met Mancey by chance in Blacktown about a week prior to 27
October 1995. Each told the other of the difficulties which he had experienced. Each needed money. On 27 October 1995 Ay said that he again told
Mancey of his troubles. There was a dispute as to what was said at that meeting. However, Ay accepted the recordings of their conversations as accurate.

The appellant said that his discussions with Mancey provided a way by which he could cope with his problems. He felt relieved when he talked about them. When he had the meetings with Mancey he did not know what he was talking about.

Ay said that his wife's house could not be seen from the points where they were sitting and standing in Tallowong Park. While he agreed that there were references in the tapes to her being killed he was never serious about having her killed and never intended that to happen. Ay asserted that Mancey kept pushing him and putting pressure on him. The tapes reveal that Mancey tried to cut through Ay's ramblings on several occasions and brought Ay back to the "big" job, whether he wanted Mancey to proceed and the terms of payment and engagement. At T172 this passage appears in Ay's cross examination: "Q: But you spoke again with Mr Mancey on the telephone, didn't you? 
A: Yes, he called me.

Q: And I suggest to you in that conversation you told Mr Mancey that you didn't want to go ahead with the plan just at that time? 
A: Probably.

Q: And the plan that you were talking about when you said you didn't want to go ahead with it at that time was the plan about killing your ex-wife? 
A: Wrong.

Q: Well what plan was it that you say you said you didn't want to go ahead with at that time? 
A: I didn't want to be in touch with him for anything.

Q: I suggest to you that you said to him that you didn't want him to do it just at that time? 
A: I had decided not to get in touch with him any more at that. I decided to go to court, to approach the court, and that's what I did." 
Ay denied that on 10 November 1995 he said that he still wanted to go ahead with the killing but not just at the moment.

In his Summing Up the judge told the jury that the Crown had to satisfy them beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant did solicit. The judge continued at
SU 1: "What does `solicit' mean? It merely means to ask or to try and persuade him to murder Inayet Ay, his ex-wife. To `murder' means what it says, to illegally kill so it is not a difficult situation from the point of view of the law involved, it is basically a question of fact but it must be an intentional solicitation. He must be intending to ask or persuading the person involved to carry out the murder or to do the murder. It matters not that the person is not persuaded and indeed could never be persuaded." 
The judge pointed out that it did not matter that it was never the intention of Mr Mancey to carry out the killing. The judge said at SU2: "It can be a persuasion to do something in the future, it does not have to be right at this minute, as long as the persuasion or the asking is to commit the act alleged and it matters not if after the solicitation has been made, if you are satisfied that it was made, that the person who makes it changes his mind." 
And "So what has to be proved is as I say this intentional soliciting or asking or attempting to try and persuade the man to perform the act of murdering Inayet
Ay, his ex-wife." 
The judge explained how the jury could determine the appellant's intention and that it was permissible to look at all the events before, during and after the meetings. He told the jury that they should look at what Ay said and what he did. The judge referred to the appellant's submission that the jury should look at his conduct after the meeting of 6 November 1995 when he telephoned and said he was not interested and the Crown's riposte that the only reason the appellant rang and said that he did not want to go ahead was because he had formed the requisite intention before and changed his mind. The judge explained that the jury should look at all the facts and decide, as a question of fact whether they were satisfied that Ay "had the necessary intention, that he intended to persuade, to ask this man to kill his wife." 
The judge crystallised the case of the Crown thus: "... and the Crown says `If you listen to those tapes and the conversations that took place then you would be satisfied that there was indeed out of that period culminating up to the last there a situation in which the accused was asking, and did in fact, ask the witness Manser (sic) to kill his ex-wife' and the Crown says `You would be satisfied that that was done and it was done intentionally, that it wasn't a question of joking or just carrying on'. They said `If you listen to the conversations and look at the conversations you will see the thought that had been into it by the accused as to the ways in which he was suggesting himself that such a killing could be carried out and that this was not a case of a person just going along with something that was, in effect, something he did not want to do and was just carrying on a conversation about this clearly indicates that he wanted his wife killed." 
And the case of the accused thus: "The accused makes a case, he does not have to prove anything but he has given evidence and what he says is that he had no intention - while he might have said these things and while he might appear on the face of it from what was said on the tapes that you would understand that in the condition he was in at the time, that he was upset, that he was not really intending and that he rang later and said that he was not going to go - or words to the effect that he was not going to go as both counsel used this phrase I think - he did not want to go through with it or words to that effect." 
The judge referred to the submissions of the Crown and of Ay as to the credibility of Mancey.

At the conclusion of the Summing Up Ay sought a direction that the accused was entitled to be acquitted unless at the time of the solicitation the jury concluded that the accused had the intention that his ex wife should be killed.

The judge declined to give this direction on the basis that the correct direction was that the jury had to be satisfied that when he (Ay) made his request he had the intention of persuading the man (Mancey) to kill his wife.
It was accepted at the trial that the judge had given a direction to this effect.

Appeal Ground 1 - "The learned trial judge erred in law in failing to identify for the jury the important factual elements in the Crown case and relate them to the elements of the crime, in particular in failing to direct them that while they needed to consider the relevant conversations as a whole, they needed to consider the effect of those parts which qualified expressions of intention and those parts which were ambiguous (which should have been identified) and reminding them of the necessity to bear in mind the confused language used by the appellant and the lack of fluency in English." 
The appellant submitted that the Crown case essentially comprised conversations between him and Mancey in which the appellant explored the possibility that Mancey might be prepared to kill his wife. The question for the jury was whether this exploration amounted to the crime charged. It was further submitted that the mere expression of a wish by Ay that Mancey kill his wife may well not amount to soliciting within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s26.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) . The question must be decided by a consideration of the whole of the circumstances.
It was contended that Mancey must have known that Ay did not have $25,000 to pay him. This was relevant to whether there was ever an intention to procure
Mancey to commit murder.

The appellant submitted that there was never any concluded agreement between the appellant and Mancey that the appellant's wife would be killed. Nor was there any unqualified proposal by the appellant to this effect. The appellant's expressed wish that his wife be killed was so hedged around with hesitations and qualifications that it was open to the jury to conclude that the appellant was exploring whether he should solicit Mancey to kill his wife rather than actually soliciting him to do so.

The appellant further submitted that, in the context of his trial, it was crucial to instruct the jury as to the distinction between exploration and solicitation. The jury was not so instructed. There was the further difficulty of the appellant's limited English language skills.

The judge was never asked to direct the jury in the terms suggested. The appellant's case was conducted on the basis that he lacked the requisite intention, that is, he was not intending to persuade Mancey to carry out the murder. The thrust of the appellant's case has changed on appeal.

The judge was correct in telling the jury that soliciting can be a persuasion to do something (the murder) in the future and it often is. The judge also correctly left it to the jury to decide upon the effect of the conversations and summarised the Crown case as being to take the conversations as recounted by Mr Mancey and as recorded at face value and the appellant's case that they should take his conversations in the light of his explanations and especially his lack of intention that his ex-wife should be killed. He also denied Mr
Mancey's version of the conversation of 27 October 1995 and the telephone conversations.

The judge sufficiently informed the jury that the offence comprised a request from the appellant to Mancey to kill his wife with the object of persuading
Mancey to murder her.

The emphasis in the appellant's evidence and his case at the trial and the judge's summary of it was that the accused never intended that Mancey should go ahead and murder the appellant's wife.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s26.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) on which the Indictment was based reads: "Whosoever: conspires and agrees to murder any person, whether a subject of Her Majesty or not, and whether within the Queen's dominions or not, or solicits, encourages, persuades, or endeavours to persuade, or proposes to, any person to commit any such murder, shall be liable to penal servitude for 25 years." 
The Indictment is limited to soliciting to murder. However, the various words used in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s26.html) overlap. Similar words are found in 24 and 25 Vict C. 100 [s.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) (U.K.).
In The Queen v. Most 1881 7QBD 244 at 258 Huddleston B said: "The largest words possible have been used - `solicit' - that is defined to be, to importune, to entreat, to implore, to ask, to attempt to try to obtain; `encourage,' which is to intimate, to incite to anything, to give courage to, to inspirit, to embolden, to raise confidence, to make confident; `persuade' which is to bring to any particular opinion, to influence by argument or expostulation, to inculate by argument; `endeavour' and then, as if there might be some class of cases that would not come within those words, the remarkable words are used, `or shall propose to,' that is to say, make a merely a bare proposition, an offer for consideration. It is to be a misdemeanour of a highly criminal character to solicit, to encourage, to persuade, or even to propose to any person to kill any other person, whether one of her Majesty's subjects or not." 
This case concerns the word "solicit" but that word is contained in a section which has a wide reach. The passage quoted was referred to in R v. Forgione [(1969) SASR 248], the Full Court stating at 251-2, "To ask, to attempt to try to obtain, are in our view amongst the meanings of the word "solicit". The
Full Court continued: "We do not agree with Mr Moran that the word `solicit' in this section is restricted to the meaning of `to importune, to entreat or implore'.
Importuning, entreating or imploring may of course be `soliciting', but so may something less dramatic and less vehement. In our view, a request or a proposal to A that he should murder B, would be a soliciting within the meaning of the section, if seriously made." 
At 252 the Court added: "Her Honour correctly left it to the jury to put their own interpretation on the conversation as deposed to by Burford, if they believed this happened, and the jury were perfectly entitled to infer from the use of the interrogative form, `Will you kill him for me Tony', `What you think Tony, would you kill him for $500?' that the accused was not merely indulging in an abstract philosophical speculation or inquiry but was making a concrete request or proposal that Burford should kill Gabrielli for reward. Indeed, the remark, when you have done it you come and work for me for good money and I will give you some more" seems to contemplate the murder as a fait accompli. We should have been surprised if the jury had drawn any other inference from this conversation; it was clearly for them and it was left to them." 
Forgione was applied in R v. Williams [(1978) SASR 423.] In R v.
Azzopardi CCA, unreported, 1 October 1998 Sully J adopted the following passage from the judgment of Stout CJ in Sweeney v. Astle [[1923] NZLR ] at .
 "The word `solicits' is a common English word, and it means, in its simplified form, `to ask.' In various English dictionaries this simple meaning is given, but other similar words are also used to explain other meanings it possesses, such as `to call for', `to make a request', `to petition', `to entreat', `to persuade', `to prefer a request'." 
In Black's Law Dictionary, 6 th Edn 1990 (USA) this appears in the definition of "solicit": "... and though the word implies a serious request, it requires no particular degree of importunity, entreaty, imploration or supplication ...

As used in context of solicitation to commit a crime, term means to command, authorise, urge, incite, request or advise another to commit a crime." 
Under the definition of "solicitation" this appears: "For the crime of solicitation to be completed it is only necessary that the actor, with intent that another person commit a crime, have enticed, advised, incited, ordered or otherwise encouraged that person to commit a crime." 
To that list I would add the word "asked".

In Canada the common law had been codified and the phrase used is "counsels, procures or incites." Many of the Canadian cases turn on the word, procured.'
These propositions emerge from the Canadian cases: the offence is complete when the solicitation occurs even though it is immediately rejected by the person solicited.
 it does not matter if the person solicited agrees to commit the offence but really has no intention of committing the offence or later changes his mind.

These propositions are also part of the law of soliciting to murder in New
South Wales. There is also the further proposition that on the charge of soliciting to murder there is no defence of withdrawal prior to the murder being committed. In R v. Wright, CCA, unreported, 8 July 1997, Grove J with whom Ireland and Levine JJ agreed quoted with evident approval this direction of the trial judge: "When one person communicates to another with the object of persuading the second person to commit murder, then that offence is complete at the conclusion or completion of the communication." 
This was a trial which concluded in about 4 days from the time the Crown
Prosecutor opened. The important evidence consisted of the tape recordings of the meetings of 2 and 6 November 1995 and the visual recording of the latter.

The judge stated the elements of the offence and in his summing up put the appellant's case as his counsel had conducted it and put it to the jury. The judge sufficiently related the law to the facts. The first element of the offence was simple. Had the Crown proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant asked Mancey to kill his wife. From the Summing Up the jury would have understood that they had to look at the whole of the evidence and answer that question. The second element that the accused made this request with the intention of persuading Mancey to murder her was also on the facts relatively simple. Again, the jury was to have regard to the whole of the circumstances.
This was a case which did not call for an elaborate Summing Up. The case was best dealt with simply and succinctly. This is what the judge did. The judge covered the law and the facts sufficiently.

This was a case where, as the jury found, the appellant asked the appellant to murder his wife with further details to implement the request to be supplied.
When it came to actually supplying the details and putting the request into effect the appellant did not proceed.

Appeal Ground 1 fails.

Appeal Ground 2 - "The ... judge erred ... when instructing the jury as to the evidence of the appellant in failing to direct the jury that, even if they rejected his evidence or accepted it only in part, they could not convict him unless they were satisfied on the whole of the evidence of his guilt beyond reasonable doubt." 
No such direction was sought at the trial and leave is sought to raise this point. The appellant contended that the implication of the instruction given at pp 5-6 of the Summing Up on 8 August 1997 was that the onus on the Crown continued in the event that the accused had said nothing but that once he gave evidence unless he established his innocence or raised a reasonable doubt he should be convicted. It was critical that the jury should have been directed that the onus on the Crown continued for the entire case. It was further submitted that the jury were directed that even if they did not accept entirely that the appellant's evidence was true, if there was a reasonable possibility that it might be true having regard to the other evidence which they accepted, then they should give the accused the benefit of the doubt.

The suggested implication of the instruction given is not as alleged. All the judge said at pp5-6 of his Summing Up on 8 August 1997 was that the evidence of the appellant may have a number of different effects or none at all. He added that it may satisfy them that the appellant was innocent or it may raise a reasonable doubt as to his guilt or it may help the Crown satisfy them beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. Regard must also be had to the other remarks of the judge. In his opening remarks (T10 of 4 August ) the judge said: "The Crown having laid this charge against the accused it rests upon the shoulders of the Crown to prove it, or more properly those ingredients that go to make up the charge. At no stage throughout these proceedings is there any onus cast upon the accused to prove anything. From start to finish it rests upon the shoulders of the Crown. And the charge being a criminal charge the
Crown must prove those elements and ingredients and each of them beyond reasonable doubt." 
He used words to the same effect and indeed in almost identical terms during his Summing Up (P 9 of 7 August 1997). After the passage on 5 and 6 of the
Summing Up on 8 August 1997 the judge reminded the jury on p 7 and at the start of the summary of the accused's case that the accused did not have to prove anything.

This ground is without merit.

Leave to Appeal Against Sentence 
In his remarks on sentence the judge correctly described the Crown case as a very strong one.

The judge said that there was evidence called that on the last arranged date (9 November 1995) the appellant did not turn up. There was some dispute whether that was because he was going to put it off for a period or had changed his mind. The judge was not prepared to say what the reason was. It was Mancey who pursued the appellant by telephone on 10 November 1995. Having regard to the course of events, Mancey was apprehensive about his own safety and relieved when Ay was arrested.

The judge treated the offence as a serious one and thought that the appellant had given a lot of thought as to how his ex-wife should be killed. The judge also referred to the appellant's significant business losses, his difficult financial situation, the withdrawal of $13,000 from his bank account for child maintenance and the problems over access to his daughter. By the time of the trial the appellant had made substantial efforts to rehabilitate himself financially. He had taken a lease of another shop and had borrowed money to start the business. The judge found that the appellant had shown no remorse.
The judge was surprised that the appellant had borrowed money and started up another business with the trial pending. This was an indication that the appellant did not appreciate the gravity of the situation.

The appellant's younger brother said that in August/September 1995 the appellant talked about his problems over and over again and lost himself in them. He told anyone who would listen. The younger brother talked to the appellant and his ex-wife and suggested to the appellant that he see a doctor for treatment. The younger brother arranged for their father to come to
Australia from Turkey to help and stabilise the appellant. The younger brother supported the appellant emotionally and socially and gave him some work in his cleaning business. He also provided security for his loan from the bank. The younger brother noticed a change in the appellant when he was released on bail.

The appellant saw Dr F H Lowden, a consultant psychiatrist, once in each of
February, March and May 1997. It appears that the appellant is intelligent and undertook but did not complete some University engineering studies in Turkey.
Dr Lowden's provisional diagnosis was "major agitated depression ... coloured by his dependent personality traits." He had difficulty with his impulse control. He was placed on medication. The doctor initiated psychotherapy to improve the appellant's self esteem and to deal with interpersonal issues and anger management.

A study of the tape recordings reveals that the appellant was far from well.
He was garrulous and obsessed with his personal problems. He was immersed in them and thinking in odd ways. He was not normal. His utterances were those of a person who was a little unbalanced.

The appellant's prior record was not such as to entitle him to leniency.

The judge correctly emphasised the seriousness of the offence and the need for personal and general deterrence.

It is settled that "the judge may not take facts into account in a way that is adverse to the interests of the accused unless those facts have been established beyond reasonable doubt, but if there are circumstances which the judge proposes to take into account in favour of the accused, it is enough if those circumstances are proved on the balance of probabilities": Storey [(1996) 86 A Crim R, 519] at
The judge was not prepared to make a finding as to why the appellant did not turn up.

It is significant that the appellant did not attend the last meeting. It is also significant that he did not supply a photograph, did not advise her, name and address and did not pay any money. It is apparent from the subsequent loan that the accused had the capacity to raise money with his brother's assistance.

It is also significant that despite his request he never supplied the details in question which would have facilitated the murder although he stated that he would do so. It is obvious from Det Stone's evidence that the house of the wife was never identified. Despite the request the appellant never gave the final authorisation by supplying the details requested even though he was pressed by Mancey who was trying to obtain conclusive evidence. In R v.
Lewis, CCA, unreported 24 April 1998 Dunford J reviewed the sentences imposed for this offence. There is a wide range in the sentences because of the very different facts involved and the substantially different degrees of criminality revealed by the cases. This case is not akin to any of the previous cases.

In view of the unbalanced condition of the appellant, the pressing of the appellant by Mancey despite the appellant's condition, the appellant never supplying the photograph of the ex wife and her address nor paying any money, the appellant not attending the pre-arranged meeting and repelling Mancey's telephone communications I regard the minimum term of 7 years 4 months and the additional term of 2 years, 5 months as manifestly excessive. A substantial sentence is warranted to punish the appellant and to emphasise general and personal deterrence. The applicant served 2 months 13 days in pre-trial custody.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence granted. Appeal against sentence allowed.
In lieu of the sentence imposed, the appellant is sentenced to 7 years penal servitude comprising a minimum term of 5 years 3 months starting on 26 May and ending on 25 August 2002 and an additional term of 1 year 9 months starting on 26 August 2002.

IRELAND J: I agree with Smart J for the reasons given by his Honour. 
DUNFORD J: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J for the reasons given by his Honour. * * * 
