

Honourable James Roland Thompson Wood, Royal Commissioner versus Norman Robert
Beves [1996] NSWSC 561 (22 November 1996) 
HONOURABLE JAMES ROLAND THOMSON WOOD, ROYAL COMMISSIONER V NORMAN ROBERT
BEVES /96 
FRIDAY 22 NOVEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION SULLY J 
JUDGMENT [On preliminary point taken by the defendant] 
HIS HONOUR: Before the Court is a summons by which Wood J of this Court, in his Honour's capacity as Royal Commissioner inquiring into the New South Wales Police Service, seeks to bring before the Court for adjudication in accordance with the relevant provisions of the [Royal Commissions Act, 1923](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/), as amended, what amount to charges of contempt in the face of the Commission, allegedly committed by Mr.Beves.

Learned counsel for Mr. Beves has taken a preliminary point which is, in essence, to the following effect: that the certificate which has been presented to this Court in accordance with the relevant provisions in that behalf of the Act, is something to which the Court is not entitled to have regard at all unless and until the certificate has first been tendered formally and admitted formally into evidence.

The relevant provisions of the Act are found in [s.
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s18b.html), which reads as follows: "Punishment of contempt 
B(1) A contempt of a commission may be punished in accordance with this section.

The commissioner may present to the Supreme Court a certificate setting out the details which the commissioner considers constitutes the contempt.

If the commissioner presents such a certificate to the Supreme Court: the Supreme Court shall thereupon inquire into the alleged contempt; and after hearing any witnesses who may be produced against or on behalf of the person charged with the contempt, and after hearing any statement that may be offered in defence, the 
Supreme Court (if satisfied that the person is guilty of the contempt) may punish or take steps for the punishment of the person in like manner and to the like extent as if the person had committed that contempt in or in relation to proceedings in the Supreme Court; and the provisions of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and the rules of court of the Supreme Court shall, with any necessary adaptations, apply and extend accordingly.

Such a certificate is prima facie evidence of the matters certified.

Neither liability to be punished nor punishment under this section for contempt consisting of failure to attend before the commission as a witness in obedience to a summons excuses the offender from such attendance, and the commissioner may enforce attendance by warrant under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s16.html) or by exercise of any other available power.

A contempt of a commission may not be punished by a commissioner under [section ."](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s18.html) 
It seems to me to be beyond present question that the Commissioner has presented to the Court in the manner contemplated by s. 18B(2) a certificate of the kind contemplated by that section. It seems to me that the operation of s.18B(3) entails that, upon that presentation by the Commissioner to the
Court, two things are achieved.

First, there is placed formally before the Court an originating process, constituting in a formal sense the proceedings in the Court, within the parameters of which the Court is to inquire into, and to adjudicate upon, the alleged contempt.

Secondly, and by reason of s.18B(4), the contents of the certificate are made prima facie evidence of the matters certified by the Commissioner, and are so given status in precise terms, and in aid of the inquiry which the
Court is required by the statute to conduct.

It follows that, in my opinion, it is not necessary for the plaintiff to go through the process of making a formal tender of the certificate; and it is not necessary for the Court to go through the formal process of marking the certificate as an exhibit in the Court's own inquiry. All of that has been achieved, in my view, by the operation of s.18B.

That said, it will become a live issue whether the defendant is able to rebut the prima facie evidentiary standing given to the contents of the certificate by s.18B(4). I apprehend that such may be done in either or both of two ways.

The defendant may, first, propound some matter of law which, if found favourably to the defendant, must entail that the contents of the certificate cannot be given, ultimately, the prima facie effect for which the statute provides.

The defendant may, secondly, adduce evidence, either by affidavit or in some other permitted fashion, which evidence, if accepted, will entail findings of fact having the effect of rebutting in whole or in part the evidentiary standing which, prima facie, the matters to which the Commissioner has certified, enjoy pursuant to s.18B(4).

In my opinion, the threshold point taken by learned counsel for the defendant is not correct in law; and it is, accordingly, over-ruled.
 
The Honourable James Roland Thomson Wood versus Norman Robert Beves /96 
Friday 22 November 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
SULLY J 
The Honourable James Roland Thomson Wood versus Norman Robert Beves /96 
Friday 22 November 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
SULLY J 
JUDGMENT [On further preliminary point taken by the defendant] 
HIS HONOUR: The nature of the present proceedings makes it important, I think, that the Court come, without reserving, to a view on the arguments that have been addressed to it this morning. The matters in issue are, I think, manifestly of the greatest public importance; and it is, I think, in the relevant public interest that they not enter into, so to speak, a state of suspended animation while the Court takes time to prepare extended, polished, written reasons for the conclusion to which it has, in fact, come. I trust that those who come hereafter to read what follows will make the necessary allowances in that regard.

Before the Court is a summons in which the plaintiff is his Honour, Wood J of this Court, in his capacity as sole Royal Commissioner inquiring into the New
South Wales Police Service. His Honour seeks by his summons, declarations to the effect, put simply, that the defendant cited in the summons, Mr. Beves, has been guilty of a succession of contempts in the face of the Royal
Commission.

His Honour has proceeded in that behalf pursuant to the provisions of [s.18B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s18b.html) of the [Royal Commissions Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/) , as amended. His Honour has presented a certificate of the kind contemplated by that section. As I indicated in a judgment delivered ex tempore this morning, I am of the opinion that the material, - and I mean by that, the whole of the material, - covered by his Honour's certificate, has standing in this Court as material carrying the prima facie presumption for which provision is made in express terms by [s.18B(4).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s18b.html) 
That point having been resolved adversely to her earlier submissions, learned counsel for the defendant has taken a further preliminary point. Put simply, it can be understood as follows.

It is contended that certain of the provisions of the [Telecommunications
Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ta1979350/) (C'th), as amended, ("the Interception Act"), have the effect of rebutting the prima facie presumption raised by [s.18B(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s18b.html) of the [Royal Commissions
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/), in that they prevent this Court, in the proceedings in this Court commenced by the plaintiff's summons, either from receiving formally into evidence the greater part of the material covered by the Royal Commissioner's certificate, or from making any practical use of that material, when conducting the inquiry that is mandated by [s.18B(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s18b.html) of the [Royal Commissions
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/).

The defendant points to certain sections, and in particular to [Part
VII](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/index.html#p7), of the Interception Act. Part VII is a collected set of provisions that are described in the heading to the Part, as being provisions for "Dealing with
Intercepted Information." 
I observe that it is not in present dispute that the information relevant for present purposes was lawfully obtained pursuant to a warrant duly issued under the relevant provisions of the Interception Act.

The question for present decision, then, is not the lawfulness of the interception; but, rather, what lawful use, in terms of the Interception Act, this Court may now make of that material.

The fulcrum upon which Part VII turns is s.63, which is, so far as is now relevant, in the following terms: "Subject to this Part, a person shall not, after the commencement of this
Part: communicate to another person, make use of, or make a record of; or give in evidence in a proceeding; lawfully obtained information or information obtained by intercepting a communication in contravention of subsection 7(1)".

It is contended, and I think correctly so, by learned counsel for the defendant, that the only provision of Part VII which might serve to make the questioned material now available to this Court, is s.74. That section is, relevantly, in the following terms: "(1) A person may give lawfully obtained information.............in evidence in an exempt proceeding".

Plainly, the application of s.74, and in particular of s.74(1), to the present case, involves a consideration of the concept of "an exempt proceeding".
 
That term is itself the subject of extensive definition in s.5B of the
Interception Act. That section, so far as is now relevant, provides as follows: "A reference in this Act to an exempt proceeding is a reference to: a proceeding by way of prosecution for a prescribed offence: or................................................................................
 a proceeding of the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police
Service;...............................................................".
 
Plainly enough, s.5B(a) itself gives rise to an inquiry as to what might be contemplated by the description " a prescribed offence". That term, also, is defined in the Interception Act, and in s.5, as follows: "`prescribed offence'means: a serious offence; an offence against subsection 7(1) or section 63; an offence against a provision of Part VIIB of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/); any other offence punishable by imprisonment for life or for a period, or maximum period, of at least 3 years; or an ancillary offence relating to an offence of a kind referred to in paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this definition".

The contentions of the defendant, put simply, are that the proceedings in this
Court cannot be fitted within either of the two categories of "exempt proceedings" as established by paragraphs (a) and (i) of s.5B.

The learned Crown Advocate, appearing for the plaintiff, has contended that the present proceedings can be fitted within the definition in s.5B(a). It is contended that the offence of contempt in the face of a Royal Commission is a common law offence; and, as such, that it is punishable in a way that is, effectively, at the unfettered discretion of a Court that comes, with the requisite jurisdiction and power, to punish the contempt.

This entails, so it is submitted, that such an offence satisfies, at least in theory, the description of an offence "punishable by imprisonment for life or for a period or maximum period.......of at least 3 years." That entails, in its turn, that the offence falls within the statutory definition of a "prescribed offence" as contained, particularly, in paragraph (d) of the statutory definition.

Reference is made in that regard to the discussion of the term "punishable by"in such decisions as :Prevato versus Governor, Metropolitan Remand Centre <case>; [(1986) 64 ALR 37]; Wood v
Reason & anor. [(1977) 1 NSWLR 631]; and
Cheatley versus The Queen & ors. <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 291.] 
I think that such an approach does not pose the correct question. The correct question, it seems to me, is whether a common law offence is "an offence" in the sense in which that term is used in the Interception Act.

That question makes it necessary to refer to yet another particular definition contained in s.5 of the Interception Act, this time the definition of "offence". That term is defined as meaning, simply, "an offence against a law of the Commonwealth or of a State".

The Acts [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/) of the
Commonwealth, as I read it, does not itself deal in specific terms with what is entailed in the concept of "a law of the Commonwealth"as distinct from "the law of the Commonwealth". I think that it is a reasonable inference to draw from such provisions as s.10A of the Acts [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/), and from one's general knowledge of what is normally entailed by reference to "a law of the
Commonwealth", that such expression has in Commonwealth law a settled meaning, which meaning embraces statutes of the Commonwealth; and, at least in most circumstances, such statutory instruments and the like subordinate legislation as are given effect by reason of an Act of the Commonwealth
Parliament.

I do not believe, as at present advised, that, specific statutory provisions to the contrary apart, the ordinary understanding of the expression "a law of the Commonwealth" when appearing in a Commonwealth statute, is apt to embrace general common law offences.

I am strengthened in that view by specific provisions which are made in various Commonwealth statutes, -(see, for example, the relevant provisions of the Customs Act), - giving specific statutory standing to what would have been, otherwise, common law offences of conspiracy and the like. Insofar as it is contended that the present proceedings in this Court are "exempt proceedings" because they are by way of prosecution for a "prescribed offence", I am of the opinion that the submission is incorrect in law.

Different problems of construction arise in connection with s.5B(i). The point at issue really comes down to this question: is it a proper construction of s.5B(i) to read that provision as though, instead of referring to "a proceeding of the Royal Commission....", it referred to "a proceeding of or incidental to a proceeding of the Royal Commission.....", or to some comparable extended definition.

I take the correct relevant starting point to be the following statement of principle contained in the judgment of Barwick CJ in Tickle Industries Pty.
Limited versus Hann & anor. <case>; [(1974) 130 CLR 321] at 331: "It is, in my opinion, a sound rule of statutory construction that a meaning of the language employed by the legislature which would produce an unjust or capricious result is to be avoided. Unless the statutory language is intractable, an intention to produce by its legislation an unjust or capricious result should not be attributed to the legislature".
 
Were I unconstrained by authority to the contrary, I would favour the view that to construe s.5B(i) in any other way than as importing the notion of any curial proceedings ancillary to principal proceedings in the Royal Commission, would be to produce precisely such an "unjust or capricious result"as is warned against by Barwick CJ.

It seems to me to negate common sense to propound that the Commonwealth
Parliament can have intended, -and that by an amendment made specifically to the Interception Act so as to make fully receivable by the Royal Commissioner himself, lawfully intercepted material, -that the Royal Commissioner should be deprived of one of the most effective weapons available to him under the [Royal Commissions
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/) for the proper maintenance of the integrity and the efficiency of his inquiry, that is to say, the weapon of proceedings, in accordance with that Act, for contempt of the Commission.

It is to be borne in mind that what is being postulated in the present proceedings is that it is demonstrable by the use of the lawfully intercepted material that the defendant has committed an egregious contempt of the Royal
Commission by a contumacious refusal to answer truthfully and honestly questions properly put to him in the course of his examination before the
Royal Commissioner.

As I say, authority apart, it seems to me to negate common sense to think that s.5B(i) can have been intended by he Commonwealth Parliament to create a situation in which the only tribunal invested by law with the power to punish such an egregious contempt, namely this Court, is closed off from considering, or from receiving, or from making in any other way proper use of the primary material capable, on the hypothesis relevant for present purposes, of demonstrating the contempt of which the Commissioner complains.

It is contended by learned counsel for the defendant that there is, precisely, such authority to the contrary of what would be my unconstrained view. That authority is said to be found in the decision of the Court of Appeal Division of this Court in Director of Public Prosecutions versus Serratore [(1995) 132
ALR 461.] 
It is not necessary, I think, to quote extensive citations from the judgments of the members of the Bench that decided Serratore. It is sufficient to note in a general way what is said by Kirby P at 470 and 471; and what is said by Cole JA at 475 and 476.

It is, of course, the case that Serratore is distinguishable on its facts from the facts of the present case. The relevant question is, however, whether there is any such distinction between the two cases as would justify my saying that the essential process of reasoning that underpins the decision in
Serratore ought, logically, not to apply in the present case.

I will not dissemble about the point. If I thought that there was any way in which I could properly distinguish that process of reasoning in its application to that case, from that process of reasoning in its possible application to this case, I would unhesitatingly do so. The fact is, however, that I think it is not possible to make such a distinction.

The very notion that there should be such an interpretation of the
Interception Act as would prevent absurdity was at the heart of the submissions put unsuccessfully in Serratore. That such an obvious absurdity is not determinative of such an issue as the one that I am now called upon to decide, is, I think, clear from what is said in the judgments to which I have referred.

Notwithstanding that I consider the result to be wholly unsatisfactory as an exercise, not only of common sense, but as an exercise in determining what I would regard as the true justice and merits of the point now taken, I consider that I am constrained, nevertheless, by the decision in Serratore to hold that the present proceedings in this Court cannot be fitted properly within the relevant provisions of s.5B(i).

For the whole of the foregoing reasons I have come, although with reluctance, to the conclusion that the further preliminary point taken by the defendant must be upheld.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter it is important to frame orders consequent upon the rulings I have just given on the preliminary points as argued this morning.

It seems to me that there are essentially two courses between which the Court can choose. One of them, obviously enough, is simply to dismiss the summons, having regard to the concession made frankly by the Crown Advocate. The alternative is to stand the matter over generally on some just terms; by which
I mean on some terms that do not leave the proceedings, serious as they obviously are, hanging over Mr Beves' head indefinitely. A choice between those courses seems to me to involve a little practical common sense rather than some enthusiastic plunge into arcane legal principle.

Simply to dismiss the summons will leave the Commissioner with two choices, neither of which seems to me to be very practical. One is to appeal the order dismissing the summons to the Court of Appeal Division of this Court. The other is to seek some relevant statutory amendment of the Interception Act.(I observe, parenthetically, that it would, of course, be open to the
Commissioner to pursue both those courses concurrently.) 
Either of those courses is likely to occupy a great deal of time, and might very well entail that the Commissioner is prevented from seeking some proper redress against Mr Beves, not because of something related to the essential justice and merits of the case, but by nothing more than by an accident of timing, having regard to the time constraints attaching to the Letters Patent, by the authority of which the Commissioner is conducting his current enquiry.

The alternative course, of standing the matter over generally on some proper terms, seems to me to be both just and sensible. If the Commissioner decides that he wishes to have the Court of Appeal Division look at my judgment delivered this morning, then he can seek leave of that Court to Appeal; and I indicate that in so far as that it might be necessary for me to give a certificate or some such preliminary authorisation for such an application, I would give it without hesitation, having regard to the nature and public importance of the matter. Were the Commissioner to take that course, and his application and subsequent appeal to be successful, then there would still be on foot the present proceedings, and they could be reactivated promptly, and, hopefully so as to fit within the time constraints to which the Commissioner is otherwise subject.

In so far as the Commissioner might prefer to seek statutory enhancements of his power, and perhaps of the ancillary powers of this Court, then, once again, it seems to me the that preferable course is to make some reasonable provision that will enable the Commissioner to do that, without having to run the risk that at the end of the day he will be left, because of the time constraints to which he is himself subject, with amendments incapable of being given practical effect for the reason that there is no time to recommence and to re-present before this Court properly framed proceedings.

I consider, therefore, that a just order in the circumstances of the present case would be an order standing the plaintiff's summons over generally; reserving liberty both to the plaintiff and to the defendant to move upon proper notice for the restoration of the matter to the list, and for the making of final orders in the proceedings as they stand.

That should entail that nobody will, as it were, steal a march on anybody else. If events show that, as a matter of common sense, it is not to be expected that anything can be done within the available time constraints to remedy, howsoever, the ruling that I have been constrained to give this morning, then the matter can be relisted, and final orders made dismissing the summons, thereby relieving Mr Beves from any continuing burden deriving from the current orders of the Court.

As with so much else to do with the practical administration of justice, the question is one of balance. I think a fair balance is struck by making orders in the terms I have propounded.

I make a formal order standing over the plaintiff's summons. It will be restorable on a day to be fixedand upon seven days' notice in writing by either party to the other. If it is practicable in the events that happen, the matter, if so restored, should be restored to my list. All questions of costs arising from this morning's proceedings are reserved * * * 
