

Re Systems V International Pty Ltd [2003] NSWSC 250 (24 March 2003) 
Last Updated: 7 May 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Re Systems V International Pty Ltd <case> revised - 29/04/2003  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2020/03  
HEARING DATE{S): 24 March 2003  
JUDGMENT DATE: 24/03/2003  
PARTIES: 
Phillip Patrick Carter and Gregory Winfield Hall in their capacity as Deed
Administrators of Systems V International Pty Ltd - (P)  
JUDGMENT OF: Campbell J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
P Sibtain - (P)  
SOLICITORS: 
Gilbert & Tobin - (P)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CORPORATIONS - voluntary administration - variation of deed of company arrangement by extending termination date of deed  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Termination date extended  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
EQUITY LIST  
CAMPBELL J  
MONDAY 24 MARCH 2003  
SC2020/03 PHILLIP PATRICK CARTER & GREGORY WINFIELD HALL (in their capacity as Deed Administrators of Systems V International Pty Ltd)  
JUDGMENT - Ex tempore  HIS HONOUR: This is an application that a deed of company arrangement be varied so that the definition of "termination date" in the deed is altered to read "31 October 2003 or such date as amended at a meeting of creditors".  The application is made concerning a company, which was placed into administration on 21 April 2002. There have been two creditors' meetings. The first was on 29 April 2002, the second on 13 June 2002.  At the second creditors' meeting, the creditors resolved that the company enter into a deed of company arrangement. That deed was executed on 20 June
Over the period from 20 June 2002 to 7 February 2003 the administrators continued the business of the company. A creditors' report, which was issued on 21 November 2002, reported that if a sale could be made of the business, or assets of the company, then secured creditors should receive a distribution.
The report said that neither under a deed of company arrangement, nor upon a liquidation, would sufficient money be available to enable any return to the unsecured creditors.  On 29 November 2002 a creditors' meeting was convened, which resolved to extend the termination date of the deed to 31 March 2003 to allow a proposed sale of the company to be completed prior to termination of the deed. That proposed sale did not proceed.  However, another potential purchaser emerged. A contract for sale of certain of the assets of the company was exchanged on 7 February 2003. The final payment pursuant to that sale contract was due to be made on 14 March 2003. It has not in fact been paid at the moment, but the administrators expect it will be paid in the course of this week.  At present, the deed is due to terminate at the end of March.  However, there are still steps for the administrators to carry out to finalise the affairs of the company. There is one outstanding debtor, who owes an amount of a little less than 1900 Euros. There are some plant and equipment of the company which was not sold under the sale agreement, and which is proposed to be sold at an auction, which is scheduled to occur on 8 April As a result of the sale of the business of the company, various employees will become redundant. It is not possible for those employees to make application under the GEERS scheme until the situation concerning their redundancy is clear. The administrators' experience is that payment to the administrator of amounts, which are payable to the administrator for passing on to employees under the GEERS scheme, can take months to be made after a claim is lodged. In all circumstances, the administrator seeks to have the deed extended. He estimates that the period of time which is sought, namely to have the deed terminate on 31 October 2003, is what is likely to be necessary to enable the administration of the deed to be concluded.  If a creditors' meeting is needed to be called, it would cost the company of the order of $4500.  The present application is one which is made under <case> of the
Corporations Act. Section 447A (1) provides:  "The court may make such order as it thinks appropriate about how this Part is to operate in relation to a particular company".  The powers conferred under <case> (1) are not restricted to making orders to cure defects, and there is nothing on the face of <case> (1) which suggests it should be read down. In Australasian Memory Pty Ltd versus Brien [[2000]
HCA 30] the
Full Court of the High Court so held. The powers under <case> enable the court to enlarge the time for convening a first meeting of creditors (Re
Application of Walker <case>  In my view, there is power to make the present order.  Turning now to whether it is appropriate to make the order, the making of the order will enable the administration, which the creditors have already voted for, to be seen through to its end. I can see no way in which any creditor would be deleteriously affected by the extension of the time in the manner which is asked for. Some money will be saved for distribution to creditors, as a result of not needing to call another meeting. When the unsecured creditors will receive nothing under the deed, there is no reason to believe that any interest of theirs will be prejudiced by not having the opportunity to attend a meeting to vote on the extension. Those creditors who are employees would be benefited by the order made, as they will be able to receive amounts under the GEERS scheme in an orderly fashion.  I make the orders contained in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the originating process. This order may be entered forthwith.  
LAST UPDATED: 07/05/2003 * * * 
