

Perpetual Trustees (Wa) Ltd versus Equus Corp Pty Ltd and Ors Matter No 2591/97 [1998] NSWSC 71 (5 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 April 1998 `

PERPETUAL TRUSTEES (WA) LTD versus EQUUS CORP PTY LTD & ORS` ` 2591/97` `5 March 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is the trial of a separate issue arising in complex litigation between the parties over a series of transactions involving financing certain films. The litigation is not only in the present proceedings but also covers an earlier set of proceedings in this Court, number 2827/96 which were considered by a judgment of Windeyer J on 19 February 1997 and pending proceedings before the Federal Court of Australia, VG610/96. 
It is fortunately unnecessary to go into the very complex facts because it is agreed that I should deal with three questions and then transfer the balance of the proceedings so that they can accompany the Federal Court proceedings.

The three questions which I have ordered be dealt with separately, and before all other issues, are as follows: "A. Whether on the true construction of the documents in Ex AX02, and in the events which have happened, the first defendant is entitled to participate in the Trust Fund described in the Deed in AX02, pp 1 to 131, only on the basis that it has paid to itself any amount distributable from the Trust Fund from the money it owes to the Trust Fund.

B. What, if any, interest rates are to be charged against the trustee on the various amounts which make up the distribution fund as referred to in par 38 of the Statement of Claim.

C. Whether on the true construction of the said documents, in the events which have happened and on the assumption that the first defendant had an obligation to pay $5,008,760 pursuant to the Equus Letter of Credit referred to in the
Statement of Claim, the plaintiff is entitled to set off against the claim of the first defendant to participate in the Trust Fund so much of the sum due as is sufficient to extinguish it." 
A. The argument on the first question involved two matters: (i) whether the equity illustrated in Cherry versus Boultbee <case>; [(1839) 4 My & Cr 442] applied in this case and, (ii) whether on the true construction of the document which is the Appendix to these reasons, there was an assignment under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s12.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), or an equitable assignment, or an equitable charge, or what otherwise was its effect.

In the ultimate, I do not have to answer sub-question (ii) because I am of the view that the submissions made by Mr Palmer QC and Miss Gleeson for the plaintiff are correct in that the equity illustrated by Cherry versus Boultbee applies in a wider class of cases than just the situation where debts at law are owing by "A" to "B" and "B" to "A".

There are agreed facts, which are in the document MI01. In summary, the plaintiff trustee is the trustee of the various assets relating to a film, originally given the working title "Night of the Leopard", but later released under the title "Double Impact", pursuant to a Trust Deed of 9 May 1988, which is set out on pp 1 to 131 of Ex AX02.

There were a number of investors in the film and they fall into two classes, the defendants, who borrowed money from the first defendant, Equus Corp Pty
Ltd, in order to fund their investment in the film, and the 117th to 134th defendants who invested in the film other than by borrowing from the first defendant.

Mr Coles QC and Mr Newlinds appeared for the first defendant. Mr Beech-Jones of counsel appeared for 86 of the first group of defendants. Mr Beech-Jones did not become involved in the debate on questions A and C.

As at the relevant time there were moneys which found their way to the trustee pursuant to the deed and which were held by it. The regime set up for dealing with those moneys is set out in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s19.html) of the Trust Deed, which was essentially as follows.

Under clause 19.01, the investors authorised the trustee as their agent to receive any fees payable pursuant to the relevant production services agreement. These fees and other moneys which might be required to be paid were thus paid to the trustee. The moneys received might attract interest. If so, the interest was to be added to the moneys collected. The trustee was then to pay its own commission, management fees and out-of-pocket expenses and then distribute the balance to the investors.

Clause 19.08 provided that all distribution of fees shall be made within 30 days of the receipt of those fees. Clause 19.10 was an overriding provision that the trustee shall not be obliged to make a distribution of fees if in its reasonable opinion there would be insufficient money in the Fees Account to pay for amounts required for proper disbursement.

The series of documents in virtually identical form to that in the Appendix operated, on one argument, to assign all the rights, title and interest in the film to Equus, the first defendant. On the opposing argument it operated only to assign part of the rights to the film. By reason of that series of documents Equus became entitled to receive from the trustee a considerable sum of money.

On the 15 July 1996 the trustee issued a statutory demand for just over $5 million against Equus. Equus applied to set aside the statutory demand and on May 1997, in the Federal Court, Heerey J declined to set aside the statutory demand, but reduced the amount of it to $943,765. There was an appeal and cross-appeal to the Full Federal Court, which were dismissed in
December 1997.

Equus paid the amount of the statutory demand, but the Federal Court of
Australia restrained the trustee from disbursing the amount paid until further order of that Court and those matters will doubtless be dealt with in the still pending Federal Court proceedings. The plaintiff trustee claims that there is still a large amount of money over and above that sum payable to it.

So there is the situation where on the assumed facts (that is the facts that were agreed only for the purpose of the proceedings before me and inferences I draw from them) there is an amount owing by the trustee to Equus and an amount owing from Equus to the trustee.

What has been called the principle in Cherry versus Boultbee, which I have deliberately called the equity illustrated by Cherry versus Boultbee, is set out as well as anywhere, if I can say so with respect, in Re Peruvian
Railway Construction Co Ltd [[1915] 2 Ch 144] at 150, namely: "Where a person entitled to participate in a fund is also bound to make a contribution in aid of that fund, he cannot be allowed so to participate unless and until he has fulfilled his duty to contribute." 
S R Derham in his Set Off (2nd ed Clarendon Press Oxford 1996) in chapter thoroughly considers what he calls the rule in Cherry versus Boultbee. The consideration shows with reference to the decided cases that although often very loose language is used with respect to the principle, it is to be distinguished from the right of set off; see Cherry versus Boultbee itself. It is also to be distinguished from the traditional right of retainer; see for instance Re Akerman [[1891] 3 Ch 212], 219, though it developed to a degree from rules of retainer and rules of satisfaction of debts by legacies.

As Mr Derham points out, the earliest reported example of the application of the equity occurred in Jeffs versus Wood <case>; [(1723) P Wms 128]; [24 ER 668.] In that case the problem was that there was a debt and a legacy. Insolvency ensued and the problem appears to be that there could be no set off in the strict sense because the legacy was not a debt but only an amount which could be recovered in the ecclesiastical court. That led Jekyll
MR to say that there was a case for equitable intervention and that the plaintiff was only to pay the surplus having deducted what is due from the legatee.

Jeffs versus Wood is still good law, as is illustrated by the fact it was applied recently in New Zealand in Commercial Factors Ltd versus Maxwell Printing Ltd [[1994] 1 NZLR 724.] That was a commercial cheque swapping and factoring arrangement and although the commercial complications of the 20th century are far greater than those considered in Jeff's case in the 18th century, the principle is still applicable. Jeff's case itself illustrated that one does not have to find debts that are both due at law or both due in equity or both able to be dealt with in the one court. Indeed the fact that they are not able to be set off appears to be one of the essentials of the application of the rule. Philip Wood in his English and International Set Off (Sweet and Maxwell London 1989) in chapter 8 makes it clear that one only gets into the Cherry versus Boultbee equity if there is no set off, because if set off applies then there is no need for the equity. 
I did for a while find it strange that the application of two equitable principles should give different results. This is particularly so when the principles of equitable estoppel and the equity illustrated by Cherry v
Boultbee both arose out of the idea it was unconscionable to allow procedural problems to get in the way of the justice of the situation where debts were owed by "A" to "B" and "B" to "A". The principles of equitable set off are relatively confined, as noted by Sheller JA, with whom Kirby P and
Meagher JA agreed, in Lord versus Direct Acceptance Corp Ltd [(1993) 32 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281993%29%2032%20NSWLR%20362 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 367.

As I said, that concerned me for a while but it seems to me in the ultimate that the rules, whilst they often will overlap in the fact situation to which they are applicable, are independent equities which can be invoked in the appropriate case.

There are also other indications in the authorities that the equity illustrated by Cherry versus Boultbee is applicable in situations where one of the parties is only entitled in equity or beneficially to money and there is a common law debt owing on the other side. The main example of this is
Burridge versus Row <case>; [(1842) 1 Y & CCC 183]; 62 ER 183 affirmed [(1844) 13 LJ Ch 173.] As Mr
Derham pointed out on p 472 of his work in par 10.12.5, this runs contrary to Campbell versus Graham <case>; [(1831) 1 Russ & M 453] and on appeal [(1834) 8 Bligh NS 622], though Mr
Derham's construction of the appeal judgment in that case might not be completely accurate. However, whether that be right or not, I agree with his conclusion. There is no reason why a Court of Equity should not apply the equity illustrated in Cherry versus Boultbee where one person merely has an equitable title and, indeed, it seems to me the authorities show that this is the right approach: see also Re Weston; Davies versus Tagart [[1900] 2 Ch .] 
The rationale of the equity is that if a person has to contribute to a fund he or she should not be able to have the fund dissipated by collecting from it before he or she has made contribution; that equity will not apply where it is contrary to statute or where it is contrary to the agreement of the parties, or otherwise the circumstances show that it would not be in accordance with conscience that it should apply.

One of the strongest arguments put by Mr Coles QC and Mr Newlinds for Equus was that this series of transactions was a very complicated one and that the documentation had been very carefully thought out, the rights to receive moneys were dealt with in very, very great detail and it would be impossible to impute to the parties that they would be relying on some equity which was inconsistent or even supplemental to their detailed agreement.

On the other hand, Mr Palmer QC and Miss Gleeson put that one can obviously find very detailed provisions in the contract between the parties, but not even the most detailed agreement can deal with all possibilities that might arise in the future, and that where a situation arose in the future no matter how detailed the document, it may well be appropriate for equity to intervene.
Where there was an unforeseen insolvency situation, or where an unanticipated event occurred whereby a party was both a contributor to and claimant from a fund, or where there may be some doubt about the solvency of a party, that was the very situation where equity would step in and give the protection that in conscience should be given. I, with respect, agree with that submission and it does not seem to me that the detailed provisions of the agreement are such as to exclude the equity.

There were detailed submissions put to me that on the true construction of the documents in Ex AX02 there was no "fund" within the meaning of the equity illustrated in Cherry versus Boultbee. It is true that Mr Derham in his chapter deals with the cases in such a way that one might think that there was a very fixed rule of equity, and that if various matters occurred, the court of equity would not apply the principle. However, principles of equity are inherently flexible and it is usually erroneous to place too much semantic significance on individual words. Even though most of the cases illustrating the application of the equity are cases where there is a definite fund, it does not seem to me that that necessarily is a prerequisite for the application of the principle.

However, I do not have to go that far because it seems to me, despite the ardent submissions put by Mr Coles QC and Mr Newlinds that the pool of moneys which are collected by the trustee under the provision of cl 19 of the Trust
Deed do constitute a fund in the sense in which that word is used in this part of the law. The word "fund" is a rather flexible one, as is illustrated in chapter 8 of Mr Wood's book, to which I have already referred.

They sought to argue that all that was happening was that the trustee was a conduit, the trustee received the moneys and then had an obligation to pay them out within 30 days, less authorised deductions. However, it seems to me that the pooling provisions, especially the provision in cl 19.10, shows that there was more than this and that there was a passing of the property in the fees to the trustee. When cl 19.08 says that all distributions of fees are to be made within 30 days that was not a contractual condition or warrantee, but merely a direction to the trustee to pay within 30 days or a reasonable time thereafter and that it could only be policed by the proper action for administration of the Trust in a Court of Equity and not by action for debt in a Court of Common Law. Accordingly, it seems to me that the arguments that there is no fund, even if a fund is necessary, fail.

I cannot see any reason why the equity illustrated in Cherry versus Boultbee should not apply to the present case. Equity gives relief in situations analogous to where equity has traditionally given relief in the past and despite the submissions of the first defendant I cannot see any reason why it should not apply here. Accordingly, I answer question A "yes".

B. It has been put by the defendants that I should not answer this question.
On the other hand, the plaintiff says that it is proper that the question be answered and it would be helpful to the parties to have an answer to the question now.

The background is that on the assumed facts unauthorised distributions were made out of the fund and that it will be necessary to reconstitute the fund by restoring these over-payments, together with some form of interest. The assumption that I make is that interest will be paid as from the date from which the moneys were wrongly taken out of the fund. Again I am using the word "fund" in a shorthand sense and do not want it to be thought of as being used technically.

There are differences between the cases where a trustee with malice aforethought removed moneys from a trust fund and where the trustee misconstrued the trust instrument or otherwise acted innocently. I was told from the Bar table that there was no claim in any litigation to date that the trustee had acted with malice aforethought. Accordingly, the trustee's position should be dealt with on the basis that there was an innocent breach of trust.

Traditionally innocent breaches of trust have been dealt with by the court in a much more merciful way than by applying commercial rates of interest. For many years the court applied a four percent rule without further analysis: see Re Tennant; Mortlock versus Hawker <case>; [(1942) 65 CLR 473] at 507. The modern position was reconsidered by Kearney J in
Hagan versus Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308] at 391 to .

In the instant case there is evidence that the moneys, had they not been disbursed, would have been retained by the trustee in its common fund and there is evidence that the rate in the common fund varied from 5.72 percent to .47 percent between mid-1994 and mid-1997 and is now 3.82 percent. Without doing a mathematical exercise, I would have thought a rate of approximately 4 percent would be a fair equivalent when one is considering that there would have been commission and charges et cetera payable out of the fund.

The principal argument against adopting a 4 per cent rate was, I think, twofold. First, that had the moneys been paid over to the investors they would have discharged their liability pro tanto to Equus, from whom they had borrowed the moneys to put into the scheme in the first place, and that the trustee knew about that application because it had been privy to the document which set up the whole scheme.

The second was that the trustee had no right to retain any moneys for more than 30 days because of clauses such as 19.08 of the Trust Deed. I have already dealt with that second argument. The first seems to me to look at the matter the wrong way around. The only right that the beneficiaries had was to have the moneys administered in the way the trustee has administered them. One has got to look to see what was the loss to the fund. In my view the loss to the fund was what the fund would have obtained by being invested in the Common
Fund in the way in which it had been up until that time. Accordingly, the answer to question B is 4 percent.

C. I have already dealt with this question incidently when dealing with question A. The decision of the Court of Appeal in Lord versus Direct Acceptance
Corp (supra) is binding on me. At p 367 the Court of Appeal made it clear that one cannot have an equitable set off in this State unless the claim sought to be set off goes to the root of the whole transaction or that the title of the plaintiff is impeached by the matter being set off.

In the instant case we have not got that situation. We have a situation where a series of investors have borrowed from Equus, they have then either assigned or charged their capital or the proceeds of that capital to Equus and Equus and/or the trustee are now seeking to set off the two amounts. It does not seem to me that that fits the test laid down by the authorities. Accordingly,
I answer question C "no".

It follows from the way in which I have approached this matter that it is not necessary to construe the document in the Appendix. However, in case the matter should go further, and I be held to be wrong, I will make some brief observations about it.

There is no doubt at all that the document speaks with two voices, both with the voice of assignment and the voice of charge. That may very well be, as counsel pointed out, because of the document which is behind tab 9 in the agreed bundle at pp 290 to 294A, that the property which was proffered by the investors to Equus to secure his or her debt to Equus might have been land, might have been personal property and might have been a chose in action, either legal or equitable, so that when the drafter came to prepare the document in common form for all investors, the drafter had to cover all possibilities. The risk was taken in using one document rather than directing the mind to each particular situation.

The distinction between an assignment and a charge is well set out for present purposes in Mr Starke QC's book Assignment of Choses in Action in
Australia (Butterworths Sydney 1972) at pars 16 and 17 on pp 13 to 15. The basal distinction is that with an assignment there is a transfer of the fund or the whole of the property of the assignor at least for the term of the assignment, whereas with a charge there is only a transfer of part or some more limited rights given. See also Tancred versus Delagoa Bay & East Africa
Railway Co [(1889) 23 QBD 239] and
National Mutual Life Nominees Ltd versus National Capital Development Commission [(1979) 37 FLR 404.] 
Each set of counsel has concentrated on the words which boost the word "charge" or "assign" as the case may be. It is very difficult not to notice the dichotomy in the document and that the drafter tried to get the best of both worlds. However, I opine to the view that it is an assignment. I believe that the second paragraph is one that can be read consistently with an assignment as something which subsequently follows from the fact of the assignment and the words "I confirm" in the fourth paragraph, which might be thought to be otiose, are really as they say confirmatory as to the wide power that Equus has.

Accordingly, I am inclined to the view the document is an assignment, but as I said before this is not necessary for the result of the case.

I think it is only now necessary to make formal orders as to costs and the further conduct of the proceedings. As to costs, the first defendant should pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.

There has been an argument as to whether at least the appearing remaining defendants ought to be ordered to pay costs. I do not think that is completely academic because it may or may not be the case that the first defendant will meet the order for costs, but I think there should be liberty reserved to the plaintiff to apply for costs against the other defendants should it not receive the costs from the first defendant.

The costs to which I refer are, of course, the costs of the argument of the separate questions.

By consent under the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-vesting)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/joca427/) New South
Wales [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/joca427/s5.html), I transfer the proceedings to the Federal Court of Australia and request the
Registrar to send the file to the Victorian Registry of that court with a suggestion they be connected with proceedings VG610/96 pending in that court.
 * * * 
