

Liquor Administration Board of NSW versus Miller [1996] NSWSC 470 (4 October )

LIQUOR ADMINISTRATION BOARD OF NEW SOUTH WALES versus MILLER /95; CL 12314/94 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY, CLARKE, SHELLER JJA 
CATCHWORDS: LIQUOR LICENCES - assessment of fees - premises holding both retail and wholesale off-licences - [Liquor Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) - s80 must be construed to avoid double taxation - sales to employees and prescribed persons - whether wholesale or retail 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed (in part) 
The respondent was the holder of a wholesale off-licence and a retail off-licence issued under the [Liquor Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) (the Act). Under the Act, fees were payable to the appellant for licences. The applicable fees were determined by reference to the categories set out in s80, and, so far as was relevant to the facts of this case, were calculated according to the formula set out in s80 (2) (c) and (d). For the purposes of assessment and re-assessment of fees, the respondent was required to provide the appellant with certain information regarding the sales and purchases of liquor during the month that next succeeded the end of the assessment period.

Both before and during the licence fee years 15 January 1990 to 15 January , the respondent made significant sales to company employees and to unlicensed persons authorised to sell liquor, or "prescribed persons". It was contended that these were erroneously included as retail sales, and should not have been subject to a fee. The respondent applied for re-assessments of the retail off-licence fees for the four previous twelve monthly periods.

In its decision of 23 August 1994, the appellant stated that where liquor was received onto premises which hold both a wholesale and retail off-licence, all such liquor would be subject to a full licence fee. If the liquor was sold on to other retail outlets, attracting the full fee again, s80 (3) must be construed so as to avoid double taxation. However, the appellant concluded that the double taxation issue would not arise where sales were made to employees and prescribed persons, and that these sales should be included in the assessmant for the fee payable under the retail licence.

The respondent brought proceedings against the appellant, seeking declarations that it had erred in its re-assessments of fees. Barr AJ found that sales by wholesalers to prescribed persons could be characterised as wholesale, and that although sales to the employees of wholesalers have the appearance of retail sales, neither of the two categories of sales was assessable under the respondent's retail licence. The respondent was therefore entitled to re-assessments of the fees in question. The appellant appeals from that decision.
 
HELD: . Where the legislature prescribed the applicable amount in the case of a retail off-licence under s80 (3) (a), it could only be dealing with liquor sold pursuant to that licence. The intention was not to impose a further fee related to liquor licensed to be sold pursuant to the wholesale off-licence. Read in its context, s80 (3) (a) is concerned only with the amount paid or payable by the licencee for liquor delivered upon or purchased for the licensed premises and sold pursuant to the retail off-licence.
Sales to employees and prescribed persons were permitted by the wholesale off-licence. As such, the applicable amount for the retail off-licence could not include the purchase price for liquor which was sold or to be sold pursuant to the wholesaleoff-licence. The factual dispute to be decided was whether the liquor sold to employees and prescribed persons during the relevant periods was sold pursuant to the wholesale or retail off-licence.
Although the sales in question had been recorded as retail sales, the respondent's evidence that this recording was erroneous was unchallenged. The sales to prescribed persons and to employees were made pursuant to the wholesale off-licence and may not be brought into account in determining the fee for retail off-licences.

ORDERS . Appeal allowed to the extent necessary to amend declaration 5 by the substitution for the words "for the purposes of the wholesale licence" of the words "and sold or to be sold pursuant to the wholesale licence";
Otherwise appeal dismissed;
The appellant to pay the respondent's costs of the appeal.
 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA.
 
CLARKE JA: I agree with Sheller JA.
 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
The Liquor Administration Board of New South Wales (the Board) appeals from a decision by Barr AJ (as his Honour then was) of 10 February 1995. The respondent, Ronald Jack Miller, is the holder on behalf of Tucker & Co (Australia) Pty Limited (Tucker) of a wholesale off-licence and a retail off-licence issued by the Licensing Court under the [Liquor Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) (the Act) for premises at 11 Rosebery Avenue, Rosebery (the premises). Tucker is one of the largest liquor distributors in New South Wales. The respondent brought proceedings by summons in the Common Law Division for declarations that the Board erred in its re-assessments of licence fees payable in respect of each licence for the licence fee years ending 15 January 1990 to 15 January 1994. Barr AJ upheld this contention and made declarations, inter alia, that "4. (O)n the proper construction of the [Liquor Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) (as amended) (`the [Liquor
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/)') and upon the events which have happened, the annual licence fee for each of the licensing years ending 15 January 1990 to 15 January 1994 (inclusive) for the
Wholesale Licence is the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each year.
he annual licence fee paid for the Retail Licence for each of the licensing years ending 15 January 1990 to 15 January 1994 (inclusive), do [sic] not include any percentage of the cost of liquor purchased or delivered upon the Licensed Premises for the purposes of the Wholesale Licence." 
THE PREMISES 
During the relevant period, more than 99 per cent of Tucker's annual liquor sales in New South Wales, which exceeded $27 million, were wholesale. All liquor was delivered to a special part of the premises called the wholesale lease area from which liquor sold by wholesale was consigned. The retail licence area was a separate area of the building divided by a chain mesh fence from the wholesale licence area. Liquor sold by retail was taken from the bulk store in the wholesale licence area to the retail licence area from which it was sold. The same employees of Tucker undertook the dispatch of liquor sold by wholesale and by retail. However, it was common ground that the two licences were held for the whole premises. 
RETAIL AND WHOLESALE LICENCES 
Division 1 of [Part 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/index.html#p3) of the Act in the form it took during the periods in question provided for the granting of various classes of licence authorising the licensee to sell liquor on the premises specified in the licence, including off-licences to sell liquor by retail and off-licences to sell liquor "to persons authorised to sell liquor"; [s18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s18.html) (2) (b) and (3) (a) and (c). "Person authorised to sell liquor" was defined to mean (a) a licensee; (b) a registered club; (c) a person who was authorised, by the law of another State or a Territory of the Commonwealth, to sell liquor and (d) a person who was prescribed, or who belonged to a class of persons that was prescribed for the purposes of the paragraph; [s4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s4.html) (1). I shall refer to the persons in para (d) as "prescribed persons". One such prescribed person was a person who sold or supplied liquor (otherwise than as referred to in [s6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s6.html) (c) - (f) of the Act) whether in New South Wales or elsewhere but was not required by the Act to hold a licence in respect of the sale or supply of liquor in New South Wales; reg 3C.

The authority conferred by a licence to sell liquor to persons authorised to sell liquor included authority to sell liquor to the employees of the licensee [(s18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s18.html) ), limited to no more than 5 per cent of the total value of sales pursuant to the licence during an assessment period; [s22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s22.html) .

LICENCE FEES 
Section 80 (1) of the Act provided that a fee was payable to the Board for a licence while the licence was in force and was so payable in respect of each period that was prescribed for the purposes of the subsection and succeeded the grant of the licence, other than the period so prescribed during which the licence was granted. The fee payable was determined by reference to four categories set out in s80 (2); (a) a hotelier's licence; (b) an off-licence for a vigneron; (c) an off-licence to sell liquor to persons authorised to sell liquor or an off-licence for a brewer; and (d) "any other case". A fee or any part thereof calculated on a percentage basis was reduced by the authorised deductions prescribed by s81. So far as presently material, s80 (2) (c) and (d) read as follows: "(2) The fee payable under subsection (1) ........
 in the case of an off-licence to sell liquor to persons authorised to sell liquor .........: where an off-licence to sell liquor by retail is not held in respect of the same premises - $1,000 or 13 per cent of the applicable amount prescribed by subsection (3) plus 7 per cent of the applicable amount prescribed by subsection (3A), whichever is the greater; or where an off-licence to sell liquor by retail is so held - $1,000; or in any other case - 13 per cent of the applicable amount prescribed by subsection (3) plus 7 per cent of the applicable amount prescribed by subsection (3A), reduced, where the fee or any part thereof is calculated on a percentage basis, by the authorised deductions prescribed by s81." (emphasis added) 
Section 80 (3) picked up the phrase "the applicable amount prescribed by subsection (3)" from s80 (2) (a) (i) and (ii), (c) (i) and (d) and defined it for various categories of licence. So far as presently material, s80 (3) provided: "The applicable amount prescribed by this subsection is: in the case of ......... an off-licence to sell liquor by retail - the amount paid or payable by or on behalf of the licensee for all liquor (other than low alcohol beer) that, during the assessment period for the licence fee, was delivered upon or purchased for: the licensed premises; .......
 in the case of an off-licence to sell liquor to persons authorised to sell liquor, ........ where ....... an off-licence to sell liquor by retail is not held in respect of the same premises - an amount equal to the sale price of all liquor (other than low alcohol beer) that, during the assessment period for the licence fee, was sold pursuant to the licence to persons referred to in paragraph (d) of the definition of `persons authorised to sell liquor' in [s4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s4.html) or to employees of the licensee; .......
 in any other case - the amount paid or payable by or on behalf of the licensee for all liquor (other than low alcohol beer) that, during the assessment period for the licence fee, was delivered upon or purchased for the licensed premises." (emphasis added) 
Section 80 (3A) provided that the applicable amount prescribed by that subsection was the amount that would be determined under subs (3) if that subsection applied to low alcohol beer rather than to all other liquor.
Accordingly, the only difference between the treatment of low alcohol beer and other liquor was in the percentage used to fix the fee (7 per cent and 13 per cent respectively). The applicable amount was the same in each case.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s4.html) (1) defined "assessment period" in relation to a licence fee to mean the period prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of the definition that, by an intervening period so prescribed, last preceded the licensing period in respect of which the fee was payable. The relevant licensing period ran from January to 15 January in the following year and the assessment period was the financial year that last preceded the relevant licensing period.

It should be observed immediately that, according to s80 (3), in the case of a retail off-licence (subs (3) (a)) the applicable amount was calculated by reference to payments made by the licensee for liquor delivered upon or purchased for the licensed premises during the assessment period. In the case of a wholesale off-licence, where a retail off-licence was not held in respect of the same premises (subs (3) (b)), the applicable amount was calculated by reference to the sale price of liquor sold pursuant to the licence during the assessment period to prescribed persons or to employees of the licensee.

PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT 
Section 84 (2) of the Act required the respondent, as the holder of the licences, during the month that next succeeded the end of the assessment period to lodge a statutory declaration with the Board in the form approved by the Board and including such information as might be required by the form in relation to sales and purchases of liquor. Section 85 (1) required the respondent, as a person who sold liquor to a person authorised to sell liquor, during the month that followed an assessment period for the licence, to forward a statutory declaration to the Board in the approved form specifying, in relation to that assessment period, such information in relation to liquor so sold as might be required by the form. Section 82 provided for the secretary of the Board to assess the amount of a licence fee in so far as it was payable on a percentage basis. Section 83 (2) enabled the Board from time to time to re-assess a licence fee, and provided that any such re-assessment was, subject to any further re-assessment, final and conclusive.

ASSESSMENT AND RE-ASSESSMENT 
Both before and during the periods here in question, the respondent made significant sales to company employees and to unlicensed persons authorised to sell liquor, that is to say to prescribed persons. Barr AJ said that in the initial assessment of the fee for the wholesale licence for the assessment period 1991 - 1992 (for the licensing period ending 15 January 1994), the Board calculated a fee based on a proportion of the declared sale price of the liquor to "unlicensed persons described as persons authorised to sell liquor". Following the respondent's protest and a visit by the Board's supervising inspector, an intention was expressed to include sales to unlicensed persons described by the Act as "persons authorised to sell liquor" and sales to employees of the respondent in the assessment of the fee for the retail off-licence. This was done. At the same time the Board conceded that the respondent was correct in his contention that the fee payable on the wholesale off-licence was the flat fee of $1,000. The respondent applied for re-assessments of retail off-licence fees for each of the four previous twelve monthly periods. Barr AJ said: "In making returns for those years (the respondent) had included as retail sales, sales in a number of categories, including sales to employees and to unlicensed persons authorised to sell liquor. He now contended, consistently with the dispute which had already arisen, that these were wholesale sales and that no fee should have been payable in respect of them. Their declaration as retail sales was an error and he claimed entitlement to a refund of a proportion of the retail licence fee already paid for each of those years." 
The Act provided that where the only licence held for particular premises was a retail off-licence, the licence fee was calculated by reference to the amount paid or payable for liquor delivered upon or purchased for the premises during the assessment period; s80 (2) (d) and (3) (a). On the other hand, where the only licence held for particular premises was a wholesale off- licence, the fee was the greater of $1,000 or a percentage of the amount equal to the sale price of all liquor sold during the assessment period pursuant to the licence to prescribed persons or employees of the licensee; s80 (2) (c) and (3) (b). No doubt convenience dictated the different methods of assessment. Ordinarily it would not be possible to know what quantities of liquor would be sold to prescribed persons or employees until the sales were made. In the case of a retail off-licence, the purchase price was an appropriate benchmark. In the case of a wholesale off-licence, calculation by reference to the purchase price would not permit a distinction to be made between sales to employees or prescribed persons and other sales. This difference made the task of assessment difficult when both a retail and a wholesale off-licence were held for the same premises.

Where a wholesale off-licence but not a retail off-licence is held for premises, the legislature seems by s80 (2) (c) (i) and (3) (b) to treat sales to prescribed persons or employees as retail sales and fix the fee accordingly, the only difference being that the benchmark is not the purchase price of the liquor but the sale price to those persons. There is no apparent reason for the legislature to treat such sales differently where both a wholesale and a retail off-licence are held for the same premises, unless it was thought, in such a case, that such sales would be treated as having been made, not under the wholesale off-licence, but under the retail off-licence.
In 1994 the Act was amended to prohibit the sale or supply of liquor pursuant to a wholesale licence to prescribed persons or employees if a retail off- licence was held in respect of the same premises; s22 (2A). This amendment did not affect the licences here under consideration.

THE BOARD'S DETERMINATION 
The Board's decision of 23 August 1994 was apparently directed to the inspectorate's application for the re-assessment of liquor fees for the periods in question "in respect of the off-licence (retail) held by [Tucker] in respect of 4 categories of sales: 
Sales to employees, 
Sales to unlicensed persons, 
Stock donated for trophies, charity associations, prizes, etc, 
Sales at auction." 
The Board accepted the respondent's submissions in respect of categories (c) and (d) that the respondent had mistakenly treated these sales as having been made under the retail licence and re-assessed the licence fees accordingly.
The decision continued: "In respect of matters under (a) and (b) the Board has given consideration to the submissions made on behalf of the company received on 28 March 1994 and Mr
Whealy's opinion of 11 July 1994.

It has also had regard to Mr Inspector Miner's submissions of 21 July 1994.

The Board is of the opinion that Mr Miner's submission correctly states the law applicable to the receipt of liquor onto premises which hold both a wholesale and retail licence.

In brief this is that by virtue of s80 (3) all such liquor would be subject to the full licence fee, but where such liquor is on-sold to other retail premises, which purchase attracts the licence fee again, Gerendasi's [sic] case requires that the literal wording of s80 (3) be construed to avoid double taxation.

In relation to sales to employees and sales to unlicensed authorised persons, no such double taxation position arises, and s80 (3) requires the payment of the licence fee under the retail licence.

We so find and accordingly reassess the fee in accordance with the attached schedules." 
DETERMINING THE APPROPRIATE FEES 
Section 80 (3) provided that the applicable amount prescribed by the subsection in the case of a retail off-licence was the amount paid or payable by the licensee for all liquor (other than low alcohol beer) "that, during the assessment period for the licence fee, was delivered upon or purchased for the licensed premises." Read without regard to its context, the language of that part of the subsection would produce the result that, because the respondent had a retail off-licence for the premises, 13 per cent of the total amount paid for all liquor delivered upon or purchased for the premises was the fee payable under subs (1), albeit that 99 per cent of the annual sales were by wholesale. According to the Board, the only constraint on this draconian result was that, to the extent the sales by wholesale were to "persons authorised to sell liquor" who were licensees or registered clubs, in order to avoid "double taxation", the amount paid on purchase by the respondent for that part of the liquor should not be treated as part of "the applicable amount". This was said to follow from Wood J's decision in Gerandasi versus Swanson (1986) (unreported) 16 July 1986. 
With respect and although the end result produced is an arbitrary and, perhaps, unintended one, I think the Act can be made to work in a simpler way.
The assessment procedure required the licence holder during the month that succeeded the end of the assessment period to lodge a statutory declaration containing no doubt what the Board considered to be necessary information for the making of an assessment of the fee for the next licensing period. By that time the amount paid or payable for all liquor delivered upon or purchased for the premises during the assessment period and the amount of wholesale sales and sales to prescribed persons and employees would be known. A wholesale off- licence permitted the licensee to sell liquor to persons authorised to sell liquor. A retail off-licence permitted the licensee to sell liquor by retail; s18 (2) and (3). Logically, where a wholesale and a retail off-licence were held for the same premises, s80 (2) required first that the fee payable in the case of the wholesale off-licence be determined; s80 (2) (c). Undoubtedly by the operation of s80 (2) (c) (ii) the fee was $1,000. That fee allowed the licensee to sell all or any part of the liquor delivered upon or purchased for the premises to persons authorised to sell liquor, that is to say, as so understood, by wholesale.

Section 80 (2) then turned to deal with "any other case" which included retail off-licences; s80 (2) (d). The fee paid for retail off-licences was paid to permit the licensee to sell by retail. When the legislature proceeded in s80 (a) to prescribe the applicable amount in the case of a retail off-licence it could only have been dealing with liquor which was sold or to be sold pursuant to that licence. It should not be taken to have intended to impose a further fee related to liquor licensed to be sold pursuant to the wholesale off-licence. In my opinion, read in its context, s80 (3) (a) was concerned only with the amount paid or payable by the licensee for liquor delivered upon or purchased for the licensed premises and sold or to be sold pursuant to the retail off-licence.

This leaves undecided the treatment of the sales made to prescribed persons and employees during the assessment period. Such sales, in the case of employees up to a maximum amount, were permitted by the wholesale off-licence.
Moreover the fee payable for the wholesale off-licence brought such sales into account in s80 (2) (c) (i). If a retail off-licence was not held in respect of the same premises, the applicable amount was an amount equal to the sale price of all liquor sold to prescribed persons and employees pursuant to the licence during the assessment period. But if a retail off-licence was so held, those sales were not brought into account in determining the fee for the wholesale off-licence. It is clearly impossible to say that, because in the case where a retail off-licence was also held in respect of the same premises, the fee for the wholesale off-licence was $1,000, that in some way limited the reach of the wholesale off-licence so as not to permit sales to prescribed persons or employees. The $1,000 fee could only be read as covering a licence which permitted such sales. If this was so, the applicable amount for the retail off-licence could not include the purchase price for liquor which was sold or to be sold pursuant to the wholesale off-licence.

This reduced the dispute to one of fact. Was the liquor which was sold during the relevant period sold pursuant to the wholesale or the retail off-licence?
The appellant submitted that, since for the period up to the assessment period - 1992 (for the licensing year ending 15 January 1994) the respondent had included sales to employees and to prescribed persons as retail sales and had not treated them as made pursuant to the wholesale licence, the purchase price for the liquor so sold was part of the applicable amount for determination of the retail off-licence fees for those periods.

In support of the summons the respondent made an affidavit of 13 October 1994, no part of which seems to have been objected to. Annexed to the affidavit was an affidavit made by the respondent on 9 March 1994 which was before the Board and which explained that, because of the design of the computer system Tucker used, the computer treated all sales made to persons/organisations, which did not have a serial number, as retail sales. The result was that sales made by
Tucker to unlicensed persons/organisations under the wholesale licence were incorrectly recorded as being made under the retail licence. The respondent said: "As far as the present legislation provides, all sales to exempted persons and employees are still being sold by the company under its wholesale licence and not under its retail licence." The supervising inspector in his report of 6 June 1994 wrote: "It is clear that the sales made to staff and to prescribed persons may be made under the authority of either a retail or a wholesale licence. However, by purporting to make the sales under the wholesale licence, the licensee asserts that no licence fee may be assessed on the liquor the subject of the sale.
 .......

Because the sales could be made `under the authority of' the wholesale licence, it does not follow that the sales were in fact so made. There is no distinguishing feature to indicate whether sales have been made `under the authority of' the wholesale or the retail licence. The cost of liquor sold to staff was in fact declared as retail purchases, and no evidence has been produced which would correct an assumption that the sales were made as retail sales, or sales to unlicensed persons, as it permitted by the retail licence.

No apportionment principle has been suggested. No indication has been given as to whether any special purchases have been made with the intention of supplying only staff. Nor has it been recognised that sales to staff and general retail sales require some increase in those purchases which would otherwise be made only for purposes of sale to licensed persons.

The staff do not purport to be buying the liquor for themselves to engage in wholesale trade. The purchases are being made for personal consumption, and therefore fall squarely within the category of a `retail sale'.

The fact that sales are permitted `under the authority of a wholesale licence' does not alter their essential character as sales to unlicensed persons.

The Act clearly seeks to assess sales made to persons who do not hold a licence, and which are not otherwise assessed.

The Act makes no express distinction between liquor received on retail premises for retail sale or wholesale sale. However, Gerandasi's case makes it clear that it would be unreasonable to assess liquor actually sold by wholesale on the retail licence as this would be in effect double taxation.

However, Gerandasi does not support the proposition that liquor properly assessable on the retail licence should not be so assessed in line with the clear power conferred by s80 (3) to assess such liquor." 
In response to the submission from the respondent's counsel of 11 July 1994 the supervising inspector prepared the submission dated 21 July 1994, which the Board accepted. He wrote: "The [Liquor Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) preserved the right of a wholesaler to sell liquor by retail. In preserving this right the legislation made it clear that retail sales would not be assessed on both the wholesale and the retail licence. There is no indication that the special position extended to the avoidance of payment of a liquor fee on sales to persons who did not hold a licence.
 .......

It is submitted that the application has sought to misapply the principles of
Gerandasi's case. Gerandasi's case reads down the literal wording of s80 to avoid a double taxation of liquor delivered upon premises covered by both a retail and a wholesale licence.

That case sought to avoid the taxation of liquor to be sold by wholesale because the purchaser of such liquor would himself be subject to assessment for licence fee. This is made apparent by the references to `double taxation' in the judgment, particularly at pages 17 (para 2) and 19 (para 4).

Gerandasi's case provides no ground for reading down s80 (3) of the [Liquor
Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) where a person acquiring the liquor will not be assessed for licence fee under the Act (or by similar interstate legislation).
 .......

I argue that the requirement in Gerandasi to avoid an unreasonable interpretation of the assessment provisions in respect of retail licences on the same premises as a wholesale licence need only go so far as to avoid a double taxation.

Defence canteens are not in precisely the same position as holders of licences under the [Liquor Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/).

Defence canteens and other `prescribed persons' have historically not been obliged to pay a fee for a licence. The provisions brought in to assess a fee in relation to sales to prescribed persons were introduced in recognition of this.

In consequence, the assessment of sales to `prescribed persons' does not create a form of double taxation as would assessment of sales to licensed persons who themselves are assessed a licence fee on their purchases.

The fact that defence canteens are authorised to sell liquor does not create an obligation to `read down' the provisions of [s30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s30.html) [sic] of the Act. To do so would mean that sales to defence canteens are assessable for some businesses conducted as wholesalers but provide an exemption for others. In the absence of such an obligation, the provisions of the Act, which are otherwise clear, should be observed to assess such liquor on the retail licence.

Retail licences are assessed on `purchase price paid or payable' and assessment on the retail licence at this value rather than sales value does constitute a concession, but this is as far as the concession generated by s80 (c) (ii) goes." 
The Board decided that this submission of 21 July 1994 correctly stated the law applicable to the receipt of liquor onto premises which held both a wholesale and retail licence. This decision turned upon the view that all liquor brought on to the premises was subject to "the full licence fee" under s80 (3) unless it was onsold to other retail premises. It was unnecessary for the Board to form any view about whether the respondent, during the periods in question, sold liquor to prescribed persons and employees pursuant to the wholesale off-licence but incorrectly recorded the sales as retail sales. The
Board made no finding about this, though it clearly accepted that the respondent's records were mistaken in regard to donated stock and sales at auction. The evidence raised this issue of fact for determination by Barr AJ.

BARR AJ'S DECISION 
Barr AJ concluded that the Act regarded sales by wholesalers to persons authorised under [s4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s4.html) (d), that is to say prescribed persons, as sales at wholesale. His Honour said: "I do not accept the submission that if, as in the present case, the wholesaler also has a retail licence, those sales must be regarded as retail sales and declared and taxed accordingly. I think that the Act would have said so if it had intended so. As well, commercial reality suggests that such prescribed persons purchase their liquor not from retailers but from wholesalers. Such sales, it seems to me, have all the incidents of wholesale sales.

I do not think that the Act requires such sales to be regarded as other than wholesale sales merely because the wholesale licensee happens to hold a retail licence as well. Section 80 (3)(a)(i), which deals with tax on retail licence sales, appears on its face to be wide enough to authorise such an approach, but that subparagraph has to be read down as applying only to liquor coming onto the premises for the purposes of retail trade. See Gerandasi versus Swanson per Wood J at 16-23.

So I think that such sales should be regarded as having been made under the wholesale licence. They look like wholesale sales. They are permitted to be made by a wholesale licensee who does not happen to have a retail licence. The
Act does not require them to be regarded as retail merely because a retail licence happens to be held by the licensee as well." 
His Honour does not seem to have regarded as significant the fact that the respondent treated such sales, mistakenly, as retail sales. Barr AJ saw the sales to employees of a wholesaler rather differently. His Honour said: "On the other hand, sales to employees of a wholesaler have the appearance of retail sales. The purchasers are not licensees and may not lawfully resell the goods. They consume the goods, yet they do not pay tax on them. It might appear remarkable that the Act permits such sales to be made by a wholesaler to its employees without holding a retail licence (provided they do not exceed % of total sales) and permits those sales to go untaxed. However, that is the obvious intention of the Act, at least where only a wholesale licence is held.
It is an exception to the general principle that the Act intends to tax the sale of liquor at one point or other. Here the clear intention is not to tax it at all where only a wholesale licence is held." 
I interpolate here that, with respect, what his Honour said was not correct.
If only a wholesale off-licence was held and not a retail off-licence, the fee would be "$1,000 or 13 per cent of the applicable amount prescribed by subs plus 7 per cent of the applicable amount prescribed by subs (3A), whichever is the greater" (s80 (2) (c) (i)), and the applicable amount would be an amount equal to the sale price of all liquor that, during the assessment period for the licence fee, "was sold pursuant to the licence to persons referred to in para (d) of the definition of `person authorised to sell liquor' in s4 (1) or to employees of the licensee." If anything, the fee in respect of such sales was higher because the benchmark was the sale price rather than the purchase price. The curious thing was that, if the licence holder also had a retail off-licence for the premises, the fee for a wholesale off-licence was not so calculated and was a flat rate of $1,000. Barr AJ seemed to address this question despite what he had said about the position where no retail off-licence was held. His Honour said: "The question arises, therefore, why that intention should be seen as changing where the wholesaler happens also to hold a retail licence. During written arguments tendered by the parties to the Board, a copy of which was tendered before me, it was pointed out that the right of wholesalers to sell to staff was an historical advantage carried forward from the [Liquor
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) of 1912.
The Board's response to that contention was that the advantage did not extend to provide an avoidance of fees on sales to staff. I am unable to accept that submission, because that is precisely what it must have done. The reason why it has for many years in this State been the intention of Parliament to benefit wholesalers and their staff by holding back from taxing sales of liquor to them (within the ceiling of 5% of total sales) really does not matter for the purposes of this summons. The question is whether the legislative scheme seen in s80 can be construed as evincing an intention to withhold that benefit where, as in the present case, the wholesaler holds a retail licence as well. It seems to me to be of no assistance in construing the section to say that sales by a retailer to its employees are regarded as ordinary retail sales and taxed accordingly. I can see no reason why sales to the plaintiff's employees should cease to be regarded as privileged sales by a wholesaler merely because the plaintiff happens to hold a retail licence as well. The Act, it seems to me, does not require it and does not authorise it." 
With all respect there seems to me to be a fundamental error in his Honour's reasoning. He has proceeded from the premise that where only a wholesale licence is held, sales to prescribed persons and employees are untaxed in the sense that the fee is not calculated by reference to them.

For reasons which I have stated, in my opinion, sales to prescribed persons and to employees made pursuant to a wholesale off-licence, where a retail off- licence was also held, were not to be brought into account for determining the fee of either. However, it remained important to determine whether the liquor in question was sold pursuant to the wholesale off-licence or pursuant to the retail off-licence. Barr AJ was not required on his view of the matter to decide this factual question. However, the respondent's evidence about erroneous recording was unchallenged and accepted by the Board in respect of donations and auction sales. In my opinion there is no bar to this Court's accepting it. The sales to prescribed persons and to employees were made pursuant to the wholesale off-licence and may not be brought into account in determining the fee for the retail off-licences.

This brings me back to the declarations that Barr AJ made. Declaration 5 is to the effect that the annual licence fee paid for the retail off-licence should not include any percentage of the cost of liquor purchased or delivered upon the licensed premises for the purposes of the wholesale licence. I would substitute for the words "for the purposes of the wholesale licence" the words "and sold or to be sold pursuant to the wholesale licence". This change is to avoid any difficulty that may arise in the case of liquor purchased and delivered to the wholesale licence area and then subsequently transferred to the retail licence area and sold by retail.

GERANDASI'S CASE 
In Gerandasi's case Wood J had to consider an assessment in respect of premises upon which both a retail and wholesale business of selling liquor was conducted without any division of stock between the two. The question posed was whether the plaintiff was required to pay a flat fee for the wholesale licence plus a percentage fee for the retail licence on all stocks whether destined for retail or wholesale purposes (or only on the former). His Honour said: "The question ultimately to be resolved depends on a reading of s80. As I have already observed, this section separately specifies the fee for the various forms of licence under that Act, and it is to be noted, makes special provision for the two situations in which a wholesale off-licence may be held.

Where there is no retail off-licence held in respect of the same premises, the fee is the greater of $1,000 or ten per cent of the sale price of all liquor sold `pursuant to the licence' (ie wholesale stock) to employees of the licensee (s80 (2 (c) (i) and s80 (3) (b)). Where a retail off-licence is held in conjunction with the wholesale licence the fee is the flat rate of $1,000 (s80 (2) (c) (ii)). In most cases, the licence fee for the wholesale business will be the flat rate, and the quantum of stock purchases and turnover will be irrelevant. ....... irrespective of when or whether it is sold.
 ......

In the case of the licensee holding only a retail off-licence, it may be assumed that the whole of the stock delivered to or purchased for the premises will be destined for retail sale. In such a case there is no good reason in principle why the fee should not be assessed on the basis of all liquor purchased for or delivered to the premises, particularly since a deduction may be given for an emergency wholesale transaction (s81 (b)). In these circumstances the absence of any words in the section qualifying or delimiting the liquor delivered or purchased as designed for retail trade (where the legislation deals with a retail licence held by itself) is understandable." 
A little later His Honour said: "In particular, it appears to me that there is a clear intention within the Act to maintain a distinction between wholesale and retail licences and businesses, and to assess the licence holder separately in relation to each.
The wholesale licence is now assessed whereas previously a spirit merchant was only assessed in respect of retail sales. For ease of assessment it appears a lump sum basis was selected for the wholesaler as the primary criterion without regard to purchases or turnover. Having regard to the purpose of the
Act, and the context within which wholesale and retail sales take place, it seems to me that the percentage fee for the retail license more logically is concerned with liquor engaged in that trade. I believe it likely that the acquisition of stock by delivery or purchase was selected as the criterion, to aid assessment, and to overcome the problems involved with carry-over stock and the like when assessing a fee by reference to the cost of liquor sold." 
With respect I do not read his Honour's judgment as advocating the method of interpretation the Board adopted. The presumption against double taxation supports the construction his Honour preferred, which accords with the approach I have taken.

ODDBINS PTY LIMITED 
Counsel referred to the ex tempore decision of this Court in Oddbins Pty
Limited versus Liquor Administration Board of New South Wales (unreported) 4 April
That decision turned upon the particular fact that the licensee's records for the assessment period recorded that all liquor delivered to the premises had been delivered to and purchased for the retail business under the retail licence. Their Honours did not find it necessary to engage in a close analysis of the Act as was required in the present case. It should be treated as no more than a decision upon the particular situation before the Court.

CONCLUSION 
In substance the appeal should be dismissed and the appellant ordered to pay the costs. However, as I have indicated, I think declaration 5 requires a minor amendment. Accordingly I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed to the extent necessary to amend declaration 5 by the substitution for the words "for the purposes of the wholesale licence" of the words "and sold or to be sold pursuant to the wholesale licence";
Otherwise appeal dismissed;
The appellant to pay the respondent's costs of the appeal.
 * * * 
