

Regina versus Rolfe Matter No 72091/98 [1998] NSWSC 756 (25 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus MATHEW JAMES ROLFE /98 June 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: Mr. Morison, who appears for this applicant, has said all that can be said in respect of this application which first came before me on 22 June and was stood over to today to enable the Crown to produce, if it could, a transcript which had been taken of what was recorded with a listening device in a motor vehicle in which the applicant had discussed various matters with his partner. 
Those matters bear such a relationship to the evidence that is otherwise available from bank staff as to be capable of linking this applicant to an armed robbery which took place on 2 April 1998 at the ANZ Bank at Thirroul, when two masked men jumped out of the roof and robbed female bank staff at gunpoint.

The applicant had been charged with a number of offences, in particular offences of malicious wound, assault occasioning grievous bodily harm (two counts), assault (two counts), seven traffic offences and later was arrested on 24 July 1997 on nine counts of steal motor vehicle, drive conveyance without consent, receiving (11 counts) (those receiving counts were, to some degree, alternative to the stealing counts), goods in custody, break enter and steal and obtain credit by fraud.

He was charged in due course with being party to a substantial conspiracy to receive and dispose of stolen motor vehicles. The bank robbery offence that I have referred to was therefore alleged to have been committed whilst he was on bail for offences he is alleged to have committed whilst on bail.

Mr. Morison, who appears for him, informs me that committal proceedings in which the co-accused have succeeded in obtaining the appropriate order from the magistrate in respect of the conspiracy charges are proceeding but those proceedings have exposed the Crown case as being primarily dependent on two informers who he says he has been told are not "stacking up well" under cross- examination, but he is unable to say that the Crown will be left with no case nor is he able to say with what charges, if any, the Crown might be left to give consideration to preferring at trial.

The applicant was not involved in that committal because he did not, on 30
January, attend court in respect of matters in respect of which he was bailed.
The armed robbery offence is next listed for 30 June 1998 at the Burwood Local
Court for mention and reply to the prosecution brief.

Bail was not sought at the Burwood Local Court prior to an application being made to this court. Bail had, however, been granted in the District Court for the other outstanding charges on 19 April, the applicant having handed himself in in the District Court. The applicant was re-arrested one month later.

Mr. Morison has sought to rely upon the voluntary handing-in as evidence that the applicant was hardly likely not to appear in answer to the charges but it has been pointed out by the Crown that one cannot assume that at the time he did that he was aware that the clandestine listening device had been planted in his vehicle.

In any event, when one looks at the applicant's criminal history which is quite extensive, and one looks at the occasions on which the applicant is not before the court, and one looks at the charges and the seriousness of those charges and the fact that a most serious charge has now been preferred as having been committed on bail, I have concluded that I am satisfied that the applicant is likely to commit further offences if granted bail of a serious nature within the meaning of s.32(2A) in that he has been involved, so it is alleged, in organised crime offences involving the stealing of cars and in the armed robbery.

I am satisfied that that likelihood, together with the likely consequences of the commission of such further offences outweighs the applicant's general right to be at liberty. I am further satisfied that there is an unacceptable risk to the community should the applicant be granted bail, bearing in mind the nature of those offences.

I appreciate that, bearing in mind the point to which the charges have reached in the criminal justice system, the applicant may be detained for a very lengthy period of time but this follows as a consequence of such serious offences being alleged to have been committed after bail had been so granted.

In the circumstances, bail is refused.
 * * * 
