

Regina versus Nelson Rowatt Chad [1997] NSWSC 190 (13 May 1997) 
REGINA versus Nelson Rowatt CHAD /96 May 1997 
C O U R T O F C R I M I N A L A P P E A L 
GLEESON CJ, HUNT CJ at CL, SULLY J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Giving false evidence before ICAC - Guilty plea - Crown agrees not to urge custodial sentence - non-custodial sentence imposed - Crown appeal - discretion to dismiss appeal because of Crown's conduct.

RESULT: Crown appeal dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: This is a Crown appeal against sentences imposed by Judge Robison in the District Court upon the respondent (Nelson Rowatt Chad) on 2 December last.

The respondent was originally charged on indictment with a conspiracy to give false evidence, and with six offences under the [Independent Commission
Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) - two of destroying documents and one of altering documents, each with intent to delay or obstruct an investigation by the Independent Commission Against
Corruption,[1] and three of giving evidence before ICAC which was to his knowledge false in a material particular. These offences are created by ss 87 and 88 of the ICAC Act.

The conspiracy charge was stayed by the District Court on 21 October last pending the outcome of the remaining charges. Those remaining charges were listed for trial in the District Court on 4 November. Following a voir dire examination by Judge Robison at that time concerning the legality of the seizure of various documents by ICAC officers, in which the judge held that they had been illegally seized but that the Crown had nevertheless satisfied him to exercise his discretion to admit the documents,[2] discussions took place between the parties - what is quite properly called charge bargaining - and agreement was reached whereby: the respondent would plead guilty to one charge of destroying documents with intent to delay or obstruct the ICAC investigation and one charge of giving evidence before ICAC which was to his knowledge false in a material particular, and he would ask the District Court to take another offence of giving false evidence into account, pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s21.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/); and the Crown would accept those pleas in full satisfaction of the indictment.

The maximum sentence for each of those offences is imprisonment for five years or a fine of $20,000, or both. In relation to each of the two pleas of guilty, the judge fined the respondent $5000 and ordered him to perform 400 hours of community service. The community service was to be performed concurrently - that is, 400 hours in all. The total fine was $10,000, which was payable within six months.

The charges against the respondent arose out of an inquiry by ICAC into the conduct of public officials in accessing and disseminating official information belonging to public authorities and of persons dealing with such officials. The respondent (a former police officer) was a licensed private inquiry agent and security officer. He had been required to produce to the
Commission all of the documents of his company (Satinvale Pty Ltd) relating to its investigation into the circumstances of Mr Andrew Kalajzich's conviction for the murder of his wife.

The respondent was called as a witness, and on 4 July 1991 he was asked whether he had ever obtained confidential information either directly or indirectly from any government department or authority. He replied "Not that I recall". When documents were shown to him which indicated that he had in fact received confidential police information (namely, consorting cards), the respondent accepted that fact, and he indicated as his source of information a man called Kesel, who had worked on the Kalajzich inquiry. The respondent was asked whether this was the only occasion upon which he had received confidential police information during the course of his career as a private inquiry agent, and he replied "Yes, sir, to the best of my knowledge". He said that he had no cause to use such information, as it was his investigative ability and not his connections in which his clients were interested. He asserted that the Kalajzich matter was a "unique inquiry" for his company to undertake, and that the consorting cards had been obtained in "a moment of weakness".

On 17 and 18 October 1991, ICAC investigators searched the premises of
Satinvale Pty Ltd and a number of documents were seized, which Judge Robison subsequently held were illegally seized. It was subsequent to this seizure that the respondent disposed of a number of documents, which were carbon copies of telephone messages which his company had received. This was the subject of the second count of the indictment to which the respondent pleaded guilty.

On 18 October, he gave evidence under objection admitting that he had directly or indirectly obtained Government information otherwise than in a lawful and regular fashion. He identified another source of information (a man called
Fardell) who, he said, was able to provide "just about anything you wanted, really". He went on to admit that he had also obtained criminal histories - again from the man called Kesel.

On 16 December, the respondent was called to give evidence for a third time.
During the course of that evidence he denied that he had ever obtained information from the Roads and Transport Authority through Insp Waddell of the
Police Service. Documents seized by the ICAC investigators revealed that, in the course of carrying out surveillance on business premises for an investigation into the pilfering of stock, the respondent had written, beside a vehicle registration number recorded by the employee who conducted the surveillance, the telephone number of Insp Waddell at the Paddington police station and another registration number. The evidence showed that Insp Waddell had accessed the RTA database through the police computer at Paddington at that time. This was the subject of the offence taken into account in the
District Court.

On 13 January 1992, the respondent was again called as a witness. He admitted that it was his company's general practice to buy and sell confidential
Government information to assist in inquiries as to the whereabouts of persons. That evidence demonstrated the falsity of his evidence on 4 July, which was the subject of the first count of the indictment to which the respondent pleaded guilty.

This Court has held, for good reasons, that the offence of giving false evidence before ICAC should receive a custodial sentence except in very particular circumstances,[3] and it was said that, at least in the absence of extraordinarily compelling subjective circumstances, sentences which had been imposed by the Local Court in such cases which consisted of fines, community service orders and recognizances (singly and in combination), not being penalties involving a significant sentence of full time imprisonment, were manifestly inadequate, inadequate to a point verging on irresponsibility.[4] 
Although the judge acknowledged and accepted that decision, he also - somewhat confusingly - referred to what he said was his responsibility as a judicial officer to eliminate all non-custodial options before being able comfortably to arrive at a full time custodial sentence. In the light of this Court's statement of principle in relation to sentencing for false evidence before
ICAC, his responsibility in this case might more accurately have been stated as being to impose a significant full time custodial sentence unless there were extraordinarily compelling subjective circumstances which required otherwise.

The judge did, however, approach his task correctly in the end. He said that it was important to bear in mind that these were serious offences, and the need for public deterrence. He referred to this Court's statement of principle, but he nevertheless held that a combination of particular circumstances collectively amounted to exceptional circumstances warranting in this case the community service orders and the fines in lieu of a significant full time custodial sentence. He identified those circumstances as arising out of the respondent's character, his assistance to the authorities, his medical condition (although to a lesser extent), what is described as his considerable suffering over a period of time and the delay in bringing the prosecution. The judge conceded that none of those considerations taken by itself would have warranted such sentences, and that it was only in combination that the sentences which he imposed could be justified. That approach is a permissible one, but in order to assess whether that collective approach could justify the sentences imposed it is necessary first to consider each separately.

The evidence led as to the respondent's character was impressive, when read in isolation. The judge said: "It is quite clear that the prisoner is held by a number of people as being a person of integrity and capacity. The references show overall that he is a person who has embarked upon a number of acts of bravery. He has saved lives, he is held in high esteem by those who know him. He is described as a responsible person. Subjectively these factors can not be overlooked and must be taken into account. I have noted that, in addition to acts of bravery and, if I may say so, heroism on this man's part, he has also been entrusted with security duties of the highest order. For example, he has ... been involved in the security of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales. He has also been a personal bodyguard for a former President of the United States. He was the first Australian policeman to attend an FBI course in the United States and he clearly did well in that course.

There are indications of the prisoner's honesty and integrity speckled throughout these references ... " 
He went on to refer to what some of these referees said as to the respondent's "honesty and integrity", his "integrity and decency" and his "exemplary" character.

These are all good illustrations of the very clear distinction which the law draws between a person's character and his reputation. The judge's acceptance of these references as a matter in mitigation in the present case is also a good illustration of misunderstanding the true significance of evidence of good character in one particular aspect where the offence relates to an entirely different aspect of his character. There can be no doubt that the respondent's character was indeed exemplary in relation to his actions as a police officer over some thirty years, and as a lifesaver over an even longer period, in both of which capacities he displayed great courage - indeed heroism.

However, these offences for which sentences were being imposed involved dishonesty of a high order, in that the respondent knowingly gave false evidence before ICAC. His character - as opposed, apparently, to his reputation - was already seriously flawed in this aspect. Two of the three departmental charges which were found by the Police Tribunal to have been proved, and which led to the respondent's dismissal from the Police Service, were the making of wilfully false statements on separate occasions seven months apart when interviewed by the Internal Police Security Unit. In those circumstances, less weight must be given to evidence of his character as a courageous and efficient police officer and lifesaver, and little weight if any at all should be given to those references attesting to his honesty and integrity.[5] It is significant that, although the judge referred specifically - although, in reality, only in passing - to the respondent's dismissal from the Police Service for misconduct, he does not refer to the nature of that misconduct, or expressly recognize that the nature of that misconduct was very relevant to the aspect of his character involved in these offences.

The next matter was the respondent's assistance to the authorities. Because some of this material is of a sensitive nature, it is best that no detail be given of it in open court. Most of it might properly be called the passing on of intelligence rather than the provision of evidence. Some of it may be accepted as having been useful, and some of it was obviously of importance.
But I would not place this assistance as warranting any great discount in mitigation. Section 442B of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides that the discount for assistance to the authorities should not be such as to make the sentence imposed unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and circumstances of the offence.

The third matter was the respondent's medical condition. A psychiatric report tendered by the respondent disclosed that he suffered from hypertension and major depression and that he had been treated (apparently with success) for prostate cancer. The psychiatrist said that the risk that the respondent's health would decline after sentencing was likely to be significantly worse if it were a custodial sentence rather than a community service order. He instanced the major lifestyle change, the severity of separation and a destruction of the respondent's normal coping mechanism (which he identified as being very actively involved in responsible work) as being likely to affect the respondent's health.

The judge recognized the availability of medical facilities in the prison system, but he nevertheless said that the psychiatrist's opinion "weighed heavily" with him when considering an alternative to a full time custodial sentence. He did, however, conclude that the respondent's medical condition played a lesser part in his decision than the other matters. That was correct.
One of the purposes of a custodial sentence is to change the prisoner's lifestyle dramatically and to separate him from his family. They are matters which cannot provide any basis for imposing other than a significant custodial sentence in this case.

The fourth matter was what the judge described as the respondent's considerable suffering over a period of time. He said that he suspected that the respondent had suffered both financially and personally, and he drew attention to the fact that it was to the respondent's credit that he corrected his evidence before being prosecuted. He thought that this was a strong subjective feature in the circumstances. The judge did not explain how this could be so. The respondent made no admissions until he was forced to, and then only to the extent to which he was forced to, still lying in relation to matters in relation to which he realised that ICAC had nothing on him at that stage. By the time he finally made the admission that it was his company's general practice to buy and sell confidential Government information, he no doubt realised that there was no longer any point in denying it.

The final matter was the delay in bringing the prosecution. The respondent gave evidence before ICAC for the last time in February 1992. ICAC's report was released in August 1992. The Government referred the report to the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions in July 1993 for advice in relation to possible criminal charges. The charges against the respondent were first mentioned in the Local Court in August 1994. The committal was fully fought, and continued at different times from December 1994 until May 1995. The respondent was arraigned in the District Court in June 1995. After the interlocutory proceedings referred to earlier, the matter was listed for trial and the pleas of guilty were not entered until November 1996. That is not a happy history, but the charge bargaining could have taken place at least two years earlier than it did. The respondent was certainly entitled to have the delay from the date of the report to the date when the charges were laid (a period of two years) taken into account,[6] but I do not see this as a compelling subjective feature of the case.

I am satisfied that the judge erred in not imposing significant full time custodial sentences. The five matters upon which the respondent relied and which the judge accepted could not, even in combination, amount to the extraordinarily compelling subjective circumstances which had to be demonstrated to avoid such sentences. They were relevant to the length of the custodial sentence to be imposed, but (by the reason of the nature of the offences committed) they took the matter no further than that. The judge correctly described the offences as objectively very serious. He correctly rejected the respondent's explanation for giving the false evidence - that he was attempting to protect the sources from which he had obtained the information - as providing any excuse whatsoever for his conscious decision to give that false evidence. The judge said that he was not in a position to decide whether the explanation given for destroying the documents - that the respondent was upset at the ICAC raid and had over-reacted - was true, and he described it as having sinister overtones. The only other mitigating factor was the pleas of guilty, but the late stage at which they were entered meant that they had utilitarian value only, in saving the time and cost of the trial.[7] 
A Crown appeal lies from sentences which are so inadequate as to indicate error or departure from principle, or which depart from accepted sentencing standards, in order to have this Court correct them.[8] There nevertheless remains in this Court a discretion to dismiss Crown appeals notwithstanding the error which has been demonstrated. There are various bases upon which that discretion will be exercised. Two different bases are said to be relevant here.

The first is the conduct of the Crown in the District Court. It was part of the agreement reached on the charge bargaining discussions that the Crown would draw the judge's attention to the appropriate authorities but would neither urge the judge to impose a custodial sentence nor concede that a non- custodial sentence was appropriate. That somewhat unusual agreement was adhered to. Unfortunately, the judge does not appear to have asked what the
Crown's attitude to a non-custodial sentence would have been - which would have been an appropriate (indeed, a wise) question to have asked before he departed from what this Court had said should be the normal sentence for this offence - but the agreement reached between counsel did not stipulate what answer would have been given if that question had been asked.

It has been submitted on behalf of the respondent that this agreement prevents the Crown from now urging this Court on appeal to impose the custodial sentence which it agreed not to urge the judge to impose. In Everett versus The
Queen,9 the joint judgment in the High Court held that the failure of the
Crown to submit to the sentencing judge that a particular type of sentence should not be imposed should deny the Crown leave to appeal to make that submission to the appellate court, if it appears that the Crown - " ... was on notice that there was a real possibility that such [a sentence] might be [imposed] but refrained from submitting that it would be inappropriate and not within a proper exercise of the sentencing discretion."[10] 
That was a Tasmanian appeal. In this State, the Crown does not, of course, require leave to appeal. The joint judgment, however, based its decision upon the decision of the Full Court of South Australia in Regina versus Wilton.11
That decision related to the disposition of a sentence appeal after leave had been granted. Wilton's Case has been followed in this State in relation to Crown appeals,[12] when the point has also been made that the
Crown is under a duty to assist the sentencing judge to avoid appealable error.[13] The decision in Everett upon this point has also been followed in this State.[14] 
Nevertheless, that does not in my view mean that the Crown is necessarily debarred, on appeal, from taking a stance different from that taken at first instance, but this Court, in the exercise of its discretion, is entitled to take account of the fact that, at first instance, the Crown acquiesced in the course which was taken by the sentencing judge; the weight to be given to such a consideration depends upon the circumstances of the particular case, but it may be of considerable significance if the respondent was given a non- custodial sentence at first instance, and its weight may also vary with the degree to which this Court thinks that the sentencing judge fell into error.[15] 
Whichever way the test is put - and, as it is apparent, it has not always been put consistently - I am satisfied in the present case both that the Crown was put on notice that the respondent was going to submit that a non-custodial sentence should be imposed (whether or not there was a "real possibility" that it would in fact be imposed), and that the Crown failed in its duty to assist the sentencing judge to avoid appealable error by imposing such a sentence.
Merely drawing the judge's attention to the relevant authorities did not make it clear to him that, as has now been successfully argued, he would be making an appealable error if he did not impose a significant full time custodial sentence. The written submissions, in accordance with the agreement, merely sat on the fence. I do not read them as even implicitly making that submission.

Sentencing judges are entitled to rely upon the Crown to make such submissions. There is a substantial difference between on the one hand submitting that an appealable error will be made and on the other hand merely arguing that the judge should impose a particular type of sentence in the exercise of his or her discretion. The failure to make the submission that appealable error would result in the present case certainly enlivens this
Court's discretion to refuse to intervene despite the error demonstrated.

The other basis put forward for this Court's exercise of that discretion in the present appeal relates to the nature of the sentence which could be imposed by this Court in substitution for that imposed in the District Court should the Crown appeal be upheld. According to the somewhat sparse figures available from the Judicial Commission, there had been four cases for giving false evidence before ICAC heard in the District Court prior to the present case. One of the four (in which the offender pleaded guilty to one count) resulted in a community service order for 200 hours; three resulted in full time custodial sentences (two for pleas of guilty to multiple counts, and one for a plea of not guilty to a single count), each of them for six months or less. The respondent in the present case would be entitled, by reason of his double jeopardy, to have this Court impose a sentence which is lower than that which should have been imposed at first instance.[16] As he would be entitled to at least some discount for his assistance to the authorities, and as he is also entitled to a credit for the community service which he has already performed and the fine which he has now paid, the custodial sentence which this Court could impose upon the respondent would seem to be of a short duration only.

These two matters persuade me that this Court should, in the exercise of its discretion, dismiss the Crown appeal. That is the order which I propose.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

SULLY J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court is that the Crown appeal is dismissed.
 [1] (hereafter referred to as ICAC).
 [2] [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) [3] Regina versus Anthony Aristodemeu (CCA, 30 June 1994, unreported) at 4.
 [4] Ibid (at 6-7).
 [5] cf [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s110.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).
 <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 59] at 64-66.
 [7] Regina versus Winchester [(1992) 58 A Crim R 345] at .
 [8] Griffiths versus The Queen (1977) 137 CLR 293 at 310, 327; Everett versus The
Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295] at 300; Regina versus Dean William Wright (CCA, 28 February , unreported) at 8.
 (at 302-303).
 [10] McHugh J was of much the same opinion (at 307).
 [(1981) 28 SASR 362] at 367-368.
 [12] See, for example, Regina versus Jermyn [(1985) 2 NSWLR 194] at -204; Comptroller-General of Customs versus D'Aquino Bros Pty Ltd [(1996) ALR 649] at 669.
 [13] Regina versus Jermyn (at 303); See also Regina versus Tait [(1979) 24 ALR ]
at 477; Malvaso versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 227] at 240.
 [14] Regina versus Sean Patrick Jones (CCA, 9 October 1995, unreported) at 1-2;
Regina versus Pasi Taito Juhani Andersson (CCA, 26 March 1997, unreported) at -7.
 [15] Regina versus Allpass [(1993) 72 A Crim R 561] at -565.
 [16] Regina versus Tait (at 476); Regina versus Holder and Johnston [[1983] 3
NSWLR 245] at 256, 269-270; Regina versus Wilton (at 367-368; Regina v
Allpass (at 562); Regina versus Warfield [(1994) 34 NSWLR 200] at -210; Everett versus The Queen (at 302).
 * * * 
