

Regina versus Caracaleanu Nos. Cca 60296194 and Cr D 70048/93 Sentencing [1995]
NSWSC 159 (14 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), HUNT CJ AT CL(2) AND DUNFORD(3) J
HRNG
SYDNEY, September 1995 #DATE 27:9:1995 #ADD 14:11:1995 
Counsel for the Applicant:       C K Stewart 
Solicitors for the
Applicant:      Heenan and Co 
Counsel for the Respondent (Crown):   A M Blackmore 
Solicitors for the Respondent (Crown):
S E O'Connor (Solicitor for Public Prosecutions)
ORDER
Leave to appeal refused; and
Time served to count.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P This is an application which arises out of charges that were brought against Samuel Caracaleanu (the applicant). The charges followed a knife attack on a victim whom I will describe as Mr O. The attack occurred on 10
December .
A serious knifing results in a sentence of 2 years penal servitude The applicant was charged with two offences. He was indicted upon both. They were, wounding with intent to murder, an offence against [section 27](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s27.html) of the [Crimes
Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/); and in the alternative, malicious wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm, an offence against [section 33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s33.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).
The applicant pleaded not guilty to each charge. He stood his trial. The jury returned a verdict of not guilty on the first count of the indictment but guilty upon the alternative count.
It then fell to Finlay J, on 25 May 1995, to sentence the applicant.
For that purpose his Honour was required to find facts consistent with the jury's verdict. He proceeded to do so. His Honour's reasons for sentence have been placed before this Court. I incorporate those reasons by reference, although I will not set them out in these reasons. His Honour sentenced the applicant to penal servitude of 4 years, made up of a minimum term of 2 years and an additional term of 2 years. The applicant seeks leave to appeal to this Court against the severity of that sentence.
The facts very shortly were that on 10 December 1991 Mr O visited the applicant's home. He did so without invitation. He did so apparently because of threats which had been made by the applicant, including a threat to bum down Mr O's house. Mr O went to the applicant's home to suggest that the applicant should get his facts straight upon the matter which was dividing them. Mr O understood that the applicant was very disturbed with him for seeing a fifteen-year-old boy then living in the applicant's house. The disturbance appears to have arisen out of the fact that Mr O was homosexual and was seeing the boy, known as Eddie or "Mosquito". He was a boy in respect of whom the applicant felt an unexplained affection or duty. The applicant was upset about the interest of Mr O in the boy. Apparently, he feared, or suspected, a sexual motivation on Mr O's part, something which Mr O denied.
The applicant was, at the time of the visit by Mr O, very drunk, as Finlay
J found. In the course of an altercation which broke out and which is described in his Honour's reasons, the applicant used a knife obtained from the kitchen in which the altercation was found to have occurred, to strike Mr
O. This caused four very serious wounds to Mr O's person. As found by Finlay
J, they were a neck wound lacerating the jugular vein, three centimetres long but extending deeply for eight centimetres. This wound was found to have been a serious wound likely to have bled profusely.
Secondly, a fifteen centimetres long wound to the right armpit extending into the muscle. Thirdly, a wound to the right back over the upper scapula in which the supra scapula artery was severed. Fourthly, a horizontal wound eight centimetres long on the left-hand side of Mr O's face.
Self-evidently these were extremely serious wounds. But for chance, the neck wound, in particular, affecting as it did the jugular vein, might have caused the death of Mr O.
Mr O was chased out of the house by the applicant. A question arose at the trial as to whether the wounds were inflicted outside the house in the course of the chase. If that had been found, it would have aggravated the seriousness of what was done. But Finlay J proceeded on the basis that he could not be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt to that effect. He sentenced the applicant upon the finding that what occurred had occurred entirely within the applicant's own home, which Mr O had entered uninvited. This Court must proceed to its review upon the same basis.
In his written and subsequent oral submissions counsel for the applicant has put all of the matters that could be put in respect of the circumstances which tend to mitigate the seriousness of what occurred. He does not criticise the reasons which were given by Finlay J for the sentence he imposed. He cannot point to any consideration which his Honour ought to have taken account which he failed to mention. Nor does he state that there is any observation in his Honour's reasons which indicate that Finlay J took into account a matter which ought not to have been taken into account. No error of principle is identified; nor any error of law.
In effect, the applicant's argument is that, having regard to the factors mitigating the circumstances of the offence, in the context of the encounter between the applicant and Mr O, the resulting sentence imposed by his Honour was excessive and so out of line with that which this Court, on review, would fix as to authorise this Court's intervention.
To achieve the objective of leave to appeal, and the provision of an order allowing the appeal, the applicant has to show an error on his Honour's part. This Court must, of necessity, accord a high measure of respect to the sentencing discretion of the primary judge. It is important to bear in mind that the maximum sentence which is allowed for by [section 33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s33.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), in the event of a conviction on the count upon which the applicant was convicted, is penal servitude for twenty-five years.
 .
Considerations tending to mitigate the offence The considerations which tend to mitigate, to some extent, the very serious wounding that occurred in this case include:
The fact that, immediately prior to the wounding and in the scuffle which broke out between the applicant and Mr O, the latter bit the applicant on the left shoulder. This could have explained, to some extent, the applicant's lunge with the knife which led to at least some of the wounding;
The judge found that the applicant did not originally intend to wound the victim before grabbing the knife;
This was not a case, as many knifing cases are, of a person who has carried a
knife for supposed self-protection or other use. It is a case where the applicant took a knife which was in his kitchen and used it there;
Everything that occurred happened within a very short space of time. Finlay
J's reasons indicate that his Honour approached the matter upon the basis that this was not a case of premeditation;
The jury found, and the judge proceeded upon the basis that, the applicant did not have an intention to kill his victim;
The judge found that the applicant was very drunk at the time of the offence. He was in his own home. He was entitled to be drinking there. The fact that he was intoxicated must be taken into account and was taken into account by his Honour;
The applicant was in his own home. The victim was technically a trespasser.
However, as was pointed out by Dunford J during argument, it was not unreasonable to infer that Mr O did so, faced with the serious threats that had been made to him. He did so to reason with the applicant. He had come to request the applicant to get his facts right before he thought ill of him.
This was arguably a reasonable and rational thing for Mr O to have done. If the applicant did not want him to be present, there were ways of removing him which did not involve the use of a knife and the infliction of very serious and life-threatening wounds;
The applicant had no previous convictions. He was thirty-nine years of age at the time of the offence. He was a trained tradesman. He had considerations in his life standing to his credit which he was entitled to call upon when facing sentence upon the conviction which followed the jury's verdict;
The applicant gave evidence (and other evidence confirmed) that he was determined to give up alcohol, which he asserted was the basic cause of what had occurred;
The judge found that the applicant was basically a passive man. Indeed, in some of his descriptions of him Finlay J appears to have reached a generally favourable view of the applicant. The possibility of his re-committing an offence of the present kind would appear to be minimal; and
The applicant explained his concern, preceding the attack on Mr O, by reference to a sense of duty to protect a boy of fifteen years who was living under his protection. That sense of duty, however, cannot excuse for a minute the taking of the law into his own hands in such a way. This Court, like
Finlay J, must make it absolutely clear that such acts of violence are not tolerated by the community. They are not excused by the fact that the applicant had formed a suspicion about Mr O's sexual conduct in relation to the boy. It should be said emphatically that the expressed concern did not excuse the conduct of the applicant. The use of a knife against the person whom he suspected, which person completely denied his suspicions, was intolerable and cannot be condoned. 
Considerations tending to aggravate the offence
All of these considerations were mentioned, directly or indirectly, by
Finlay J. Clearly they were taken into account by his Honour when proceeding to sentence the applicant. But his Honour also had to take into account the objective circumstance of the offence. Considerations tending to aggravate the seriousness of the case were as follows:
The applicant had made serious threats against Mr O in the past. Indeed, in his interview with the police he continued with those threats stating that he wanted to kill the victim. Finlay J discounted these particular allegations.
He considered that the jury must have done so by virtue of their verdict of not guilty on the first count. However, his Honour could not approach the sentence on the basis that this was an entirely unexpected situation. The applicant had made serious threats which had occasioned the visit to his home by Mr
O during which the latter was injured;
The wounds were objectively significant and dangerous, and indeed life-threatening. Wounds of that kind, repeated, with four large cuts indicate a course of aggressive, violent conduct which is completely unacceptable;
The jury's verdict must indicate that the jury rejected the suggestion of self-defence on the applicant's part;
The Australian community has, as Finlay J observed, a complete abhorrence of the use of knives. This is an abhorrence which is reflected in sentences imposed by judges, which have been confirmed by this Court; and
The applicant did not to the time of trial express, or demonstrate, any contrition for what he had done. Nor has he done so before this Court. Finlay
J was required to approach the sentence to be provided in the circumstances with the lack of contrition in mind. 
Comparison of cases with common features of knifing
The Court was taken to sentences in several cases of knife stabbings.
Far from bearing out the contention that the sentence imposed upon the applicant by Finlay J was out of line with what might be said to be the ordinary range for a sentence in circumstances roughly comparable, the sentence that was imposed in this case is shown to be well within the range.
The decisions to which the Court was taken included Regina versus Dib CCA , unreported, 13 September 1991 where an original sentence of penal servitude for four years six months minimum term for an assault with a knife was varied, on appeal, to four months and three days. However, that order was made in circumstances which were quite unique and were not present in this case. Those circumstances related to the extreme hardship to the applicant whose son had suffered a cardiac condition which left him with a functional level of a three-year-old child and who required the constant care and attention of the applicant. Regina versus Dib must be regarded as entirely special.
It depends wholly upon its own facts.
Cases more in line with this one are Regina versus Allen CCA , unreported, 25 February 1992; Regina v
Henry, CCA , unreported, 6 October ; Regina versus Filipo, CCA , unreported, 25 March 1994; and Regina v
Rumbel, CCA , unreported, 15 December 1994. In those decisions of this
Court minimum term sentences respectively of seven years, six months; six years; six years six months; and three years were confirmed or imposed. It is important to make the point again that no two cases are entirely comparable.
However, in most of the cases mentioned there were the common features of the use of a knife with stabbing, scars left on the victims, the presence of intoxication at the time of the offence and the presence of some degree of emotional stress which was said to have explained the circumstances which had led to the use of the knife.
Protesting that each case is different, it can still be seen from the minimum term sentences that were imposed in the foregoing cases, and the overall sentences which were imposed, that, taking even into account the factors subjective to the accused and the mitigating of the circumstances, the sentence imposed by Finlay J was not outside the range which was available to his Honour in the circumstances.
The Court was taken to the decision in Regina versus Garvey, CCA , unreported, 24 February 1995. That was a case where a wounding by a knife led to a sentence at first instance of eighteen months' minimum term with an additional term of two years six months. That sentence drew an appeal by the
Crown. This Court allowed the Crown's appeal. It substituted a sentence of five years' penal servitude with a minimum term of two and a half years and an additional term of two and a half years. It is commonplace that, in a Crown appeal which is successful, the sentence which is ordinarily imposed is generally somewhat lower than that which would have been the proper one to the case.
This is so because of the factor of "double jeopardy" applicable to such cases. Therefore, the ultimate sentence of two and a half years' penal servitude in Garvey must also be regarded as special. But it is still higher than that which Finlay J imposed upon the applicant in this case. 
Conclusion and orders: leave to appeal refused
Bearing in mind all of the foregoing considerations
I have not been convinced that the applicant has shown error on the part of his Honour. The sentence which was imposed was one which was within the range available to his
Honour in the exercise of his sentencing discretion. I therefore see no basis upon which this
Court can properly interfere with it.
Accordingly, I propose that the application for leave to appeal against the sentence be dismissed. Time served by the applicant should count in discharge of the sentence.
The order of the Court is that the application for leave to appeal against the sentence imposed by Finlay J is dismissed. The time served is to count. The prisoner is to be returned to custody of the Corrective Services officers to continue the serving of his sentence.
JUDGE2
HUNT CJ at CL I agree.
JUDGE3
DUNFORD
J I also agree.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/159.html  
