

Wily versus Frank Lo Presti (No 2) Matter No 4048/95 [1997] NSWSC 595 (28
November 1997) ` 
Hugh Jenner Wily in his Capacity as Liquidator of Abalnon Pty Ltd versus Frank Lo Presti (No 2)` ` 4048/95` `28 November 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `4048/95 - HUGH JENNER WILY IN HIS CAPACITY AS LIQUIDATOR OF ABALNON PTY LTD v FRANK LO PRESTI (NO 2)` `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: Abalnon Pty Ltd ("the Company") is currently in liquidation, Mr H J Wily being its liquidator. The liquidator in his official capacity sues the defendant, Mr Frank Lo Presti, for repayment of alleged preferential payments totalling $117,000. Those payments were made by the company in liquidation between 17 March and 16 July 1993. The company was wound up by order made on 4 November 1993 and it is common ground that the relevant date for relating-back purposes under the Corporations Law is 27 August 1993. Counsel are agreed that the relevant law for the purpose of making this decision is that contained in <case> of the [Bankruptcy Act 1966](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) in the form that it took prior to the 1996 amendments. This comes about by virtue of <case> of the Corporations Law. 
There is no doubt on the evidence that the liquidator has established all the relevant facts entitling him to an order unless the transactions are saved under [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) of the [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/). In particular, it is established that: 
The defendant loaned the company $450,000 in July 1992; 
The $117,000 was repaid in the period I have mentioned by a series of cheques, the largest of which was for $60,000; 
For the whole of the period 17 March to 16 July 1993 the company was insolvent; 
The defendant was an unsecured creditor and no unsecured creditor will be paid any dividend at all in the liquidation; and 
That, in fact, the payments of $117,000 confer an advantage on the defendant.

The issues that I need consider, accordingly, are those based on [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) and (4) of the [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) in the circumstances of the facts of this case.

I was very much assisted in this matter by the thorough written submissions that were presented by both counsel. That consideration saved me having to do a considerable amount of notetaking and research. Nonetheless, some of the issues that arise do involve very fine distinctions. It is extraordinary, really, the law of preferences having been in much the same form for the last seventy years, with so many decisions having been reported in the law reports as to what the section means, that we are still, in 1997, having to delve deeply into the meaning of some basic concepts. Nonetheless, that is what has to occur.
 [Subsections (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) and (4) in the form in which they must be applied are as follows: "122. (2) Nothing in this section affects - the rights of a purchaser, payee or encumbrancer in good faith and for valuable consideration and in the ordinary course of business; the rights of a person making title in good faith and for valuable consideration through or under a creditor of the debtor; or a conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation of the debtor executed, made or incurred under or in pursuance of a maintenance agreement or maintenance order.
 ...

For the purposes of this section - a conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation shall be deemed to have been executed, made or incurred in favour of a creditor if it is executed, made or incurred in favour of a person in trust for that creditor; a payment of tax, or of any other amount payable to the Commonwealth, or to the Commissioner of Taxation, under or because of an Act of which the
Commissioner has the general administration, is taken to be made for valuable consideration and in the ordinary course of business; and a creditor shall be deemed not to be a purchaser, payee or encumbrancer in good faith if the conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation was executed, made or incurred under such circumstances as to lead to the inference that the creditor knew, or had reason to suspect - that the debtor was unable to pay his debts as they became due from his own money; and that the effect of the conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation would be to give him a preference, priority or advantage over other creditors." 
The focus must be on three matters: First, whether under [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) there have been payments made in good faith; secondly, whether those payments were made in the ordinary course of business; and, thirdly, whether there is a problem with deemed bad faith under [s (4)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
Stating the issues in this way shows that I am focusing on [s (2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) and [s (4)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
The element in [s (2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) that I have omitted, that is, whether the transaction is for valuable consideration, is of no concern because the defendant obviously furnished valuable consideration.

The onus of proving the matters under [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) is on the defendant. There is some debate in the cases as to where lies the onus of proof under [s (4)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
The majority view in this State appears to be that it is on the liquidator, but there are a number of authorities which say that onus has no part to play in the matter and that one must look at all the facts and make up one's mind.
The question of onus does not really play a vital part in this particular case.

I will thus deal then with these three vital matters.

As to good faith, Mr Chippindall for the liquidator, says that essentially the transaction was one where in July 1992 Mr Lo Presti was asked by a friend to advance him a substantial sum of money for a period of time. The friend was Mr
Barbato, who was, for all intents and purposes, Abalnon Pty Ltd. Mr Barbato was moving into the business of importing calendars for sale over the
Christmas period, and he had made arrangements for a large supply of calendars to come from the United States but he lacked the wherewithal to pay for them.

Mr Lo Presti was the godfather of Mr Barbato's son and both Mr Lo Presti and
Mr Barbato were members of the Australian Italian community and were probably in a closer relationship of friendship than is usual with Anglo-Celtic
Australians. Although a cynic might wonder, the facts seem clearly established that Mr Lo Presti, knowing that his friend needed $450,000, trusted his friend, made no inquiries, arranged for $500,000 to be borrowed on the security of property of his own and of his near relatives and then lent $450,000 of that to the company. The other $50,000 was prepayment of interest.

The transaction is a remarkable one in that Mr Lo Presti was not getting any benefit at all because he was lending the money interest-free without security, yet he himself was at risk for $500,000 to the lender. The property of himself and his family was tied up and he was paying interest at rates which, at one stage, got to 28 per cent. Nonetheless, Mr Lo Presti said that that is what Italian Australians do for their friends, and I accept that.

I should note that it is clear that Mr Lo Presti is not a moneylender. Nor is his usual business moneylending. His principal business appears to be carrying on a restaurant at Crows Nest.

The money was supposed to be repaid in October 1992. It was not. Mr Barbato mentioned to Mr Lo Presti that he was not in a position to pay at that stage and the loan was extended to December, and then later to March 1993. Then in
April 1993 there were further rearrangements. All of these extensions were at cost to Mr Lo Presti.

Starting in March, the company paid a series of cheques through to Mr Lo
Presti or his solicitor. Those cheques included the $117,000 the subject of these proceedings. However, there were other cheques as well. There were a series of cheques which were dishonoured on first presentation and some marked "present again" which, when they were presented, some were paid and some were not.

There was in March/April 1993 a considerable number of cheques which were not paid by the bank. Moreover, Mr Chippindall says it is significant that, to the knowledge of Mr Lo Presti, the company banked with the National Australia Bank yet some of the cheques that were being issued were drawn on a different bank.

Mr Chippindall says that when one looks at all the circumstances, these facts, which are really undisputed, go under each of the three headings to show that the transactions in the present case should not pass through the gateways allowed in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) with respect to preferences.

The facts as I have set them out, which are really undisputed, are a weakened version of what appears in Mr Chippindall's written submissions. The reason for this weakened form is that Mr Barbato was not able to be brought to court by the liquidator and in an earlier judgment I gave on evidentiary matters, I admitted part, but rejected significant other parts, of the evidence that was given by Mr Barbato as an examinee under <case> of the Corporations Law before Deputy Registrar Williams. The material which was rejected made a considerable number of holes in material on which Mr Chippindall would otherwise have relied for showing that Mr Lo Presti knew more about Mr Barbato and Abalnon's financial ways than he would let on.

Mr Lo Presti's affidavit was read and he was vigorously cross examined by Mr
Chippindall. Mr Chippindall put to Mr Lo Presti a series of questions suggesting that he knew more than he was saying about Mr Barbato's financial state but Mr Lo Presti denied this. Mr Lo Presti presented himself as an honest man. He answered Mr Chippindall's questions cheerfully, directly and without prevarication and gave the impression of being the sort of person who would do for a friend the sort of thing that happened here. Accordingly, although Mr Chippindall suggests that the reasonable Australian business person would, under the circumstances I have outlined, have had suspicions, I do not consider that as a matter of fact this happened with Mr Lo Presti.

Mr Walton for the defendant, simply says that if I accept Mr Lo Presti as a witness of truth, then that is the end of the liquidator's case on good faith under [s (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
I believe that is correct and, as I accept Mr Lo Presti, I am satisfied that the transaction was one in good faith.

I should define a little more precisely what I mean by "transaction". It is very easy to slide from examining the transaction of repayment, which is the transaction attacked as a preference, into a consideration of the transaction of loan. What has to be considered is whether the repayments were made and accepted in good faith and for valuable consideration and in the ordinary course of business. There is not the evidence to satisfy me that when the moneys were repaid in April/July, they were repaid in any other way than in good faith.

Mr Lo Presti was very interested in clearing the liability to the persons who had lent him the money because the loan was only going to be for a short time.
He and his solicitor were pressing Mr Barbato for repayments. Repayments were made. There was an attempt to rearrange the debt, but I cannot see anything there that would make me find that the transaction, that is, the repayments, were made otherwise than in good faith.

I pass accordingly to whether the repayments were made in the ordinary course of business.

At this stage, the matter gets more technical. There has been considerable debate as to what is the significance of the phrase "and in the ordinary course of business" in [s122(2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) of the [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/). The history is thoroughly analysed by Priestley JA in Harkness versus Partnership
Pacific Ltd which is reported in [(1997) 143 ALR 227] The
Partnership Pacific case is an odd one in some respects in that the
Court of Appeal there consisted of Priestley JA, Clarke JA and Abadee AJA.
Clarke JA gave a short judgment disposing of the appeal, with which Abadee AJA agreed, and then Priestley JA, who was the senior judge sitting and who had asked Clarke JA to give the first judgment, spent some 40 printed pages giving a complete history of the provisions but agreeing with the result reached by
Clarke JA.

Accordingly, the analysis of Priestley JA cannot in one sense be said to be the reasons of the whole court, but there was nothing in them which has been dissented from by either of the other judges. I believe that I should follow what Priestley JA said in the Partnership Pacific case, even acknowledging that his reasoning was not adopted by the other judges.

His Honour's analysis shows that the Commonwealth parliamentary draughtsmen, when they were putting together Australia's first [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) in 1924 to had considerable difficulty because there were two divergent systems of insolvency in Australia, and it was necessary in many parts of the Bankruptcy
Act 1924-1928 to provide for alternative procedures to reflect the systems that have existed in the north-eastern States as opposed to the southern
States but in some respects, including the section which was the predecessor of <case>, it was necessary to come down on one side or the other or to compromise.

Section 95 of the 1924 Act, which is the predecessor of <case>, introduced the concept of "ordinary course of business" into Australian bankruptcy law.
However, the concept had been present prior to 1825 in another connection. The other connection is that early Bankruptcy Acts made the debtor's bankruptcy relate back to the first act of bankruptcy committed by the debtor whenever that had occurred. This had the result sometimes of relating the bankruptcy back many years, and so invalidating otherwise perfectly good transactions.
The judges of the 18th century so conducted themselves that, in effect, they modified the effect of the old statutes by not invalidating transactions which were in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing or which were perfectly fair in the eyes of an ordinary person of commerce.

The way in which the judges of that era proceeded is well reflected in the seminal case of Rust versus Cooper <case>; [(1777) Cowp 629]; [98 ER 1277.] In that case Lord Mansfield said, at ER 1280, that one had to distinguish between fraudulent acts and acts done in the common course of business. He said: "If, in a fair course of business, a man pays a creditor who comes to be paid, notwithstanding the debtor's knowledge of his own affairs, or his intention to break; yet, being a fair transaction in the course of business, the payment is good; for the preference is there got consequentially, not by design: it is not the object; but the preference is obtained, in consequence of the payment being made at that time." 
The High Court started to consider the meaning of the phrase in 1932 in
Robertson versus Grigg <case>; [(1932) 47 CLR 257.] Priestley JA analyses the High Court decision in that case in the Partnership Pacific judgment at ALR [282, ACSR 59-60.] As his Honour says, the justices were divided on the question of semantics in
Robertson's case, but in Burns versus McFarlane <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 108], the High Court adopted the view of Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke
J in Robertson versus Grigg.

The next case of relevance is Downs Distributing Co Pty Ltd versus Associated
Blue Star Stores Pty Ltd <case>; [(1948) 76 CLR 463.] What is usually cited from that case is the passage of Rich
J's judgment at 477, the last sentence of which seems to define "ordinary course of business" as: "The transaction must fall into place as part of the undistinguished common flow of business done, that it should form part of the ordinary course of business as carried on, calling for no remark and arising out of no special or particular situation." 
The High Court dealt with the matter again in a case whose significance was debated before me at length, Taylor versus White <case>; [(1963) 110 CLR 129.] There is something in that case for everybody. I thought, with respect, that the best analysis of it was made by Pincus J, when a judge of the Federal Court of Australia, in Re Cummins; Ex Parte Harris [(1985) ALR 129] at 134-137. I respectfully agree with most of what his Honour says, though I think some of it, for New South Wales, has been overtaken by
Priestley JA's judgment in the Partnership Pacific case.

Pincus J says that when you analyse the judgment in Taylor versus White, one can see that half the judges preferred one view of the test of what is in the ordinary course of business and the other half the other test. But it is difficult to divine this without a close analysis of the judgment. Pincus J says at 135 that one test could be "a fair transaction and what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view". His Honour was quoting from Alderson v Temple <case>; [(1768) Burr 2235] at 2240; <case>; [98 ER ] at 168.

The second test is that set out in the last sentence of the passage from Rich
J's judgment in the Downs Distributing case, which I have just cited.
Pincus J says at 136 that it is open to single judges to use either as appears to be just in the circumstances. Since that judgment, Ryan J in the Supreme
Court of Queensland in Re Buckleys Earthmoving Pty Ltd [(1993) 10 ACSR ]
has followed the second test, that is, the Rich J dictum.

In New South Wales, Priestley JA's judgment shows that it is really an error to concentrate on that last sentence by itself. His Honour says at ALR [285;
ACSR 62] that: "Why it seems to me to be unfortunate for this sentence to have been so frequently referred to, is that it has been taken by itself, and as suggesting that anything done differently from usual between creditor and debtor can not be something done in the ordinary course of business. Such a view is far from the realities of commercial life ... . Taken too literally, Rich J's sentence can be read as qualifying what he, Dixon J and McTiernan J had said in Burns v McFarlane ...".

Priestley JA said in the Partnership Pacific case, at the page I have just mentioned, that it usually does not matter which test applies as most cases which are going to pass as fair transactions will be matters which occur as part and parcel of ordinary business. However, the present case is one where it does matter.

Mr Chippindall's submissions concentrated on the fact that there was great friendship between Mr Lo Presti and Mr Barbato; that the transaction of loan and the partial repayments and the renegotiated transactions in April 1993 should really be looked at as one, and they were far from the usual transaction of any reasonable person of business. Accordingly, applying the
Rich J test, they could not be transactions that occurred in the ordinary course of business.

This submission was bolstered by pointing to the fact that in Taylor v
White itself, the case involved a family transaction. In that case, a husband and wife were the sole directors of the company concerned. The wife was a signatory on her mother's bank account and, through the wife, the mother lent the company money. When the company was experiencing difficulties, the wife's mother got paid before anyone else. The case, of course, concerns other aspects as well but the various judges concentrated on the question of whether there was a payment in the ordinary course of business.

Dixon CJ said at 136 that whilst he recognised that the phrase "in the ordinary course of business" referred to business as a general conception and not the conduct of any particular business, the transaction in the case "seems to me to have been a family transaction in which a son-in-law, with the help of his wife, decided to borrow money from his mother-in-law for his company and then attempted to effect its repayment in the face of approaching disaster. The time-honoured phrase `in the ordinary course of business' is meant to refer to transactions regularly taking place in a sustained course of activity or some other usual process naturally passing without examination."
He then goes back to refer to Rust versus Cooper.

Mr Walton puts that if one differentiates between family transactions and commercial transactions, one can get to the absurd result that no transaction, if it involves a family member, can ever get through the gateways of <case>.
However, there must be a large number of transactions where, at arm's length, people who are related to each other or who are friendly with each other are involved together in commerce.

It seems to me that there is a lot in what Mr Walton says. I do not believe there is a dichotomy in the cases between, on the one hand, a family transaction, and, on the other hand, transactions in the ordinary course of business. The fact that the transaction involves members of the debtor's family may cause a tribunal of fact to look more closely at it but the fact that it is a family transaction does not disqualify it from being in the ordinary course of business. I do not believe what Dixon CJ said in Taylor v
White is contrary to what I have just said. His Honour had to say those words because the case before him was clearly one where the reasons for making and accepting the payments were to prefer a family member and the payments were not in any sense a fair transaction involving the ordinary flow of commerce.

However, where one gets an amount of money loaned to a company under conditions that are far more free than they would be from a complete outsider, if the money is repaid then the transaction of repayment is nothing more than paying a creditor money that is owed for the transaction. It is, of course, a completely different matter if one gets a situation such as Taylor versus White where the disaster is there and both the payer and the payee know that the money is coming back to avoid the consequences of the disaster.

In the instant case, the payment was overdue. The lender to Mr Lo Presti was concerned. Mr Lo Presti raised his concerns with Mr Barbato, and Mr Barbato made part payments. I do not see how the matter was anything other than a fair transaction. There is nothing in the evidence to show that exactly the same would not have occurred if there were no question of bankruptcy or insolvency pending. Indeed, the way Mr Barbato seems to have carried on his business at the time, despite the fact that it is now revealed that he owes substantial moneys in sales tax and other taxes, meant, at least to Mr Lo Presti, that the business was a thriving one. Certainly, also Mr Barbato seemed to conduct himself in the ordinary way at this time. Accordingly, I believe that the evidence shows that it was a fair transaction.

Again, one has got to define carefully what is meant by "the transaction". It seems to me one must take the loan and the repayments as two separate transactions. The loan was past and gone when the moneys were paid over in
July 1992. What is being examined is the partial repayment of the loan between
March and July 1993. Once one isolates the repayment from the making of the loan, it seems to me that there is nothing more, on the evidence, than the payment of moneys on account of moneys which were due by the company to a creditor and to the creditor's solicitor, and they were made in the ordinary course of business.

The final matter is whether there is implied bad faith under section 122(4).
The words on which to focus are that the creditor "had reason to suspect - (i) that the debtor was unable to pay his debts as they became due" and that the effect of the payment would give the creditor a preference.

I was concerned about the word "reason" for some time because it seemed to me semantically what had to be shown is that, objectively, the creditor had a reason not that the creditor had a suspicion. However, having re-read a large number of the cases, it would seem that the judges have taken the view that one asks the question: Would a reasonable person, who had knowledge of all the facts that this creditor knew, have a reasonable suspicion that the debtor was unable to pay his debts as they became due? I will adopt this sort of test.

The matters that Mr Chippindall mainly relies on in the material that actually got admitted into evidence centre around the unusual nature of the transaction of loan and the repayment transactions; the fact that Mr Lo Presti was not a moneylender yet had raised half a million dollars and on-lent $450,000; that
Mr Barbato's company's cheques were being dishonoured, including cheques for substantial amounts; and that the debt should have been repaid in October , but without any really good reasons was not repaid and scheduled for repayment in December, and then again in March and subsequently in April.
There were then attempts to rearrange things, which were frustrated by bounced cheques. Mr Chippindall submits that all of those matters would have amounted, in the mind of a reasonable person of business, to a reasonable suspicion that the debtor was unable to pay his debts from his own money and that the repayments would give the creditor a preference.

However, the question is really a question of fact, and if one looks at the way in which judges have approached that question of fact over the centuries, one can see that in different times and places all sorts of strange commercial happenings have been held by courts not to amount to reason to suspect insolvency.

If one goes back to 1790, the Court of Exchequer decided Holmes v
Wennington <case>; [(1790) 2 Bos & Pul 401]; ER 1350. That is a case where Eyre CB considered the situation where the debtor had been arrested. He considered that the mere fact that the debtor had been arrested once or twice for not paying debts would not be sufficient in itself to show that the debtor was unable to pay his debts from his own money.
The learned Chief Baron said that all it did show was that the creditor was particularly diligent in getting payment and that the debtor was one of those commercial men who only paid at the last moment. Accordingly, even though one might suspect that being arrested and imprisoned for debt is a good indication of insolvency, in 1790 the judges would not draw that inference from that fact alone.

There have been other cases, such as Re Lambert Homes Pty Ltd [(1984) 71
FLR 385](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281984%29%2071%20FLR%20385 "View LawCiteRecord" ), where the mere fact of the return of a debtor's cheque marked "present again" was held not to be sufficient. See also Re Brittain; Ex parte
Barnes [(1984) 2 FCR 35] where Woodward J in the Federal Court held that that fact plus the fact of the threat to refer matters to solicitors by the creditors was not enough in itself to show that there was reason to suspect insolvency.

Again, in Queensland Bacon Pty Ltd versus Reece <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 266] at 291-292 and again at 312, the High Court said that what must be reasonably suspected was that the debtor was insolvent, that is, unable, not merely unwilling, to pay his debts as they become due and that in a credit squeeze it is more difficult to draw the inference than otherwise.
Another example is Re Beatty; Ex parte Melsom [[1965] ALR 291] where the debtor's bank account was in overdraft and the bank had been continually pressing the debtor to bring his overdraft within limits. This circumstance was not enough objectively to imply insolvency. Finally, in Re Weiss; Ex parte White [[1970] ALR 654] the mere fact that the debtor had sold his house and had paid the proceeds to a creditor was held not to be sufficient in itself.

The cases over the last 300 years, which I have recently read, show that the construction of sections such as <case> are to be given a liberal interpretation towards the creditor if there is any real doubt. Part of the reason for this is historical, because of the draconian effect of the early bankruptcy laws to which I have already referred, although under <case> an objective test has to be applied. One bears in mind that people in the real world of commerce are used to people who pay their debts at the last moment or whose cheques bounce from time to time or who are unsatisfactory customers, and the mere fact that this sort of thing happens does not necessarily mean that a reasonable person of business would suspect that their debtor was insolvent.

Looking at the matters which Mr Chippindall put for the liquidator, I do not consider that, on an objective view, a reasonable person of business would conclude that there was a reasonable suspicion that the company was insolvent so that the repayment was a preference. It follows that the proceedings must be dismissed.

So far as costs are concerned, the defendant has asked for costs. The ordinary rule is that a successful party is entitled to costs but there are matters which will displace the application of the ordinary rule. Mr Chippindall puts that the application relied on what was in the original transcript of Mr
Barbato, which it was reasonable for the liquidator to do. Had Mr Barbato given evidence, it may be that the question of fact might have gone the liquidator's way. Certainly the liquidator would have some ammunition to cross examine Mr Lo Presti even more vigorously than in fact occurred.

However, in the light of the fact that Mr Barbato appears to have revised his transcript, regardless of what evidence Mr Barbato would have given, I do not really think that there is sufficient in the case to prevent the ordinary rule applying. So, accordingly, the plaintiff should pay the defendant's costs and the first fund available for the payment of costs is the assets of the company.

Exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
