

Lymgrove P/L versus Wge P/L [1996] NSWSC 158 (27 May 1996) 
LYMGROVE PTY LTD versus WGE PTY LTD /96 
MONDAY 27 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a Notice of Motion by the defendant in winding up proceedings for a declaration that a demand purportedly issued under <case> of the Corporations Law against it was invalid.

The Corporations Law, Part 5.4, endeavoured to set out a procedure which would be relatively simple to deal with disputed cases of insolvency. Unfortunately, in practice, the provisions have not worked out simply at all and there have been a considerable number of cases where, because both creditors and debtors have not observed the strict requirements of the Part, there has been a very real chance of injustice.

In the instant case, the plaintiff and the defendant were in the construction industry. The plaintiff, Lymgrove Pty Ltd, whose ACN is 003 382 376, alleges that the defendant company is indebted to it in the amount of $165,703.25, being the balance due on some nine invoices which it has particularised. The defendant was served with a document which was headed "Creditor's Statutory
Demand for Payment of Debt", the first numbered paragraph of which said, "1.
The company owes Lymgrove Engineering Pty Limited, ACN: 003 382 376...("the creditor") the amount of $165,703.25...". Paragraph 3 then required the defendant to pay to the creditor the amount of that debt or secure or compound it to its reasonable satisfaction.

The correspondence which was involved in the relevant contract between the parties shows that the plaintiff in fact used for this purpose letterhead which was inscribed with the words, "Lymgrove Engineering Pty Ltd, ACN: 003 346, PO Box [57, Hamilton 2303".] The registered office of the plaintiff is actually 10 Crown Street, Sydney, 2011. It can be seen that this correspondence, including the invoice which is PX03, did not bear the company's name in that the word "engineering" had infiltrated; it did not bear the company's ACN, which was misprinted as ending in "346" instead of "376"; and as I have indicated, it had an address other than the company's registered office.

A company search has been put in evidence and there is no dispute that there is no such company as Lymgrove Engineering Pty Ltd and that the company whose
ACN is 003 382 376 is Lymgrove Pty Ltd, the plaintiff.

The defendant took proceedings to set aside the statutory demand under <case> of the Corporations Law. Unfortunately for it, it seems that that application was served a day out of time and because of the decision of the High Court in
David Grant & Co Pty Ltd versus Westpac Banking Corporation [(1995) 131
ALR 355], it could not be granted. The defendant is very much affected by this because <case> of the Corporations Law means that it may not, without the leave of the Court, oppose a winding up application on a ground that it could have relied on under a <case> application unless the Court gives leave, and under <case> of the Corporations Law the Court is not to grant leave unless it is satisfied that the ground is material to proving that the company is solvent.

Had an application been made under 459G, then 459J would have come into play and the Court could have set aside the demand if it were satisfied that, because of a defect in the demand or some other reason, it should be set aside. I have been referred to various case on the meaning of <case>. Although there is some conflict in the authorities as to just what field it covers, the prevailing view appears to be that "defect" in <case> covers defects large and small, material or immaterial and whether they refer to persons, entities or amounts: Topfelt Pty Limited versus The State Bank of New South Wales Limited <case>; [(1993) 47 FCR 226]; Scandon
Pty Limited versus Dome Suppliers Pty Limited [(1995) 17 ACSR 662.] 
It is recognised by Lockhart J in the Topfelt case that there may be some situations where the defects are so grievous that the statutory demand might be a complete nullity (see p 238). V & M Quality Constructions versus W G
Brady Pty Limited [(1994) 12 ACLC 970], was such a case. It must be realized that that was an unusual case because it was decided on a very limited basis being the battleground which the parties themselves had chosen. However, ordinarily, as Lockhart J pointed out the time for dealing with any matter which goes to the sufficiency of the demand, whether a defect be a small one or a great one, is under <case>.

Miss Blackman for the defendant, submits that there is a very great difference between a misdescription and a complete misnomer of the creditor. She referred to the House of Lords decision in Anisminic versus Foreign Compensation
Commission <case>; [(1969) 2 AC 147] at 170 where
Lord Reid deals with the difference between irregular decisions and null and void decisions.

However, for the purposes of the Corporations Law, there are various provisions which mean that apart from the exceptional case, things that are wrong with a statutory demand should normally be dealt with in terms of defects. "Defect" is defined by <case> of the Corporations Law in a wide and inclusive way so that misdescriptions of persons or entities are expressly included. Furthermore, "statutory demand" is defined in <case> in such a way as to include a purported statutory demand. It seems to me that the legislature intended to give the term "defective statutory demand" a very wide coverage and the way in which Part 5.4 of the Law is framed intends to have them all dealt with under 459G.

In saying this, I have no doubt at all that there is occasion for the Court to exercise its inherent powers and grant injunctions or make declarations in the interests of justice and that will happen where there is a clearly void or forged demand. However, in the instant case the misnomer or misdescription was not one which is alleged to have caused any confusion. It is not a case where there was the use of the wrong ACN in the statutory demand nor is this a case where there could be confusion caused by a series of similar named companies in the same group. Accordingly, in my view, the problems with this demand were merely defects which could have been dealt with under 459G and 459J had the application been made in time and I cannot declare that the statutory demand was a nullity.

I should note that Miss Blackman submitted - and she is supported in this by what Senior Master Mahoney said in the Scandon case - that the decision in
Grant's case means that it is sudden death for a company which is served with a statutory demand not to comply strictly with the Corporations Law, so it is also necessary for a company seeking to obtain the benefit of the Law by serving a statutory demand to observe strictly the basic requirements of disclosure of its identity (see Scandon at p 674). I think in general that submission is correct and I think also that the way in which the creditor has gone about its business leaves a lot to be desired, but I do not think it gets into the category of being a void demand.

The Court will now have to consider whether leave should be granted under s
S. That matter was adverted to by Lockhart J in the Topfelt case. It will not be every case where a defect in the statutory demand will of itself give rise to sympathy in an application under <case>. In the instant case it may or may not be significant that the wrong ACN number was used on the contractual documents. I considered this matter briefly in National
Education Advancement Programmes versus Ashton [(1995) 14 ACLC 30] and expressed the view obiter that non-compliance with <case> of the Corporations
Law did not lead to illegality but it may be that some day someone will wish to argue the matter fully.

Accordingly, I dismiss the Notice of Motion of 11 April 1996 with costs, but will stand the matter down while counsel consider what application is going to be made under <case> and when it is going to be made.
 [Counsel later announced that a compromise had been reached pursuant to which the Court could give leave under <case> of the Corporations Law on certain conditions. Orders are to be made in accordance with short minutes to be brought in later today to record these matters].
 * * * 
