

Regina versus Biggs Matter No 60122/97 [1998] NSWSC 15 (25 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 31 March 1998 
REGINA versus ROGER MARK BIGGS /97 February 1998 
Wood J, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
WOOD J: I will ask Justice Sperling to deliver the first judgment. 
SPERLING J: On 21 February 1997, the applicant pleaded guilty to one count of armed robbery with wounding, one count of using an offensive weapon to prevent lawful apprehension and one count of common law assault. That was before Kinchington DCJ in the District Court.

In relation to the offence of armed robbery with wounding, his Honour imposed a sentence consisting of a minimum term of nine years penal servitude and an additional term of six years. In relation to the second and third offences, his Honour sentenced the applicant to a fixed term of five years penal servitude and a fixed term of eighteen months imprisonment respectively, both to be served concurrently with the sentence on the first charge.

There was no challenge to the findings made by the sentencing judge as to the objective facts of the case. His Honour said: "At about 9 pm on the evening of Thursday 3 october 1996, Kelly Gormley was working alone at The Great Australian Ice Creamery in Crawford Street,
Queanbeyan. She was closing up the shop on that night and had opened the rear security screen door to gain access to the rear passage, when she was confronted by the offender who was holding a length of timber in both hands over his head. The offender, at that time, had his face and head covered by his tee-shirt and without warning, immediately commenced to hit Miss Gormley on the head with the timber and told her to shut up and be quiet. Miss Gormley tried to escape from her assailant but was forced to the ground, whereupon the offender continued to assault her and grabbed hold of her ponytail, dragged her into the shop to the vicinity of the cash register, where he removed $465 in cash from the till. Thereafter, Miss Gormley was forced into the alley way behind the shop, where she pleaded with the offender not to hurt her or rape her. Whereupon the offender dragged her to a more isolated part of the laneway and continued to assault her by striking her about the head, arms and body, with the piece of wood.

At about this time, the second of the offender's victims, a Mr Tony Bourke, arrived on the scene. He challenged the offender and attempted to apprehend him, whereupon the offender then attacked Mr Bourke with the piece of wood and struck him on the forearm. Whereupon Mr Bourke struck the offender and knocked him to the ground then fell upon him and told him to stay down until the police arrived.

A struggle ensued between the offender and Mr Bourke and the offender broke free and attempted to decamp from the area via the ice cream shop. Mr Bourke following him into the ice cream shop, again confronted the offender, and a further struggle ensued between them, during which Mr Bourke was punched in the groin by the offender, in an effort to make his escape. However, despite these assaults on his person, Mr Bourke was able to subdue the offender until police arrived, whereupon he was handcuffed and taken back to Queanbeyan
Police station." 
Nor is there any challenge to the findings of the sentencing judge as to the injuries received by the respective victims. His Honour said: "As a result of these various assaults, Miss Gormley sustained two scalp wounds which required suturing, a broken nose, and fractures to both hands, together with bruising about her face, head, arms, and abrasions to both her arms and legs; while Mr Bourke sustained bruising to his left forearm, as well as pain and discomfort to his groin area." 
His Honour briefly summarised the applicant's criminal history. I record it in further detail. Ignoring earlier matters, since 1987 when the applicant was seventeen years of age the applicant has been sentenced on some twelve occasions or thereabouts for acts of violence to the person of one kind or another, or threatened violence. His convictions also include a conviction for armed robbery and numerous other offences.

The applicant has served many gaol sentences for these offences, although the longest sentence imposed prior to the present occasion is a minimum term of twelve months with an additional term of four months. (I mention that the sentence for armed robbery in 1990 was in fact eight months rather than one month as recorded by his Honour.) 
So far as subjective considerations are concerned, his Honour mentioned that the applicant was affected by alcohol and some form of drug at the time of the offences now in question, that the applicant left school at the age of nine and had had an extremely disadvantageous upbringing and young life, both as a child and as a young man.

His Honour was satisfied that the applicant had pleaded guilty at the earliest available opportunity and that he could accept the applicant's pleas of guilty as expressions of remorse and contrition.

The case involves abduction by force, actual physical violence to the female victim and actual injury to her. When interrupted, the applicant was intent on doing even more harm to his victim. His Honour said that the circumstances under which the offence was committed indicated that the criminality involved fell within the higher range of penalties to be imposed for that type of offence. This cannot be doubted.

On behalf of the applicant, it was submitted that the sentence was excessively severe. It was submitted that the sentencing judge ought to have given greater weight to the fact that the applicant had at no stage denied his involvement in the offences, and that greater recognition should have been accorded to the applicant's dysfunctional upbringing and Aboriginal background. In the latter respect, reliance was placed on the decision of Wood J in Fernando (1992) A Crim R at 58.

In support of the submission that a sentence of this severity is reserved for offences of much greater criminality, reference was made to the decision of this Court in Merritt (26 February 1996, unreported). In that case there was a total sentence of thirteen years, apportioned as a minimum term of nine years and an additional term of four years. There was an appeal against the severity of sentence. Leave was granted but the appeal was dismissed. The decision therefore stands as no more than a single instance of the exercise of sentencing discretion.

On the appeal in Merritt, Badgery-Parker J said: "There is no single sentence which is 'right' for a particular offence. The most that can ever be said is that there is a range of sentences. The sentencing judge in every case has a wide discretion within the range, and even if it were the fact that individual members of this Court might have concluded that a sentence of a different total length or differently constructed might have been appropriate, that is not of itself a reason why this Court should intervene. The question is whether error on the part of the sentencing judge is established, and error is not established merely by submitting, however forcefully, that there were considerations which might have dictated a more favourable result." 
In some respects the facts of Merritt are more serious than the present case. In other respects the facts of the present case are more serious than those of Merritt. Any such comparison serves only to confirm what was said by Badgery-Parker J in the passage which I have quoted.

No error of principle is apparent from his Honour's remarks on sentence; nor is it apparent from anything said by his Honour that his Honour failed to give appropriate weight to any particular consideration, including the considerations mentioned by counsel for the applicant. However, a total sentence of fifteen years with a minimum term of nine years was, in my opinion, excessive having regard to the objective and subjective features of the case to which I have referred. The sentence should, therefore, be set aside.

In re-sentencing the applicant, this Court has the benefit of what was before the sentencing judge. There is now also a report of Professor Hayes dated 16
February 1998. She said: "At the time of the assessment, Mr Biggs was a pleasant and stocky Aboriginal man who co-operated well with the assessment.

Mr Biggs was born at Lake Cargelligo. He is the third youngest in a family of four sisters and three brothers. The family initially lived on a mission near
Murray Bridge until he was aged 13, when they moved to Albury. His father died in 1992. His mother is alive and lives at Lake Cargelligo.

Mr Biggs attended school at 'The Lake' until the family moved to Albury and left school at the end of year 8 because he did not like school. He has basically been on the dole since leaving school and has had no jobs. He has a history of juvenile offending which starts in 1983 when he was aged thirteen.
He lived at home with his mother most of the time after he left school. He says that at the age of fifteen he started drinking alcohol and would drink until he ran out of money or alcohol. He usually drank in parks and he drank every day. He mostly cannot remember what happened because he drank to the point of blackout.

He started sniffing glue when he was aged about eight or nine and this continued until he was 11 or 12. He says that he did this because most young fellows did it.

He started smoking marijuana at the age of 15 and smoked however much he had.
He usually smoked about two grams per day. He says that he drank and smoked marijuana because he wanted to be with his friends and be part of the scene.
He says that the alcohol made him aggressive most of the time and he never fought when he was sober. He says that all of his charges are related to fighting when he was drunk. He thinks that maybe he has over 100 charges.

He said that he has been in boys' homes from the age of thirteen, initially for offences such as car stealing. The second time he was in a boys home was in 1987 when he was 17, for assault and stealing. He then came gaol in 1988 and has been in and out of gaol ever since. The longest time he has been out of gaol since 1988 was for four months. Every time he leaves prison he goes straight back to alcohol. He goes to live in Albury or Lake Cargelligo with one of his aunts or his mother. Usually he is off the grog in gaol but he has used heroin in gaol since 1994. He does not use heroin outside, except for the last time of his release. On the outside he also uses pills, mainly Rivatrils.

The night before the offence he had a fight with a friend and stole the friend's Rivatrils. On the day of the offence he had consumed alcohol,
Rivatrils and marijuana. He says that he cannot remember the whole day leading up to the offence. He can remember getting up and having a shower. He obtained some money from his mother. He and his brother-in-law bought a slab (a carton of beer) at about 9 o'clock in the morning and started to drink. He also began to smoke marijuana and took three Rivatril tablets. He continued drinking and went to a friend's house and then to a cousin's house. They drove him around and he then went to Queanbeyan, he thinks it was early in the evening. When he woke up he says that he had no Rivatril tablets left, so he must have taken them. He says that he was supposed to go to meet a friend but the friend said he would meet him downtown and so Mr Biggs went downtown and this is when the offence happened. He says he cannot recall hitting the victim but he can recall being hit by Mr Burke.
 ... ... ...

Mr Biggs says that since he has been in gaol of recent times he has been trying to get into drug and alcohol classes, but he has been moved so often that it has been impossible for him. He has done some drug and alcohol courses on previous occasions. During all the time of his incarceration in adult and juvenile institutions, Mr Biggs says that he has never had a psychological assessment and never had individual psychological or psychiatric counselling.
He says that he thinks he needs to have one to one counselling because he goes into his shell when he is in a group. " 
It further appears from the report that extensive psychological testing was carried out by Professor Hayes and she reports on the results of those tests.
Profession Hayes' conclusions were as follows: "In summary, this is the history of a young man who has had probably a low average level of intelligence, but whose mental abilities have suffered owing to his extreme substance abuse. Whilst in custody he has received very little help directed at assisting him to be drug and alcohol free upon release.
 ... ... ...

He also needs to be able to participate in drug and alcohol counselling, and this can only be brought about if he remains at one prison for a stable period of time. He also needs to have involvement on a one-to-one basis with a psychologist or a psychiatrist for extensive counselling related to the causes of his substance abuse. When he is approaching release he needs to be released to a rehabilitation program as part of his parole. A case management plan for
Mr Biggs needs to be drawn up by prison psychological, medical and substance abuse services." 
Notwithstanding the mitigating subjective features of this case, a substantial sentence is necessary because of the very serious objective features of the episode which gives rise to this sentence. I would find special circumstances in this case, there being a need for an extended period of supervision on parole when the applicant is released.

I propose the following orders:
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal allowed.
Sentence on the charge of armed robbery set aside.
In lieu thereof, the applicant be sentenced to a minimum term of seven years penal servitude to date from 3 October 1996 and expiring on 2 October , together with an additional term of four years penal servitude, the applicant being eligible for release on parole on 3 October 2003.

I would endorse the observation of the sentencing judge that, if released on parole, the applicant should be subject to the supervision and guidance of the
New South Wales Probation Service.

WOOD J: I agree. 
SMART J: I also agree. 
WOOD J: The order of the Court will be as proposed by Justice Sperling. * * * 
