

Regina versus P.J.E. No. 060216/95 Criminal Law and Procedure [1995] NSWSC 117 (31 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
COLE JA(1), GROVE(2) AND SPERLING JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 25 August #DATE 9:10:1995 #ADD 31:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:       R N Howie QC 
Solicitors for the Appellant: 
S E O'Connor 
Counsel for the Respondent:       P Kintominas 
Solicitors for the Respondent:     T A Murphy
ORDER
Appeal allowed.
JUDGE1
COLE JA I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Sperling
J.
I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour. My reasons may be briefly stated.
Under the Westminster system of government operative in
Australia, there is a separation of powers between the legislature and the judiciary. It is the function of the legislature to enact the substantive laws applicable to citizens. It is the obligation of the courts to implement and enforce those laws in proceedings brought before the courts by citizens, corporations or other bodies authorised to commence proceedings.
In the case of the criminal law, where a conflict arises between the State and the citizen, it is the function of the courts to ensure that, when prosecuted, a citizen receives a fair trial. The law which must be applied by the courts in that trial is either the common law or the statutory law as enacted by Parliament. Unless it be unconstitutional, the courts have no option but to implement the laws enacted by the Parliament.
A trial may be unfair if it suffers procedural irregularity, and the courts have an overarching power under the common law to ensure that procedural irregularity does not result in an unfair trial. However the courts have no power to determine that a trial will not be conducted in accordance with a constitutionally valid law which addresses either the substantive law constituting the offence alleged, or substantive provisions which determine what evidence may or may not be received in the conduct of that trial.
The reason why that is so is because every trial involves a tension between "the interests of the prosecution representing the State and the interests of the accused".((1) Alexander versus The Queen 91981) 135 CLR 395 at 430 per Mason J.)
In different societies and at different times, the legislature regards it as appropriate to adjust the substantive law governing that conflict and tension in different ways. In s.409B [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) one sees the determination of the legislature of New South Wales in determining the balance between the interests of a person charged with serious sexual assault, and the interests of society in ensuring that prosecutions for such an offence can be brought with as little distress as is currently regarded as reasonable to the complainant. In determining the aspects of evidence which are admissible in such a trial, the legislature has, on behalf of society, determined that balance. It is not for the courts, or any individual judge of a court, to determine that the balance determined by the legislature is inappropriate or "unfair" in the sense of depriving an accused person of material which, were it admitted, may provide that person with a defence. To do so would be to interfere with a constitutionally valid substantive law enacted by the
Parliament.
It is clear that a court may stay criminal proceedings which are vexatious, oppressive or otherwise an abuse of process.((2) Ridgeway versus R <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 41] at 83 per Gaudron J) However, it could never be an abuse of process, however that expression be defined, to seek to conduct a trial in accordance with a constitutionally valid substantive law determining the admissible evidence.
The statements of principle as I have expressed them do not impinge upon the capacity of a Court of Criminal Appeal after a trial has occurred in accordance with the law, including s409B, to consider whether, nonetheless, a verdict should be quashed upon the ground that the conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory, or that there has been a miscarriage of justice.((3) M versus The
Queen [(1994) 69 ALJR 83)] That is because "the requirement of fairness (is) separately identified since it transcends the content of more particularized legal rules and principles and provides the ultimate rationale and touchstone of the rules and practices which the common law requires to be observed in the administration of the substantive criminal law".((4) Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 292] at 326 per Deane J) If a Court of Criminal Appeal were to conclude that, "either in the conclusion itself, or in the manner in which it has been reached"((5) Davies and Cody versus The King (1937) 57 CLR at 180), the jury in a trial conducted in accordance with s409B, were mistaken or mislead, the conviction must be quashed. Such a decision would not question the authority of the Parliament's enacting of s409B or its applicability to the trial in question; rather it would recognise, as Gaudron J did in Dietrich((6) CLR at 326), that a trial conducted strictly in accordance with law may nonetheless be unfair such that a miscarriage of justice may have occurred.
I do not think that Gaudron J in Ridgeway versus R((7) <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 41] enunciated any principle to the contrary.
For these reasons I agree with the orders proposed by Sperling J.
JUDGE2
GROVE J
I have had the advantage of reading the judgments of Cole JA and
Sperling J in draft form. There is no need for me to repeat the circumstances in which the issues in this appeal arise for determination.
The stay of proceedings on the indictment in the
District Court was obtained on the basis of contentions that the operation of s409B of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) would exclude evidence in the trial of the following matters: 
What the respondent told the arresting police officers when first confronted by the allegations; 
The circumstances in which the complainant complained to her mother and in particular the method in which the mother extracted the complaints; and 
That the complainant's mother boasted that she would do to the respondent that which she did to the complainant's real father if the respondent ever left her (i.e. prevent him from ever seeing the children by raising allegations of sexual abuse), and the subsequent reaffirmation to implement that threat after the respondent left her.
As I understood the argument presented by the Crown Advocate, it was not denied that the statute would so operate although the basis upon which such evidence might otherwise be rendered inadmissible was not explored. I do not consider that it was open to find that the inhibitions upon evidence which might be adduced lead to no conclusion other than that any trial so conducted will be unfair. The limits of prediction are that it may be or it may not be.
Whether a trial has been unfair can be judged best by an examination of its incidents. Circumstances can no doubt be contemplated in which it can be predicted that a trial will inevitably be unfair therefore an abuse of process and a stay of proceedings appropriate but I am unpersuaded that the present case is of that category. The consequences of the application of <case> will remain available for examination, if it becomes appropriate, in the exercise of review jurisdiction if it be contemplated that a conviction is unsafe or unsatisfactory. Dealing with such a ground is an occasion which the law recognizes a jurisdiction exercisable only by a supervising court notwithstanding any conclusion at first instance: Regina versus R  <case>; [1989 168 CLR 23] at 46: "A power to ensure a fair trial is not a power to stop a trial before it starts. It is a power to mould the procedures of the trial to avoid or minimize prejudice to either party."
His Honour's statement recognizes that there may be remaining prejudice even after steps to minimize it have been taken. In the event of conviction, whether any residue of prejudice has provoked miscarriage is a matter for a tribunal of review.
The appeal should be allowed and the order staying proceedings upon the indictment quashed.
JUDGE3
SPERLING J The respondent was arraigned before a judge of the District Court in April of this year on charges of indecent assault upon his stepdaughter at various times between April 1986 and November 1992, she being aged six at the earliest of those dates and thirteen at the latest. He was also charged with having sexual intercourse with the child in 1986 when the child was under the age of ten years, she then being six or seven years of age.
The respondent sought an order for a permanent stay of proceedings on the ground that <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) would so restrict the conduct of his case that an unfair trial was unavoidable.
Section 409B provides that, in prescribed sexual offence proceedings (which would include the subject proceedings), evidence which discloses or implies that the complainant has or may have had sexual experience or a lack of sexual experience or has or may have taken part or not taken part in any sexual activity is inadmissible. There are specified exceptions, which do not apply in the present case.
His Honour made the order sought.
The Crown has appealed pursuant to [s 5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/).
Before his Honour, the respondent submitted that he would be seriously prejudiced by the operation of <case> in three areas of evidence, namely: 
What the respondent told the arresting police officers when first confronted by the allegations.
 
The circumstances in which the child complained to her mother and in particular the method in which the mother allegedly extracted the complaint from the child.

The mother's alleged boast before the charge was proffered that she would do to the respondent what she had done to the child's natural father if he ever left her, that is, prevent him from ever seeing the children of their marriage by raising allegations of sexual abuse, and the subsequent reaffirmation by the mother to implement that threat after the respondent had in fact left her.
His Honour found that the respondent would be prejudiced in his defence in these respects and to a substantial degree. He said: "It is my view that it cannot be suggested that the line of defence sought to be taken is an otherwise impermissible one but for <case>. To deny the accused the right to present it letter and verse, would in my view result in fundamental unfairness to the accused. It is not a case where the unfairness can be sought to be overcome by Judges' directions as was the case in Tolmie (unreported, Court of
Criminal Appeal, 7 December 1994). I cannot imagine any direction which could balance out the denial of fairness arising out of the confinement of the defence." 
His Honour concluded that because the trial would be seriously unfair, albeit conducted according to law, the indictment should be stayed.
There is a strong presumption in favour of the correctness of a discretionary decision. However, that presumption will be overcome where there has been an error which consists in acting upon a wrong principle; House versus The
King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] at 627.
The Crown's submissions in support of the appeal may be summarised as follows.
 (1.) It is an error of principle to stay proceedings on the ground that the conduct of the proceedings would be unfair because of the operation of a statute intended to restrict the conduct of the proceedings in some specified manner. The power to stay for abuse of process does not run where the source of perceived unfairness is a valid enactment of Parliament.
 (2.) Insofar as there is a common law right to a fair trial, the right has been modified by Parliament. Any such right has been curtailed in this instance by unequivocal legislative action.
 (3.) The accused's proper avenue of complaint lies in an appeal on the "unsafe and unsatisfactory" ground if convicted or on the ground of a miscarriage of justice.
 (4.) The exercise of discretion was so wrong as to involve necessarily that there was a failure to exercise the discretion properly.
 (5.) The trial judge misconceived the way the evidence would be used, with the result that he gave more weight to the accused's prejudice than he should have done.
The respondent's submissions may be summarised as follows: (1.) His Honour was correct to conclude that the operation of the section would unfairly exclude relevant evidence and result in an unfair trial.
 (2.) The legislation would operate unreasonably and unfairly in a number of ways preventing evidence on collateral matters which may be of importance. It would prevent an accused from showing a complainant was a complusive false accuser of sexual misconduct on the part of others. It would prevent the accused from advancing a case that the complainant has made a false complaint in order to divert attention from some other illegal conduct involving sexual activity, such as incest. It would prevent furtherance of a case that the complainant was subject to sexual fantasy arising from an earlier repressed sexual experience. These were cited as examples of "legitimate" forensic purpose proscribed by the section. The implication of this argument was that there was a special need for the Court to adopt a role in relation to this legislation in order to prevent injustice which would otherwise flow from its application.
 (3.) Unfairness is no less so because it arises from an act of Parliament.
 (4.) Basic rights in the conduct of a defence in a criminal trial are negated by the legislation, such as the right to be heard, the right to present evidence, the right to cross-examine and the right to present argument.
 (5.) In the present case three significant areas of evidence would be closed off to the accused.
I would resolve these arguments as follows.

I should first interpolate an observation here before coming to the real point of the appeal. The prior "sexual experience" or lack of it, or alternatively, the prior "sexual activity" in which the child had or may have "taken part or not taken part" consisted of earlier sexual abuse of the child or the absence of it. I should say that it is not self-evident to me that such prior sexual abuse or the lack of it is within the ambit of <case>. The phraseology may be apt to apply only to prior sexual experience or activity which was consensual. However, the ambit of the section as properly construed has not been argued, both sides accepting for the purposes of the appeal that the section would operate in the present case. Accordingly, I put that point to one side.
The power to make an order for the permanent stay of criminal proceedings should be exercised with great restraint. In Jago versus The District Court of New
South Wales <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 23] Brennan J explained why this is so. He said (at ): "(A)lthough our system of litigation adopts the adversary method in both the criminal and civil jurisdiction, interests other than those of the litigants are involved in litigation, especially criminal litigation. The community has an immediate interest in the administration of criminal justice to guarantee peace and order in society. The victims of crime, who are not ordinarily parties to prosecutions on indictment and whose interests have generally gone unacknowledged until recent times, must be able to see that justice is done if they are not to be driven to self-help to rectify their grievances. If a power to grant a permanent stay were to be exercised whenever a judge came to the conclusion that prejudice might or would be suffered by an accused because of delay in the prosecution, delay in law enforcement would defeat the enforcement of the law absolutely and prejudice resulting from delay would become a not unwelcome passport to immunity from prosecution. Refusal by a court to try a criminal case does not undo the anxiety and disability which the pendency of a criminal charge produces, but it leaves the accused with an irremovable cloud of suspicion over his head. And it is likely to engender a festering sense of injustice on the part of the community and the victim." 
Jago involved an application for a permanent stay of proceedings for delay, a ground on which there is precedent for the exercise of the power in an appropriate case. His Honour's observations are, however, pertinent to an application for a stay of criminal proceedings on any ground.
It is basic to our system of jurisprudence that the courts must apply the statutory law whether they agree with it or not. But the point is of such importance in the present case that I refer to some recent judicial comment on that principle.
In Kable versus Director of Public Prosecutions (unreported, C/A , 9.5.1995), the court upheld the validity of the [Community Protection
Act 1994](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1994270/) and upheld the order for detention which had been made under that statute. Clarke JA said: "The position in which the court finds itself is relatively straightforward, notwithstanding that the Act presents to me as as a prima facie and unjustified infringement of the appellant's basic human rights. If the Act is valid the
Court is bound to enforce it. The primary question is whether the law is valid."
Sheller JA said: "However, essential to democracy is the acceptance of the sovereignty of the elected Parliament subject only to constitutional restraints. Despite the earnest arguments to the contrary I am satisfied for the reasons given by Mahoney
JA that the Act was a valid exercise of the Parliament's law making power. Where the Parliament makes laws it is the duty of the courts to uphold and apply them."
The obligation of the courts to implement statutory law irrespective of a perception that the statute works an injustice was stated in connection with the very section in question in the present appeal by Allen J (with whom
Gleeson CJ and Meagher JA agreed) in M [(1993) 67 ACrimR 549], 558 in the following terms: "What was said in Parliament undoubtedly supports what, in my judgment, is manifest from the structure of the section itself. It enacts a blanket prohibition. To that prohibition the only exceptions are those specifically stated. There is not any judicial discretion, arising from considerations of justice as perceived by the court in any individual case, to proceed on the basis that some further exception can be read into the section by the implication.

In moving the second reading of the Bill in the Legislative
Council the Minister for Education referred to the specifically stated exceptions in <case> to the blanket prohibition. He continued: 'Consideration was given to the argument that there may be other unforeseen circumstances in which cross-examination on sexual history should legitimately be allowed as relevant to an issue in a case. According to this view, a general discretion should be vested in the courts to determine the relevance of it, and to allow cross-examination in appropriate cases. This approach has been adopted in some other jurisdictions - for example, in Victoria and South
Australia. Deliberately such an approach is not being taken in the legislation before the House. None of the many examples that have been considered are persuasive of the necessity for a general discretionary power to allow cross-examination on sexual history where the judge decides it is relevant' (Hansard, No 47, p 5456).
 
What there was said by the Minister supports what is clear from the structure of the section. The legislature has endeavoured to foresee all the exceptions which justice requires and to provide specifically for them.
It has excluded all others. It has taken the risk that experience will throw up circumstances, which it has failed to foresee and expressly provide for, in which denial of evidence disclosing or implying that the complainant has or may have had sexual experience or lack of sexual experience, or has or may have taken part or not taken part in any sexual activity, results in injustice to an accused at his trial. The wisdom of so
Draconic a restriction upon judicial discretion and of so bold an assumption of perfect prescience may be questioned. The courts must apply, however, the law as enacted. If the present case has thrown up an instance of injustice or of possible injustice indicating the desirability of a further exception to the blanket prohibition the exception must be one enacted by
Parliament. It is not for the courts to usurp its role."
A similar observation was made in relation to <case> in R versus Bernthaler (unreported, CCA , 17.12.93). Kirby P dissented in relation to the result but on a ground not presently relevant. Badgery-Parker J (with whom Ireland J agreed) said: "It may be, as his Honour suggested, that cases such as that (and perhaps the present one) are instances of injustice or possible injustice which indicate the desirability of a further exception to the blanket prohibition made by the section; it may be that the appropriate course would be to incorporate into the section a residual discretion allowing a trial judge to determine whether despite the general principle of exclusion, evidence or cross-examination of the proscribed kind should be admitted in a particular case.
That, however, is a matter for the Parliament and not for the court."
It is true that legal proceedings may be stayed for unfairness.
But there is no legal doctrine that proceedings should be stayed because of a perception of unfairness simpliciter. The law is more refined that that.
In Gill versus Walton [(1991) 25 NSWLR 190] (in which proceedings were stayed for delay) Mahoney JA said at 211: "It is settled that, if a party to a proceeding cannot or will not have a fair trial of the matters involved, the supervisory jurisdiction of this Court may be invoked. I do not mean by this that this power may be exercised whenever there will be less than perfect justice. This power is exercisable when the trial of the issue will depart so far from perfect justice that the result is unacceptable. The mere fact that a defendant in a proceeding, criminal or civil, suffers from disadvantages which, in a perfect system operating perfectly, he would not suffer, is not sufficient to warrant intervention by this Court."
In Ridgeway versus R <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 41], Gaudron J gave the following account of the circumstances in which proceedings will be stayed for abuse of process, showing that the circumstances are not at large (at 83): "The powers to prevent an abuse of process have traditionally been seen as including a power to stay proceedings instituted for an improper purpose, as well as proceedings that are 'frivolous, vexatious or oppressive'. This notwithstanding, there is no very precise notion of what is vexatious or oppressive or what otherwise constitutes an abuse of process.
Indeed, the courts have resisted, and even warned against laying down hard and fast definitions in 'defined and closed categories' because notions of justice and injustice, as well as other considerations that bear on public confidence in the administration of justice, must reflect contemporary values and, as well, take account of the circumstances of the case. That is not to say that the concept of 'abuse of process' is at large or, indeed, without meaning. As already indicated, it extends to proceedings that are instituted for an improper purpose and it is clear that it extends to proceedings that are 'seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging' or 'productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment'".
The appellant has referred to Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 292] where there are statements of principle in wide terms concerning the power of the courts to stay proceedings. Deane J (at 327) cited with approval what was said by Gibbs ACJ and Mason J (with the concurrence of Aicken J) in Barton v
The Queen [(1980) 147 CLR 74], 96: "There is ample authority for the proposition that the courts possess all the necessary powers to prevent an abuse of process and to ensure a fair trial. The exercise of this power extends in an appropriate case to the grant of a stay of proceedings." and later (at 103): "(T)he filing of an ex officio indictment by the Attorney-General is not subject to judicial review but ... the courts do have a power to postpone or stay the trial on such an indictment where necessary to ensure that the accused receives a fair trial."
A passage from Murphy J's judgment in the same case (at 107) is also cited with approval by Deane J: "Every court hearing criminal proceedings has power to control those proceedings in order to avoid injustice; where necessary it may stay proceedings." 
Similar passages were cited by Deane J from McInnes versus The Queen <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR ]
Gaudron J in the same case made a similar statement of principle in wide terms. She introduced her judgment in the following way (at 362): "It is fundamental to our system of criminal justice that a person should not be convicted of an offence save after a fair trial according to law. The expression 'fair trial according to law' is not a tautology. In most cases a trial is fair if conducted according to law, and unfair if not. If our legal processes were perfect that would be so in every case.
But the law recognizes that sometimes, despite the best efforts of all concerned, a trial may be unfair even though conducted strictly in accordance with the law. Thus, the overriding qualification and universal criterion of fairness]" 
What her Honour meant by an unfair trial albeit conducted according to law is apparent from further observations on the next page (363). There, her
Honour referred to the discretion of the trial judge to exclude evidence that would be more prejudicial to the accused than of probative value. She also referred to special directions to allow use of an interpreter or to counteract pre-trial publicity, for change of venue, and for adjournment. Her Honour then said (363): "The examples are not exhaustive. They are, however, sufficient to show that the requirement of fairness is, and, in various different contexts, has been recognized as, independent from and additional to the requirement that a trial be conducted in accordance with law."
That there can be an unfair trial according to law meant that there can be unfairness notwithstanding compliance with the substantive law relating to the charge (in the case of criminal proceedings) or the remedy sought (in the case of a civil claim) and notwithstanding compliance with the adjectival law relating to court proceedure and the admission and rejection of evidence. In
Dietrich it was the absence of legal representation for an accused person facing a serious criminal charge that was considered to be unfair. If the trial had been conducted in strict compliance with the substantive criminal law and with the adjectival law relating to court proceedure and the admission and rejection of evidence, it would nonetheless have been unfair. It was in this sense that there could be an unfair trial according to law. Her
Honour is not to be read as saying that a trial can be considered unfair because of compliance with the law.
In receiving the general statements of principle made in a case such as
Dietrich it is necessary to bear in mind the context in which those statements were made. In Quinn versus Leathem <case>; [(1901) AC 495], the Earl of Halsbury said (at ): "(T)here are two observations of a general character which I wish to make, and one is to repeat what I have very often said before, that every judgment must be read as applicable to the particular facts proved, or assumed to be proved, since the generality of the expressions which may be found there are not intended to be expositions of the whole law, but governed and qualified by the particular facts of the case in which such expressions are to be found.
The other is that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides. I entirely deny that it can be quoted for a proposition that may seem to follow logically from it. Such a mode of reasoning assumes that the law is necessarily a logical code, whereas every lawyer must acknowledge that the law is not always logical at all."
These important principles governing the use of legal authorities have been followed in Australia on numerous occasions; for recent examples, see
Shepherd versus The Queen <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573] at 343; Australian Broadcasting Corporation versus Waterhouse [(1991) 25
NSWLR 519] at .
Dietrich involved unfairness arising from a lack of legal representation.
There is no reason to suppose that their
Honours had in mind the effect on the conduct of a trial of a statute restricting the evidence which could be given and that they intended their statements of general principle to apply to such a case. The notion that a trial judge should refuse to exercise his jurisdiction because of a perceived unfairness arising from the operation of statutory law on the conduct of the trial is so remote from the facts of
Dietrich that what was said in general terms in that case cannot be read as so applicable.
We have also been referred to the decision of this Court in R versus Morgan [(1993) 30 NSWLR 543.] Evidence was excluded at the trial because the trial judge thought <case> operated to prohibit it. The main judgment was given by
Mahoney JA, with whom Gleeson CJ and Sully J agreed. The ratio decidendi of the decision was that, in the events that had occurred, s 409B did not apply to the evidence which had been excluded. Accordingly, the conviction was set aside and a new trial was ordered.
As an alternative ground of appeal, it was argued that if <case> operated to exclude the evidence, the conviction should be quashed as being unsafe and unsatisfactory. The Courts observations on the alternative ground of appeal were accordingly obiter dicta.
This Court would not, however, lightly adopt a different approach were the statements in Morgan germane to the question before us.
But it does not seem to me that they are. The Court in Morgan appears to have been of the opinion that if a sufficient degree of unacceptable prejudice arose from the operation of <case>, a Court of Criminal
Appeal could and should set aside the conviction which had been recorded as unsafe and unsatisfactory. Although Dietrich was mentioned by Mahoney JA in this context, as was the power of the courts to stay proceedings for unfairness, the question of a stay of proceedings did not arise in Morgan. Nor did his Honour say that if the point had been taken in Morgan before the trial began there ought to have been a stay. The decision does not stand as authority for the grant of a stay in reliance upon a perceived injustice arising from the operation of <case>.
The question of principle which arises in the present case is whether the jurisdiction to stay an indictment extends to include a perception of unfairness arising from the operation, in accordance with its terms, of a validly enacted statute of the Parliament. In my view, it does not. To hold otherwise would, in effect, be to elevate the Court's judgment above that of the Parliament. That would particularly be so in the present case because the statutory provision embodies the judgment of the Parliament on the very matter for which a claim is made for the exercise of judicial power. The Parliament could have given the courts a general discretion to allow evidence if, in the opinion of the Court and in the circumstances of the particular case, it would be unfair not to do so. The Parliament chose not to do that. The second reading speech, quoted in M (supra) at 558, shows that this was a considered decision.
It would be the height of irony if a law enacted to facilitate the bringing of charges for sexual offences were to provide grounds upon which to stay such proceedings. I do not think it does.
We have also been referred to a decision by Wood J in R versus Morris (18
October 1990, unreported). The charge was one of sexual assault. His Honour discharged the jury during the course of the trial. It was known to his Honour and to counsel, but not to the jury, that the complainant had been examined after the alleged assault and it was found that her hymen was ruptured. It was also known that the complainant had on a previous occasion when six years of age had sexual intercourse with a person other than the accused, which could account for the rupture to the hymen. It was considered that evidence of the prior act of sexual intercourse could not be given because of <case>. To have permitted evidence to be given of the ruptured hymen but not of the earlier act of intercourse would have been unfairly prejudicial to the accused.
Accordingly, a decision was taken not to call the doctor.
In the course of the trial the jury asked two questions. The first was whether the complainant had been examined by a doctor when she reported the assault. The second arose from evidence by the complainant that this was not the first time that she had seen an erection. The jury asked when she had first seen one.
Wood J took the view that the jury's questions could not be answered by adducing further evidence without infringing <case> or causing unfair prejudice to the accused or both. His Honour further took the view that there was no direction that he could give the jury that would enable the accused to have a fair trial on the evidence as it stood in view of the questions which had arisen in the jury's mind. His Honour therefore discharged the jury.
It may be noted that in his Honour's view the questions asked by the jury were sensible and obvious. It would seem therefore to have been an inevitable consequence of his Honour's approach that, in the circumstances of the case, there could never be a satisfactory trial because of the operation of <case>.
If this line of reasoning be correct, it is difficult to see how a court could decline to grant a permanent stay of such proceedings if an application were made. The decision therefore has a bearing on the question we have to decide.
I have to say that I respectfully disagree with his Honour's approach. A court is bound to apply the law, including the statutory law relating to procedure and evidence. A court cannot, in my view, decline to exercise its jurisdiction on the ground that, in its opinion, the trial would be unjust because of the operation of a statutory law relating to the way the trial is to be conducted. The Parliament has the prerogative to say how a trial is to be conducted. The courts cannot over-ride that prerogative by refusing to exercise their jurisdiction.
It seems to me that Wood J was obliged to inform the jury that the evidence did not provide an answer to either of their questions and that he could not provide any other answer. If the result was, in his view, an unfair trial, he was powerless to prevent it.
The situation is hardly novel. The operation of common law principles or statutory rules relating to the admissibility or inadmissibility of secondary evidence or of hearsay evidence, for example, may lead, in the perception of the trial Judge, to an unjust and an unfair trial, but he may be powerless to do anything about it.
For these reasons, I would hold that the jurisdiction of the courts to stay an indictment for unfairness does not extend to a perception by the Court of unfairness arising from the operation of a valid statutory provision prohibiting certain kinds of evidence from being given, such as <case>.
The order below should therefore be set aside.
It is unnecessary in these circumstances to examine whether the respondent will truly be prejudiced at his trial in the ways alleged on his behalf or to the extent alleged.
I propose the following orders: 
Appeal allowed.

Order that the order for a stay of the indictment be vacated.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/117.html  
