

Director of Public Prosecutions versus Arthur Stanley Smith Attorney General for the State of New South Wales versus Arthur Stanley Smith and Ors [1996] NSWSC (2 May 1996) 
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS versus Arthur Stanley SMITH 
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ORS versus Arthur Stanley
SMITH & ORS 
CCA 60109/96 CA 40194/96 CL 1120/96 
Thursday 2 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, CLARKE JA, SHELLER JA 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: We have before us two sets of appellate proceedings, one in the
Court of Criminal Appeal and one in the Court of Appeal. Although the parties to the proceedings are not identical, with the consent of all parties we have heard both sets of proceedings together. In consequence, all who wished to be heard have been heard, regardless of whether they were directly involved in both sets of proceedings.

The moving party in both cases is the Attorney General for the State of New
South Wales. He is supported by the Director of Public Prosecutions, and by the two persons who have been referred to by the pseudonyms Mr Harris and Mr
Bowman. He is opposed by three media organisations, who desire to be free to publish the real names of Mr Harris and Mr Bowman.

The appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal is brought by the Attorney General, as of right, under [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). It is an appeal against a decision of Magistrate O'Shane in the Central Local Court on 11 March 1996.

Magistrate O'Shane is currently hearing lengthy committal proceedings arising out of charges against Arthur Stanley Smith. The defendant Smith, who is already serving a life sentence for murder, has been charged with a number of other offences of murder.

One of the witnesses for the prosecution is a man who is giving evidence under the pseudonym Mr Green. (There does not appear to be any dispute about either the power of the learned magistrate to permit that course, or about the appropriateness of that course in his case). Mr Green, we were informed, claims to have witnessed one of the murders.

During the cross-examination of Mr Green, on 7 March 1996, counsel for Smith asked him a series of questions about the circumstances in which he came to give information to the police about the alleged murder. In particular, he was asked how he managed to contact the police officer who was in charge of the investigation of Smith. He said that "a party" got in touch with him and gave him the name of a certain prisoner. At the suggestion of that party he visited the prisoner. Although it is not entirely clear from his evidence who gave the assurances, either the "party", or the prisoner, or both of them, reassured him concerning possible danger, and encouraged him to go to a certain police officer with his information. Counsel for Smith, without objection, asked Mr
Green to name the two persons involved. He named them both. The "party" is the person now referred to as Mr Harris, and the prisoner is the person now referred to as Mr Bowman.

The true names of Harris and Bowman were stated, in open court, in the presence of Smith, some relatives or friends of Smith, some journalists, and a few other members of the public. Harris and Bowman, who had no warning that this was going to happen, promptly applied, by counsel, to the learned magistrate for an order that their true identities should be concealed from the public by the use of pseudonyms, and for an order restraining the publication of the evidence of Mr Green which identified them.

Her Worship made interim suppression orders, designed to hold the situation until she could hear argument on the application and make a decision. She heard argument on the following day, 8 March 1996, and gave her decision on 11
March 1996. Her decision, which is the subject of the [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) appeal, was to refuse the application.

The Attorney General, in addition to lodging an appeal with the Court of
Criminal Appeal, on 11 March 1996 commenced urgent proceedings in the Common
Law Division of the Supreme Court, which came before Hulme J. Those proceedings invoked the Supreme Court's supervisory jurisdiction, and sought intervention in aid of the public interest immunity claimed to have been violated by the magistrate's decision. Hulme J made interim orders which, once again, were aimed at preserving the status quo established by the magistrate's interim orders, until he could hear argument and give a decision. He then, over a period of days, heard evidence and argument from the Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions, Messrs Harris and Bowman, and the three media organisations mentioned earlier. (The media organisations had not been represented before the magistrate, and the arguments they advanced in support of her decision ranged a good deal wider than the matters she considered).

Hulme J ultimately dismissed the proceedings before him. His principal reason for doing so was that, by reason of [s17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s17.html) of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), and the Third
Schedule to the Act, he had no jurisdiction to intervene. The matter, he considered, was, in substance, an appeal against an interlocutory judgment or order of a magistrate in committal proceedings, and the proper and exclusive avenue of redress was to appeal was to the Court of Criminal Appeal under [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/).

In addition, however, his Honour expressed some views on the merits of the case. His Honour's decision gave rise to appeals, and cross-appeals, to the
Court of Appeal, and these constitute the second set of proceedings before us.

The claim for public interest immunity 
The basis of the application which was made to Magistrate O'Shane, and which was pursued before Hulme J and in this court by the Attorney General, was a claim that information as to the true identities of Harris and Bowman, and as to at least part of their conduct, was covered by public interest immunity, they being, relevantly, police informers.

In support of that claim there were filed, and received in evidence before the learned magistrate, two confidential affidavits by Mr Harris, a confidential affidavit by a Senior Assistant Commissioner of Police, Assistant Commissioner
Bruce Gibson, and a formal affidavit by Assistant Commissioner Gibson claiming "public interest immunity privilege" in relation to the identity of the two persons and requesting that they be referred to by pseudonyms. In his confidential affidavit Assistant Commissioner Gibson gave brief evidence, in a general way, about conduct of Harris and Bowman and gave reasons in support of the claim made in his formal affidavit. In his two confidential affidavits
Harris gave more detailed evidence and advanced reasons in support of the claims for immunity.

The Attorney General has strongly challenged the way in which the learned magistrate, in her confidential reasons for her decision, dealt, or failed to deal, with this material. In brief, the Attorney General submitted that her
Worship appeared to have substantially ignored it, and to have based her characterisation of the activities of Harris and Bowman largely, and perhaps solely, on the brief account given by Mr Green before his evidence was interrupted by the application in question. Since it is impossible to deal with the arguments on this aspect of the case openly without subverting the immunity which is the basis of the entire proceedings, we shall give our reasons on this point in a Confidential Appendix to this judgment, publication of which is prohibited in the manner and to the extent there stated. For the reasons given in that Confidential Appendix we accept the submissions of the
Attorney General on this point.

The Attorney General has also submitted that the learned magistrate erred in her approach to the principles she was to apply in dealing with the claim for immunity before her. On the other hand, senior counsel for the media organisations submits that Magistrate O'Shane took an approach in terms of principle which was unduly favourable to the claim for immunity. He has submitted that she had no power to make the orders sought from her. These competing contentions will be examined below.

As was noted earlier, Magistrate O'Shane, having considered the claim for public interest immunity, decided to reject it. In the [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) appeal the Attorney General contends that this involved error calling for appellate intervention, and asks the Court of Criminal Appeal to make the orders which it is said should have been made at first instance.

The [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) appeal 
The decision of Magistrate O'Shane to refuse the application of Messrs
Harris and Bowman concerning the use of pseudonyms and the suppression of part of the evidence of Mr Green was an interlocutory judgment or order within the meaning of [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) (cf
Attorney General for NSW versus Stuart [(1994) 34 NSWLR 667]). Messrs
Harris and Bowman were not parties to the committal proceedings, but the
Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions both have a right of appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal; [(s5F(2)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) 
The claim to public interest immunity, which was asserted before the learned magistrate, and which is sought to be vindicated in this appeal, is based upon the following principles, which are established by authority: The fact that one person provides information to another in confidence does not of itself mean that disclosure of such information may not be compelled in legal proceedings. The private interest in confidentiality yields to the public interest in the due administration of justice. However, in certain circumstances the law recognises that a more important public interest is served by protecting information, or the identity of an informant, from disclosure in court. One such circumstance is involved in the practice, which has long since hardened into a rule of law, that the identity of police informers will be protected from disclosure (D versus National Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children <case>; [[1978] AC ] at ).
 The rationale of this form of public interest immunity is that, if it were not extended, sources of information would dry up and the prevention and detection of crime would be hindered.
 There is powerful authority for the proposition that, at common law, when a claim for immunity is made in respect of the identity of a police informer, the court before whom the claim is made does not undertake for itself, afresh, a balancing exercise, weighing one interest against another. The balance has already been struck; it falls on the side of non-disclosure except where, at a criminal trial, disclosure could help show that the accused is not guilty. (D v National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, above, at 218);
Cain versus Glass (No 2) [(1985) 3 NSWLR 230] at -247). Contrary views, in support of a conclusion that a balancing exercise is still required, have been expressed (eg R versus Meissner [(1994) 76
ACrimR 81]). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s130.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) (which, although the learned magistrate was not referred to it, applies to the committal proceedings against Smith) appears now to require a weighing of competing interests. Even so, at the very least, the Attorney General is entitled to rely upon the high importance which this aspect of the law of public interest immunity attaches to the protection of the identities of police informers, and the generally accepted reason for that importance.
 The use of pseudonyms, supported, where appropriate, by such rulings and directions as may be necessary to give practical effect to the immunity, is a common method of protecting the public interest here involved. (Attorney
General versus Leveller Magazine Ltd [[1979] AC 440]; for an example of the use of pseudonyms in a case where the public interest required non- disclosure of identity, see John Fairfax Publications versus Doe [(1994) 37 NSWLR ]
per Kirby P at 112-113).
 Magistrates have the power to direct that pseudonyms be used in such a case (John Fairfax Group versus Local Court of NSW [(1991) 26 NSWLR 131]). (As was noted earlier, the name Mr Green, in the present case, is itself a pseudonym). Where proceedings are not held in camera, a non-publication order may be made to protect an informer (Attorney General or NSW versus Mayas Pty Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR 342] at 343; John Fairfax & Sons versus Police Tribunal [(1986) 5
NSWLR 465] at 472).

Before turning to the application of these principles to the present case, and the learned magistrate's reasoning upon them, it is convenient to deal with an argument, raised by the media organisations, which was not considered in the
Local Court. The argument, in short, was that, in the present case, the names of Harris and Bowman had been given, without objection, in public evidence, they had been heard by Smith and others, including journalists, and the cat was out of the bag. In that situation, it was argued, her Worship was powerless to intervene.

The foundation for the argument is an observation made by McHugh JA, to the effect that, where a court allows evidence to be given in open court then, in the absence of statutory authority, it has no power to prevent the publication of that evidence (Attorney General for NSW versus Mayas Pty Ltd (1988) 14 NSWLR at ). The context of that observation is to be noted. His Honour, in using the term "allows", was referring to a decision to hear evidence in open court rather than in camera, notwithstanding a statutory power to close the court.
His point was that, if a decision is made not to exercise the statutory power to close the court, a magistrate cannot thereafter (in the absence of statutory authority) restrict publication of the evidence which has been given in open court.

Here, however, the magistrate was not confronted with an application to suppress evidence which had been given in open court as a result of a decision on her part not to close the court.

If one accepts, as a matter of principle, that the magistrate had the power, in advance, to do in relation to Messrs Harris and Bowman, what she had already done in the case of Mr Green, and conceal their identities by permitting or directing the use of pseudonyms, then it cannot be the case that she was deprived of that power simply because, without any conscious decision on her part, their names were mentioned in open court. If it were otherwise, the operation of the public interest immunity could be frustrated by an accident, or by the malice of a witness who blurted out the name of an informer in open court before he or she could be stopped.

Magistrate O'Shane was correct to deal with the application before her upon the assumption that, if the case were otherwise a proper one for the exercise of the power that was invoked, she had not lost that power simply because Mr
Green named Harris and Bowman before they had an opportunity to apply to have their identities concealed.

However, although this is not a matter which influenced her Worship in her decision, there is a potential factual significance in the circumstance that the identity of Harris and Bowman has been made known to Smith and some of his associates. In some cases the making of an order aimed at suppressing the identity of a police informer could not be justified as being necessary for the administration of justice for the reason that the information in question was already in the public domain. That, however, is not the present case. It is one thing to say that some people, including people who might not be minded to be scrupulous in their obedience to court orders, are aware of information.
It is another thing to say that it is in the public domain. As senior counsel for the Attorney General, and for Harris and Bowman, pointed out, rumours will always be current, in criminal and other circles, but newspaper articles publishing sworn testimony in court have a quite different impact.

We would add that if, at a future time, which could arrive before the conclusion of the committal proceedings, the identities of Harris and Bowman and their roles as police informers were to become public knowledge, or were to become known to a sufficiently wide section of the community, then it could be appropriate to reconsider and perhaps withdraw, any suppression orders that were made. (This is what ultimately occurred in John Fairfax Publications v
Doe).

We have referred earlier to the factual basis of the learned magistrate's decision to refuse the application, which we have found to involve material error.

The Attorney General also argued that her Worship misapprehended the applicable legal principles. In particular, he pointed out that she expressed the view that her task was to consider two conflicting aspects of the public interest and to decide which predominated in the instant case and, further, that the applicants for the order sought carried the onus of satisfying her that the claim for immunity was made out. She ultimately disposed of the matter on the basis that Harris and Bowman were not relevantly police informers, but, it was argued, she also appeared to consider that she was free to choose for herself, in the particular case, between the desirability of open justice, on the one hand, and the need to protect sources of police information, on the other hand.

Having regard to her refusal (which we respectfully regard as erroneous) to accept that the two persons in question were police informers, it is far from clear that these views of the Magistrate were determinative of her decision.
(That, no doubt, is why Hulme J said that her errors were errors within jurisdiction). However, she was incorrect to assign an onus to those seeking to uphold the immunity, and she failed to take account of the substantial weight the law on this subject has given, and gives, to the public interest on keeping confidential police sources of information.

We consider that the learned magistrate has been shown to have been in error.

It does not necessarily follow, however, that the appeal should be allowed. We have to consider for ourselves whether to make orders of the kind sought by the Attorney General. In that connection, the argument before us has proceeded upon the basis that the additional evidence tendered before Hulme J is also before us, and that the arguments advanced by the media organisations are to be taken into account.

For the reasons given above, we reject the submission that the learned magistrate had no power to make the orders sought.

It is argued, however, that, even assuming such power, this is a case in which the making of the orders sought is not necessary for the administration of justice. The argument was also put, somewhat differently, in terms of [s130](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s130.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), by saying that in the particular circumstances of the present case, the public interest in admitting information into evidence is not outweighed by the public interest in preserving informer secrecy.

These arguments are dealt with in the Confidential Appendix.

We have concluded that, in the circumstances that existed before the learned magistrate at the time of the application to her, and in the present circumstances as revealed by the evidence before this court, the case is one which has been shown to involve the public interest immunity claimed by the
Attorney General, the public interest in preserving confidentiality in relation to police informers outweighs any countervailing public interest, and the making of the orders sought by the Attorney General is necessary for the administration of justice.

The Appeal from Hulme J 
Hulme J had before him applications for relief, and cross-applications, and there are appeals, and cross-appeals, from his decisions, including interim orders made by him to preserve the status quo during argument pending the delivery of his judgment, and pending the hearing of any appeal.

These proceedings were listed before us as a matter of urgency and, like Hulme
J, we had to endeavour to fit them in between previously listed cases. We heard full argument on the s5F appeal first, because that appeared to be the most direct way of getting to the merits, and because of the part-heard committal proceedings.

We are not satisfied that we have heard full argument on all the aspects of the appeal from Hulme J.

Accordingly, we are proceeding to give judgment in the s5F appeal. However, if, in the light of our decisions on the s5F appeal, the parties still require our judgment on the appeals and cross-appeals from Hulme J, then it will be necessary for those matters to be listed for further argument on a date when the court is able to hear such argument having regard to the exigencies of its list.

Orders in the s5F appeal Appeal allowed; decision of Magistrate O'Shane of 11 March 1996 set aside.
 Order that there be no publication of the real names of, or of material tending to identify, the persons known as Mr Black and Mr White (and later as
Mr Bowman and Mr Harris) in the proceedings presently before her Worship
Magistrate Ms P O'Shane in the Central Local Court between the Director of
Public Prosecutions and Arthur Stanley Smith in connection with the evidence given by Mr Green in those proceedings.
 Order that those persons be referred to in connection with evidence of Mr
Green by pseudonyms.
 Order that there be no publication of the real names of, or of material tending to identify, the persons known as Mr Black and Mr White (and later known as Mr Bowman and Mr Harris) in connection with the proceedings in the court, and the Court of Appeal, and in the proceedings before Mr Justice Hulme relating to the matter referred to in 2 above.
 Order that the confidential affidavits tendered in the said proceedings before Magistrate O'Shane and Mr Justice Hulme remain confidential until further order of this court.
 
EVIDENCE - PUBLIC INTEREST IMMUNITY - USE OF PSEUDONYMS 
In the course of committal proceedings a witness, in cross-examination, identified two named persons in connection with certain events. An application was made on behalf of those persons that they be referred to by pseudonyms.
The application was refused. The Attorney General appealed under [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), claiming public interest immunity on the basis that the persons were police informers -
HELD - The claim for immunity had been made out. Discussion of principles relating to such immunity.

Attorney General for NSW versus Stuart [(1994) 34 NSWLR 667], D v
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children <case>; [[1978] AC ], Cain v
Glass (No 2) [(1985) 3 NSWLR 230], Attorney
General versus Leveller Magazine Ltd [[1979] AC 440], John Fairfax
Group versus Local Court of NSW [(1991) 26 NSWLR 131] applied.

O R D E R S Appeal allowed; decision of Magistrate O'Shane of 11 March 1996 set aside.
 Order that there be no publication of the real names of, or of material tending to identify, the persons known as Mr Black and Mr White (and later as
Mr Bowman and Mr Harris) in the proceedings presently before her Worship
Magistrate Ms P O'Shane in the Central Local Court between the Director of
Public Prosecutions and Arthur Stanley Smith in connection with the evidence given by Mr Green in those proceedings.
 Order that those persons be referred to in connection with evidence of Mr
Green by pseudonyms.
 Order that there be no publication of the real names of, or of material tending to identify, the persons known as Mr Black and Mr White (and later known as Mr Bowman and Mr Harris) in connection with the proceedings in the court, and the Court of Appeal, and in the proceedings before Mr Justice Hulme relating to the matter referred to in 2 above.
 Order that the confidential affidavits tendered in the said proceedings before Magistrate O'Shane and Mr Justice Hulme remain confidential until further order of this court.
 * * * 
