

Sutton versus BE Australia WD Pty Ltd (No 3) [2017] NSWSC 689 (1 June 2017) 
Last Updated: 1 June 2017 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
The plaintiff shall bring in short minutes of order of the declarations which the Court proposes to make in accordance with this judgment within 7 days.
Further, the plaintiff shall file further submissions as to the settlement reached with the second defendant and interest in accordance with this judgment within 28 days of the publication of judgment. Leave is granted to the file further evidence by affidavit bearing upon those issues within the same timeframe.  
Catchwords: 
UNFAIR CONTRACT - ex parte proceedings - claim for declaratory relief and monetary payments pursuant to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html) and (5) of the [Industrial Relations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/) - whether the contract or arrangement was unfair, harsh or unconscionable or against the public interest - transitional provisions - regard to record of Industrial
Court save for evidence objected to - arrangements constituted contract for purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html) - no jurisdictional barrier under [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s108a.html) the [Industrial Relations Commission Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ircr2009410/) - grounds concern unfairness regarding termination, bullying and disparagement - no protection from arbitrary and immediate termination - termination without notice - contract unfair in operation - termination likely to and did cause the plaintiff to suffer hurt, distress and humiliation - no protection from bullying and harassment - no provision for the timely resolution of any complaint or grievance - insufficient evidence to support disparagement ground - contract was unfair and harsh for the purposes of [s (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ircr2009410/s105.html) - declaratory relief granted - monetary orders - relevant common law principle regarding notice - additional factors under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ircr2009410/s106.html) - compensation for distress, stress, damage to reputation and humiliation - mitigation - settlement second defendant - avoiding risk of double counting - interest, costs - directions for further submissions and evidence  
JUDGMENT
By a second further amended summons Mary Sutton ("the plaintiff") sought declaratory relief and monetary payments, pursuant to [s 106(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html) and (5) of the [Industrial Relations Act 1996](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/) (hereafter referred to as "the Act"), against BE Australia WD Pty Ltd ("the first defendant") and Phillip James Davidson ("the second defendant") regarding work performed by the plaintiff for the first defendant. The proceedings against the second defendant were dismissed upon the basis of consent orders, without admission of liability, for the payment of a sum of $350,000 inclusive of costs.
The balance of the matter concerning the first defendant proceeded before the Court, ex parte.

Relief Sought
The plaintiff sought the following relief: * (1) An order declaring void (except for monies already paid) the arrangement between the plaintiff and the first defendant whereby [the plaintiff] performed work in the taxation consulting industry for [the first defendant] ("the Contract").
* (2) An order declaring that the contract or arrangement was unfair, harsh or unconscionable or against the public interest.
* (3) An order that the contract be varied from its commencement in the terms set out in Schedule A.
* (4) An order that [the first defendant] pay [the plaintiff] such sum of money in connection with the contract or arrangement as the Court considers just in the circumstances of the case.
* (5) An order that [the first defendant] pay [the plaintiff's] interest on the sums of money ordered to be paid by the Court, from 7 October 2005 being the date of the termination of the Contract at the rates set by the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/).
* (6) An order that [the first defendant] pay the costs of the proceedings.
Schedule A to the second further amended summons was in the following terms: * (1) The First Respondent and Second Respondent will not conduct themselves in a manner which: * (a) Is contrary to the legitimate expectations and understandings of the Applicant particularly in circumstances where any such actions of the First and Second Respondent have the potential to, or do in actual fact, damage or detrimentally impact on the terms and conditions whereby the Applicant performed work for the First Respondent; * (b) Is contrary to the representations made to the Applicant; * (c) is likely to, or does in fact, cause the Applicant to suffer distress and/or anxiety, humiliation and/or damage to her good name and character.
* (2) The First Respondent shall not terminate the Contract without a proper reason and without providing the Applicant procedural fairness, including informing the Applicant of the precise nature of the allegations made against her and providing her an opportunity to answer those allegations and to be heard before a decision is made in relation to the termination of the Contract.
* (3) The First Respondent will take all reasonable steps to prevent any of its employees or agents from bullying and or harassing the Applicant.
* (4) The First Respondent may only terminate the arrangement by giving the Applicant 15 months' notice in writing or payment in lieu thereof.
* (5) For the purpose of (4), above, payment in lieu of notice shall be calculated by reference to the payments made to the Applicant whilst performing work for the First Respondent and based on her average hours per week.
* (6) The exercise of any discretion permitted under the Contract shall be exercised by the First Respondent towards the Applicant in a manner that is at all times fair, just and conscionable, and in this regard the Respondent will afford to the Applicant natural justice and procedural fairness.
* (7) The First Respondent shall investigate any allegations made by the Applicant concerning the conduct of the Respondents.
* (8) The First Respondent will inform the Applicant of its findings of any complaint made by the Applicant concerning the conduct of the Respondents.
* (9) The Respondents following the termination of the Contract shall not alone or with others disparage the Applicant and/or undermine her prospects of future employment and/or employment.

The Parties (during the course of the proceedings)
The first defendant was a wholly owned subsidiary of BearingPoint Inc, formerly known as KPMG Consulting Inc (hereafter referred to as "the first defendant's parent company"). The first defendant's parent company was incorporated as a business under the law of the State of Delaware in the United States of America ("USA") in 1999 and was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. It was based in McLean, Virginia.
In 2001, the first defendant's parent company purchased the first defendant from KPMG in Australia.
On 9 September 2009, the first defendant underwent a formal name change from "BearingPoint Australia Pty Ltd" to "BE Australia WD Pty Ltd". The company went into external administration from 1 October 2009 until 7 December 2014, thereafter it ceased to be in any form of administration. (ASIC records show the filing of a notice of termination of a deed of company administration on 8 December 2014). It might be noted that in proceeding before the NSW Court of Appeal in 2011, the plaintiff was found not be a creditor for the purposes of [Pt 5.3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p5.3a) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth): BE Australia WD Pty Ltd (subject to a Deed of Company Arrangement) versus Sutton [(2011) 82 NSWLR 336]
The second defendant was at all material times an Associate Director of the first defendant. He was the person whom: * (1) managed and controlled the affairs of the first defendant; * (2) was concerned with setting the terms of the plaintiff's engagement; and * (3) controlled the performance of the plaintiff's engagement.
The plaintiff is a taxation specialist, has a bachelor of business degree and is a fellow of the Taxation Institute of Australia. The plaintiff has worked as a professional tax specialist for in excess of the last 25 years in the Australian Taxation Office, light professional services chartered accounting firms as well as in in-house taxation executive roles in large multinational corporations.
The plaintiff was an employee of Roland Jackson Group Pty Ltd ("RJ Group") (a family company) from 15 October 2003. The sole director and sole shareholder of RJ Group was the plaintiff's partner. It was conceded that the plaintiff was not an employee of the first defendant but performed work for the first defendant via arrangements reached between RJ Group, Link and the first defendant.
The plaintiff was primarily responsible for Australian and New Zealand tax issues for the first defendant (and associated companies) and reported to the second defendant. The service provided by the plaintiff to the first defendant may be briefly summarised as follows: * (1) She provided specialist taxation services of the same kind as an employee of the first defendant at the Associate Director level. This included generating high-level taxation strategies for the potential re-capitalisation or closure of the first defendant.
* (2) She was authorised by the first defendant to enter into and execute documents on behalf of the first defendant, for example, with the Australian Taxation Office, Price Waterhouse Coopers ("PWC") and Ernst & Young ("EY").
* (3) She reported to Mr Corbett, Chief Financial Officer of the first defendant's parent company.

Course of the Proceedings
The plaintiff commenced proceedings by the filing of a summons for relief on 1 November 2005. The proceedings were brought against the first defendant by reference to the name of the company prior to the aforementioned name change.
The first defendant filed a reply to the summons on 23 February 2006 and the plaintiff responded to the same on 7 July 2006.
An amended summons was filed by the applicant on 13 June 2008. The amendments primarily exposed the matters underpinning the alleged unfairness to the plaintiff which is said to have occurred in the period from about August 2004 to October 2005.
The first defendant filed a reply to the amended summons on 24 October 2008 to which the plaintiff replied by filing a response to the amended reply on 18 December 2008.
On 4 September 2008, Marks J dismissed a notice of motion brought by the first defendant to have the proceedings struck out upon the basis of the provisions of <case> of the Act: Sutton versus BearingPoint Australia Pty Limited  <case> ("Sutton No 1").
On 2 April 2009 the first defendant filed an amended reply to the amended summons for relief.
About 30 October 2009 the plaintiff provided her solicitors with instructions to make an application to join the second defendant to the proceedings.
On 2 June 2012 the plaintiff's applications for special leave to appeal the judgment of the NSW Court of Appeal in BE Australia WD Pty Limited (subject to a Deed of Company Arrangement) versus Sutton was refused.
On 15 May 2013, the plaintiff filed a notice of motion seeking leave to file a further amended summons joining, among others, the second defendant in the proceedings.
It might be noted that, by that motion the plaintiff had also sought to join Mr Charles Cochran, the Vice President and country leader of the first defendant, to the proceedings as a further respondent. Mr Cochran was then a resident of the USA. The plaintiff obtained an order of substituted service on Mr Cochran by emailing or posting documents. Mr Cochran sought to set aside the service of the originating process on him thereby discharging the order of the Industrial Court giving leave to serve him outside of Australia. That motion was dismissed by Boland J: Sutton versus BE Australia WD Pty Limited ACN 093 054 623 (subject to deed of company arrangement)  <case> A challenge was brought to that decision in the NSW Court of Appeal which held that the Industrial Court did not have power to require service of its process outside of Australia: Cochran versus Sutton  <case> As a result Mr Cochran could not be served.
An appearance was entered by the first defendant on 21 November 2014. At that stage of the proceedings the plaintiff was seeking to amend the summons and join the second defendant. The first defendant sought that the plaintiff file a new further amended summons before further proceedings. The Court made orders for a directions hearing on 6 February 2015, when the matter became listed for the first time before Kite AJ.
On 11 August 2015, Kite AJ determined to grant leave to the applicant to file a further amended summons and joined the second defendant: Sutton versus BE Australia WD Pty Limited (No 2)  <case>
There was thereafter an appearance before Kite AJ by counsel appearing for both the first and second defendant. The matter was fixed for conciliation before Kite AJ.
On 28 August 2015, the plaintiff filed a further amended summons. The second defendant's reply to that summons was filed on 2 March 2016.
There was a further appearance for the first and second defendant before Kite AJ on the 29 September 2015. That appearance continued on the 18 December 2015, which included a debate about the issuing of a conciliation certificate of attempted conciliation.
A certificate of attempted conciliation was issued by Kite AJ on 2 February 2016 at which time directions were made for the hearing of the matter. Both defendants were then before the Industrial Court. (This was the last occasion the first defendant appeared in this matter).
By the time the matter was called before the Industrial Court, then reconstituted, after the conciliation, there was no appearance for the first defendant but an indication that Ashurst had ceased to act on behalf of the first defendant. On that occasion the plaintiff sought trial dates and there were submissions regarding the taking of evidence by video link of, inter alia, Mr Cochran. The matter was stood over to provide an opportunity to the first defendant to appear and to make submissions upon the proposed directions. Directions were made on 1 April 2016 in order to adjudicate upon the taking of the evidence of overseas witnesses. There was no further appearance for the first defendant in the proceedings.
From the 11 April 2016 until 25 November 2016 the first defendant was given notice of each successive step in the proceedings, including orders made in the proceedings, by means of service of relevant documents upon the first defendant at its registered company address in accordance with orders of the Court.
On 28 July 2016 the issue regarding the taking of overseas evidence was resolved by the Court making consent orders that such evidence would be taken by audio visual link to the USA.
By successive directions the matter was readied for trial.
The trial commenced before the Industrial Court on 25 November 2016 with the plaintiff making opening submissions. A court bundle (consisting of three volumes) filed on 8 May 2009 was tendered by the plaintiff, save for an affidavit under Tab 12. The tendering of the affidavit was subject to any objections including those which had been foreshadowed by both parties. The matter was adjourned part-heard.
The matter resumed on 9 February 2017 before this Court. At that time, the aforementioned consent orders regarding the second defendant were made.
Leave was given to file the second further amended summons in court. This had the effect of substituting the proper name for the first defendant and removing the second defendant after settlement.
When the matter returned before this Court on 27 February 2017, there was no appearance for the first defendant. Mr Gibian of counsel sought the matter proceed ex parte. This was granted.
Mr Gibian then objected to the whole of the material of the Court Book which had been filed by the first defendant and tendered by the second defendant and sought that the material be struck out of the Court Book for the purposes hearing the matter ex parte. That application was partly granted upon the basis of the reservation granted the plaintiff and second defendant at the time of the admission of the Court Book as Exhibit 1, namely, that it was subject to objection. It was also excluded by virtue of a ruling made pursuant to cl 66(2)(b) of Div 4 of [Pt 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p18) of Sch 4 of the Act (which will be discussed below).
In the result, the material in Tabs 8-19, save for pages 777-780 and 1008-1014, appearing in the Court Book was struck out..
The evidence that remained before the Court, other than the formal affidavits of Mr Stuart Brady (solicitor for the plaintiff), included: * (1) the affidavits of Ms Sutton, sworn 22 March and 25 October 2007, 15 April 2009 and 29 April 2016; * (2) the affidavits of Penelope Ann Mora, sworn 17 December 2008 and 3 March 2009; and * (3) the affidavits of Christopher Yost, sworn 19 December 2008 and 4 March 2009.

Transitional Provisions and Ex Parte Proceedings [Part 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p18) of Sch 4 of the Act contains provisions of a savings and transitional nature consequent to the passage of the [Industrial Relations Amendment (Industrial Court) Act 2016](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/iraca2016511/) . Division 4 of [Pt 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/iraca2016511/index.html#p18) of Sch 4 makes provision for "pending proceedings" being proceedings that commenced before the "abolition day" (8 December 2016), which had not been finally determined before that day by the Court in which proceedings were commenced (cl 65(1)).
Pending proceedings may be either "unheard proceedings" or "part heard proceedings". Part heard proceedings are defined in cl 65(1) as meaning pending proceedings where the Court in which the proceedings were commenced had begun to hear (but had not determined) the proceedings before the abolition day. The matter presently before the Court is such a matter given that opening submissions had been completed and the principal evidence in the cases of the parities had been tendered before the Industrial Court.
The procedure to be adopted in part heard proceedings is specified by cl 66(2) of Div 4 of [Pt 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/iraca2016511/index.html#p18) as follows: 
In relation to part heard proceedings in the Industrial Court, the judicial member (or person acting as a judicial member) constituting the
Industrial Court for those proceedings: is to continue, on and from the abolition day, to hear the matter, and to determine the matter, sitting as the Supreme Court, and  may have regard to any record of the proceedings before the Industrial
Court, including a record of any evidence taken in the proceedings before the
Industrial Court.
It is in consequence of this clause that the Court, as presently constituted, sits in the hearing and determination of this matter. As mentioned above, cl 66(2)(b) gives a discretion to the Court to have regard to any record of the proceedings before the Industrial Court including a record of evidence, such as the plaintiff's affidavits and documents in Ex 1. The Court has not had regard to the evidence filed by the first defendant, in Ex 1. It was appropriate to exercise a discretion in that fashion because the evidence, which had been filed in the Court Book, had been adduced only by the second defendant who was no longer a party to the proceeding. The first defendant did not appear to tender that evidence. Further, the first defendant's witnesses were not available for cross examination.
It might also be noted that [Pt 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ircr2009410/index.html#p13) of the [Industrial Relations Commission Rules 2009](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ircr2009410/) applied to the proceedings for an order under [s 106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ircr2009410/s106.html) of the Act when the proceedings were commenced. [Rule 13.2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ircr2009410/s13.2.html) required that an application to the Industrial Court to exercise its powers under [s 106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ircr2009410/s106.html) of the Act must be in the approved form and contain the minimum information set out in r 13.2(2). The approved form provided for the filing of a summons of relief setting out the matters of fact and law upon which the applicant relied.
From 9 December 2016, r 6.3(i) of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) provided that the proceedings for an order under [s 106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s106.html) of the Act is to be in accordance with para [19] of the Practice Note SC CL 3 - Administrative & Industrial Law List. The requirement to commence proceedings by the filing of a statement of claim in accordance with that provision did not apply when these proceedings were commenced and does not apply to the proceedings, which continued to be heard by this Court by reason of cl 66 of [Pt 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p18) of Sch 4 of the Act.
Finally in my view the proceedings were appropriate to proceed on an ex parte basis. There is ample proof that the first defendant was appropriately served with all relevant documents and directions made by the Court and had notice that the matter was listed for hearing. No adverse inference can be drawn against the first defendant in these circumstances but the non-appearance of the first defendant results in the plaintiff's evidence being unchallenged in the proceedings. That evidence will have to be weighed in reaching factual conclusions in the matter in the light if the material before the Court that is, as to whether it sustains the propositions advance in the plaintiff's case. (To the extent adverse findings are made against the second defendant, it should be noted they are made only in the context of the evidence before the Court and in a context where the proceedings concerning the second defendant were settled without admission of liability). Further, the Court is not excused from dealing with jurisdictional issues which were flagged at earlier points in the proceedings or that are evident having regard to the subject matter of the relief claimed.
For completeness, I note that I have considered the amended reply to the amended summons for relief filed by the first defendant (the last form of pleading filed by that entity). It is sufficient to note that the first defendant admitted that it had engaged the plaintiff by means of a contract with a recruitment agency to provide services in the nature of a senior tax specialist. It was pleaded that it was a temporary replacement for Ms Penelope Ann Mora but it was agreed that the sum paid after September 2004 was $800 (plus GST) per hour (representing an increase in the rate paid). There was an admission that there was a meeting to discuss the direct engagement of the plaintiff with the first defendant but it was pleaded that such arrangement was never approved or commenced. A job description was prepared. It was pleaded that the plaintiff was not employed by the first defendant on a permanent full-time basis. It was admitted that the plaintiff raised (but only on one occasion) threatening and intimidating behaviour by the second defendant with an officer of the first defendant. It is clear that the first defendant denied the existence of a contract or arrangement for the purposes of [s 106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s106.html) of the Act.
With these considerations in mind that I now turn to the factual background derived from the evidence in the proceedings.

Factual Background
The engagement of the plaintiff for work with the first defendant commenced in August 2004. That engagement was initiated by Helen Aldridge of a recruitment firm known as Link Recruitment Pty Ltd ("Link") on 7 July 2004 who informed the plaintiff of the availability of a senior taxation executive role with first defendant.
In around mid-July 2004, the plaintiff attended an interview with representatives of the first defendant conducted by the second defendant. Approximately two days later, the plaintiff received a telephone call from the second defendant in which he indicated that he would like to offer the position to the plaintiff but would have to go through Link (via Ms Aldridge) to formalise the offer.
Towards the end of July 2004, a series of documents were executed to facilitate an arrangement whereby the plaintiff was to perform work as a tax specialist for the second defendant as follows: * (1) An assignment contract between Link and the first defendant for the placement of the plaintiff as a "contractor" ("the first agreement"). This agreement provided that the first defendant may terminate a temporary/contractor by giving 4 hours notice.
* (2) A contract entitled "Service and Confidentiality Agreement Temporary Staff or Incorporated Contractor" was entered into between the RJ Group and Link on 23 July 2004 whereby the plaintiff would provide services to clients of Link ("the second agreement"). The agreement provided that the plaintiff was self-employed, had no obligation to accept any assignment and was not guaranteed any work. The agreement also provided that Link may, except when the plaintiff was on assignment, terminate this agreement for any reason without notice. This was the vehicle by which Link offered the plaintiff's services to the first defendant.
By a letter dated 28 July 2004 from Link addressed to the plaintiff, Link confirmed the plaintiff's contract assignment as "Tax Manager Asia-Pacific Tax Matters" with the first defendant, commencing on 3 August 2004 (this reflects correspondence from Link to the first defendant to the same effect). The rate of remuneration recorded was a daily rate of $650 (plus GST), which later increased to $800 (plus GST) per day.
The arrangement was put in place by the plaintiff commencing work for the first defendant on 6 August 2004, invoices being submitted for payment by RJ Group to Link and Link in turn invoicing payment from the first defendant.
In September 2004, following a negotiation between the plaintiff and the second defendant, the arrangement was varied by increasing the daily payment rate to be received by RJ Group to a daily rate of $800. The arrangement was further varied, from around August 2005, such that invoices were submitted directly to the first defendant by RJ Group.
The plaintiff, as an employee of RJ Group, was entitled to a remuneration package. The figures and components throughout the relevant periods are as follows: 
Period 
Component 
Sum ($)  ---  July 2004 - 30 June 2005 
Salary ,600  
Superannuation ,700  
Salary sacrifice ,518  July 2005 - 7 October 2005 
Salary ,000  
Superannuation  
Salary sacrifice ,965 
In total the plaintiff received an amount of $174,323 from RJ Group in the 14 month period from 1 July 2004 to 7 October 2005.
It was contended by the plaintiff that because the arrangement required her to contract through Link, via the second agreement, that the plaintiff was: * (1) denied the status of direct employee; and, * (2) not afforded the protection from bullying, harassment or retribution (hereafter referred to as "protective provisions"), if any, under the first agreement. To the extent any protective provisions were included under the second agreement protection, it was submitted, these were only afforded to the "clients" of Link.
I interpose to note, as to the first such issue, the following factual background: * (1) In July 2005, upon being offered the role by the second defendant, the plaintiff was informed that "going forward is the expectation that these three roles, including this one, will be confirmed as permanent roles"; * (2) On 28 April 2005, Mr Corbett said in a telephone conference that the plaintiff would be made "full-time"; * (3) On 24 June 2005, 1 July 2005 and 22 July 2005 in three respective meetings with Mr Cochran, following prior discussions to prepare documentation setting out the role to be considered, the plaintiff was assured that she would have a "direct contract" with the first defendant; and * (4) On 30 September 2005, the plaintiff was informed by a Ms Scmulewicz for the first defendant that it was accepted the plaintiff had an "ongoing contract" with the first defendant and that the standard documentation to formalise the ongoing engagement of the plaintiff was being finalised. This was notwithstanding a significant deterioration in the relationship between the plaintiff and the second defendant by this time. The background to the deterioration follows below.
Over the course of 2004 and the early part of 2005, the plaintiff and a Ms Mora raised concerns in relation to the second defendant's conduct, with representatives of first defendant, particularly in relation to certain transactions. Thereafter, the second defendant's conduct became increasingly aggressive and the initially cordial working relationship, perhaps unsurprisingly, deteriorated. The second defendant engaged in belittling conduct and name calling. He also undermined the work of the plaintiff and Ms Mora, which included taking credit for their work without recognition. The plaintiff and Ms Mora made plans to move their offices to distant themselves from the second defendant.
On 24 June, the plaintiff and Ms Mora raised the conduct of the second defendant with Mr Cochran. At the meeting the issues of bullying and harassment of the plaintiff's position with the first defendant were discussed. Mr Cochran undertook to address the issues within 48 hours. However, that did not occur. The plaintiff continued to pursue her complaint through June, July and early August throughout 2005.
Notwithstanding the concerns raised, the second defendant's conduct escalated, culminating in an incident on 25 August 2005 in which the second defendant aggressively confronted the plaintiff and Ms Mora and used a chair to prevent them from leaving a conference room in which he had taken them. He started yelling and became extremely aggressive and made accusations about a tax issue. The plaintiff was distressed.
The plaintiff and Ms Mora reported the incident on the same day to a number of representatives of the first defendant including to Mr Cochran and Mr Christopher Yost. Interviews were conducted with plaintiff and Ms Mora. In an interview on 30 August the plaintiff and Ms Mora were aggressively questioned by Mr Cochran and Mr Redman. They were advised they would receive a response in 24 hours but none followed.
The plaintiff continued to experience harassment and undermining behaviour by the second defendant (including an aggressive confrontation by the second defendant on 28 August 2005). The second defendant took steps to contact recruitment agencies to fill the plaintiff and Ms Mora's positions (and contacted the financial controller of the first defendant with a view to ending the plaintiff's engagement). The plaintiff was forced to raise her concerns with a number of officers of the first defendant including Mr Redman and Mr Carson, Associate General Counsel to the first defendant.
On 16 September 2005 the plaintiff raised her concern with Mr Whitener, legal counsel for the first defendant, and sent to Mr Carson a detailed complaint setting out her concerns in relation to the second defendant's conduct. No attempt was made to interview the plaintiff until a security officer from the first defendant's parent company, Tim Bower, travelled from the USA on 30 September 2005. In the interview, Mr Bower accused the plaintiff of not answering his questions and being "bitter and twisted". The plaintiff submitted this was demonstrative of some form of investigation having been undertaken by the first defendant.

Termination
On 4 October 2005, Richard Storey, on behalf of the first defendant wrote to the second defendant providing him a final warning for unacceptable conduct - the conduct being described as "preventing staff from exiting a meeting room and what was alleged as threatening an bullying behaviour". It was said the conduct was in breach of the company's values. The second defendant's employment was retained.
The second defendant responded to the letter by stating he had never previously behaved in such a manner and had done so because "persons concerned [were] refusing to work [with him] in a professional manner during the prior two months and had refused to reply to requests on the day in question".
On 4 October 2005, the plaintiff received an email from Ms Samulewicz suggesting that she had only a 4 hour assignment of work to be completed over the following days. Then, on 7 October 2005, Mr Redman approached the plaintiff and informed her that her services were no longer required and he threatened to call the police if she did not leave the workplace immediately.
The plaintiff was provided with no explanation as to the reasons for the termination of her services. She had, by that stage, not been advised of actions taken by the first defendant with respect to the second defendant. The only written information provided to plaintiff in relation to the termination was a hard copy of an email.
The plaintiff submitted, at the time of her termination, pursuant to her contract of employment with RJ Group, she was entitled to remuneration in the sum of $140,000.

Contract or Arrangement
The unfair contracts jurisdiction permits the Court to grant relief with respect to a contract whereby a person performs work in any industry if it considers that the contract is an unfair contract. The term "contract" is defined in [s 105(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s105.html) of the Act as being "any contract or arrangement, or any related condition or collateral arrangement, but does not include an industrial instrument".
The consequence of the definition is that the unfair contracts jurisdiction extends beyond legally binding contracts to an "arrangement" whereby a person performs work in any industry.
It is well settled that the term "arrangement" in [s 105](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s105.html) of the Act is one of wide meaning: see, for example: AOS Group Australia Pty Ltd (in liquidation) versus Arrogante  <case>.
An "arrangement" may also be found to exist where two or more legally binding contracts are sufficiently associated with each other in a practical sense as together to constitute an arrangement of which each contract is a part: Custom Credit Corporation Ltd at 131; Kwong versus Stone Microsystems (Aust) Pty Ltd  <case>.
An arrangement can extend to a circumstance in which another entity is interposed between the person performing work in an industry and the entity for whom the work is ultimately performed.
In Ross versus GM Context (Australia) Pty Ltd [(2000) 107 IR 1] ("Australian Co-operative Foods"), for example, Basten JA (with whom Giles and Hodgson JJA agreed) concluded (at [66]): 
Whether a contract, not being an employment contract, qualifies as a contract whereby work is undertaken in an industry, will depend upon the evaluation of a number of factors, including those set out above. Responding specifically to the arguments put forward for Dairy Farmers, the following points are significant. First, whilst acknowledging that the contract under consideration does not involve the employment of persons to perform work in an industry, it must be accepted that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s106.html) was not intended to be so limited. Any contract involving a service company of an individual worker, will involve two contractual steps between the principal and the performance of the work. It was not in dispute that such an arrangement could constitute a contract within [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s106.html)
The second further amended statement of claim sought relief with respect to the contract or arrangement between the plaintiff and the first defendant whereby the plaintiff performed work in the taxation consultancy industry for the first defendant it was effective from 6 August 2004.
It is clear that an arrangement, in the sense of an understanding or plan of concerted action, was formed between the plaintiff and the first defendant whereby she performed work. The arrangement was then put into effect by the execution of a number of legally enforceable contracts.
I accept the submission of the plaintiff that the totality of those arrangements constituted a contract for the purpose of [s 105](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s105.html) of the Act in the sense that they fell within the extended meaning of that expression, namely, an arrangement. In addition to the above, the basis for that conclusion is as follows: * (1) The plaintiff was interviewed, given information about the role and selected for the position by the second defendant acting as representative for the first defendant.
* (2) The second defendant, acting as representative for the first defendant, offered the position of tax manager to the plaintiff and facilitated the practical arrangements to enable her engagement through Link.
* (3) The plaintiff entered into arrangements through Link and involving RJ Group at the insistence of the first defendant that that was how she was to perform work for the company.
* (4) The contracts between the first defendant and Link and between the plaintiff and Link were solely for the purpose of facilitating the plaintiff performing work for the first defendant.
* (5) The plaintiff performed work entirely at the direction of and for the benefit of the first defendant and performed the role in a manner indistinguishable from a direct employee of the company.
* (6) The plaintiff negotiated changes to her remuneration with the second defendant acting as a representative of the first defendant which were then implemented by the first defendant giving directions to Link.
* (7) From August 2005, the arrangement was, on the evidence, varied such that Link was not involved and the first defendant directly paid invoices for the work performed by the plaintiff to RJ Group.
* (8) The engagement of the plaintiff was terminated by decision of senior management of the first defendant and the decision to terminate communicated by the first defendant's Human Resources Manager, Mr Redman.
* (9) The involvement of Link and RJ Group was an administrative step entered into at the insistence of the first defendant which cannot disguise that there was a direct understanding or bilateral plan of action between the plaintiff and the first defendant whereby she performed work for the company.
* (10) Furthermore, in Brown versus Rezitis <case>; <case>; Australian Co-operative Foods at [52]). The jurisdiction is intended to permit the Court to examine the true nature of the relationship between the parties which I have found in this case to be an arrangement for the purposes of [s 105.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s105.html) * (11) The very purpose of the section would be destroyed if a business wishing to have an individual perform work for it could avoid examination of that arrangement by simply insisting upon the involvement of an intermediary entity, whether a related entity, service company or labour hire/placement agency. The true nature of the relationship was that there was an arrangement between the plaintiff and the first defendant for her to perform work for the company.

Were the requirements under <case> met?
Section 108A(1)(a) operates such that application cannot be made under Div 2 of [Pt 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p9) of the Act if the application "relates to a contract of employment" described in the subsection ("the first issue"). The exclusion in <case>(a) concerns any application under [s 106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s106.html) of the Act which relates to a contract of employment with a remuneration package paid or received (or payable or receivable) exceeds the remuneration cap during the period of 12 months before the termination of the contract ("the second issue").
It may be noted that the limitations under <case> of the Act were previously agitated in these proceedings. As earlier mentioned, the first defendant sought "to have the proceedings struck out because they were precluded from having been instituted by <case> of the Act": Sutton No 1. Marks J dismissed the motion in an interlocutory judgment, which removed the second issue.
The first issue concerns whether or not the plaintiff's application "relates to a contract of employment". I earlier found that the plaintiff performed work for the first defendant as a tax manager under a contract for the purpose of [s 105(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s105.html) of the Act in that the plaintiff performed that work under an arrangement (formalised by two agreements) falling within the definition of a contract under that provision. By the first agreement the plaintiff was identified as "the Contractor", under contract assignment, and by the second agreement the plaintiff was described as "self-employed".
The definition of a "contract of employment" under <case> extends to "any contract or arrangement under which work is done by a person in the capacity of an employee" and includes "a related condition or collateral arrangement with respect to such a contract".
Mr Gibian correctly submitted, in my view, that the manner in which the arrangement was put into effect was to intentionally avoid establishing a direct employment relationship. This was enabled by the interceding role of Link under the first agreement. The plaintiff emphasised that no aspect of the alleged contract or arrangement was in connection to a "contract of employment".
I accept that the plaintiff was not an employee for the purposes of the first and second agreements and thereby did not fall within the definition in <case>. It follows that the present application is not caught by the terms of <case>, and accordingly offers no jurisdictional barrier in this case. Strictly speaking, it is not necessary then to consider the matters raised under the second issue. However, for completeness, I will briefly touch upon those matters.
The second issue to be established is that the remuneration cap only applied to the payments received by an "employee" - that is the value of the payments paid or received by the employee. The remuneration cap cannot be assessed by reference to the payments made to or received by RJ Group. This is because the Act dictates that the focus of inquiry must be the payments paid to, or the employment benefits received by, the person engaged in the work as an employee.
As earlier mentioned, the second issue was dealt with by Marks J in Sutton No 1. His Honour found that, by reference to some earlier authorities of the Industrial Court, the relevant payments for the purposes of <case>, were the payments received by the employee concerned or employment benefits (at [17]-[19]). His Honour, at [17], accepted a submission: [T]hat <case> is framed by reference to a remuneration package which is payable or receivable by an individual, being the person who performs the work. That is, arguably, the definition of remuneration package by reference to monetary remuneration and employment benefits payable or receivable must direct attention to what is payable to or receivable by the individual rather than what is paid to or receivable by a contracting corporate entity.
His Honour's conclusion was, with respect, correct. It is consistent with the purposes of <case>, namely, to exclude high income earners from the unfair contracts jurisdiction. As set out in Commander Australia Ltd versus Kerr  <case>, the second reading speech to the amending legislation stated: 
By narrowing the application of the unfair contracts provisions of the [Industrial Relations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), greater certainty will be introduced into their operation, and the more extravagant and speculative claims will be prevented. The Industrial Relations Amendment (Unfair Contracts) Bill 2002 will introduce the following limitations on the operation of the existing unfair contracts provisions. An employee earning an annual remuneration package in excess of $200,000 will not be able to make an application under the unfair contracts provisions. "Remuneration package" will be defined to mean the total value of the monetary remuneration and employment benefits that are payable or receivable under a contract of employment.
Bonuses and other performance-related or incentive payments will be included in the meaning of monetary remuneration. "Employment benefits" will mean all those benefits of a private nature that are provided to an employee at the cost of his or her employer. The bill spells out that this includes superannuation contributions and motor vehicles, but makes it clear that this is not an exhaustive list. The bill also empowers the making of regulations to prescribe any new types of employment benefits that might emerge. The $200,000 cap on applicants will be annually indexed by reference to the percentage increase from year to year of the cap on access to the unfair dismissal provisions. The unfair dismissal cap increases on an annual basis by reference to the increase in the Federal unfair dismissal cap. That increase is worked out on the basis of increases in weekly earnings, as published by the
Australian Statistician.
In reliance upon the approach to construction of <case> and, in particular, the definition of "employment benefit" in Shankland versus Beta Alistine Pty Ltd (ACN 108 128 534)  <case> at <case>, his Honour concluded that <case> could not apply to the totality of the money or other benefits provided to RJ Group but rather to the amounts paid to or received by the plaintiff (Sutton No 1 at [17]-[19]).
Since the interlocutory proceedings, the plaintiff had filed further evidence (supplementing the material previously before Marks J), to demonstrate that, even if the payments received by RJ Group should properly be taken into account, they would still not exceed the remuneration cap, namely, $200,000. The summary of the evidence, in this respect, is set out in paras [54]-[55] of this judgment.
Hence, even if the payments made to RJ Group were relevant in assessing the remuneration cap under <case> of the Act, the payments received by RJ Group in the period from 7 October 2004 to 7 October 2005 were less than $200,000.
I conclude that <case> represents no jurisdictional barrier to the plaintiff presenting her application in this matter.

Merits
The grounds of unfairness may be summarised under three broad categories: * (1) Termination 
The grounds essentially consisted of the following: the arrangement resulted in the plaintiff being in a position of unequal and inferior bargaining power such that the plaintiff had no protection from arbitrary and immediate termination of her engagement at any time and without reason;  the arrangement permitted for the termination of the plaintiff's services essentially without any notice and failed to ensure a reasonable period of notice of payment in lieu of notice upon termination of the arrangement; and  the arrangement permitted the first defendant to terminate the arrangement without proper reason, without providing any form of procedural fairness and in a manner that was likely to and did cause the plaintiff to suffer hurt, distress and humiliation. 
Bullying and Harassment 
The ground consisted of: the arrangement failed to contain any reasonable provisions to protect the plaintiff from bullying and harassment or to ensure the appropriate and timely resolution of any complaint or grievance that the plaintiff might have occasion to raise in the course of her work; and 
Disparagement 
The ground consisted of: the arrangement failed to include any provision to protect the plaintiff from future disparagement and from conduct that was likely to and did undermine her prospects of securing future employment and successfully continuing her career.
I will provide my findings with respect to each category in turn.

Termination
The manner in which the arrangement for the plaintiff to perform work was put into effect was that the first defendant could terminate the plaintiff's engagement at any time on four hours notice given to Link. Link was under no obligation to provide any work or to provide any payment to the plaintiff other than for work actually performed and could terminate the agreement for no reason with no notice if the plaintiff was not on an assignment. I agree with the submission of the plaintiff that the arrangement failed to provide protection against arbitrary or an immediate termination and failed to ensure that any fair or proper process was adopted in circumstances where the first defendant proposed to terminate the plaintiff's engagement in that work.
This conclusion is a fortiori given that prior to and during the engagement, various representations were made to the plaintiff to the effect that the role would be made permanent and that the plaintiff would be engaged in an ongoing role by the first defendant. To the knowledge of the first defendant the plaintiff declined other positions to her detriment because of those representations. Further, the contract became unfair by its operation over time because, in the light of arrangement for work which unfolded and the aforementioned representations, the period of notice provided for in the arrangement was wholly inappropriate and unfair.
The unfairness of the arrangement was also contributed to by the following factors: * (1) The plaintiff was a senior taxation specialist with approximately 25 years of experience in industry; * (2) The plaintiff was engaged in a manner that was indistinguishable from that of an employee; * (3) The nature of the engagement was such that, the plaintiff was precluded from engagement in other work; and * (4) The nature of the plaintiff's role combined with her professional standing was such that she was likely to be particularly damaged by an unexplained termination of her engagement by a company such as the first defendant.
On 4 October 2005, the plaintiff was informed the only work that she would be required to do was four hours of further work summarising the state of the projects that she was up to. As earlier mentioned the evidence provided by the plaintiff indicated that the second defendant was endeavouring to source other individuals to replace the plaintiff and another employee, Ms Mora, whom had recently resigned. The plaintiff submitted, correctly in my view, that the notification of her termination occurred in circumstances in which it was obvious there was still work to be done. No representation was made to indicate there was some restructure or deficit of work to be performed going forward.
On 7 October 2005, the plaintiff was informed, without explanation, that her services were no longer required. At the same time, the plaintiff was also threatened that the police would be called if she failed to leave the premises immediately. It appears that at some time between 30 September and 4 October it was decided that the plaintiff's engagement would be terminated, and on 7 October that was put into effect with no more explanation than an assertion that the first defendant no longer required the plaintiff's further services and without any consultation with her.
In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the arrangement constituted an unfair contract pursuant to <case> of the Act. The obligation upon the first defendant to ensure that adequate protective provisions were in place in relation to termination was not diminished by the plaintiff's status as a contractor or engagement under labour hire type arrangements: see, for example, AHI Healthcare Systems versus Clinical Associates of Australia  <case> at <case>. (Nor did her engagement through RJ Group diminish that obligation). I do not consider the arrangement was "temporary" as pleaded at the time by the first defendant. The plaintiff was working in a very senior position and used specialist skills. The first agreement applied to both temporary engagements and contractors, the plaintiff falling under the latter category. It is clear on the evidence the plaintiff was not engaged merely as a replacement during Ms Mora's leave, because her engagement continued unabated upon Ms Mora's return. Clear representations were made about her role being ongoing (which were primarily interrupted due to the unreasonable conduct of the second defendant and in the absence of a proper response by the first defendant). The RJ Group, Link and the first defendant formed part of a contractual matrix by which the plaintiff performed work for the first defendant in a senior capacity akin to a full-time employee at an Associate Director level.
The arrangement, established by the first and second agreements, failed to provide any adequate protection against arbitrary termination (see, Lavings versus Barclay Mowlem Construction Ltd [(1994) 99 IR 247] at 253-254) and provided for a period of notice which, as the contract was performed over time, was unfair.
Overall, I find that by virtue of the factors discussed under this heading that the contract constituted an unfair contract for the purposes of <case>(a) of the Act and, in particular, I find the contract was unfair and harsh.

Bullying and Harassment
I also accept the submission of the plaintiff that the unfairness of the arrangement was further exacerbated by the failure of the arrangement to make any provision to adequately protect the plaintiff from bullying or harassment or the resultant distress and harm. Further, the first defendant failed to provide for any appropriate mechanism for the investigation of complaints or protection from retribution.
In the months preceding the plaintiff's termination, the plaintiff sought recourse from the first defendant in relation to the bullying and harassment conduct of the second defendant. By early 2005, there began a deterioration in the working relationship between the plaintiff and the second defendant, which rapidly descended to a level which may be appropriate to be described as intimidating and involving harassment.
Complaints were communicated to the authorised representatives of the first defendant on several occasions by many means. This included email correspondence, telephone correspondence and face-to-face meetings from early July 2005, and specifically on 18, 25 and 30 August 2005. The plaintiff correctly submitted that no explanation was provided by the first defendant to justify the lack of timely action taken in response to the complaint. The reasonable inference to be drawn from that evidence is that no adequate mechanisms had been put in place by the first defendant to ensure that complaint made by the plaintiff was adequately addressed and acted upon. In fact, the complaints were not effectively acted upon by the first defendant.
It was clear that the first defendant considered that the second defendant's conduct (at least on 25 August 2005) was unacceptable. This is hardly surprising given the second defendant had barred the plaintiff and her colleague from exiting the conference room, whilst he verbally abused them. He was described as being "very, very angry", at the time, and "[his] face was bright red". Nonetheless, the first defendant took no action to inform the plaintiff of its conclusions regarding the second defendant or steps to protect her from further intimidation. Rather the plaintiff was dismissed.
A contract, as defined in <case> of the Act, may be declared unfair if it fails to ensure that a fair process was undertaken prior to an employee (or other worker) having their engagement terminated on performance, conduct or redundancy ground: see, for example, Abboud versus State of New South Wales (Department of School Education)  <case>- <case>.
Whilst the second agreement included a "Discrimination and Harassment" clause, the provision was inadequate due to it being one-sided in its operation. The clause purported to impose an obligation upon the plaintiff and RJ Group to not harass or discriminate against any person in the course of providing services to a client of Link (that is the first defendant). No reciprocal obligation was imposed upon Link to ensure that the plaintiff was not the subject of harassment or discrimination or that she would have an effective and practical remedy in that event.
I agree with the submissions advanced by the plaintiff that the evidence in the proceedings supports the inference that the plaintiff's engagement with the first defendant was terminated as a result of her complaints about the second defendant's conduct in his dealings with her and Ms Mora. This supports the conclusion that the termination was based upon an unfair contract in the sense that the contract was unfair and harsh.
The arrangement failed to contain adequate protective provisions to protect the plaintiff from bullying and harassment or to ensure adequate action was taken in the event the plaintiff had occasion to make a complaint or grievance particularly issues concerning the propriety of the second defendant professional conduct in the first defendant. The arrangement further became unfair because of the conduct of the first defendant in failing to address the behaviour of the second defendant or protect the plaintiff from its consequence.
In respect of the ground of bullying and harassment, I conclude that the arrangement was unfair and harsh pursuant to <case>(a) of the Act and, in particular, I find the contract was unfair and harsh.

Disparagement
A contract may be unfair if it fails to contain provision preventing an employer from engaging in conduct after termination which has the effect of disparaging or undermining the future employment prospects of an individual: see, for example, Bowker versus Software Engineers Australia Pty Ltd  <case> at <case>- <case>.
An arrangement whereby work is performed for the purpose of <case> of the Act may become unfair as a result of subsequent conduct, even if such conduct occurs after the termination of the arrangement: see Gambotto versus John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd <case>; [(2001) 104 IR 303] ("Gambotto") at [34]. This is because, "[t]he conduct arises out of and is directly referable to the contract itself" (Gambotto at [34] per Peterson J).
The plaintiff acknowledged the difficulty associated with an individual attempting to prove post-termination disparagement. The plaintiff primarily relied upon evidence of several failed attempts in retaining employment in a comparable position. The principal example of this conduct concerned the plaintiff's engagement with the SIMS Group Australia Holding Pty Ltd ("SIMS").
From 3 November 2008, the plaintiff was employed by SIMS. Both PWC and EY provided taxation services to SIMS. Within a short time of the plaintiff's commencing the newly acquired employment, SIMS received notification from EY that the plaintiff was in trouble for serious misconduct at first defendant. The plaintiff was informed that allegations had been made and that SIMS was investigating the matter. The plaintiff surmised that the allegations had derived from the first defendant.
The plaintiff was informed that EY was applying "pressure to SIMS" and that a possible cause was a "Machiavellian plot between EY partners to get their name on our fees and to get any tax work they [could] from PWC".
The plaintiff was made redundant in March 2009 and on the evidence been unable to obtain comparable work since that time. After her departure, the plaintiff was informed that her position had been terminated partly as a result of the first defendant raising issues with EY and partly due to EY itself. The source of this information was EY. No attribution was given to the first defendant as such.
One of the documents attached in support of the plaintiff's contentions in this respect attributed a statement to a representative of the first defendant saying he could not comment of the plaintiff's past arrangement for "legal reasons". There is evidence that the second defendant insisted on reference checks being forwarded to him but no indication of his approach to any such approach, if, in fact, they were made.
In my view, there is direct evidence to sustain EY's involvement in the disparagement of the plaintiff, which may be properly described as vindictive, but no evidence directly implicates the first defendant. It may have been suggested that there would be no motive in EY's action but for the encouragement of the first defendant, but the evidence does provide an alternative motivation, namely EY's ambitions for growth (although the precise conclusions in this respect are not entirely clear).
Further, I consider there is insufficient evidence to enable an inference to be drawn that the first defendant, either directly or indirectly, engaged in the disparagement of the plaintiff after her termination thereby causing the defendant harm.

Declarations
In the circumstances, I consider it is appropriate to make the declarations sought by the plaintiff, which appear in para [3](1) and (2) of this judgment, save that no declaration will be made that the contract was unconscionable or against the public interest as sought by the plaintiff (see para 3(2)). Further, I consider the order sought and extracted in para [3](3) of this judgment, namely, varying the contract in accordance with the terms of Schedule A (appearing in para [4] of this judgment) should be granted, save for cll (4) and (5) of Schedule A, so far as the clauses specify a period of notice or payment in lieu thereof or cl 9 (which was not substantiated on the evidence).

Monetary Orders
I turn then to the balance of the relief sought by the plaintiff appearing in para [3](4)-(6) of this judgment.
The Court has a broad discretion under <case> of the Act to make such orders as to the payment of money as the Court considers just in the circumstances of the case. The power extends to such orders as can reasonably be thought to have a real connection with the making, variation or avoidance of the contract or arrangement: Brown versus Rezitis at 165; Fish versus Solution 6 Holdings Ltd <case>; [(2006) 225 CLR 180] ("Westfield Holdings") at [161]) may nonetheless be instrumental in determining the quantum of a money order pursuant to <case>: Westfield Holdings at [130]. In making a money order I must do what is just in the circumstances of a particular case: Westfield Holdings at [102].
In this matter, the plaintiff sought that the Court should make an order for the payment of money in connection with the arrangement that takes account of: * (1) The failure of the arrangement to contain any reasonable provision with respect to notice of termination or payment in lieu thereof and the consequences of the failure to protect the plaintiff from arbitrary and immediate termination on her future employment and career.
* (2) The stress and humiliation suffered by the plaintiff as a result of being exposed to bullying and harassment at the hands of the second defendant and the failure of the arrangement to include any adequate provision to protect her from such conduct.
* (3) The impact upon the plaintiff's career and earnings resulting from the failure of the arrangement to protect her from conduct of the first defendant which disparaged her and undermined her future employment prospects.
I shall deal with issues (1) and (2) seriatim (the applicant having failed to demonstrate the contract or arrangement was unfair, harsh or unconscionable or against the public interest with respect to the disparagement ground).

Termination of Employment
The amount claimed in the further amended statement of claim was calculated on the basis of a 15 month period of the earnings actually received by the plaintiff in respect of her work for the first defendant. The evidence demonstrated that the plaintiff received a daily payment through the contract which resulted in total remuneration of $174,323. It was submitted that figure provides an appropriate basis for calculating the plaintiff's loss of earnings.
It was submitted the unfairness in the arrangement, whereby she performed work, and the conduct it permitted on the part of the first defendant caused immediate and substantial loss to the plaintiff. It was contended this had an enduring and devastating effect upon the plaintiff's career and earning potential. It was further contended a substantial payment ought to be ordered having regard to the ongoing loss of earnings experienced by the plaintiff for reasons including the following: * (1) Despite her efforts to obtain other employment, the plaintiff did not obtain any further work between October 2005 and May 2006 when she took up a short term position with IBM and was then again unable to obtain alternative employment until commencing with SIMS in November 2008.
* (2) The termination of the plaintiff's engagement occurred notwithstanding repeated and clear representations made by Mr Cochran and others during 2005 that the plaintiff would be employed in a permanent and ongoing position by the first defendant.
* (3) To the knowledge of the first defendant, the plaintiff did not pursue opportunities to obtain other employment, including a tax role with United Group, as a result of representations made to her in relation to her ongoing engagement with the company.
* (4) The fact of the plaintiff's immediate and unexplained termination cast a pall over her reputation and ongoing employment prospects. The events which took place in relation to her engagement with the first defendant have destroyed her otherwise successful career.
These contentions may be accepted on the evidence in these proceedings.
In this context, it was submitted that the Court was not strictly limited to common law notions of reasonable notice of termination: Westfield Holdings at [161]. The Court may have regard to the fact that the consequences of the unfairness evident in the arrangement whereby the plaintiff performed work have had enduring consequences for her beyond the immediate period following the termination. Again this submission may be accepted in the broad but I do not consider that Westfield Holdings is authority for a proposition that factors relevant to the assessment of reasonable notice may be put out of account in determining appropriate money orders. Those common law principles offer a guidepost as to what may constitute an appropriate period of notice of termination or payment in lieu thereof in considering whether a contract is unfair for the purposes of <case>. Further, those principles may also inform the assessment of the quantum of money orders that should be properly made upon the finding of the existence of an unfair contract.
Bearing in mind those considerations, the following additional factors are relevant to the assessment of money orders (even if, strictly speaking, the engagement of the plaintiff was not as an employee): * (1) The plaintiff had a high grade of appointment which was important. The plaintiff worked with the Asia-Pacific region (principally in Australia and New Zealand) and dealt with significant tax issues.
* (2) The plaintiff had high level experience in the provision of taxation services.
* (3) The plaintiff was employed between 6 August 2004 (although the confirmation of her employment was slightly earlier) and 7 October 2005, namely, slightly over 12 months. Reference is made by the plaintiff to a period of engagement of 14 months which does not accord with the joint chronology tendered in the proceedings or the evidence of the plaintiff. Nothing turns on this issue because on any account the plaintiff's term under the contract was relatively short. Despite a reference being made by the first defendant to the plaintiff having 4 hours work assigned on 4 October 2005, I do not consider that represented the giving of notice under the first agreement. Rather it was an allocation of work for the balance of an assignment. No notice was received on 7 October when the plaintiff was asked to leave work immediately, presumably because the assignment was treated as running its course and no notice was required.
* (4) The security of her employment was not strong (in the sense of permanent full-time employment) given the arrangement continued on a daily basis until termination, but the position was treated as being akin to an Associate Director without interruption until termination and representations were made for ongoing permanent employment influencing the plaintiff to act to her detriment when another position was offered.
* (5) I infer the plaintiff must have had a reasonably long term future with the first defendant but for the difficulties arising with the second defendant.
* (6) The loss of her engagement in the circumstances which unfolded resulted in the plaintiff facing a significant period without finding alternative employment.
* (7) At the time of her removal the plaintiff was about 45 years of age.
The determination of money orders will require an evaluation of all relevant factors contributing to that assessment. Clauses 4 and 5 in Schedule A (see para [4] above) should provide for a period of notice or payment in lieu thereof. However, the specification of any such period of notice and any quantification thereof should await the overall determination of any money orders. That assessment will be made after the receipt of any evidence and submissions filed concerning the settlement reached with the second defendant in accordance with direction which will be made below.

Bullying and Harassment
The plaintiff submitted that an order should be made arising from the stress and humiliation she suffered as a result of the failure of the arrangement to include any adequate provision to protect her from bullying and harassment. The plaintiff did not claim compensation for loss occasioned by discrete medical or other expenses incurred as a result of her suffering distress and humiliation.
It was submitted, that compensation may be awarded under <case> of the Act for "distress" or "stress and suffering" arising from the unfairness of a contract or arrangement whereby work is performed is settled: see, for example, King versus State Bank of New South Wales (No 2)  <case>- <case>. I accept this submission so long as it is tempered by the observation that there must be a careful approach taken in assessing an appropriate money order with respect to the ground to avoid the "risk of double compensation".
It was submitted, the failure of the arrangement whereby work was performed to contain provision to protect the plaintiff from bullying and harassment, or ensure that any complaints were properly acted upon, exposed the plaintiff to conduct peculiarly likely to cause distress and humiliation. The plaintiff has given evidence of feeling belittled and humiliated by the conduct of the second defendant and the failure of the first defendant to respond appropriately. The effect of the conduct was humiliation, distress and damage to the plaintiff's career by virtue of reputational damage. I accept those submissions subject to the caveat that there must be avoidance of double counting of factors taken into account under the previous termination of employment heading associated with the difficulties in finding alternative employment. I also note that there was no material evidence as to the impact of the conduct of the first defendant upon the plaintiff.
The calculation of compensation in the nature of general damages for hurt, humiliation and distress will frequently not be susceptible to mathematical calculation. In Hall versus A&A Sheiban Pty Ltd <case>; [(1989) 20 FCR 217] at 256, for example, Wilcox J said (at 256): [D]amages for ... injury to feelings, distress, humiliation and the effect on the claimant's relationships with other people are not susceptible of mathematical calculation ... [t]o ignore such items of damage simply because of the impossibility of demonstrating the correctness of any particular figure would be to visit injustice upon a complainant by failing to grant relief in respect of a proved item of damage.
It was submitted that some guidance can appropriately be drawn from decisions involving the award of general damages for hurt, humiliation or distress in other contexts: see, for example, the approach in Lee versus Smith [(2007) EOC 93-456], where, it was submitted, the Full Federal Court increased damages to $100,000 for distress and effects on reputation and personal life arising from repudiation of an employment contract. The Full Court said (at [91]): 
It is true that the evidence going to the consequential loss claimed by
Walker was not great in volume but it was striking in its effect. The evidence did not need to be corroborated. It was not challenged. We do not agree that expert evidence was necessary. We are not clear what type of expert evidence would be required. The consequential effects of the loss of his job on
Walker's business reputation and personal life, drastic as they were, are not out of the ordinary course of events. In the circumstances, we think the award of $5,000.00 is a significant under assessment of the loss which Walker suffered in this regard. If his evidence is accepted, as it must be, he suffered a considerable dislocation of his life with serious long term effects. In our view, the cross-appeal should succeed and an award in the amount of $100,000.00 should be substituted for the award of $5,000.00.
Some care should be taken in obtaining guidance as to appropriate money orders from these authorities. Each matter turned upon its own facts and circumstances, noting that Lee, Poniatowska and Richardson involved issues of sexual discrimination and harassment.
In my view, the events which took place during the plaintiff's engagement with the first defendant, particularly the conduct of the second defendant resulted with the plaintiff suffering humiliation and distress. The plaintiff is correct to submit that her unexplained termination of the arrangement, have had a serious and enduring impact upon the plaintiff personally and upon her reputation and career. Those effects were exacerbated by the failure of the first defendant to act upon her complaints or inform her of the outcome of its investigations.
I shall adopt the same approach to assessment and quantification as that adopted with respect to the termination of employment ground.

Mitigation
The Court is required by <case> of the Act to take into account whether or not the plaintiff took action to mitigate loss. This section does not require a strict application of the doctrine of mitigation at common law: English versus Aradlay Insurance Brokers Pty Ltd  <case>- <case>, but it is proper to have regard to those principles in appropriate cases.
Ordinarily, where an employee has been successful in avoiding loss or has failed to take reasonable steps to avoid loss in the period following dismissal, the Court, in determining what is just in the circumstances of the case will give consideration to whether, and to what extent, any money amount in respect of notice of termination that is contemplated to be made the subject of an order under <case> should be reduced by moneys earned or "[imputed] earnings" in the relevant post termination period: Westfield Holdings at [161].
It was submitted, there is no basis to think that the plaintiff did not act reasonably in mitigating her loss. She has given evidence of endeavouring to obtain replacement employment for a substantial period without success.
The plaintiff did obtain some employment with IBM from May 2006. It was submitted, however, that in the circumstances of this matter, the period of loss suffered by the plaintiff clearly did not end then. The employment was IBM was only short-term and, the effect of the events surrounding her engagement by the first defendant continued for many years and continued to cause the plaintiff loss as a result of the effective destruction of her career. The period of loss of earnings is certainly not limited to the period to May 2006.
Having regard to the period of notice and the aforementioned submissions for the plaintiff, which I accept, I do not consider any money order in favour of the plaintiff should be reduced by the operation of common law principles of mitigation (and that the application of those principles would not require such a result).

Settlement as against the Second Defendant
The plaintiff was able to reach a settlement against the second defendant prior to the proceedings being heard. The plaintiff accepted that, where relief is sought for the same loss against more than one defendant, the Court may (but is not required to) take into account a settlement as against one defendant to ensure the plaintiff does not receive double recovery: Miletich versus Murchie [(2012) 297 ALR 566] ("Nau versus Kemp") at [108]; Miletich at [124]-[125]; Ewin at [691].
The first authority relied upon by the plaintiff in this regard was Banque. Steyn J sets out the accepted principle: [A] plaintiff who has a claim against two defendants cannot recover more than his total loss, and must therefore give credit for any sum received from one defendant in or towards satisfaction of the claim, whether received before or after judgment.
The judgment also concerned the entitlement of a plaintiff to deduct the costs incurred in pursuing an action before giving credit for the amount received upon the settlement with one defendant. The approach of Steyn J was as follows (at 882-883): 
The first live issue, as between Chemical and Skandia, is whether the costs of the action against Notcutt ought to be deducted from the credit to be given. Notcutt was liable to Chemical on the ground of Notcutt's vicarious responsibility for the fraud of an employee. I am satisfied that Notcutt would have been held liable in full for the agreed costs if the matter had proceeded to trial against Notcutt. The principle appears to be that if a plaintiff who receives payment from one tortfeasor establishes an additional separate claim against that tortfeasor, the payment is allocated first to that claim, and credit must be given in favour of the second tortfeasor only for the excess necessarily referable to the overlapping claim. ... It also appears to me to be the approach which is required by an application of first principles.
Prima facie therefore the costs of Chemical's action should be deducted from the credit to be given for the receipt of money under the Notcutt settlement.  ... More importantly, the terms of settlement expressly provided that the recovery against Notcutt would be in full and final settlement of the banks claims 'including claims for costs'. These words cannot be treated as pro non scripto or as a sham. The argument based on the actual allocation of the proceeds of the settlement between the banks is a tenuous one. In multi-party disputes an element of arbitrariness frequently enters into the calculation of recovery by way of overall settlement. That may have been so in the present case. Certainly, it would be wrong to read the contract as if the words 'including claims for costs' were not there. And there is nothing in the terms of settlement which serves to displace the general principle that the credit to be given to one tortfeasor in respect of recovery from another tortfeasor must be adjusted to take into account any additional and separate claim which the plaintiff had against the second tortfeasor.  ... 
This decision supports the general principle which I have stated, and authoritatively makes clear that there is no general equitable principle of pro-rating in such cases.
In Banque, Steyn J concluded "the agreed costs of the action against Notcutt must be deducted from the recovery made under the terms of settlement before credit is given".
The second authority relied upon by the plaintiff, Nau versus Kemp concerned the application of [section 5(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/) in the context of consent judgment entered against one tortfeasor. The judgment confirmed the provision applied only to a judgment awarding damages arrived at by judicial assessment not to a consent judgment implementing the settlement of an action. McColl JJA considered the Banque principle at [108]: 
It might be noted that where, as in the present case, the settlement is inclusive of costs, the party against whom the defence of satisfaction is pleaded will be entitled to deduct the costs of the settled action before having to give credit for the amount received under the settlement: Banque at 882, per Steyn J.
The decision did not address the approach to be taken by the Court in this calculation. Her Honour simply noted that "[t]here may be room for debate as to how that figure should be determined" (at [108]).
Two Federal Court decisions in Miletich (per Gray J) and Ewin (per Bromberg J), were also relied upon by the plaintiff. Both decisions considered Banque and go further to suggest an appropriate course for the Court with respect to such deductions.
Gray J in Miletich applied the principles set out by Steyn J in Banque as follows (at [124]): * (1) the amount of a settlement against one joint tortfeasor must be taken into account in determining the amount of damages to be awarded against another joint tortfeasor; and * (2) in the case of a lump sum settlement, the costs incurred by the claimant in pursuing the joint tortfeasor with whom the settlement was reached should be deducted from the lump sum, in order to determine the amount to be taken into account in assessing damages against the other joint tortfeasor.
In accordance with these principles, the Gray J in Miletich made the following finding (at [126]): 
Further evidence will be required before the amount of that judgment and, consequently, the amount of interest to be included in the judgment, can be determined. The appropriate course is to order that the applicants file and serve an affidavit detailing the terms of settlement reached between them and
Mr Murchie and Wilmot Murchie and, if necessary, setting out the amount they claim to be entitled to deduct from any lump sum settlement by way of costs.
The applicants should also be ordered to file and serve minutes of proposed orders that reflect these reasons for judgment. The proceeding should be listed for further hearing on a suitable date, on which submissions as to the appropriate orders can be made.
It was noted that the terms of settlement were offered to the Gray J in the course of proceedings, however his Honour "[initially] declined on the basis that I did not wish to be influenced in determining any issues of apportionment by knowledge of what the applicants had already recovered through the settlement." However, upon applying the principles set out in Banque, such evidence was deemed essential to prevent double counting or recovering more than the sum that is due: see also, Townsend versus Stone Toms & Partners [(1984) 27 BLR 26] at 38.
The approach of Gray J was accepted as "appropriate" by Bromberg J and applied in Ewin at [691]: 
The appropriate course there adopted, and which I will here follow, is to order Ms Ewin to file affidavit material disclosing the terms of any settlement with LLA, Robert Walters or any other person and the amount, if any, Ms Ewin claims she is entitled to deduct from any lump sum settlement on account of costs. The basis for any such deduction for costs will need to be verified by affidavit. I note in that respect that where a settlement is inclusive of costs, the party against whom double recovery is pleaded is entitled to deduct the costs of pursuing an action against the party with whom settlement was reached before giving credit for the amount received under the settlement: see Miletich at [124]-[125] per Gray J and Nau versus Kemp &
Associates Pty Ltd [(2010) 77 NSWLR 687]; <case> at <case> per McColl JJA, both citing Banque Keyser Ullman SA versus Skandia (UK) Insurance
Co Ltd (No 2) [[1988] 2 All ER 880] at 882 per Steyn J.
I consider Banque, Miletich and Erwin state principles which should be applied in assessing money orders under <case> in this matter, even though they related to different causes of action.
When viewed in the light of those authorities, the material before the court creates a prima facie basis "to deduct the costs of pursuing an action against the party [being a co-defendant] with whom settlement was reached before giving credit for the amount received under the settlement", given that settlement with the second defendant was, on the material before the Court, "inclusive of costs". However, a conclusion as to the issue requires a closer examination of the terms of settlement, as contemplated with aforementioned authorities, and the factors which are mentioned in the following paragraph of this judgment. The terms of the consent order (in MFI A) states that the costs included in the settlement incorporated all past costs as between the plaintiff and the second defendant including those arising in relation to the interlocutory judgment of Kite AJ on 11 August 2015. The consent order provided that the Court would note that a Deed of Settlement will be entered into by the parties.
In respect of costs, the Court received an affidavit of Stuart Brady affirmed on 24 February verifying the substantial costs incurred by the plaintiff in these proceedings being a total of $502,661.78 (marked Ex A in the proceedings). However, there were no submissions particularising the basis for those costs or whether the questions raised under this heading should be assessed on the basis of costs as charged by the various legal representatives of the applicant over time or on some other basis such as party-party costs. Further, there would appear no delineation, by submission, as to whether those costs were attributable to proceedings involving the first and or second defendants.
In respect of the deduction sought by the plaintiff, this contention must be supported by evidence. Gray J referred to the filing of "an affidavit detailing the terms of settlement reached". Bromberg J adopted the same approach. I consider the approach adopted in those matters should be adopted in the present matter with accompanying submissions.
In the result, I propose to hear further from the applicant about the issue of the settlement with the second defendant by giving leave to file further evidence by affidavit dealing with that question and by making of directions for the filing of written submissions.

Interest
It was submitted, an order should also be made for the payment of interest on any amount ordered to be paid by first defendant under <case> of the Act. The proceedings have taken, it was contended, an extraordinary period to conclude and resulted in the plaintiff bearing the losses she has incurred for in excess of a decade. Further, it was contended a useful summary of the procedural history is set out in the judgment of Kite AJ in Sutton versus BE Australia WD Pty Ltd (No 2)  <case> at <case>- <case>. Kite AJ further noted (at [30]): 
On the face of events there has been a substantial lapse of time between the termination of the contract and the pressing of this application. I do not consider it can be said that the applicant has been dilatory in prosecuting her claims. The chronology provides ample explanation for the lapse of time in particular the decision by the respondent in 2009, just prior to the scheduled trial, to enter voluntary administration, required the applicant to take a number of procedural steps to be able to continue the prosecution of those claims. Those reactive steps have been opposed and, necessarily, litigated.
That has taken time.
In these circumstances, the plaintiff contended the Court should make an order for the payment of interest upon any payment required to be made by the first defendant. I accept that submission. The plaintiff submitted that the convenient course would be for the plaintiff to be given leave to file a schedule of interest after judgment. That step would be premature given the further submissions sought from the plaintiff. I do require, however, submissions to be filed dealing with the basis upon which, it is contended, interest should be calculated including the date from which interest should be calculated.

Costs
The plaintiff foreshadowed seeking an order for costs by seeking a gross sum order under [s 98(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) . I will reserve the question of costs.

Money Orders
Having regard to the outstanding issues of the consequences of the settlement reached with the second defendant I will refrain from pronouncing upon any money orders at this time.

Orders
The plaintiff shall bring in short minutes of order of the declarations which the Court proposes to make in accordance with this judgment within 7 days. Further, the plaintiff shall file further submissions as to the settlement reached with the second defendant and interest in accordance with this judgment within 28 days of the publication of judgment. Leave is granted to the file further evidence by affidavit bearing upon those issues within the same timeframe.
 * * * 
