

Fay versus State of New South Wales Matter No 600056/94 [1998] NSWSC 495 (21
August 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
FAY versus STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
NR600056/94 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: During the period from 1920 to 1985, the defendant leased certain land (the land) and used it as a cattle dip for the purpose of tick control. It is alleged that, in the course of that activity, it used certain toxic chemicals (arsenic, DDT, Dioxathion, Ethion and Ethion/Chlordimeform). Further, it is alleged that the use of arsenic and DDT contaminated the land, rendering it worthless. 
On or about July 1983, the land was purchased by the plaintiff. Subsequently, certain contractual arrangements were entered into between the parties. Under these arrangements, the defendant was required to do certain things within two months from 28 February 1985 (including the conducting of soil tests, the removal of contaminated soil and clearing and restoring the land to a condition acceptable to the plaintiff).

These proceedings were commenced in 1994. The present claim is that propounded in an Amended Statement of Claim filed on 23 December 1996.

An Amended Defence was filed on 12 January 1998. It traverses certain allegations (by way of either non-admission or denial). It raises other defences (including defences under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969).

In November 1996, the plaintiff served a Notice to Answer Interrogatories upon the defendant. It contained 22 interrogatories.

The defendant has declined to answer all but two of these interrogatories. It has answered interrogatories numbered 6 and 13. The answers to these interrogatories are to be found in a Verified Statement in Answer to
Interrogatories filed on 25 November 1997. The answer to number 6 informs the plaintiff that soil samples were taken in or about early February 1985 and tested and it provides the results of the tests. Further, it informs the plaintiff that a clean-up of the site was then undertaken. Also, it informs the plaintiff that further sampling was carried out after the clean-up had been completed and it provides the results of the tests.

On 25 July 1997, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion seeking an order that the defendant serve a Statement pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/index.html#p24) rule 6 of the Supreme Court Rules. In substance, it was pressing for answers to the unanswered 20 interrogatories.

This Notice of Motion was heard by Registrar Irwin on 11 August 1997. He refused to grant any relief and dismissed the Notice of Motion.

On 16 September 1997, the plaintiff filed a further Notice of Motion. It sought a review of the decision of the Registrar. As the application for review had been filed out of time, an extension of time is also necessary.
These applications were heard on 24 July 1998.

The originating process claims, inter alia, damages. Largely, it is a claim for economic loss. The process alleges four causes of action. The first is founded on breach of contract. The alleged breaches took place in 1985. There are two causes of action founded on negligence. One relates to a state of affairs as at 31 December 1982. The other relates to a period from 1920 to
The fourth cause of action is founded on nuisance.

The plaintiff continues to press for answers to the 20 interrogatories. It is said that they are principally relevant to the causes of action founded on negligence.

The principles of the review process were not in issue. The decision of the
Registrar stands unless the Court is satisfied that it should be disturbed.
The onus of satisfying the Court that the decision should be set aside rests with the party seeking the review.

Both applications were heard together. The application for relief in respect to the unanswered interrogatories was considered on its merits. There was a review in fact, subject to the demonstration of an entitlement to an extension of time.

For the purposes of dealing with the applications, it is not necessary to embark on a detailed analysis of the pleading and/or the interrogatories themselves.

At the outset, I should briefly mention that the relief claimed in the original Notice of Motion is misconceived. Part 24 rule 6 is a provision which specifies the requirements to which a statement in answer to interrogatories should conform. It does not empower the Court to make an order to answer interrogatories. Rules 3 and 5 empower the Court to make an order. These rules make it clear that an order should be made only where an answer is necessary.
In the case of rule 5, it is made a threshold requirement. If it is not satisfied, the Court has no power to make an order.

In this case, I am not satisfied that any of the answers are necessary. Whilst the reaching of this view is sufficient to dispose of the applications, there are additional reasons justifying refusal of relief.

Leaving aside typographical errors, the interrogatories are poorly drafted. In totality, they are burdensome and otherwise oppressive. There are particular interrogatories that are manifestly oppressive. There is a significant lack of relevance. There are interrogatories of the "fishing" variety. In mentioning these matters, it is not my intention to exhaustively recite the reasons which would justify rejection of the plaintiff's claim for relief.

In the circumstances, I have reached the view that the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate a case for the disturbing of the Registrar's decision.

Before proceeding further, perhaps I should mention one matter. When the matter had been before the Registrar, he seems to have been led to the view that a concession had been made to the effect that certain of the matters were statute barred. Subsequent to his decision, the plaintiff filed a Reply. It alleges estoppel as an answer to the statutory defences.

In the light of the views expressed on the interrogatories, I return to the application for an extension of time. Although the delay was relatively minor, it has not been satisfactorily explained. Further, an extension should only be granted if there is some utility in so doing. The review on the merits has revealed that there would not be any utility in granting such an extension of time. Accordingly, this application is refused.

I dismiss the applications. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the applications.
 * * * 
