

Regina versus Selim Matter No Cca 60693/97 [1998] NSWSC 165 (19 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 June 1998 
REGINA versus JACQUELINE SELIM /97 May 1998 
Smart J, Studdert J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Luland DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60693/97 
DELIVERED: Tuesday 19 May 1998 
HEARING DATE: Friday 3 April 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus JACQUELINE SELIM 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART, STUDDERT, HIDDEN JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - I M BARKER QC/S J STANTON 
RESPONDENT - M J IERACE 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - AITKEN MCLACHLAN & THORPE 
RESPONDENT - COMMONWEALTH DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS 
RESULT: DISMISSED 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - drug offence - cocaine - attempting to obtain possession - 221 grams of pure cocaine - appropriate sentence. 
NO. OF PAGES: 11 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: I agree with Studdert J. Despite the mistake made by the judge, the actual sentence which he imposed was correct. On re-sentencing I would arrive at the same sentence as that imposed by the judge. Leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

STUDDERT J: This is an application for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Luland of Queen's Counsel on 19 December 1997. The applicant, Jacqueline Selim, had pleaded guilty before his Honour on 20 August 1997 to an offence under <case>(c) of the Customs Act of attempting to obtain possession of a prohibited import, namely cocaine. The quantity involved was 221 grams of pure cocaine, that being not less than the traffickable quantity. Under <case>(d) of the Customs Act the maximum penalty for this category of offence is twenty-five years imprisonment or a fine not exceeding $100,000 or both. His Honour imposed a head sentence of three years imprisonment and set a non parole period of eighteen months. His Honour directed that the applicant be released upon a recognisance after the expiration of eighteen months of the head sentence. 
Mr Barker of Queen's Counsel, who has appeared for the applicant, has submitted that the learned judge erred in his approach to sentence in this matter in a number of respects, but before considering the grounds upon which the application is based, I should refer to the facts.

His Honour, in his remarks on sentence, set out the facts upon which he based his sentence. They were these: "A young American female named Trina Smith was arrested on 4 May 1997 at
Sydney Airport importing two packages of cocaine. She told police an American woman named Janie Connors was to pay her $US5,000 to bring the two packages here and she was to give one to Janie's husband, Wallace, and the other to
Jackie, whose telephone number she had.

Following her arrest Smith assisted police in a controlled delivery of the package for Jackie. In the early hours of the morning of 5 May 1997 arrangements were made for Smith to deliver the goods to the prisoner, Jackie, at the Hyde Park Hotel. The prisoner booked into a room with her friend,
Jessie de Forrest, later identified as Jessie Zimmerman, and after telephone contact was made with Smith de Forrest went to the foyer to meet Smith and collect the package. Police then arrested the prisoner in her hotel room. Upon their entry she admitted her implication and later detailed her involvement in a record of interview. The prisoner had $2,000 cash with her for Smith.

In her interview she said she received numerous calls from Janie Connors the previous day and went on her instructions to meet Trina Smith and collect one package of cocaine and was then to return to her home and await further instructions from Wallace Connors who was living at Parramatta. She said her reward for collecting the cocaine was that she would be given some of the drug as she was a drug addict. The package the prisoner attempted to possess contained 221 grams of pure cocaine." 
The subjective features of the case were as follows: The applicant was born on September 1971, so that she was twenty-six years of age at the time of being sentenced. She came from a privileged background, being the eldest of three children born to a wealthy businessman and a mother who was a doctor.
She went to a private school and having completed her secondary schooling embarked upon an Arts course at Sydney University which she did not complete.
She later resumed tertiary study however and was in the final year of a degree course at the University of Western Sydney when arrested. Evidence was placed before the sentencing judge that the applicant's upbringing was unhappy and that she had experienced emotional and physical abuse from her father both during her childhood and her adolescence. The pre-sentence report and a psychologist's report were placed before the District Court and his Honour had regard to them.

The psychologist first saw the applicant in 1987 when she was referred for assistance by the pastoral care team at the school which the applicant attended and the psychologist, Ms Taylor, has detailed in the report the problems that the applicant experienced in her relationship with her father.
Plainly his Honour accepted what the psychologist had to say about the stresses of that relationship from the applicant's point of view, although accepting that the applicant's father probably did love the applicant in his inadequate way. At the time of sentencing however, both parents were very supportive of the applicant.

The applicant began to take drugs at a young age and then, in the course of overseas travel and whilst in America, she was introduced to cocaine, to which she became addicted. This addiction was found by his Honour to have motivated the crime.

Following her arrest, the applicant gave assistance to the authorities which was described in evidence as valuable and which was followed by an arrest. His
Honour noted the applicant's willingness to give evidence against the person arrested, and others inculpated should they return to New South Wales.

By the time the sentence was passed the applicant had been in custody for seven months and his Honour found that she had been drug free for that period and that she had received drug counselling. The pre-sentence report indicated that the applicant was very motivated to rehabilitate herself and his Honour found that indeed the applicant had very good prospects for rehabilitation.

There was evidence before the District Court that the applicant's father was suffering from cancer and the prognosis was that he had only a short time to live, perhaps as little as four months. The psychologist, Ms Taylor, expressed the view that it was imperative in the interests of the applicant's psychological state that she and her father become reconciled before he died and that reconciliation would be impeded by the applicant remaining in prison.

His Honour reviewed all those subjective circumstances of this case in his comprehensive remarks on sentence.

This brings me to the grounds upon which the applicant seeks leave to appeal.

Mr Barker has submitted firstly that the learned judge was in error in not taking into account as a mitigating factor the finding which he did make that the applicant's addiction to cocaine motivated the crime. In her record of interview, it is recorded that the applicant used at least three grams of cocaine per day. The evidence was that she was to be rewarded by being given some of the drug for her own use. When considering the question of parity between the sentence he was about to pass on the applicant and the sentence already passed upon Smith, his Honour said: "I do not mitigate the prisoner's criminality because she was addicted to the drug as compared to Smith being paid cash for her involvement." 
Since his Honour had found that there was a link between the applicant's addiction and her participation in this crime, that was a circumstance which, on the authorities, entitled the applicant to have her criminality regarded as on a lower level than had she been committing the offence purely for monetary gain: see Tulloh (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 16 September 1993, and in particular the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL). See also R versus Bernath
VR 271, and in particular the judgment of Callaway JA at 275-276. To what extent a penalty otherwise appropriate should be adjusted if the offender commits the offence to feed an addiction calls for close assessment of all the relevant circumstances. However, his Honour's remarks in this case indicate that he did not take into account the applicant's particular motivation and in this respect, in my opinion, he fell into error.

Mr Barker further submitted that the learned judge erred in the reduction that he made to take account of the fact that the sentence to be imposed was not subject to remission. Section 16G of the Commonwealth Crimes Act required his Honour to take that circumstance into account in determining the length of the sentence and his Honour was alert to that requirement. So it was that his
Honour arrived firstly at a head sentence of seven years and then reduced it by two years (a reduction of two-sevenths). In El Karhani [(1990) 21 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281990%29%2021%20NSWLR%20370 "View LawCiteRecord" ), it was suggested that a reduction of about one-third was not inappropriate to recognise the effect of remissions. It was pointed out in that case that one-third was not a fixed ratio but "given the individualised `adjustment' called for by <case> it is an appropriate starting point" (see the joint judgment of the court at 387). Had the judge reduced the head sentence of seven years by one-third, this would have reduced the head sentence to four years and eight months. Allowing then the further reduction in respect of assistance, which was fixed by his Honour at two years, this would have reduced the head sentence to two years eight months and that in turn would have led to a reduction of the non parole period by two months upon the basis that the custodial period fixed was fifty percent of the head sentence.

The requirements of <case> do not impose upon the sentencing judge an inflexible requirement that he reduce the sentence otherwise considered appropriate by precisely one-third. Plainly had his Honour done so, that would have brought about the consequence of a reduction of the non-parole period in the manner calculated but it does not follow that the approach here taken by the judge to the exercise required by <case> necessarily calls for the intervention of this Court.

It was further submitted that the judge erred in failing to accord sufficient parity between the applicant and Smith. When Judge Luland sentenced Smith in
August 1997 he started with a head sentence of eight years imprisonment but recognising he should adjust that "by approximately one-third" because of s
G, he reduced the sentence to five years six months. Then, having taken into consideration assistance to the authorities, he reduced the sentence by a further two years. This resulted in a head sentence of three years six months and he then proceeded to fix a non-parole period of two years.

The judge was careful to address the question of parity when he came to deal with the applicant. He did so in a passage commencing at the foot of p 2 of his remarks. His Honour treated both offenders as couriers although he indicated that he intended to make some adjustment in the applicant's case because of the lesser quantity of drug with which she was concerned. His
Honour compared the different backgrounds. Smith came from an underprivileged background in which she experienced poverty and violence. She was younger than the applicant, who came from a privileged background but nevertheless experienced the physical and emotional abuse referred to above. His Honour regarded the value of the assistance as being roughly equal and I see no error in that. It is to be recognised that Smith was found to have participated in this offence through monetary greed and the applicant participated to feed her habit, but overall I do not consider that on a comparison of the two sentences the applicant would be justified in feeling aggrieved by the manner in which she has been punished.

The applicant's head sentence was less than that of Smith by six months and the applicant was treated more favourably than Smith in the proportion of the head sentence which was fixed as a non parole period.

It was further submitted that the judge failed to give sufficient weight to the significance of the terminal illness of applicant's father, having regard to the state of the applicant's relationship with him and her emotional condition as identified by Ms Taylor. Further, it was submitted that the sentencing judge failed to take into account the impact of a gaol sentence upon the applicant's university studies. Those matters were before him and although he did not specifically refer to the applicant's study, I would not infer that he overlooked it. Nor do I conclude that the sentence at which his
Honour arrived indicates that he disregarded these features of the case or that he failed to give them sufficient weight.

The final matter complained of is that his Honour gave insufficient weight to the fact that the applicant had been in custody for seven months before she was sentenced. Plainly his Honour was alert to that because he backdated the sentence and he specifically referred to the applicant's progress in rehabilitation achieved in the period before sentence.

The sentencing remarks make it clear that the judge addressed the various matters he was required to address by reason of <case> of the Crimes Act.

There is no rigid rule as to the proportion that a non-parole period should bear to the head sentence, but more often than not the non-parole period is more than fifty percent of the head sentence and is ordinarily of the order of % to 662/3% of it. Here the non-parole period was set at a level which must be considered as favourable to the applicant.

In the unreported judgment of this court in R versus Doan (27 September 1996) sentences in other cases involving traffickable quantities of heroin were reviewed in a schedule to the judgment. Offences involving cocaine are not ipso facto to be treated more leniently than those involving heroin: see R v
Ferrer-Esis [(1991) 55 A Crim R 231] and Pereira versus The Queen [(1992) 66 ALJR 791.] The range in those cases considered in Doan lends no support for the submission that the sentence here imposed was manifestly excessive, after taking into account the assistance given and offered, and the subjective features reviewed.

Whilst I consider that the learned judge erred in the respect I have identified, when I regard the sentence overall, it seems to have been an appropriate one notwithstanding all the subjective features. I have therefore concluded that the sentence imposed should not be disturbed.

I would propose that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

HIDDEN J: I agree with Studdert J. * * * 
